 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The willie wagtail was first described by the English ornithologist John Latham in 1801 as Turdus leucophrys . Its specific epithet is derived from the Ancient Greek words leukos " white " and <unk> " eyebrow " . Other early scientific names include Muscicapa tricolor by Vieillot , and Rhipidura <unk> by naturalists Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827 , who erected the genus Rhipidura . The generic term is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> " fan " and oura " tail " . 
 John Gould and other early writers referred to the species as the black @-@ and @-@ white fantail , although did note the current name . However , willie wagtail rapidly became widely accepted sometime after 1916 . Wagtail is derived from its active behaviour , while the origins of willie are obscure . The name had been in use colloquially for the pied subspecies of the white wagtail ( Motacilla alba ) on the Isle of Man , and Northern Ireland . 
 Other vernacular names applied include shepherd 's companion ( because it accompanied livestock ) , <unk> , morning bird , and Australian nightingale . Many Aboriginal names are onomatopoeic , based on the sound of its scolding call . <unk> is a name from the Kimberley , and <unk> is used by the Gunwinggu of western Arnhem Land . In Central Australia , southwest of Alice Springs , the Pitjantjatjara word is <unk> @-@ <unk> ( pa ) . Among the <unk> , it is <unk> . In Bougainville Island , it is called <unk> in the <unk> language from the west coast , and in <unk> of Kieta district it is <unk> . In the Solomon Islands <unk> it is sometimes called the polis ( police ) or pris ( priest ) bird , because of its black @-@ and @-@ white colouring . 
 The willie wagtail is unrelated to the Eurasian wagtails of the family <unk> . It is one of 47 members of the fantail genus Rhipidura ; some authorities classify this group of birds as a subfamily <unk> within the drongo family Dicruridae , together with the monarch flycatchers , while others consider them distinct enough to warrant their own family <unk> . Early molecular research in the late 1980s and early 1990s revealed that the fantails belong to a large group of mainly Australasian birds known as the parvorder Corvida comprising many tropical and Australian passerines . More recently , the grouping has been refined somewhat and the fantails have been classified in a " core <unk> " group with the crows and ravens , shrikes , birds of paradise , monarch flycatchers , drongos and <unk> builders . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 The following three subspecies are widely recognised : 
 R. leucophrys leucophrys , the nominate subspecies , is the most widely distributed form found in Australia . The description below refers to it . There is negligible variation within this form , and little between the three ; all have very similar plumage . 
 R. leucophrys <unk> was described by John Gould in 1848 . It is found across northern Australia , from northern Western Australia to Queensland . It has shorter wings , and it has a gradient in wing length between latitudes 18 – 22 ° S across the Australian continent where this subspecies intergrades with leucophrys . The subspecific epithet is Latin <unk> " smeared with pitch " . 
 R. leucophrys melaleuca was described by French naturalists Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard in 1830 . It occurs in eastern Indonesia , New Guinea , the Solomon Islands and the Bismarck Archipelago . It is significantly larger , with longer bristles and larger bill . Its subspecific name is derived from the Ancient Greek melas " black " , and leukos " white " . 
 = = Description = = 
 An adult willie wagtail is between 19 and 21 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 and 8 @.@ 5 in ) in length and weighs 17 – 24 g ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 85 oz ) , with a tail 10 – 11 cm ( approx 4 in ) long . The short , slender bill measures 1 @.@ 64 – 1 @.@ 93 cm ( around 0 @.@ 75 in ) , and is tipped with a small hook . This species has longer legs than other fantails , which may be an adaptation to foraging on the ground . The male and female have similar plumage ; the head , throat , upper breast , wings , upperparts , and tail are all black , with a white eyebrow , " whiskers " and underparts . The bill and legs are black and the iris dark brown . Immature birds in their first year after moulting from juvenile plumage may have pale tips in their wings , while juvenile birds themselves have duller plumage , their upperparts brown @-@ tinged with some pale brown scallops on the head and breast . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The wagtail is very " chatty " and has a number of distinct vocalisations . Its most @-@ recognised sound is its alarm call which is a rapid chit @-@ chit @-@ chit @-@ chit , although it has more melodious sounds in its repertoire . The alarm call is sounded to warn off potential rivals and threats from its territory and also seems to serve as a signal to its mate when a potential threat is in the area . John Gould reported that it sounded like a child 's rattle or " small cog @-@ wheels of a steam mill " . In his book What Bird is That ? ( 1935 ) , Neville Cayley writes that it has " a pleasant call resembling sweet pretty little creature , frequently uttered during the day or night , especially on moonlight nights " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Widespread and abundant , the willie wagtail is found across most of Australia and New Guinea , the Solomon Islands , the Bismarck Archipelago , and eastern Indonesia . It is sedentary across most of Australia , though some areas have recorded seasonal movements ; it is an autumn and winter visitor to northeastern New South Wales and southeast Queensland , as well as the Gulf Country and parts of Cape York Peninsula in the far north . It is a vagrant to Tasmania , and on occasion reaches Lord Howe Island . There is one record from <unk> Island in the Chatham Islands archipelago east of New Zealand in 2002 . The willie wagtail was released in Hawaii around 1922 to control insects on livestock , but the introduction was unsuccessful and the last sighting was at Koko Head in 1937 . 
 The willie wagtail is at home in a wide variety of habitats , but avoids densely forested areas such as rainforest . It prefers semi @-@ open woodland or grassland with scattered trees , often near wetlands or bodies of water . In New Guinea , it inhabits man @-@ made clearings and grasslands , as well as open forest and mangroves . On Guadalcanal , it was reported from open areas and coconut groves . It has responded well to human alteration of the landscape and can often be seen hunting in open , grassed areas such as lawns , gardens , parkland , and sporting grounds . The species spread into the Western Australian Wheatbelt after the original vegetation had been cleared for agriculture . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The willie wagtail is almost always on the move and rarely still for more than a few moments during daylight hours . Even while perching it will flick its tail from side to side , twisting about looking for prey . Birds are mostly encountered singly or in pairs , although they may gather in small flocks . Unlike other fantails , much of its time is spent on the ground . It beats its wings deeply in flight , interspersed with a swift flying dip . It characteristically wags its tail upon landing after a short dipping flight . 
 The willie wagtail is highly territorial and can be quite fearless in defence of its territory ; it will harry not only small birds but also much larger species such as the Australian magpie ( Cracticus tibicen ) , raven ( Corvus coronoides ) , laughing kookaburra ( Dacelo novaeguineae ) , or wedge @-@ tailed eagle ( Aquila audax ) . It may even attack domestic dogs , cats and humans which approach its nest too closely . It has also been observed harassing snake @-@ neck turtles and tiger snakes in Western Australia . When harassing an opponent , the willie wagtail avoids the head and aims for the rear . Both the male and female may engage in this behaviour , and generally more intensely in the breeding season . Territories range from 1 – 3 ha ( 2 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 4 acres ) in area . A pair of birds will declare and defend their territory against other pairs in a diving display . One bird remains still while the other loops and dives repeatedly before the roles are reversed ; both sing all the while . 
 The bird 's white eyebrows become flared and more prominent in an aggressive display , and settled and more hidden when in a submissive or appeasement display . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The willie wagtail perches on low branches , fences , posts , and the like , watching for insects and other small invertebrates in the air or on the ground . It usually hunts by hawking flying insects such as gnats , flies , and small moths , but will occasionally glean from the ground . It will often hop along the ground and flit behind people and animals , such as cattle , sheep or horses , as they walk over grassed areas , to catch any creatures disturbed by their passing . It wags its tail in a horizontal fashion while foraging in this manner ; the exact purpose of this behaviour is unknown but is thought to help flush out insects hidden in vegetation and hence make them easier to catch . The willie wagtail takes ticks from the skin of grazing animals such as cattle or pigs , even from lions asleep in a zoo . It kills its prey by bashing it against a hard surface , or holding it and pulling off the wings before extracting the edible insides . 
 The adaptability and opportunistic diet of the willie wagtail have probably assisted it in adapting to human habitation ; it eats a wide variety of arthropods , including butterflies , moths , flies , beetles , dragonflies , bugs , spiders , centipedes , and millipedes , and has been recorded killing small lizards such as skinks and geckos in a study in Madang on Papua New Guinea 's north coast . The <unk> of these lizards have been found in their faeces although it is unclear whether the whole animal was eaten or merely the tail . Either way , lizards are only a very occasional prey item forming between 1 and 3 % of the total diet . Evidence from the study in Madang suggested that the willie wagtail selectively fed nestlings larger prey . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Willie wagtails usually pair for life . The breeding season lasts from July to December , more often occurring after rain in drier regions . Anywhere up to four broods may be raised during this time . It builds a cup @-@ like nest on a tree branch away from leaves or cover , less than 5 m ( 16 ft ) above the ground . Rafters and eaves may also be used . It has been observed to build its nest in the vicinity of those of the magpie @-@ lark ( <unk> <unk> ) , possibly taking advantage of the latter bird 's territoriality and aggression toward intruders . Similarly , it is not afraid to build near human habitation . 
 The nest consists of grass stems , strips of bark , and other fibrous material which is bound and woven together with spider web . Even hair from pet dogs and cats may be used . It has also been observed attempting to take hair from a pet goat . An alpaca breeder in the Mudgee District of New South Wales has observed alpaca fleece in the nests of willy wagtails ( the results of scraps of fleece not picked up at shearing time ) . The female lays two to four small cream @-@ white eggs with brownish markings measuring 16 mm × 21 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 in × 0 @.@ 83 in ) , and incubates them for 14 days . Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial and nidicolous ; they are born naked and helpless with closed eyes , and remain in the nest . Both parents take part in feeding the young , and may continue to do so while embarking on another brood . Nestlings remain in the nest for around 14 days before fledging . Upon leaving , the fledglings will remain hidden in cover nearby for one or two days before venturing further afield , up to 20 m ( 66 ft ) away by the third day . Parents will stop feeding their fledglings near the end of the second week , as the young birds increasingly forage for themselves , and soon afterwards drive them out of the territory . 
 The female pallid cuckoo ( Cuculus pallidus ) will lay eggs in a willie wagtail nest , although the hosts often recognise and eject the foreign eggs , so successful brood parasitism is rare . Parasitism by the fan @-@ tailed ( Cacomantis flabelliformis ) , brush , ( C. variolosus ) , Horsfield 's bronze ( Chrysococcyx basalis ) , and shining bronze cuckoo ( C. lucidus ) has also been reported . 
 Although the willie wagtail is an aggressive defender of its nest , predators do account for many eggs and young . About two thirds of eggs hatch successfully , and a third leave the nest as fledglings . Nestlings may be preyed upon by both pied butcherbirds , ( Cracticus <unk> ) black butcherbirds ( C. quoyi ) , the spangled drongo ( Dicrurus <unk> ) , and the pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) , as well as the feral cat ( Felis catus ) , and rat species . The proximity of nesting to human habitation has also left nests open to destruction by children . 
 Although generally a peaceful bird , which lives quite happily alongside humans , the willie wagtail will defend its nest aggressively . Willie wagtails are known to swoop at passers by , much like the Australian magpie . While attacks from willie wagtails are not as common or as formidable as the magpie , they do come as a great shock to recipients . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The willie wagtail was a feature in Australian Aboriginal folklore . Aboriginal tribes in parts of southeastern Australia , such as the <unk> of the Lower Murray River , and the <unk> People of the Yorke Peninsula , regard the willie wagtail as the bearer of bad news . It was thought that the willie wagtail could steal a person 's secrets while lingering around camps eavesdropping , so women would be tight @-@ lipped in the presence of the bird . The people of the Kimberley held a similar belief that it would inform the spirit of the recently departed if living relatives spoke badly of them . They also venerated the willie wagtail as the most intelligent of all animals . Its cleverness is also seen in a <unk> tale of Bougainville Island , where <unk> <unk> ( Willie Wagtail ) wins a contest among all birds to see who can fly the highest , by riding on the back of the eagle . However , the Gunwinggu in western Arnhem Land took a dimmer view and regarded it as a liar and a <unk> . The willie wagtail was held to have stolen fire and tried to extinguish it in the sea in a dreaming story of the Yindjibarndi people of the central and western Pilbara , and was able to send a strong wind if frightened . In the Noongar language dialects , the willie wagtail is known as the Chitti @-@ <unk> along the <unk> River , and the <unk> in the Perth region . 
 The Kalam people of New Guinea highlands called it <unk> , and deemed it a good bird ; if it came and chattered when a new garden was tilled , then there would be good crops . It is said to be taking care of pigs if it is darting and calling around them . It may also be the manifestation of the ghost of paternal relatives to the Kalam . Called the <unk> bird in New Guinea 's eastern highlands , its appearance was significant in the mourning ceremony by a widow for her dead husband . She would offer him banana flowers ; the presence of the bird singing nearby would confirm that the dead man 's soul had taken the offering . 
 A tale from the Kieta district of Bougainville Island relates that a <unk> , the willie wagtail , darting along a river bank echoes a legendary daughter looking for her mother who drowned trying to cross a flooding river in a storm . The bird has been depicted on postage stamps in Palau and the Solomon Islands , and has also appeared as a character in Australian children 's literature , such as Dot and the Kangaroo ( 1899 ) , Blinky Bill Grows Up ( 1935 ) , and Willie Wagtail and Other Tales ( 1929 ) . 
 = Ælle of Sussex = 
 Ælle ( / <unk> / ; also <unk> or Ella ) is recorded in early sources as the first king of the South Saxons , reigning in what is now called Sussex , England , from 477 to perhaps as late as 514 . 
 According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Ælle and three of his sons are said to have landed at a place called <unk> and fought against the local Britons . The chronicle goes on to report a victory in 491 , at present day Pevensey , where the battle ended with the Saxons slaughtering their opponents to the last man . 
 Ælle was the first king recorded by the 8th century chronicler Bede to have held " imperium " , or overlordship , over other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . In the late 9th @-@ century Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ( around four hundred years after his time ) Ælle is recorded as being the first bretwalda , or " Britain @-@ ruler " , though there is no evidence that this was a contemporary title . Ælle 's death is not recorded and although he may have been the founder of a South Saxon dynasty , there is no firm evidence linking him with later South Saxon rulers . The 12th @-@ century chronicler Henry of Huntingdon produced an enhanced version of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle that included 514 as the date of Ælle 's death , but this is not secure . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Historians are divided on the detail of Ælle 's life and existence as it was during the least @-@ documented period in English history of the last two millennia . 
 By the early 5th century Britain had been Roman for over three hundred and fifty years . The most troublesome enemies of Roman Britain were the Picts of central and northern Scotland , and the Gaels known as Scoti , who were raiders from Ireland . Also vexatious were the Saxons , the name Roman writers gave to the peoples who lived in the northern part of what is now Germany and the southern part of the Jutland peninsula . Saxon raids on the southern and eastern shores of England had been sufficiently alarming by the late 3rd century for the Romans to build the Saxon Shore forts , and subsequently to establish the role of the Count of the Saxon Shore to command the defence against these incursions . Roman control of Britain finally ended in the early part of the 5th century ; the date usually given as marking the end of Roman Britain is 410 , when the Emperor Honorius sent letters to the British , urging them to look to their own defence . Britain had been repeatedly stripped of troops to support usurpers ' claims to the Roman empire , and after 410 the Roman armies never returned . 
 Sources for events after this date are extremely scarce , but a tradition , reported as early as the mid @-@ 6th century by a British priest named Gildas , records that the British sent for help against the barbarians to Aetius , a Roman consul , probably in the late 440s . No help came . Subsequently , a British leader named <unk> is supposed to have invited continental mercenaries to help fight the Picts who were attacking from the north . The leaders , whose names are recorded as Hengest and Horsa , rebelled , and a long period of warfare ensued . The invaders — Angles , Saxons , Jutes , and Frisians — gained control of parts of England , but lost a major battle at Mons Badonicus ( the location of which is not known ) . Some authors have speculated that Ælle may have led the Saxon forces at this battle , while others reject the idea out of hand . 
 The British thus gained a respite , and peace lasted at least until the time Gildas was writing : that is , for perhaps forty or fifty years , from around the end of the 5th century until midway through the sixth . Shortly after Gildas 's time the Anglo @-@ Saxon advance was resumed , and by the late 6th century nearly all of southern England was under the control of the continental invaders . 
 = = Early sources = = 
 There are two early sources that mention Ælle by name . The earliest is The Ecclesiastical History of the English People , a history of the English church written in 731 by Bede , a Northumbrian monk . Bede mentions Ælle as one of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings who exercised what he calls " imperium " over " all the provinces south of the river Humber " ; " imperium " is usually translated as " overlordship " . Bede gives a list of seven kings who held " imperium " , and Ælle is the first of them . The other information Bede gives is that Ælle was not a Christian — Bede mentions a later king as " the first to enter the kingdom of heaven " . 
 The second source is the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , a collection of annals assembled in the Kingdom of Wessex in c . 890 , during the reign of Alfred the Great . The Chronicle has three entries for Ælle , from 477 to 491 , as follows : 
 477 : Ælle and his 3 sons , Cymen and <unk> and <unk> , came to the land of Britain with 3 ships at the place which is named Cymen 's shore , and there killed many Welsh and drove some to flight into the wood called Andredes leag . 
 485 : Here Ælle fought against the Welsh near the margin of <unk> 's Burn . 
 491 : Here Ælle and <unk> besieged Andredes cester , and killed all who lived in there ; there was not even one Briton left there . 
 The Chronicle was put together about four hundred years after these events . It is known that the annalists used material from earlier chronicles , as well as from oral sources such as sagas , but there is no way to tell where these lines came from . It should also be noted that the terms ' British ' and ' Welsh ' were used interchangeably , as ' Welsh ' is the Saxon word meaning ' foreigner ' , and was applied to all the native Romano @-@ British of the era . 
 Three of the places named may be identified : 
 " Cymen 's shore " ( " <unk> ora " in the original ) is believed to be located at what is now a series of rocks and ledges , in the English Channel off Selsey Bill , on the south coast , known as the Owers . It has been suggested that Ower is derived from the word ora that is found only in placenames where Jutish and West Saxon dialects were in operation ( mainly in southern England ) . It is possible that the stretch of low ground along the coast from Southampton to Bognor was called Ora " the shore " , and that district names were used by the various coastal settlements , <unk> ora being one of them . 
 The wood called " Andredes leag " is the Weald , which at that time was a forest extending from north @-@ west Hampshire all through northern Sussex . 
 " Andredes cester " is thought to be <unk> , the Saxon Shore fort , built by the Roman rebel Carausius in the late 3rd century , at Pevensey Castle , just outside the town . Some believe Andredes cester may have been an imperial stronghold somewhere else as Henry of Huntingdon described the place as a fortified city and gave a very full account of the siege which is inconsistent with the geography of ancient Pevensey and little archaeological evidence of sustained settlement there . Also , in his " Britannia " , William Camden suggests that it could be Newenden , Kent 
 The Chronicle mentions Ælle once more under the year 827 , where he is listed as the first of the eight " bretwaldas " , or " Britain @-@ rulers " . The list consists of Bede 's original seven , plus Egbert of Wessex . There has been much scholarly debate over just what it meant to be a " bretwalda " , and the extent of Ælle 's actual power in southern England is an open question . It is also noteworthy that there is a long gap between Ælle and the second king on Bede 's list , Ceawlin of Wessex , whose reign began in the late 6th century ; this may indicate a period in which Anglo @-@ Saxon dominance was interrupted in some way . 
 Earlier sources than Bede exist which mention the South Saxons , though they do not name Ælle . The earliest reference is still quite late , however , at about 692 : a charter of King Nothelm 's , which styles him " King of the South Saxons " . Charters are documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen , and which would be witnessed by the kings who had power to grant the land . They are one of the key documentary sources for Anglo @-@ Saxon history , but no original charters survive from earlier than the end of the 7th century . 
 There are other early writers whose works can shed light on Ælle 's time , though they do not mention either him or his kingdom . Gildas 's description of the state of Britain in his time is useful for understanding the ebb and flow of the Anglo @-@ Saxon incursions . Procopius , a Byzantine historian , writing not long after Gildas , adds to the meagre sources on population movement by including a chapter on England in one of his works . He records that the peoples of Britain — he names the English , the British , and the Frisians — were so numerous that they were migrating to the kingdom of the Franks in great numbers every year . Although this is probably a reference to Britons emigrating to Armorica to escape the Anglo @-@ Saxons . They subsequently gave their name to the area they settled as Brittany , or la petite Bretagne ( literally little Britain ) . 
 = = Evidence from place names in Sussex = = 
 The early dates given in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle for the colonization of Sussex are supported by an analysis of the place names of the region . The strongest evidence comes from place names that end in " -ing " , such as Worthing and Angmering . These are known to derive from an earlier form ending in " <unk> " . " Hastings " for example , derives from " <unk> " which may mean " the followers or dependents of a person named <unk> " , although others suggest the heavily Romanised region may have had names of Gallo @-@ Roman origin derived from " <unk> " . 
 From west of Selsey Bill to east of Pevensey can be found the densest concentration of these names anywhere in Britain . There are a total of about forty @-@ five place names in Sussex of this form , however , personal names either were not associated with these places or fell out of use . This does not necessarily mean that the Saxons killed or drove out almost all of the native population , despite the slaughter of the Britons reported in the Chronicle entry for 491 ; however , it does imply that the invasion was on a scale that left little space for the British . 
 These lines of reasoning cannot prove the dates given in the Chronicle , much less the existence of Ælle himself , but they do support the idea of an early conquest and the establishment of a settled kingdom . 
 = = Reign = = 
 If the dates given by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle are accurate to within half a century , then Ælle 's reign lies in the middle of the Anglo @-@ Saxon expansion , and prior to the final conquest of the Britons . It also seems consistent with the dates given to assume that Ælle 's battles predate Mons Badonicus . This in turn would explain the long gap , of fifty or more years , in the succession of the " bretwaldas " : if the peace gained by the Britons did indeed hold till the second half of the 6th century , it is not to be expected that an Anglo @-@ Saxon leader should have anything resembling overlordship of England during that time . The idea of a pause in the Anglo @-@ Saxon advance is also supported by the account in Procopius of 6th century migration from Britain to the kingdom of the Franks . Procopius 's account is consistent with what is known to be a contemporary colonization of Armorica ( now Brittany , in France ) ; the settlers appear to have been at least partly from Dumnonia ( modern Cornwall ) , and the area acquired regions known as <unk> and <unk> . It seems likely that something at that time was interrupting the general flow of the Anglo @-@ Saxons from the continent to Britain . 
 The dates for Ælle 's battles are also reasonably consistent with what is known of events in the kingdom of the Franks at that time . Clovis I united the Franks into a single kingdom during the 480s and afterwards , and the Franks ' ability to exercise power along the southern coast of the English channel may have diverted Saxon adventurers to England rather than the continent . 
 It is possible , therefore , that a historical king named Ælle existed , who arrived from the continent in the late 5th century , and who conquered much of what is now Sussex . He may have been a prominent war chief with a leadership role in a federation of Anglo @-@ Saxon groups fighting for territory in Britain at that time . This may be the origin of the reputation that led Bede to list him as holding overlordship over southern Britain . The battles listed in the Chronicle are compatible with a conquest of Sussex from west to east , against British resistance stiff enough to last fourteen years . His area of military control may have extended as far as Hampshire and north to the upper Thames valley , but it certainly did not extend across all of England south of the Humber , as Bede asserts . 
 The historian Guy Halsall argues that as Ælle immediately preceded the late sixth @-@ century King Ceawlin as Bretwalda , it is far more likely that Ælle dates to the mid sixth century , and that the Chronicle has moved his dates back a century in order to provide a foundation myth for Sussex which puts it chronologically and geographically between the origins of the kingdoms of Kent and Wessex . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 Ælle 's death is not recorded by the Chronicle , which gives no information about him , or his sons , or the South Saxons until 675 , when the South Saxon king <unk> was baptized . 
 It has been conjectured that , as Saxon war leader , Ælle may have met his death in the disastrous battle of Mount Badon when the Britons halted Saxon expansion If Ælle died within the borders of his own kingdom then it may well have been that he was buried on Highdown Hill with his weapons and ornaments in the usual mode of burial among the South Saxons . Highdown Hill is the traditional burial @-@ place of the kings of Sussex . 
 = HMS New Zealand ( 1911 ) = 
 HMS New Zealand was one of three Indefatigable @-@ class battlecruisers built for the defence of the British Empire . Launched in 1911 , the ship was funded by the government of New Zealand as a gift to Britain , and she was commissioned into the Royal Navy in 1912 . She had been intended for the China Station , but was released by the New Zealand government at the request of the Admiralty for service in British waters . 
 During 1913 , New Zealand was sent on a ten @-@ month tour of the British Dominions , with an emphasis on a visit to her namesake nation . She was back in British waters at the start of World War I , and operated as part of the Royal Navy 's Grand Fleet , in opposition to the German High Seas Fleet . During the war , the battlecruiser participated in all three of the major North Sea battles — Heligoland Bight , Dogger Bank , and Jutland — and was involved in the response to the inconclusive Raid on Scarborough , and the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . New Zealand contributed to the destruction of two cruisers during her wartime service and was hit by enemy fire only once , sustaining no casualties ; her status as a " lucky ship " was attributed by the crew to a Māori piupiu ( warrior 's skirt ) and hei @-@ tiki ( pendant ) worn by the captain during battle . 
 After the war , New Zealand was sent on a second world tour , this time to allow Admiral John Jellicoe to review the naval defences of the Dominions . In 1920 , the battlecruiser was placed in reserve . She was broken up for scrap in 1922 in order to meet Britain 's tonnage limit in the disarmament provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Indefatigable class was not a significant improvement on the preceding Invincible class ; the main difference was the enlargement of the dimensions to give the ships ' two wing turrets a wider arc of fire . The ships were smaller and not as well protected as the contemporary German battlecruiser SMS Von der Tann and subsequent German designs . While Von der Tann 's characteristics were not known when the lead ship of the class , HMS Indefatigable , was laid down in February 1909 , the Royal Navy obtained accurate information on the German ship before work began on New Zealand and her sister ship HMAS Australia . 
 New Zealand had an overall length of 590 feet ( 179 @.@ 8 m ) , a beam of 80 feet ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) , and a draught of 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . She displaced 18 @,@ 500 long tons ( 18 @,@ 800 t ) at load and 22 @,@ 130 long tons ( 22 @,@ 490 t ) at deep load . The battlecruiser 's Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines were designed to produce 44 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 33 @,@ 000 kW ) , propelling the ship at 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . However , during trials in 1912 , the turbines produced over 49 @,@ 000 shp ( 37 @,@ 000 kW ) , which allowed New Zealand to reach 26 @.@ 39 knots ( 48 @.@ 87 km / h ; 30 @.@ 37 mph ) . The ship carried approximately 3 @,@ 200 long tons ( 3 @,@ 300 t ) of coal , and an additional 850 long tons ( 860 t ) of fuel oil ; this was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . This gave her a range of 6 @,@ 690 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 390 km ; 7 @,@ 700 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship carried eight BL 12 @-@ inch Mk X guns in four twin gun turrets . Two turrets were mounted fore and aft on the centreline , identified as ' A ' and ' X ' respectively . The other two were wing turrets mounted amidships and staggered diagonally : ' P ' was forward and to port of the centre funnel , while ' Q ' was situated starboard and aft . Each wing turret had a limited ability to fire to the opposite side , but if the ship was full broadside to her target she could bring all eight main guns to bear . Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen 4 @-@ inch BL Mk VII guns positioned in the superstructure . She mounted two 18 @-@ inch submerged torpedo tubes , one on each side aft of ' X ' barbette , and twelve torpedoes were carried . 
 New Zealand 's ' A ' turret was fitted with a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder at the rear of the turret roof . It was also equipped to control the entire main armament in the event that the normal fire control positions were knocked out or communication between the primary positions and the gun layers was disabled . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 The ship was fitted with a single QF 6 pounder Hotchkiss anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun from October 1914 to the end of 1915 . In March 1915 , a single QF 3 inch 20 cwt AA gun was added . It was provided with 500 rounds . The battlecruiser 's 4 @-@ inch guns were enclosed in casemates and given blast shields during a refit in November to better protect the gun crews from weather and enemy action . Two aft guns were removed at the same time . 
 New Zealand received a fire @-@ control director sometime between mid @-@ 1915 and May 1916 ; this centralised fire control under the director officer , who now fired the guns . The turret crewmen merely had to follow pointers transmitted from the director to align their guns on the target . This greatly increased accuracy , as it was easier to spot the fall of shells and eliminated the problem of the ship 's roll dispersing the shells when each turret fired independently . An additional inch of armour was added to the top of the magazines and turret roofs after the Battle of Jutland . 
 By 1918 , New Zealand carried two aircraft , a Sopwith Pup and a Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter , on flying @-@ off ramps fitted on top of ' P ' and ' Q ' turrets . The Pup was intended to shoot down Zeppelins while the 1 ½ Strutter was used for spotting and reconnaissance . Each platform had a canvas hangar to protect the aircraft during inclement weather . 
 = = Acquisition and construction = = 
 At the start of the 20th century , the British Admiralty maintained that naval defence of the British Empire , including the Dominions , should be unified under the Royal Navy . Attitudes on this matter softened during the first decade , and at the 1909 Imperial Conference , the Admiralty proposed the creation of Fleet Units : forces consisting of a battlecruiser , three light cruisers , six destroyers , and three submarines . While Australia and Canada were encouraged to purchase fleet units to serve as the core of new national navies , other fleet units would be operated by the Royal Navy at distant bases , particularly in the Far East ; New Zealand was asked to partially subsidise a fleet unit for the China Station . 
 To this end , the Prime Minister of New Zealand , Sir Joseph Ward , announced on 22 March 1909 that his country would fund a battleship ( later changed to an Indefatigable @-@ class battlecruiser ) as an example to other countries . It is unclear why this design was selected , given that it was known to be inferior to the battlecruisers entering service with the Imperial German Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) . Historian John Roberts has suggested that the request may have been attributable to the Royal Navy 's practice of using small battleships and large cruisers as flagships of stations far from Britain , or it might have reflected the preferences of the First Sea Lord and Admiral of the Fleet John Fisher , preferences not widely shared . The New Zealand Government took out a loan to fund the cost of the ship . 
 New Zealand 's keel was laid at Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering 's yard on the Clyde on 20 June 1910 . Launched on 1 July 1911 , the battlecruiser was commissioned into the Royal Navy four days before she was completed on 23 November 1912 . 
 = = Service = = 
 New Zealand was sent on a ten @-@ month flag @-@ waving tour of New Zealand via South Africa in 1913 . During this tour , the ship was seen by an estimated half @-@ million New Zealanders — almost half the population — and her captain was presented with a Māori piupiu ( a warrior 's skirt made from rolled flax ) and a greenstone hei @-@ tiki ( pendant ) , which were intended to ward off evil . 
 The Admiralty requested that New Zealand return to the United Kingdom when the tour concluded , rather than remain in the Pacific region as originally planned . The New Zealand Government acceded to the request and , upon her arrival on 8 December 1913 , New Zealand joined the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron ( 1st BCS ) of the Grand Fleet . The squadron visited Brest in February 1914 , and Riga , Reval and Kronstadt in the Russian Empire the following June . On 19 August 1914 , shortly after World War I began , New Zealand was transferred to the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron ( 2nd BCS ) . 
 = = = Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = 
 New Zealand 's first wartime action was the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 , as part of the battlecruiser force under the command of Admiral David Beatty . Beatty 's ships were originally intended to provide distant support for the British cruisers and destroyers closer to the German coast , in case large units of the High Seas Fleet sortied in response to the British attacks once the tide rose . When the British light forces failed to disengage on schedule at 11 : 35 a.m. , the battlecruisers , led by Beatty aboard his flagship , HMS Lion , began to head south at full speed to reinforce the smaller British ships ; the rising tide meant that German capital ships would be able to clear the sandbar at the mouth of the Jade estuary . 
 The brand @-@ new light cruiser HMS Arethusa had been crippled earlier in the battle and was under fire from the German light cruisers SMS Strassburg and SMS Cöln when Beatty 's battlecruisers loomed out of the mist at 12 : 37 p.m. By this time , New Zealand had fallen behind the three newer and faster battlecruisers and was not in position to significantly participate in the battle . Strassburg was able to evade fire by hiding in the mists , but Cöln remained visible and was quickly crippled by the British squadron . Before the German ship could be sunk , Beatty was distracted by the sudden appearance of the elderly light cruiser SMS Ariadne off his starboard bow . He turned to pursue , but Ariadne was set afire after only three salvos fired from under 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) . At 1 : 10 , Beatty turned north and made a general signal to retire . Shortly after turning north , the battlecruisers encountered the crippled Cöln , which was sunk by two salvos from Lion . During the battle , New Zealand 's captain , Lionel Halsey , wore the Māori piupiu over his uniform , setting a tradition followed for the duration of the war . Two days after the battle , New Zealand was transferred back to the 1st BCS , when the battlecruiser Inflexible arrived from the Mediterranean . 
 = = = Raid on Scarborough = = = 
 The German Navy had decided on a strategy of bombarding British towns on the North Sea coast in an attempt to draw out the Royal Navy and destroy elements of it in detail . An earlier raid on Yarmouth on 3 November 1914 had been partially successful , but a larger @-@ scale operation was later devised by Admiral Franz von Hipper . The fast battlecruisers would conduct the bombardment , while the rest of the High Seas Fleet stationed itself east of Dogger Bank , so they could cover the battlecruisers ' return and destroy any pursuing British vessels . Having broken the German naval codes , the British were planning to catch the raiding force on its return journey , although they were not aware of the High Seas Fleet 's presence . Admiral Beatty 's 1st BCS ( now reduced to four ships , including New Zealand ) and the 2nd Battle Squadron ( consisting of six dreadnoughts ) were detached from the Grand Fleet in an attempt to intercept the Germans near Dogger Bank . 
 Admiral Hipper 's raiders set sail on 15 December 1914 , and successfully bombarded several English towns ; British destroyers escorting the 1st BCS had already encountered German destroyers of the High Seas Fleet at 5 : 15 a.m. and fought an inconclusive action with them . Vice Admiral Sir George Warrender , commanding the 2nd Battle Squadron , had received a signal at 5 : 40 that the destroyer HMS Lynx was engaging enemy destroyers , although Beatty had not . The destroyer HMS Shark spotted the German armoured cruiser SMS Roon and her escorts at about 7 : 00 , but could not transmit the message until 7 : 25 . Admiral Warrender received the signal , as did New Zealand , but Beatty , aboard Lion , did not , even though New Zealand had been specifically tasked to relay messages between the destroyers and the flagship . Warrender attempted to pass on Shark 's message to Beatty at 7 : 36 , but did not manage to make contact until 7 : 55 . On receiving the message , Beatty reversed course , and dispatched New Zealand to search for Roon . She was being overhauled by New Zealand when Beatty received messages that Scarborough was being shelled at 9 : 00 . Beatty ordered New Zealand to rejoin the squadron and turned west for Scarborough . 
 The British forces , heading west to cover the main route through the minefields protecting the coast of England , split up while passing the shallow Southwest Patch of Dogger Bank ; Beatty 's ships headed to the north , while Warrender passed to the south . This left a 15 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) gap between them , through which the German light forces began to move . At 12 : 25 p.m. , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass the British forces searching for Hipper . The light cruiser HMS Southampton spotted the light cruiser SMS Stralsund and signalled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 , Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships , which he presumed were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships . However , those were some 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) behind . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape , and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the north @-@ east of the British forces and also made good their escape . 
 New Zealand became flagship of the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron ( 2nd BCS ) of the Grand Fleet on 15 January 1915 , and saw action the following week in the Battle of Dogger Bank . 
 = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = 
 On 23 January 1915 , a force of German battlecruisers under the command of Admiral Hipper sortied to clear Dogger Bank of any British fishing boats or small craft that might be there to collect intelligence on German movements . Alerted by decoded German transmissions , a larger force of British battlecruisers , including New Zealand , sailed under the command of Admiral Beatty to intercept . Contact was initiated at 7 : 20 a.m. on the 24th , when Arethusa spotted the German light cruiser SMS Kolberg . By 7 : 35 , the Germans had spotted Beatty 's force and Hipper ordered a turn south at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , believing that this speed would outdistance any British battleships to the north @-@ west ; he planned to increase speed to the armoured cruiser SMS Blücher 's maximum of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) if necessary to outrun any battlecruisers . 
 Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to make all practical speed to catch the Germans before they could escape . New Zealand and Indomitable were the slowest of Beatty 's ships , and gradually fell behind the newer battlecruisers . Despite this , New Zealand was able to open fire on Blücher by 9 : 35 , and continued to engage the armoured cruiser after the other British battlecruisers had switched targets to the German battlecruisers . After about an hour , New Zealand had knocked out Blücher 's forward turret , and Indomitable began to fire on her as well at 10 : 31 . Two 12 @-@ inch shells pierced the German ship 's armoured deck and exploded in an ammunition room four minutes later . This started a fire amidships that destroyed her two port 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) turrets , while the concussion damaged her engines so that her speed dropped to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) , and jammed her steering gear . At 10 : 48 , Beatty ordered Indomitable to attack her , but the combination of a signalling error by Beatty 's flag lieutenant and heavy damage to Beatty 's flagship Lion , which had knocked out her radio and caused enough smoke to obscure her signal halyards , caused the rest of the British battlecruisers , temporarily under the command of Rear Admiral Sir Gordon Moore in New Zealand , to think that that signal applied to them . In response , they turned away from Hipper 's main body and engaged Blücher . New Zealand fired 147 shells at Blücher before the German ship capsized and sank at 12 : 07 after being torpedoed by Arethusa . Captain Halsey had again worn the piupiu over his uniform during the battle , and the lack of damage to New Zealand was once more attributed to its good luck properties . 
 New Zealand was relieved by Australia as flagship of the 2nd BCS on 22 February 1915 . The squadron joined the Grand Fleet in a sortie on 29 March , in response to intelligence that the German fleet was leaving port as the precursor to a major operation . By the next night , the German ships had withdrawn , and the squadron returned to Rosyth . On 11 April , the British fleet was again deployed on the intelligence that a German force was planning an operation . The Germans intended to lay mines at the Swarte Bank , but after a scouting Zeppelin located a British light cruiser squadron , they began to prepare for what they thought was a British attack . Heavy fog and the need to refuel caused Australia and the British vessels to return to port on 17 April , and although they were redeployed that night , they were unable to stop two German light cruisers from laying the minefield . From 26 to 28 January 1916 , the 2nd BCS was positioned off the Skagerrak while the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron swept the strait in an unsuccessful search for a possible minelayer . 
 On the morning of 21 April 1916 , the 2nd BCS sailed again for the Skagerrak , this time to support efforts to disrupt the transport of Swedish ore to Germany . The planned destroyer sweep of the Kattegat was cancelled when word came that the High Seas Fleet was mobilising for an operation of their own ( later learned to be timed to coincide with the Irish Easter Rising ) , and the British ships were ordered to a rendezvous point in the middle of the North Sea , while the rest of the Grand Fleet made for the south @-@ eastern end of the Long Forties . On the afternoon of 22 April , the Battlecruiser Fleet was patrolling to the north @-@ west of Horn Reefs when heavy fog came down . The ships were zigzagging to avoid submarine attack when Australia collided with sister ship New Zealand twice in three minutes . Australia was damaged badly enough to be put out of action for several months , but New Zealand returned to the fleet on 30 May , a day before the start of the Battle of Jutland , relieving Indefatigable as flagship . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 On 31 May 1916 , the 2nd BCS consisted of New Zealand ( flagship of Rear Admiral William Christopher Pakenham ) and Indefatigable ; Australia was still under repair following her collision with New Zealand . The squadron was assigned to Admiral Beatty 's Battlecruiser Fleet , which had put to sea to intercept a sortie by the High Seas Fleet into the North Sea . The British were able to decode the German radio messages and left their bases before the Germans put to sea . Hipper 's battlecruisers spotted the Battlecruiser Fleet to their west at 3 : 20 p.m. , but Beatty 's ships didn 't spot the Germans to their east until 3 : 30 . Two minutes later , he ordered a course change to east @-@ south @-@ east to position himself astride the German 's line of retreat and called his ships ' crews to action stations . He also ordered the 2nd BCS , which had been leading , to fall in astern of the 1st BCS . Hipper ordered his ships to turn to starboard , away from the British , to assume a south @-@ easterly course , and reduced speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) to allow three light cruisers of the 2nd Scouting Group to catch up . With this turn , Hipper was falling back on the High Seas Fleet , then about 60 miles ( 97 km ) behind him . Around this time , Beatty altered course to the east as it was quickly apparent that he was still too far north to cut off Hipper . 
 Thus began the so @-@ called " Run to the South " as Beatty changed course to steer east @-@ south @-@ east at 3 : 45 , paralleling Hipper 's course , now that the range closed to under 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) . The Germans opened fire first at 3 : 48 , followed by the British . The British ships were still in the process of making their turn , and only the two leading ships , Lion and HMS Princess Royal , had steadied on their course when the Germans opened fire . The British formation was echeloned to the right with Indefatigable in the rear and the furthest to the west , and New Zealand ahead of her and slightly further east . The German fire was accurate from the beginning , but the British overestimated the range as the German ships blended into the haze . Indefatigable aimed at SMS Von der Tann , while New Zealand , unengaged herself , targeted SMS Moltke . By 3 : 54 , the range was down to 12 @,@ 900 yards ( 11 @,@ 800 m ) and Beatty ordered a course change two points to starboard to open up the range at 3 : 57 . Indefatigable was destroyed at about 4 : 03 , when her magazines exploded . 
 After Indefatigable 's loss , New Zealand shifted her fire to Von der Tann in accordance with Beatty 's standing instructions . The range had grown too far for accurate shooting , so Beatty altered course four points to port to close the range again between 4 : 12 and 4 : 15 . By this time , the 5th Battle Squadron , consisting of four Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships , had closed up and was engaging Von der Tann and Moltke . At 4 : 23 , a 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) shell from HMS Tiger struck near Von der Tann 's rear turret , starting a fire among the practice targets stowed there that completely obscured the ship and caused New Zealand to shift fire to Moltke . At 4 : 26 , the ship was hit by a 28 @-@ centimetre ( 11 in ) shell , fired by Von der Tann , on ' X ' barbette that detonated on contact and knocked loose a piece of armour that briefly jammed ' X ' turret and blew a hole in the upper deck . Four minutes later , Southampton , scouting in front of Beatty 's ships , spotted the lead elements of the High Seas Fleet charging north at top speed . Three minutes later , she sighted the topmasts of Vice @-@ Admiral Reinhard Scheer 's battleships , but did not transmit a message to Beatty for another five minutes . Beatty continued south for another two minutes to confirm the sighting himself before ordering a sixteen @-@ point turn to starboard in succession . New Zealand , the last ship in the line , turned prematurely to stay outside the range of the oncoming battleships . 
 New Zealand was straddled several times by the battleship SMS Prinzregent Luitpold but was not hit . Beatty 's ships maintained full speed in an attempt to increase the distance between them and the High Seas Fleet , and gradually moved out of range . They turned north and then north @-@ east to try to rendezvous with the main body of the Grand Fleet . At 5 : 40 , they opened fire again on the German battlecruisers . The setting sun blinded the German gunners , and as they could not make out the British ships , they turned away to the north @-@ east at 5 : 47 . Beatty gradually turned more towards the east to allow him to cover the deployment of the Grand Fleet in battle formation and to move ahead of it , but he mistimed his manoeuvre and forced the leading division to fall off towards the east , further away from the Germans . By 6 : 35 , Beatty was following Indomitable and HMS Inflexible of the 3rd BCS as they were steering east @-@ south @-@ east , leading the Grand Fleet , and continuing to engage Hipper 's battlecruisers to their south @-@ west . A few minutes earlier , Scheer had ordered a simultaneous 180 ° starboard turn and Beatty lost sight of the High Seas Fleet in the haze . Twenty minutes later , Scheer ordered another 180 ° turn which put them on a converging course again with the Grand Fleet , which had altered course to the south . This allowed the Grand Fleet to cross Scheer 's T , forming a battle line that cut across his battle line and badly damaging his leading ships . Scheer ordered yet another 180 ° turn at 7 : 13 in an attempt to extricate the High Seas Fleet from the trap into which he had sent them . 
 This was successful , and the British lost sight of the Germans until 8 : 05 , when HMS Castor spotted smoke bearing west @-@ north @-@ west . Ten minutes later , she had closed the range enough to identify German torpedo boats , and engaged them . Beatty turned west upon hearing gunfire and spotted the German battlecruisers only 8 @,@ 500 yards ( 7 @,@ 800 m ) away . Inflexible opened fire at 8 : 20 , followed by the rest of Beatty 's battlecruisers . New Zealand and Indomitable concentrated their fire on SMS Seydlitz , and hit her five times before she turned west to disengage . Shortly after 8 : 30 , the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of Rear Admiral Mauve 's II Battle Squadron were spotted and fire switched to them . The Germans had poor visibility and were able to fire only a few rounds at them before turning away to the west . The British battlecruisers hit the German ships several times before they blended into the haze around 8 : 40 . After this , Beatty changed course to south @-@ south @-@ east and maintained that course , ahead of both the Grand Fleet and the High Seas Fleet , until 2 : 55 the next morning , when the order was given to reverse course and head home . 
 New Zealand fired 420 twelve @-@ inch shells during the battle , more than any other ship on either side . Despite this , only four successful hits were credited to the battlecruiser : three on Seydlitz and one on the pre @-@ dreadnought SMS Schleswig @-@ Holstein . She was hit only once during the battle , confirming for the crew the piupiu and tiki worn by her new captain , <unk> ( Jimmy ) Green , brought good luck . 
 = = = Post @-@ Jutland career = = = 
 New Zealand was relieved by Australia as flagship on 9 June and temporarily attached to the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , until HMS Renown relieved her in September . On the evening of 18 August , the Grand Fleet put to sea in response to a message deciphered by Room 40 that indicated that the High Seas Fleet , minus II Squadron , would be leaving harbour that night . The German objective was to bombard Sunderland on 19 August , based on extensive reconnaissance provided by airships and submarines . The Grand Fleet sailed with 29 dreadnought battleships and six battlecruisers . Throughout the next day , Jellicoe and Scheer received conflicting intelligence ; after reaching the location in the North Sea where the British expected to encounter the High Seas Fleet , they turned north in the erroneous belief that they had entered a minefield . Scheer turned south again , then steered south @-@ eastward to pursue a lone British battle squadron sighted by an airship , which was in fact the Harwich Force of cruisers and destroyers under Commodore Tyrwhitt . Realising their mistake , the Germans changed course for home . The only contact came in the evening when Tyrwhitt sighted the High Seas Fleet but was unable to achieve an advantageous attack position before dark , and broke off contact . The British and the German fleets returned home ; the British lost two cruisers to submarine attacks , and one German dreadnought had been torpedoed . New Zealand underwent a refit at Rosyth in November 1916 . She temporarily replaced Australia as squadron flagship between 29 November and 7 January 1917 . 
 German minesweepers and escorting light cruisers were attempting to clear British @-@ laid minefields in the Heligoland Bight in late 1917 . The Admiralty planned a large operation for 17 November to destroy the ships , and allocated two light cruiser squadrons and the 1st Cruiser Squadron covered by the reinforced 1st Battlecruiser Squadron and , more distantly , the 1st Battle Squadron of battleships . New Zealand was attached to the 1st BCS for this operation , which became known as the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . New Zealand did not fire her guns during the battle . As in previous engagements , Captain Green wore the piupiu and tiki for luck . 
 During 1918 , New Zealand and the Grand Fleet 's other capital ships were used on occasion to escort convoys between Britain and Norway . The 2nd BCS spent the period from 8 to 21 February covering these convoys in company with battleships and destroyers , and put to sea on 6 March in company with the 1st BCS to support minelayers . The 2nd BCS again supported minelayers in the North Sea from 25 June or 26 June to the end of July . During September and October , New Zealand and the 2nd BCS supervised and protected minelaying operations north of Orkney . The battlecruiser was present at the surrender of the High Seas Fleet as part of the 2nd BCS . 
 = = = = Dominion tour = = = = 
 Following the war , Admiral Jellicoe was tasked with helping to plan and coordinate the naval policies and defences of the British Dominions . New Zealand was made available for his transportation , and was refitted between December 1918 and February 1919 for the tour ; the main changes were the removal of her flying @-@ off platforms and the lower forward four @-@ inch guns . The first stop was India , with New Zealand arriving in Bombay on 14 March 1919 and departing six weeks later . The battlecruiser arrived at Albany , Western Australia , on 15 May , where Jellicoe and his staff disembarked to take an overland route across the country . New Zealand sailed via Melbourne and Hobart to depart from Sydney for New Zealand on 16 August . 
 The ship called upon Christmas Island , southeast of Fanning Island , on 19 November 1920 , thinking it uninhabited . Instead , they were greeted by Joe English , of Medford , Massachusetts , who had been manager of a copra plantation on the island , but had become marooned with two others , when the war had broken out . The men were rescued . 
 The ship was particularly popular in New Zealand , where crowds flocked to visit her as they had done in 1913 . Jellicoe , too , was popular and he later returned to New Zealand to serve as Governor @-@ General from 1920 to 1924 . The ship stopped off at Fiji and Hawaii before arriving on 8 November in Canada , the final country to be assessed . After returning to the United Kingdom , the battlecruiser was paid off into reserve on 15 March 1920 . New Zealand was regarded as obsolete by the Royal Navy , because her 12 @-@ inch guns were inferior to the 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns deployed on the latest generation of battlecruisers . She was sold for scrap on 19 December 1922 to meet the tonnage restrictions set on the British Empire by the Washington Naval Treaty . The New Zealand Government completed paying off the loan used to fund the ship in the 1944 / 45 financial year . 
 Many items from the battlecruiser were sent to New Zealand after she was scrapped . Equipment including several 4 @-@ inch guns , a range finder and laundry equipment , were used by military units while other artifacts were placed on display in museums . During World War II , the 4 @-@ inch guns were the main armament of the land batteries which protected the entrances to the harbours at Auckland , Wellington and Lyttelton . The captain 's piupiu was returned to New Zealand in 2005 , and is on display at the Torpedo Bay Navy Museum in Auckland alongside the ship 's bell and other artifacts . The Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa in Wellington also holds several items from the ship in its collection . 
 = 1993 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1993 Giro d 'Italia , ( English : Tour of Italy ) , was the 76th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro started off in Porto <unk> on 23 May with a split stage , with the first leg being a mass @-@ start stage and the latter an individual time trial . The race ended on 13 June with a stage that stretched 166 km ( 103 @.@ 1 mi ) from Biella to Milan . Twenty teams entered the race , which was won by Miguel Indurain of the Banesto team . Second and third respectively were the Latvian Piotr Ugrumov and the Italian rider , Claudio Chiappucci . Indurain 's victory in the 1993 Giro was his first step in completing the Giro – Tour double – winning the Giro d 'Italia and Tour de France in one calendar year – becoming the first rider to repeat this feat in consecutive years . 
 Moreno Argentin was the first rider to wear the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) after winning the opening stage . Argentin held that lead for ten more days before losing it to Miguel Indurain after the conclusion stage 10 . Bruno Leali stole the lead away from Indurain after the race 's eleventh leg and held it until the end of the fourteenth day of racing . Indurain gained the lead after mountainous stage 14 and then held it all the way to the Giro 's finish in Milan . 
 Indurain became the first Spanish rider to win the Giro d 'Italia in consecutive years . Amongst the other classifications that the race awarded , Italian Adriano Baffi of Mercatone Uno – <unk> – Medeghini won the points competition , Carrera Jeans – Tassoni 's Claudio Chiappucci won the mountains classification , Lampre – Polti 's Pavel Tonkov completed the Giro as the best rider aged 25 or younger in the general classification , finishing fifth overall , and Ján Svorada of Lampre @-@ Polti won the intergiro competition . Lampre @-@ Polti finished as the winners of the team classification , ranking each of the twenty teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . Ariostea finished as winners of the team points classification . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty teams were invited by the race organizers to participate in the 1993 edition of the Giro d 'Italia , seven of which were based outside of Italy . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 180 cyclists . From the riders that began the race , 132 made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The 20 teams that took part in the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton included the 1992 winner , Miguel Indurain , who had not had a successful start to his 1993 campaign according to El Mundo writer Javier de Dalmases . Dalmases went on to name Gianni Bugno , Pavel Tonkov , 1988 winner Andrew Hampsten , and Claudio Chiappucci as contenders for the overall crown , while author Bill McGann dismissed Bugno saying that he was ability to " win at will " had passed . 
 Famed sprinters Mario Cipollini and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov did not compete in the race , while Dutch sprinter Jean @-@ Paul van Poppel was going to race in the Giro but was left off the roster before it started . With the aforementioned riders ' absence , Dalmases stated that Italian Adriano Baffi would likely win some of the flat stages . In addition , Dalmases believed Maurizio Fondriest was in peak form coming into the race and that he would be the first rider to don the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1993 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 14 November 1992 . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were nine stages containing high mountains , of which five had summit finishes : stage 3 , to Sella di Corno ; stage 13 , to Passo delle Erbe ; stage 15 , to Lumezzane ; stage 17 , to <unk> ; and stage 20 , to Oropa . Another stage with a mountain @-@ top finish was stage 19 , which consisted of a climbing time trial to village of Sestriere . The organizers chose to include one rest day . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 141 km ( 88 mi ) shorter , contained one more rest day , more mountains , and lacked an opening time trial prologue . In addition , this race contained one fewer stage , but two more sets of half stages . 
 The race began with a split stage on the island of Elba , where Napoleon Bonaparte was exiled briefly in 1814 . The race last visited in 1980 where the race finished in Portoferraio with a sprint finish won by Carmelo Barone . The route contained less time trials than the 1992 route , which Italian rider Claudio Chiappucci had requested . The race 's fourteenth stage , which began and ended in <unk> , was named the queen stage for the amount of difficult mountains contained in the stage . Italian rider Franco Chioccioli liked that there were more points of attack in the race and believed that played into Miguel Indurain 's hands . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 This edition of the Giro began with a split stage , with the morning leg consisting of a 85 km ( 53 mi ) undulating course and the afternoon stage being a brief 9 km ( 6 mi ) individual time trial . Moreno Argentin won the morning stage after attacking on the final climb of the day to win the leg by thirty @-@ four seconds over the chasing peloton . The afternoon time trial navigated the streets of Portoferraio and was won by Italian Maurizio Fondriest . The Giro 's second stage was relatively a flat route that culminated with a sprint finish which was won by Adriano Baffi . The next day saw the first uphill finish to the Selle di Corno . General classification hopeful Piotr Ugrumov positioned himself in the day 's breakaway and attacked up the final climb to win the stage and climb to second overall . 
 The Giro 's fourth stage ended with a sprint finish that was won by Italian Fabio Baldato . Jolly Componibili @-@ Club 88 's Dimitri Konyshev attacked in the closing kilometers of the fifth stage to take the win . The day of racing concluded with a sprint finish in Messina , which was won by Italian Guido Bontempi . Bjarne Riis , Giancarlo Perini , and Michele Coppolillo made up the leading breakaway as the race made its way into the stage seven finish in Agrigento . Riis and Coppolillo pulled away from Perini in the final seconds and Riis subsequently edged out Perini for the victory . The race 's eighth leg came down to a sprint finish in Palermo , where Adriano Baffi bested the likes of Endrio Leoni and Fabio Baldato for the win . 
 The race 's ninth stage began in <unk> after the race necessitated the transfer to the city during the rest day the day before . The riders were preparing for a sprint finish when Giorgio Furlan and Mario Chiesa attacked with about 5 km ( 3 mi ) of racing to go . The two riders successfully fended off the chasing peloton and went on to the finish in Fabriano , where Furlan managed to beat out Chiesa for the victory . The stage 10 individual time trial began and ended in the city of Senigallia . Miguel Indurain dominated the course and gained over a minute on race leader Moreno Argentin , which allowed him to gain the overall lead of the race and don the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . 
 Stage eleven was marred by rainy weather , which caused many splits in the peloton . Fabio Fontanelli won the stage as a member of the lead group , but tenth @-@ place finisher Bruno Leali gained a six @-@ second race lead by finishing more than three minutes in front of overall leader Miguel Indurain . The Giro 's twelfth stage began with a large climb which led to many attacks . Despite the flurry of attacks , the whole peloton eventually made it to the finish line together for a sprint finish that was won by Russian Dimitri Konyshev . 
 The thirteenth stage saw the first stage that contained mountains from the Dolomites . On the penultimate climb of the day , the Passo di <unk> , a lead group broke away that contained the likes of Andrew Hampsten , Piotr <unk> , and Massimiliano Lelli . The riders stayed out in front over the final climb of the Passi delle Erbe , but were eventually caught by the chase group containing the race leader Leoni . Moreno Argentin edged out Lelli for his second stage victory at the 1993 Giro d 'Italia . The next day 's route was even more demanding as it contained two ascents of the Passo Pordoi , as well as the climbing of three other highly categorized climbs . Miguel Indurain , Ugrumov , Claudio Chiappucci , and a few other general classification hopefuls were in the leading breakaway as they crossed the Pordoi for the second time . The group rode into the finish in <unk> with race leader Leoni trailing by several minutes . Chiappucci won the sprint to the line , while Indurain regained the overall lead . 
 Davide Cassani won the fifteenth stage that featured a summit finish to Lumezzane , while the general classification remained largely unaltered . The next day of racing saw a break from the mountains , with a primarily flat course that stretched from <unk> to <unk> . The stage ultimately finished with a bunch sprint that was won by Italian Fabio Baldato . The Giro 's seventeenth stage concluded with a summit finish to <unk> . Marco Saligari won the stage by over a minute on the second @-@ place finisher Gianluca <unk> , while the general classification contenders finished together leaving the classification largely unchanged . Stage eighteen was a primarily flat stage that closed with a field sprint . Adriano Baffi won the field sprint and the stage , which was his third stage victory at the Giro that year . 
 The final time trial in the 1993 Giro d 'Italia was 55 km ( 34 mi ) in length and had a summit finish on the famous climb of the Sestriere . Miguel Indurain won the leg and extended his lead over the rest of the field . The penultimate stage featured a 10 km ( 6 mi ) climb to Oropa . Second overall Piotr Ugrumov attacked multiple times on the final climb of the day to gain time on Indurain ; he attacked one last time and Indurain could not match his move . Massimo Ghirotto was the first rider to cross the finish line , with Ugrumov finishing in fifth and Indurain in tenth . Ugrumov gained 40 seconds on Indurain 's lead , but it was not good enough to take it away from the Spaniard . The final stage was a primarily flat course that stretched from Biella to Milan . The leg culminated with a bunch sprint that was won by Italian Fabio Baldato . Indurain had won his second consecutive Giro d 'Italia . 
 Success in stages was limited to nine of the competing teams , seven of which achieved multiple stage victories , while five individual riders won multiple stages . The riders that won more than once were Moreno Argentin in stages 1a and 13 , Adriano Baffi in stages 2 , 8 , and 18 , Fabio Baldato in stages 4 , 16 , and 21 , Dimitri Konyshev in stages 5 and 12 , and Miguel Indurain in stages 10 and 19 . <unk> – Ballan won two stages with Moreno Argentin and stage 3 with Piotr Ugrumov . Ariostea won four stages , with Bjarne Riis in stage 7 , Giorgio Furlan in stage 9 , Davide Cassani in stage 15 , and Marco Saligari stage 17 . Banesto won two stages with Miguel Indurain . GB – MG Maglificio won three stages with Fabio Baldato . Jolly Componibili @-@ Club 88 won two stages with Dimitri Konyshev . Carrera Jeans – Tassoni won two stages , stage 6 with Guido Bontempi and stage 14 with Claudio Chiappucci . Navigare – Blue Storm also won multiple stages , with Fabiano Fontanelli in stage 11 and three stages with Adriano Baffi . 
 Lampre – Polti and ZG Mobili each won one stage apiece . Maurizio Fondriest of Lampre @-@ Polti won the stage 1b individual time trial , while ZG Mobili rider Massimo Ghirotto won the mountainous stage 20 . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Five different jerseys were worn during the 1993 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo Pordoi . The first rider to cross the Pordoi Pass was Spaniard Miguel Indurain . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1969 were eligible for it . The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also a classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . There was another team classification that awarded points to each team based off their riding 's finishing position in every stage . The team with the highest total of points was the leader of the classification . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final Standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Miguel Indurain entered the Tour de France in July as the favorite to win the race . He would go on to win the race after taking the lead after the conclusion of the ninth stage . By winning the Tour , he became the first rider to complete the Giro - Tour double in two consecutive years . 
 = Delaware Route 4 = 
 Delaware Route 4 ( DE 4 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 279 and DE 896 in Newark east to DE 48 in downtown Wilmington . The route passes through suburban areas in northern New Castle County between Newark and Wilmington , intersecting DE 72 in the eastern part of Newark , DE 273 in Ogletown , DE 58 in Christiana , DE 7 in Stanton , DE 141 in Newport , DE 62 and DE 100 between Newport and Wilmington , and Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) / U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) in Wilmington . DE 4 is a four @-@ lane road much of its length . 
 What is now DE 4 was originally a county road that was paved in the 1930s . DE 4 was designated in the 1960s to run from the Maryland border along Chestnut Hill Road near Newark east to DE 48 in Wilmington . Between 1971 and 1981 , the route extended past DE 48 along Washington Street and Washington Street Extension to US 13 Business ( US 13 Bus . ) in Bellefonte . In the 1980s , the western terminus of DE 4 was realigned from Chestnut Hill Road to the newly built Christiana Parkway , terminating at DE 2 ( now DE 279 ) and DE 896 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 4 begins at an intersection with Elkton Road in Newark , which heads southwest as DE 279 and northeast as DE 896 . From here the route heads southeast concurrent with DE 896 on the three @-@ lane undivided Christiana Parkway , carrying two eastbound lanes and one westbound lane . The road runs through wooded areas and comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line before it cures east and widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it passes to the south of the University of Delaware 's Science , Technology , and Advanced Research campus . 
 At the intersection with South College Avenue DE 896 splits to the south and DE 4 continues east near Delaware Stadium and the Bob Carpenter Center on the University of Delaware campus to the north , intersecting Chestnut Hill Road . At this point the road becomes Chestnut Hill Road and runs between farmland to the north and residential neighborhoods to the south as it comes to a crossing of Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The road heads into commercial areas and intersects DE 72 . 
 Past this intersection , DE 4 continues east along Chestnut Hill Road and heads into suburban Brookside , passing through residential neighborhoods with some businesses and curving to the northeast . The route continues to Ogletown and passes to the southeast of the Delaware School for the Deaf before it has an interchange with DE 273 and the name changes to Ogletown Stanton Road . Following this , the road passes to the north of Christiana Hospital . Beyond the hospital DE 4 comes to an intersection with the western terminus of DE 58 and an access road to Delaware Park Racetrack and the Churchmans Crossing station on SEPTA 's Wilmington / Newark Line ( which follows the Northeast Corridor ) in Christiana . The route continues through commercial areas with some woods and curves east to reach an intersection with DE 7 . 
 At this point , DE 4 turns north for a concurrency with DE 7 on the six @-@ lane divided Stanton Christiana Road , running through wooded areas with nearby development , including the Hale @-@ Byrnes House , and passing over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line and White Clay Creek . The road passes to the east of Delaware Park Racetrack and curves northeast into Stanton . At this point , the two routes head into a commercial area and split into the one @-@ way pair of Mitch Road eastbound and Main Street westbound . DE 7 splits from DE 4 by heading northwest on Limestone Road . DE 4 continues east along the one @-@ way pair past homes and businesses with two lanes in each direction . The directions of the route rejoin and the route becomes four @-@ lane divided West Newport Pike . DE 4 enters Newport and splits into the one @-@ way pair of West Market Street eastbound and West Justis Street westbound . The route interchanges with the DE 141 and the one @-@ way pair becomes East Market Street eastbound and East Justis Street westbound . 
 The two directions of DE 4 rejoin and the route continues northeast as four @-@ lane undivided East Newport <unk> road leaves Newport and heads between suburban neighborhoods to the northwest and Banning Park to the southeast . The route intersects DE 62 and becomes Maryland Avenue , passing a mix of homes and businesses . The road comes to an intersection with the southern terminus of DE 100 and crosses a CSX railroad line . DE 4 continues into Wilmington and passes rowhomes and businesses . The route passes under I @-@ 95 / US 202 and comes to a ramp from northbound I @-@ 95 / US 202 . Past this , DE 4 enters downtown Wilmington and splits into the one @-@ way pair of Maryland Avenue eastbound and South Monroe Street westbound before ending at DE 48 , which is routed on the one @-@ way pair of Martin Luther King , Jr . Boulevard eastbound and West Second Street westbound . 
 DE 4 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 53 @,@ 936 vehicles at the west end of the DE 7 concurrency to a low of 12 @,@ 033 vehicles at the I @-@ 95 / US 202 interchange . The entire length of DE 4 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what would become DE 4 existed as a county road . The road from Stanton to Wilmington was paved four years later and the portion west of Stanton was paved by 1936 . In 1936 , work was underway to improve the road between Stanton and Newport by widening and resurfacing it , with completion a year later . In 1957 , Maryland Avenue between <unk> and Boxwood Road was widened to four lanes and the one @-@ way pair along Market Street and Justis Street in Newport was established . 
 The present DE 4 designation first appeared in 1967 , at which point it ran from the Maryland border near Newark east to DE 48 in Wilmington , following Chestnut Hill Road from the state line before picking up its current alignment southeast of Newark . By 1971 , the route was extended northeast to US 13 Bus. in Bellefonte , forming a brief concurrency with DE 48 before continuing along Washington Street and Washington Street Extension . DE 4 was truncated back to DE 48 by 1981 , with DE 3 being realigned to the easternmost part of Washington Street Extension three years later . The portion of DE 4 concurrent with DE 7 was widened into a divided highway in 1985 , with the road shifted west to a new alignment passing over the Amtrak tracks and the White Clay Creek . 
 The Christiana Parkway around the southern edge of Newark was completed in September 1983 and DE 4 was realigned to use the Christiana Parkway by 1987 , ending at DE 2 in the southwestern part of Newark . DE 896 was rerouted to use the Christiana Parkway the following year with DE 2 following by 1990 . The DE 2 designation was removed from the Christiana Parkway in 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Black Francis = 
 Charles Michael <unk> Thompson IV ( born April 6 , 1965 ) is an American singer , songwriter and guitarist . He is best known as the frontman of the influential alternative rock band Pixies , with whom he performs under the stage name Black Francis . Following the band 's breakup in 1993 , he embarked on a solo career under the name Frank Black . After releasing two albums with record label 4AD and one with American Recordings , he left the label and formed a new band , Frank Black and the Catholics . He re @-@ adopted the name Black Francis in 2007 . 
 His vocal style has varied from a screaming , yowling delivery as lead vocalist of the Pixies to a more measured and melodic style in his solo career . His cryptic lyrics mostly explore unconventional subjects , such as surrealism , incest and biblical violence , along with science fiction and surf culture . His use of atypical meter signatures , loud – quiet dynamics and distinct preference for live @-@ to @-@ two @-@ track recording in his career as a solo artist give him a distinct style within alternative rock . 
 As frontman of the Pixies , his songs ( such as " Where Is My Mind ? " and " Debaser " ) received praise and citations from contemporaries , including Radiohead 's Thom Yorke and Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain . Cobain once said that " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was his attempt to " rip off the Pixies " . Thompson reformed the Pixies in 2004 and continues to release solo records and tour as a solo artist . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Youth and college = = = 
 Charles Thompson was born in Boston , Massachusetts . His father was a bar owner , and Thompson lived in Los Angeles , California as a baby because his father wanted to " learn more about the restaurant and bar business " . Thompson was introduced to music at a young age , as his parents listened to 1960s folk rock . His first guitar was his mother 's , a Yamaha classical guitar bought with money from his father 's bar tips , which he started to play at age " 11 or 12 " . 
 Thompson 's family moved around , first with his father , and then his stepfather , a religious man who " pursued real estate on both coasts " ; his parents had separated twice by the time he was in first grade . When Thompson was 12 , his mother and stepfather joined a church that was tied to the evangelical Assemblies of God , a move that influenced many of his songs written with the Pixies , which often refer to the Bible . 
 He discovered the music of Christian rock singer @-@ songwriter Larry Norman at 13 when Norman played at a religious summer camp that Thompson attended . Norman 's music influenced Thompson to the extent that he named the Pixies ' first EP and a lyric in the band 's song " Levitate Me " after one of Norman 's catchphrases , " Come on , pilgrim ! " Thompson later described the music he listened to during his youth : 
 Thompson lived in Marblehead , Massachusetts , in an apartment . Just before Thompson 's senior year , his family moved to Westport , Massachusetts , where he received a Teenager of the Year award — the title of a later solo album . During this time , Thompson composed several songs that appeared in his later career , including " Here Comes Your Man " from Doolittle , and " Velvety Instrumental Version " . 
 After graduating from high school in 1983 , he studied at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , majoring in anthropology . Thompson shared a room with another roommate for a semester before moving in with future Pixies guitarist Joey Santiago . The two shared an interest in rock music , and Santiago introduced Thompson to 1970s punk and the music of David Bowie ; they began to jam together . It was at this time that Thompson discovered The Cars , a band he described as " very influential on me and the Pixies " . 
 In his second year of college , Thompson embarked on a trip to San Juan , Puerto Rico as part of an exchange program . He spent six months in an apartment with a " weird , psycho roommate " , who later served as a direct inspiration for the Pixies song " Crackity Jones " ; many of the band 's early songs refer to Thompson 's experiences in Puerto Rico . Thompson failed to learn to speak Spanish formally , and left his studies after debating whether he would go to New Zealand to view Halley 's Comet ( he later said it " seemed like the cool romantic thing to do at the time " ) , or start a rock band . He wrote a letter urging Santiago , with the words " we gotta do it , now is the time Joe " , to join him in a band upon his return to Boston . 
 = = = Pixies = = = 
 Soon after returning to Massachusetts , Thompson dropped out of college , and moved to Boston with Santiago . He spent 1985 working in a warehouse , " managing buttons on teddy bears " , composing songs on his acoustic guitar , and writing lyrics on the subway train . In January 1986 , Thompson formed the Pixies with Santiago . Bassist Kim Deal was recruited a week later via a classified advertisement placed in a Boston paper , which requested a bassist " into Hüsker Dü and Peter , Paul and Mary . " Drummer David Lovering was later hired on recommendation from Deal 's husband . 
 In 1987 , the Pixies released an 18 @-@ track demo tape , commonly referred to as The Purple Tape . Thompson 's father assisted the band financially , loaning $ 1 @,@ 000 in order to record the demo tape ; Thompson later said that his father " wasn 't around for a lot of my younger years , so I think he was doing his best to make up for lost time " . The Purple Tape led to a recording contract with the English independent record label 4AD . For the release of the mini album Come On Pilgrim , Thompson adopted the alias " Black Francis " , a name inspired by his father : " he had been saving that name in case he had another son " . 
 In 1988 , the Pixies recorded their debut album Surfer Rosa . Thompson wrote and sang on all the tracks , with the exception of the single " Gigantic " , which was co @-@ written and sung by Deal . To support the album , the band undertook a European tour , during which Thompson met Eric Drew Feldman , a later collaborator on Pixies and solo albums . Doolittle , with Thompson @-@ penned songs such as " Debaser " and " Monkey Gone To Heaven " , was released the following year to widespread critical acclaim . However , by this time , tensions between Thompson and Deal , combined with exhaustion , led the band to announce a hiatus . Thompson has an aversion to flying , and spent this time driving across America with his girlfriend , Jean Walsh ( whom he had met in the band 's early days ) , performing solo shows in order to raise funds to buy furniture for his new Los Angeles apartment . 
 The band reconvened in 1990 , and recorded two further albums : 1990 's Bossanova and 1991 's Trompe le Monde ; the latter was Thompson 's first collaboration with Feldman . The later Pixies albums were characterized by Thompson 's increasing influence on the band 's output , as well as a focus on science fiction themes , including aliens and UFOs . These themes would continue to be explored throughout his early solo work . Trompe le Monde includes the song " U @-@ Mass " , which was written about the university he attended as a youth , and due to the keyboard part played by Feldman , signified a move away from the band 's alternative rock sound . Although Deal had contributed on the songs " Gigantic " ( from Surfer Rosa ) and " Silver " ( from Doolittle ) , from Bossanova on , Thompson wrote all the band 's original material . This contributed to the increasing tension between him and Deal , and the Pixies broke up in 1992 ; this was not publicly announced until early 1993 . 
 = = = Early solo career = = = 
 While the Pixies ' 1991 album Trompe le Monde was being recorded , Thompson had discussions with the album 's producer , Gil Norton , about a possible solo record . He told Norton he was keen to record again , even though he had no new material ; as a result , the two decided on a cover album . However , by the time Thompson visited a recording studio again in 1992 , he had " plenty of tunes and musical scraps . " 
 He collaborated with Feldman to record new material ; they began by trimming down the number of covers to one , The Beach Boys ' " Hang On to Your Ego " . Feldman became the album 's producer , and played keyboard and bass guitar on several songs , with Santiago featuring on lead guitar and Nick Vincent on drums . Francis recorded the album during the hiatus and breakup of the Pixies in late 1992 and early 1993 . He then adopted the stage name " Frank Black " ( inverting his old persona " Black Francis " ) and released the results as Frank Black in March 1993 . Frank Black was characterized by a focus on UFOs and science fiction , although he explored other subjects , such as in " I Heard Ramona Sing " , a song about the Ramones . The album was similar in style , both musically and lyrically , to the Pixies ' albums Bossanova and Trompe le Monde . Feldman later said that the first record connected his solo career with Trompe le Monde , " but at the same time it is an island , like nothing else he [ Black ] did . " 
 The following year , Black released his second solo record , a 22 @-@ song double album entitled Teenager of the Year . Teenager included the song " Headache " ( sample ) , a moderate success on alternative rock playlists ; critics described the song as " irresistible pop " . The production of Teenager of the Year was markedly different from Frank Black ; in the previous album , MIDI templates were used when writing songs , but in Teenager , Black showed individual parts to band members , the core of which included drummer Vincent and Lyle Workman on lead guitar . Feldman noted that Thompson 's songwriting became " a lot more spontaneous " while recording the album . Thompson had begun to stray from his style with the Pixies , writing songs that covered a variety of genres and topics , and his new @-@ found method of recording was closer to later albums than that of Frank Black and Trompe le Monde . 
 Both Frank Black and Teenager of the Year were critically well received , although they enjoyed limited commercial success . In 1995 , Thompson left his long @-@ time labels 4AD and Elektra . In 1996 , he released The Cult of Ray on Rick Rubin 's American Recordings ; the album marked a turn away from the elaborate production of his first solo works and was recorded primarily live with few overdubs . His band for this album featured sole Teenager holdover Lyle Workman on lead guitar , along with bassist David McCaffrey and Scott <unk> on drums . Though the album was neither critically nor commercially successful , its stripped @-@ down approach would increasingly define Thompson 's working methods for the next several years . 
 = = = Frank Black and the Catholics = = = 
 Thompson dubbed his new band " Frank Black and the Catholics " , and recorded their eponymous first album in 1997 . Recorded live @-@ to @-@ two @-@ track initially as merely a demo , he was so pleased with the results that he decided to release the sessions with no further production . The album was delayed for over a year by conflicts at American , both internal and over its production , and was ultimately released in late 1998 by <unk> Records in the US . Since leaving American , Black has avoided long @-@ term contracts with labels , and has maintained ownership of his album masters , licensing each album individually for release . 
 Frank Black and the Catholics became the first album to be posted to the eMusic service ; they claim it is " the first album ever made legally available for commercial download " . Critical reception to the album was mixed , with some writers noting Thompson 's seemingly deliberate turn away from the " quirkiness " of the Pixies and his early solo work for a self @-@ consciously straightforward approach , and the " disappointingly straightforward punk @-@ pop " musical style present on the album . 
 He would continue to eschew multi @-@ track recording for the live @-@ to @-@ two @-@ track technique for all subsequent releases under the group name . Live @-@ to @-@ two @-@ track recording precludes the use of overdubs to correct errors or add texture ; all takes are recorded continuously , and mixing is done " on the fly " . On later albums , he incorporated more musicians into the sessions to allow for more varied instrumental textures . Explaining his rationale behind the method , he commented : 
 Well , it 's real . It 's a recording of a performance , of a real performance between a group of people , an entourage , a band , as opposed to a facsimile of that , which is frequently what people do with multi @-@ track recording ... I prefer it . It 's a little more real . It 's got a little more heart . 
 Workman left the Catholics in 1998 to pursue session and sideman work ; Rich Gilbert was added to the band to replace him . Frank Black and the Catholics released <unk> in 1999 and Dog in the Sand in 2001 . Dog in the Sand added Dave Philips on pedal steel guitar and lead guitar , and Santiago and Feldman began making occasional appearances with the group live and on record . Both <unk> and Dog in the Sand were produced by Nick Vincent . 
 By this time , while dismissing the possibility of a Pixies reunion , Thompson had begun to incorporate an increasing number of the band 's songs into Catholics concerts , as well as including Santiago in his solo work again . Black and the Catholics continued to release records ; two separate albums , Black Letter Days and Devil 's Workshop , were released simultaneously in 2002 . Devil 's Workshop included the song " Velvety " ( sample ) , a version of the Pixies song " Velvety Instrumental Version " ( written by Black as a teenager ) with lyrics . The song was one of the first signs that he had acknowledged his past work with the Pixies in his solo output . A sixth album with the Catholics , Show Me Your Tears , was released in 2003 . Show Me Your Tears ' title and many of the songs in it were inspired by Thompson 's recent divorce and entry into therapy . 
 = = = Pixies reunion , Nashville and the return of Black Francis = = = 
 In late 2003 , following long @-@ standing rumors , an official announcement was made that the Pixies were rehearsing for a reunion tour . The band played publicly for the first time in 12 years in April 2004 , and went on to tour extensively throughout the U.S. , Canada and Europe in the same year . They also recorded one of Deal 's compositions , " Bam Thwok " , which was released on the iTunes Music Store . Frank Black Francis , a double album bridging the gap between his two personas , was released to coincide with the Pixies reunion tour . The first disc consisted of solo demos of Pixies songs recorded the day before The Purple Tape was recorded , and the second contained studio collaborations , again of Pixies songs , with Two Pale Boys . 
 Also in 2004 , Thompson began to collaborate with a group of Nashville session musicians , including Steve Cropper , Spooner Oldham , Reggie Young , and Anton Fig , as well as producer Jon Tiven . In July 2005 , the collective released Honeycomb under the Frank Black name , to generally favorable reviews . Entertainment Weekly described the album as " spare , graceful , [ and ] in the pocket " , while Billboard noted it as " One of [ Thompson 's ] finest hours " . A second volume of Nashville sessions , a double album entitled Fast Man Raider Man , was released in June 2006 . Thompson appeared at a concert by Christian rock pioneer Larry Norman in June 2005 in Salem , Oregon . Norman and Thompson performed a duet on " Watch What You 're Doing " , which later appeared on Norman 's album , Live at The Elsinore . 
 Thompson continued to tour with the Pixies through 2005 and 2006 . Though the Catholics were effectively defunct , they released two separate albums of B @-@ sides and rarities , Snake Oil and One More Road for the Hit , on iTunes , with an eye towards a future CD release . Thompson was also working on more new solo material with Feldman in the first part of 2006 , some of which they performed live . In the fall of 2006 , Thompson began his first solo tour since 2003 , taking Feldman , Billy Block , and Duane Jarvis along as his backing band . In October 2006 , Thompson announced plans for the Pixies to start rehearsing and recording a new album in January 2007 , but it is believed that no recording took place because of the reluctance of another member of the Pixies to commit to the project . In December 2006 , he released the compilation <unk> album ; a collection of new studio tracks , hotel room sessions , and live acoustic recordings from a solo tour the previous summer . 
 A Frank Black " best of " compilation , Frank Black 93 @-@ 03 , was released in June 2007 . Concurrently with that release , Thompson undertook a European tour with a new band , featuring Salem 's Guards of Metropolis members Jason Carter and Charles Normal , as well as bassist Ding Archer . For this tour , Thompson eschewed his usual rhythm guitar role and performed solely as a frontman and singer . In September 2007 , a new album entitled <unk> was released under his former stage name of Black Francis . For this album , he was inspired by the life and works of Herman Brood , a Dutch musician and artist . He also released a new " mini @-@ album " entitled <unk> <unk> as Black Francis in March 2008 . 
 In February 2008 , Thompson was taken away by the Irish police in Dublin , Ireland after staging an impromptu " <unk> " acoustic solo gig at St. Stephen 's Green . He was later released and performed that night in Vicar Street as planned . However , a similar event planned for London was prevented by police and had to be re @-@ arranged for a small indoor venue . 
 Thompson currently lives in Amherst , Massachusetts , and is married to Violet Clark , his second wife , with whom he has three children , along with her two children from previous relationships . The couple formerly lived in Eugene , Oregon , where they met . Thompson and Clark currently compose the band Grand Duchy . Their debut album , Petit Fours , was released in February 2009 . 
 In 2008 , Black produced Art Brut 's third album , Art Brut vs. Satan , which was released the following year . Black gave several joint interviews with frontman Eddie Argos about the album , and Art Brut supported the Pixies at their 2009 Brixton Academy show . In 2010 , Black worked with the group a second time on their album Brilliant ! Tragic ! . 
 Black Francis released <unk> in March 2010 and contributed the song " I Heard Ramona Sing " to the soundtrack for the film Scott Pilgrim vs. the World released in August 2010 . 
 In the fall of 2010 in Nashville , Thompson recorded an album of new songs written and performed with collaborator Reid Paley , as Paley & Francis ( Reid Paley & Black Francis ) . The debut Paley & Francis album ( also titled Paley & Francis ) was produced by Jon Tiven , and features Reid Paley and Black Francis on guitars and vocals , accompanied by Muscle Shoals legends Spooner Oldham on piano and David Hood on bass . The album was released in October 2011 on Sonic <unk> in North America , and on Cooking Vinyl in the UK & Europe . 
 Paley & Francis debuted live in early September 2011 with club performances in Albany NY , Buffalo NY , and Hamilton , Ontario , and as one of the headliners of the <unk> Festival . The band for these performances consisted of Reid Paley and Black Francis on guitars and vocals , Eric <unk> on bass , and Dave <unk> on drums . The pair toured again from February 8 to 22 , 2013 , with the shows including solo performances by each artist . 
 Black Francis performed at The Coach House Concert Hall in San Juan Capistrano , California on March 22 , 2013 . The Pixies , minus original bassist Kim Deal , reunited for a United States and world tour in 2014 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 See also : Pixies ' musical style 
 Over the course of his career , Thompson 's musical style has grown to encompass a large number of genres ; however , he is considered to produce rock or alternative rock compositions . Whereas songs such as " Here Comes Your Man " ( Doolittle ) , " Velvety " ( Devil 's Workshop ) and " Headache " ( Teenager of the Year ) expose a more light rock side , others such as " Something Against You " ( Surfer Rosa ) and " <unk> " ( Teenager of the Year ) hint to a more heavy rock influence in his material . A strong country music influence is also increasingly evident in his style , most notably in his Nashville albums , Honeycomb and Fast Man Raider Man . 
 Thompson has said that he acquired his vocal style as a teenager , when a Thai neighbor asked him to sing " Oh ! Darling " by The Beatles ( from their album Abbey Road ) and to " Scream it like you hate that bitch ! " Thompson 's powerful screams were a signature of Pixies albums , along with the band 's typical song structure of quietly paced verses followed by thundering chorus lines and repetitive guitar staccato . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Thompson has drawn influence from a number of musical genres . As a teenager , he mostly listened to 1960s folk and religious music , including the Christian singer @-@ songwriter Larry Norman . For playing on his junior high baseball team , he was given Leon Russell 's 1970 debut album , which he says influenced some of his vocalizing . Later in high school and in college , he discovered punk music ( Black Flag ) , along with bands from other genres , such as the new wave band The Cars and the obscure Angst . While in Boston in 1984 , before starting the Pixies , he listened to Hüsker Dü 's Zen Arcade , The Spotlight Kid by Captain Beefheart , and I 'm Sick of You , an Iggy Pop bootleg . Thompson was also greatly influenced by the Beatles self @-@ titled 1968 release ( known as White Album ) with regards to the experimental nature of his compositions ( especially those featured in Doolittle ) . 
 Thompson 's lyrics have also featured references to the Bible , especially in his career with the Pixies ; most notably in the incestuous tale of " Nimrod 's Son " , the stories of Uriah and Bathsheba in " Dead " , Samson in " Gouge Away " and references to the Tower of Babel in songs such as " Build High " and " Old Black Dawning " . He cited surrealist films Eraserhead and Un Chien Andalou ( as mentioned in " Debaser " ) as major influences on his work with the Pixies ; however , surrealism was less of an influence in his solo career . He commented on these influences ( which he paid tribute to most in the Pixies ' Doolittle ) , saying he " didn 't have the patience to sit around reading Surrealist novels " , but found it easier to watch 20 @-@ minute films . 
 = = = Songwriting and lyrics = = = 
 During his stay in Puerto Rico , Thompson acquired a fairly fluent , although informal and at times incorrect , use of Spanish , which he has continued throughout his career . Several early Pixies songs , including " Isla de Encanta " and " Vamos " , reference his experiences in San Juan , and the lyrics are often heavily seasoned with the island 's slang . The island 's influence in his work is most notable in the song " Isla De Encanta " , named after the island 's motto , " Isla Del Encanto " . Other Pixies songs drawn from his experiences there include " Vamos " ( Come On Pilgrim ) , " Oh My Golly ! " , " Where Is My Mind ? " ( Surfer Rosa ) , " Crackity Jones " ( Doolittle ) and the B @-@ side " Bailey 's Walk " . Several of his songs contain Spanish lyrics , most notably in the Pixies ' first album , Come On Pilgrim , and a Spanish translation of " Evil Hearted You " by The Yardbirds . From his later works with the Pixies onwards , his use of Spanish drifted westward , reflecting places and aspects of the state of California and its culture . 
 Thompson 's lyrics are noted for their obscure references to off @-@ beat topics such as outer space , UFOs , and The Three Stooges — the last of these being the subject of " Two <unk> " , a song from Teenager of the Year . Lyrics with a focus on science fiction were particularly prominent on the later Pixies records , as well as his early solo albums . With the Catholics , his lyrics have tended towards historical topics ; for example , the song " St. Francis Dam Disaster " ( from Dog in the Sand ) details the catastrophic collapse of the St. Francis Dam near Los Angeles in March 1928 , and the All My Ghosts EP featured an account of the Humboldt County Massacre of Wiyot Indians in 1860 near Eureka , California . 
 = = Television appearances and videos = = 
 See also : Pixies ' television appearances and videos 
 Thompson has appeared on a range of television shows solo and as part of the Pixies , ranging from 120 Minutes and The Late Show in the United States , to The Word in the UK . 
 As part of the Pixies , he was reluctant to film music videos for singles . Elektra Records ' Peter Lubin commented that " to get videos out of them was a major ... undertaking and it only got worse over time " , citing the fact that Thompson refused to lip @-@ sync ; the video for " Here Comes Your Man " features Thompson and Deal opening their mouths as the vocals are being heard , mocking the practice . 
 In his early solo career as Frank Black , his videos were more professional ; he became more willing to take part in them . " Los Angeles " is an example ; the video features Thompson riding across a desert on a hovercraft . They Might Be Giants ' John Flansburgh , who directed the " Los Angeles " video , later commented on the change in Black 's attitude to music videos : 
 I think the Pixies had made enough anti @-@ videos that Charles was ready to do things that were more visually hopped up . The " Los Angeles " video that we did , the last minute and a half of the song is this open field of grey over which hovercrafts are floating . It 's about as tripped up as any video I 've ever been involved in , and it was also realizing a dream of Charles ' , getting him in a hovercraft . 
 Thompson has released few music videos since leaving 4AD , one being a low @-@ budget video in Germany for Dog in the Sand 's " Robert Onion " . The last widely released video produced for his solo material was for " Men in Black " , from Cult of Ray . 
 In 2013 , Thompson appeared in a video promoting McSweeney 's children 's book Lost Sloth . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Pixies = = = 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Frank Black 's 2014 Pixies guitar rig is well @-@ documented . 
 = Tristan Tzara = 
 Tristan Tzara ( French : [ <unk> ̃ <unk> ] ; Romanian : [ <unk> ˈt ͡ sara ] ; born Samuel or Samy Rosenstock , also known as S. Samyro ; April 16 [ O.S. April 4 ] 1896 – December 25 , 1963 ) was a Romanian and French avant @-@ garde poet , essayist and performance artist . Also active as a journalist , playwright , literary and art critic , composer and film director , he was known best for being one of the founders and central figures of the anti @-@ establishment Dada movement . Under the influence of Adrian Maniu , the adolescent Tzara became interested in Symbolism and co @-@ founded the magazine Simbolul with Ion Vinea ( with whom he also wrote experimental poetry ) and painter Marcel Janco . During World War I , after briefly collaborating on Vinea 's Chemarea , he joined Janco in Switzerland . There , Tzara 's shows at the Cabaret Voltaire and <unk> zur Waag , as well as his poetry and art manifestos , became a main feature of early Dadaism . His work represented Dada 's nihilistic side , in contrast with the more moderate approach favored by Hugo Ball . 
 After moving to Paris in 1919 , Tzara , by then one of the " presidents of Dada " , joined the staff of Littérature magazine , which marked the first step in the movement 's evolution toward Surrealism . He was involved in the major polemics which led to Dada 's split , defending his principles against André Breton and Francis Picabia , and , in Romania , against the eclectic modernism of Vinea and Janco . This personal vision on art defined his Dadaist plays The Gas Heart ( 1921 ) and Handkerchief of Clouds ( 1924 ) . A forerunner of <unk> techniques , Tzara eventually aligned himself with Breton 's Surrealism , and under its influence wrote his celebrated utopian poem The Approximate Man . 
 During the final part of his career , Tzara combined his humanist and anti @-@ fascist perspective with a communist vision , joining the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War and the French Resistance during World War II , and serving a term in the National Assembly . Having spoken in favor of liberalization in the People 's Republic of Hungary just before the Revolution of 1956 , he distanced himself from the French Communist Party , of which he was by then a member . In 1960 , he was among the intellectuals who protested against French actions in the Algerian War . 
 Tristan Tzara was an influential author and performer , whose contribution is credited with having created a connection from Cubism and Futurism to the Beat Generation , <unk> and various currents in rock music . The friend and collaborator of many modernist figures , he was the lover of dancer Maja Kruscek in his early youth and was later married to Swedish artist and poet Greta Knutson . 
 = = Name = = 
 S. Samyro , a partial anagram of Samy Rosenstock , was used by Tzara from his debut and throughout the early 1910s . A number of undated writings , which he probably authored as early as 1913 , bear the signature Tristan <unk> , and , in summer of 1915 , he was signing his pieces with the name Tristan . 
 In the 1960s , Rosenstock 's collaborator and later rival Ion Vinea claimed that he was responsible for coining the Tzara part of his pseudonym in 1915 . Vinea also stated that Tzara wanted to keep Tristan as his adopted first name , and that this choice had later attracted him the " infamous pun " Triste <unk> Tzara ( French for " Sad Donkey Tzara " ) . This version of events is uncertain , as manuscripts show that the writer may have already been using the full name , as well as the variations Tristan Țara and Tr . Tzara , in 1913 @-@ 1914 ( although there is a possibility that he was signing his texts long after committing them to paper ) . 
 In 1972 , art historian Serge <unk> , based on information received from Colomba , the wife of avant @-@ garde poet Ilarie Voronca , recounted that Tzara himself had explained his chosen name was a pun in Romanian , <unk> în țară , meaning " sad in the country " ; Colomba Voronca was also dismissing rumors that Tzara had selected Tristan as a tribute to poet Tristan <unk> or to Richard Wagner 's Tristan und Isolde opera . Samy Rosenstock legally adopted his new name in 1925 , after filing a request with Romania 's Ministry of the Interior . The French pronunciation of his name has become commonplace in Romania , where it replaces its more natural reading as <unk> ( " the land " , Romanian pronunciation : [ ˈt ͡ sara ] ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and Simbolul years = = = 
 Tzara was born in Moinești , Bacău County , in the historical region of Moldavia . His parents were Jewish Romanians who reportedly spoke Yiddish as their first language ; his father Filip and grandfather Ilie were entrepreneurs in the forestry business . Tzara 's mother was Emilia Rosenstock , née <unk> . Owing to the Romanian Kingdom 's discrimination laws , the <unk> were not emancipated , and thus Tzara was not a full citizen of the country until after 1918 . 
 He moved to Bucharest at the age of eleven , and attended the <unk> @-@ <unk> boarding school . It is believed that the young Tzara completed his secondary education at a state @-@ run high school , which is identified as the Saint Sava National College or as the Sfântul Gheorghe High School . In October 1912 , when Tzara was aged sixteen , he joined his friends Vinea and Marcel Janco in editing Simbolul . Reputedly , Janco and Vinea provided the funds . Like Vinea , Tzara was also close to their young colleague Jacques G. Costin , who was later his self @-@ declared promoter and admirer . 
 Despite their young age , the three editors were able to attract collaborations from established Symbolist authors , active within Romania 's own Symbolist movement . Alongside their close friend and mentor Adrian Maniu ( an Imagist who had been Vinea 's tutor ) , they included N. <unk> , Alfred Hefter @-@ Hidalgo , Emil <unk> , Claudia Millian , Ion Minulescu , I. M. <unk> , Eugeniu <unk> , Al . T. <unk> , Eugeniu Ștefănescu @-@ Est , Constantin T. <unk> , as well as the journalist and lawyer <unk> <unk> . In its inaugural issue , the journal even printed a poem by one of the leading figures in Romanian Symbolism , Alexandru Macedonski . Simbolul also featured illustrations by Maniu , Millian and Iosif Iser . 
 Although the magazine ceased print in December 1912 , it played an important part in shaping Romanian literature of the period . Literary historian Paul Cernat sees Simbolul as a main stage in Romania 's modernism , and credits it with having brought about the first changes from Symbolism to the radical avant @-@ garde . Also according to Cernat , the collaboration between Samyro , Vinea and Janco was an early instance of literature becoming " an interface between arts " , which had for its contemporary equivalent the collaboration between Iser and writers such as Ion Minulescu and Tudor Arghezi . Although Maniu parted with the group and sought a change in style which brought him closer to traditionalist tenets , Tzara , Janco and Vinea continued their collaboration . Between 1913 and 1915 , they were frequently vacationing together , either on the Black Sea coast or at the Rosenstock family property in Gârceni , Vaslui County ; during this time , Vinea and Samyro wrote poems with similar themes and alluding to one another . 
 = = = Chemarea and 1915 departure = = = 
 Tzara 's career changed course between 1914 and 1916 , during a period when the Romanian Kingdom kept out of World War I. In autumn 1915 , as founder and editor of the short @-@ lived journal Chemarea , Vinea published two poems by his friend , the first printed works to bear the signature Tristan Tzara . At the time , the young poet and many of his friends were adherents of an anti @-@ war and anti @-@ nationalist current , which progressively accommodated anti @-@ establishment messages . Chemarea , which was a platform for this agenda and again attracted collaborations from <unk> , may also have been financed by Tzara and Vinea . According to Romanian avant @-@ garde writer Claude <unk> , the journal was " totally different from everything that had been printed in Romania before that moment . " During the period , Tzara 's works were sporadically published in Hefter @-@ Hidalgo 's Versuri și Proză , and , in June 1915 , Constantin Rădulescu @-@ Motru 's Noua Revistă Română published Samyro 's known poem <unk> , <unk> de pension ( " Little Cousin , Boarding School Girl " ) . 
 Tzara had enrolled at the University of Bucharest in 1914 , studying mathematics and philosophy , but did not graduate . In autumn 1915 , he left Romania for Zürich , in neutral Switzerland . Janco , together with his brother Jules , had settled there a few months before , and was later joined by his other brother Georges . Tzara , who may have applied for the Faculty of Philosophy at the local university , shared lodging with Marcel Janco , who was a student at the Technische Hochschule , in the <unk> Guest House ( by 1918 , Tzara had moved to the <unk> Hotel ) . His departure from Romania , like that of the Janco brothers , may have been in part a pacifist political statement . After settling in Switzerland , the young poet almost completely discarded Romanian as his language of expression , writing most of his subsequent works in French . The poems he had written before , which were the result of poetic dialogues between him and his friend , were left in Vinea 's care . Most of these pieces were first printed only in the interwar period . 
 It was in Zürich that the Romanian group met with the German Hugo Ball , an anarchist poet and pianist , and his young wife Emmy Hennings , a music hall performer . In February 1916 , Ball had rented the Cabaret Voltaire from its owner , Jan Ephraim , and intended to use the venue for performance art and exhibits . Hugo Ball recorded this period , noting that Tzara and Marcel Janco , like Hans Arp , Arthur Segal , Otto van Rees , Max Oppenheimer , and Marcel <unk> , " readily agreed to take part in the cabaret . " According to Ball , among the performances of songs mimicking or taking inspiration from various national folklores , " Herr Tristan Tzara recited Rumanian poetry . " In late March , Ball recounted , the group was joined by German writer and drummer Richard Huelsenbeck . He was soon after involved in Tzara 's " simultaneist verse " performance , " the first in Zürich and in the world " , also including renditions of poems by two promoters of Cubism , Fernand <unk> and Henri Barzun . 
 = = = Birth of Dada = = = 
 It was in this milieu that Dada was born , at some point before May 1916 , when a publication of the same name first saw print . The story of its establishment was the subject of a disagreement between Tzara and his fellow writers . Cernat believes that the first Dadaist performance took place as early as February , when the nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Tzara , wearing a monocle , entered the Cabaret Voltaire stage singing sentimental melodies and handing paper wads to his " scandalized spectators " , leaving the stage to allow room for masked actors on stilts , and returning in clown attire . The same type of performances took place at the <unk> zur Waag beginning in summer 1916 , after the Cabaret Voltaire was forced to close down . According to music historian Bernard Gendron , for as long as it lasted , " the Cabaret Voltaire was dada . There was no alternative institution or site that could disentangle ' pure ' dada from its mere accompaniment [ ... ] nor was any such site desired . " Other opinions link Dada 's beginnings with much earlier events , including the experiments of Alfred Jarry , André Gide , Christian Morgenstern , Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> , Guillaume Apollinaire , Jacques <unk> , Marcel Duchamp or Francis Picabia . 
 In the first of the movement 's manifestos , Ball wrote : " [ The booklet ] is intended to present to the Public the activities and interests of the Cabaret Voltaire , which has as its sole purpose to draw attention , across the barriers of war and nationalism , to the few independent spirits who live for other ideals . The next objective of the artists who are assembled here is to publish a revue internationale [ French for " international magazine " ] . " Ball completed his message in French , and the paragraph translates as : " The magazine shall be published in Zürich and shall carry the name ' Dada ' ( ' Dada ' ) . Dada Dada Dada Dada . " The view according to which Ball had created the movement was notably supported by writer Walter Serner , who directly accused Tzara of having abused Ball 's initiative . 
 A secondary point of contention between the founders of Dada regarded the paternity for the movement 's name , which , according to visual artist and essayist Hans Richter , was first adopted in print in June 1916 . Ball , who claimed authorship and stated that he picked the word randomly from a dictionary , indicated that it stood for both the French @-@ language equivalent of " hobby horse " and a German @-@ language term reflecting the joy of children being rocked to sleep . Tzara himself declined interest in the matter , but Marcel Janco credited him with having coined the term . Dada manifestos , written or co @-@ authored by Tzara , record that the name shares its form with various other terms , including a word used in the Kru languages of West Africa to designate the tail of a sacred cow ; a toy and the name for " mother " in an unspecified Italian dialect ; and the double affirmative in Romanian and in various Slavic languages . 
 = = = Dadaist promoter = = = 
 Before the end of the war , Tzara had assumed a position as Dada 's main promoter and manager , helping the Swiss group establish branches in other European countries . This period also saw the first conflict within the group : citing irreconcilable differences with Tzara , Ball left the group . With his departure , Gendron argues , Tzara was able to move Dada vaudeville @-@ like performances into more of " an incendiary and yet jocularly provocative theater . " 
 He is often credited with having inspired many young modernist authors from outside Switzerland to affiliate with the group , in particular the Frenchmen Louis Aragon , André Breton , Paul Éluard , Georges Ribemont @-@ Dessaignes and Philippe Soupault . Richter , who also came into contact with Dada at this stage in its history , notes that these intellectuals often had a " very cool and distant attitude to this new movement " before being approached by the Romanian author . In June 1916 , he began editing and managing the periodical Dada as a successor of the short @-@ lived magazine Cabaret Voltaire — Richter describes his " energy , passion and talent for the job " , which he claims satisfied all Dadaists . He was at the time the lover of Maja Kruscek , who was a student of Rudolf Laban ; in Richter 's account , their relationship was always tottering . 
 As early as 1916 , Tristan Tzara took distance from the Italian Futurists , rejecting the militarist and proto @-@ fascist stance of their leader Filippo Tommaso Marinetti . Richter notes that , by then , Dada had replaced Futurism as the leader of modernism , while continuing to build on its influence : " we had swallowed Futurism — bones , feathers and all . It is true that in the process of digestion all sorts of bones and feathers had been regurgitated . " Despite this and the fact that Dada did not make any gains in Italy , Tzara could count poets Giuseppe <unk> and Alberto <unk> , painters Gino <unk> and Aldo <unk> , as well as a few other Italian Futurists , among the Dadaists . Among the Italian authors supporting Dadaist manifestos and rallying with the Dada group was the poet , painter and in the future a fascist racial theorist Julius Evola , who became a personal friend of Tzara . 
 The next year , Tzara and Ball opened the Galerie Dada permanent exhibit , through which they set contacts with the independent Italian visual artist Giorgio de Chirico and with the German Expressionist journal Der Sturm , all of whom were described as " fathers of Dada " . During the same months , and probably owing to Tzara 's intervention , the Dada group organized a performance of Sphinx and <unk> , a puppet play by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Expressionist Oskar Kokoschka , whom he advertised as an example of " Dada theater " . He was also in touch with Nord @-@ Sud , the magazine of French poet Pierre Reverdy ( who sought to unify all avant @-@ garde trends ) , and contributed articles on African art to both Nord @-@ Sud and Pierre Albert @-@ <unk> 's SIC magazine . In early 1918 , through Huelsenbeck , Zürich Dadaists established contacts with their more explicitly left @-@ wing disciples in the German Empire — George Grosz , John Heartfield , Johannes Baader , Kurt Schwitters , Walter <unk> , Raoul Hausmann , Carl Einstein , Franz Jung , and Heartfield 's brother Wieland <unk> . With Breton , Soupault and Aragon , Tzara traveled Cologne , where he became familiarized with the elaborate collage works of Schwitters and Max Ernst , which he showed to his colleagues in Switzerland . Huelsenbeck nonetheless declined to Schwitters membership in Berlin Dada . 
 As a result of his campaigning , Tzara created a list of so @-@ called " Dada presidents " , who represented various regions of Europe . According to Hans Richter , it included , alongside Tzara himself , figures ranging from Ernst , Arp , Baader , Breton and Aragon to Kruscek , Evola , Rafael Lasso de la Vega , Igor Stravinsky , Vicente Huidobro , Francesco <unk> and Théodore Fraenkel . Richter notes : " I 'm not sure if all the names who appear here would agree with the description . " 
 = = = End of World War I = = = 
 The shows Tzara staged in Zürich often turned into scandals or riots , and he was in permanent conflict with the Swiss law enforcers . Hans Richter speaks of a " pleasure of letting fly at the bourgeois , which in Tristan Tzara took the form of coldly ( or hotly ) calculated insolence " ( see <unk> la bourgeoisie ) . In one instance , as part of a series of events in which Dadaists mocked established authors , Tzara and Arp falsely publicized that they were going to fight a duel in <unk> , near Zürich , and that they were going to have the popular novelist Jakob Christoph Heer for their witness . Richter also reports that his Romanian colleague profited from Swiss neutrality to play the Allies and Central Powers against each other , obtaining art works and funds from both , making use of their need to stimulate their respective propaganda efforts . While active as a promoter , Tzara also published his first volume of collected poetry , the 1918 Vingt @-@ cinq poèmes ( " Twenty @-@ five Poems " ) . 
 A major event took place in autumn 1918 , when Francis Picabia , who was then publisher of 391 magazine and a distant Dada affiliate , visited Zürich and introduced his colleagues there to his nihilistic views on art and reason . In the United States , Picabia , Man Ray and Marcel Duchamp had earlier set up their own version of Dada . This circle , based in New York City , sought affiliation with Tzara 's only in 1921 , when they jokingly asked him to grant them permission to use " Dada " as their own name ( to which Tzara replied : " Dada belongs to everybody " ) . The visit was credited by Richter with boosting the Romanian author 's status , but also with making Tzara himself " switch suddenly from a position of balance between art and anti @-@ art into the stratospheric regions of pure and joyful nothingness . " The movement subsequently organized its last major Swiss show , held at the Saal zur <unk> , with choreography by Susanne <unk> , Sophie <unk> @-@ Arp , and with the participation of Käthe Wulff , Hans <unk> , Tzara , Hans Richter and Walter Serner . It was there that Serner read from his 1918 essay , whose very title advocated <unk> <unk> ( " Final Dissolution " ) : this part is believed to have caused the subsequent mêlée , during which the public attacked the performers and succeeded in interrupting , but not canceling , the show . 
 Following the November 1918 Armistice with Germany , Dada 's evolution was marked by political developments . In October 1919 , Tzara , Arp and Otto Flake began publishing Der Zeltweg , a journal aimed at further popularizing Dada in a post @-@ war world were the borders were again accessible . Richter , who admits that the magazine was " rather tame " , also notes that Tzara and his colleagues were dealing with the impact of communist revolutions , in particular the October Revolution and the German revolts of 1918 , which " had stirred men 's minds , divided men 's interests and diverted energies in the direction of political change . " The same commentator however dismisses those accounts which , he believes , led readers to believe that Der Zeltweg was " an association of revolutionary artists . " According to one account rendered by historian Robert Levy , Tzara shared company with a group of Romanian communist students , and , as such , may have met with Ana Pauker , who was later one of the Romanian Communist Party 's most prominent activists . 
 Arp and Janco drifted away from the movement ca . 1919 , when they created the Constructivist @-@ inspired workshop Das Neue Leben . In Romania , Dada was awarded an ambiguous reception from Tzara 's former associate Vinea . Although he was sympathetic to its goals , treasured Hugo Ball and Hennings and promised to adapt his own writings to its requirements , Vinea cautioned Tzara and the <unk> in favor of lucidity . When Vinea submitted his poem <unk> ( " Grievances " ) to be published by Tzara and his associates , he was turned down , an incident which critics attribute to a contrast between the reserved tone of the piece and the revolutionary tenets of Dada . 
 = = = Paris Dada = = = 
 In late 1919 , Tristan Tzara left Switzerland to join Breton , Soupault and Claude Rivière in editing the Paris @-@ based magazine Littérature . Already a mentor for the French avant @-@ garde , he was , according to Hans Richter , perceived as an " Anti @-@ Messiah " and a " prophet " . Reportedly , Dada mythology had it that he entered the French capital in a snow @-@ white or lilac @-@ colored car , passing down Boulevard Raspail through a triumphal arch made from his own pamphlets , being greeted by cheering crowds and a fireworks display . Richter dismisses this account , indicating that Tzara actually walked from Gare de l <unk> to Picabia 's home , without anyone expecting him to arrive . 
 He is often described as the main figure in the Littérature circle , and credited with having more firmly set its artistic principles in the line of Dada . When Picabia began publishing a new series of 391 in Paris , Tzara seconded him and , Richter says , produced issues of the magazine " decked out [ ... ] in all the colors of Dada . " He was also issuing his Dada magazine , printed in Paris but using the same format , renaming it Bulletin Dada and later <unk> . At around that time , he met American author Gertrude Stein , who wrote about him in The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas , and the artist couple Robert and Sonia Delaunay ( with whom he worked in tandem for " poem @-@ dresses " and other simultaneist literary pieces ) . 
 Tzara became involved in a number of Dada experiments , on which he collaborated with Breton , Aragon , Soupault , Picabia or Paul Éluard . Other authors who came into contact with Dada at that stage were Jean Cocteau , Paul Dermée and Raymond <unk> . The performances staged by Dada were often meant to popularize its principles , and Dada continued to draw attention on itself by hoaxes and false advertising , announcing that the Hollywood film star Charlie Chaplin was going to appear on stage at its show , or that its members were going to have their heads shaved or their hair cut off on stage . In another instance , Tzara and his associates lectured at the Université populaire in front of industrial workers , who were reportedly less than impressed . Richter believes that , ideologically , Tzara was still in tribute to Picabia 's nihilistic and anarchic views ( which made the Dadaists attack all political and cultural ideologies ) , but that this also implied a measure of sympathy for the working class . 
 Dada activities in Paris culminated in the March 1920 variety show at the Théâtre de l 'Œuvre , which featured readings from Breton , Picabia , Dermée and Tzara 's earlier work , La Première aventure céleste de M. Antipyrine ( " The First Heavenly Adventure of Mr. Antipyrine " ) . Tzara 's melody , Vaseline symphonique ( " Symphonic Vaseline " ) , which required ten or twenty people to shout " <unk> " and " <unk> " on a rising scale , was also performed . A scandal erupted when Breton read Picabia 's Manifeste <unk> ( " Cannibal Manifesto " ) , lashing out at the audience and mocking them , to which they answered by aiming rotten fruit at the stage . 
 The Dada phenomenon was only noticed in Romania beginning in 1920 , and its overall reception was negative . Traditionalist historian Nicolae Iorga , Symbolist promoter Ovid Densusianu , the more reserved modernists Camil Petrescu and Benjamin Fondane all refused to accept it as a valid artistic manifestation . Although he rallied with tradition , Vinea defended the subversive current in front of more serious criticism , and rejected the widespread rumor that Tzara had acted as an agent of influence for the Central Powers during the war . Eugen Lovinescu , editor of Sburătorul and one of Vinea 's rivals on the modernist scene , acknowledged the influence exercised by Tzara on the younger avant @-@ garde authors , but analyzed his work only briefly , using as an example one of his pre @-@ Dada poems , and depicting him as an advocate of literary " extremism " . 
 = = = Dada stagnation = = = 
 By 1921 , Tzara had become involved in conflicts with other figures in the movement , whom he claimed had parted with the spirit of Dada . He was targeted by the Berlin @-@ based Dadaists , in particular by Huelsenbeck and Serner , the former of whom was also involved in a conflict with Raoul Hausmann over leadership status . According to Richter , tensions between Breton and Tzara had surfaced in 1920 , when Breton first made known his wish to do away with musical performances altogether and alleged that the Romanian was merely repeating himself . The Dada shows themselves were by then such common occurrences that audiences expected to be insulted by the performers . 
 A more serious crisis occurred in May , when Dada organized a mock trial of Maurice Barrès , whose early affiliation with the Symbolists had been shadowed by his antisemitism and reactionary stance : Georges Ribemont @-@ Dessaignes was the prosecutor , Aragon and Soupault the defense attorneys , with Tzara , <unk> , Benjamin Péret and others as witnesses ( a mannequin stood in for Barrès ) . Péret immediately upset Picabia and Tzara by refusing to make the trial an absurd one , and by introducing a political subtext with which Breton nevertheless agreed . In June , Tzara and Picabia clashed with each other , after Tzara expressed an opinion that his former mentor was becoming too radical . During the same season , Breton , Arp , Ernst , Maja <unk> and Tzara were in Austria , at Imst , where they published their last manifesto as a group , Dada au grand air ( " Dada in the Open Air " ) or Der <unk> in Tirol ( " The Battle of the Singers in Tyrol " ) . Tzara also visited Czechoslovakia , where he reportedly hoped to gain adherents to his cause . 
 Also in 1921 , Ion Vinea wrote an article for the Romanian newspaper Adevărul , arguing that the movement had exhausted itself ( although , in his letters to Tzara , he continued to ask his friend to return home and spread his message there ) . After July 1922 , Marcel Janco rallied with Vinea in editing Contimporanul , which published some of Tzara 's earliest poems but never offered space to any Dadaist manifesto . Reportedly , the conflict between Tzara and Janco had a personal note : Janco later mentioned " some dramatic quarrels " between his colleague and him . They avoided each other for the rest of their lives and Tzara even struck out the dedications to Janco from his early poems . Julius Evola also grew disappointed by the movement 's total rejection of tradition and began his personal search for an alternative , pursuing a path which later led him to esotericism and fascism . 
 = = = Evening of the Bearded Heart = = = 
 Tzara was openly attacked by Breton in a February 1922 article for Le Journal de Peuple , where the Romanian writer was denounced as " an impostor " avid for " publicity " . In March , Breton initiated the Congress for the Determination and Defense of the Modern Spirit . The French writer used the occasion to strike out Tzara 's name from among the Dadaists , citing in his support Dada 's Huelsenbeck , Serner , and Christian Schad . Basing his statement on a note supposedly authored by Huelsenbeck , Breton also accused Tzara of opportunism , claiming that he had planned wartime editions of Dada works in such a manner as not to upset actors on the political stage , making sure that German Dadaists were not made available to the public in countries subject to the Supreme War Council . Tzara , who attended the Congress only as a means to subvert it , responded to the accusations the same month , arguing that Huelsenbeck 's note was fabricated and that Schad had not been one of the original Dadaists . Rumors reported much later by American writer Brion Gysin had it that Breton 's claims also depicted Tzara as an informer for the Prefecture of Police . 
 In May 1922 , Dada staged its own funeral . According to Hans Richter , the main part of this took place in Weimar , where the Dadaists attended a festival of the Bauhaus art school , during which Tzara proclaimed the elusive nature of his art : " Dada is useless , like everything else in life . [ ... ] Dada is a virgin microbe which penetrates with the insistence of air into all those spaces that reason has failed to fill with words and conventions . " 
 In " The Bearded Heart " manifesto a number of artists backed the marginalization of Breton in support of Tzara . Alongside Cocteau , Arp , Ribemont @-@ Dessaignes , and Éluard , the pro @-@ Tzara faction included Erik Satie , Theo van Doesburg , Serge <unk> , Louis @-@ Ferdinand Céline , Marcel Duchamp , Ossip Zadkine , Jean Metzinger , Ilia <unk> , and Man Ray . During an associated soirée , Evening of the Bearded Heart , which began on 6 July 1923 , Tzara presented a re @-@ staging of his play The Gas Heart ( which had been first performed two years earlier to howls of derision from its audience ) , for which Sonia Delaunay designed the costumes . Breton interrupted its performance and reportedly fought with several of his former associates and broke furniture , prompting a theatre riot that only the intervention of the police halted . Dada 's vaudeville declined in importance and disappeared altogether after that date . 
 Picabia took Breton 's side against Tzara , and replaced the staff of his 391 , enlisting collaborations from Clément <unk> and Ezra Pound . Breton marked the end of Dada in 1924 , when he issued the first Surrealist Manifesto . Richter suggests that " Surrealism devoured and digested Dada . " Tzara distanced himself from new trend , disagreeing with its methods and , increasingly , with its politics . In 1923 , he and a few other former Dadaists collaborated with Richter and the Constructivist artist El Lissitzky on the magazine G , and , the following year , he wrote pieces for the Yugoslav @-@ Slovenian magazine Tank ( edited by Ferdinand <unk> ) . 
 = = = Transition to Surrealism = = = 
 Tzara continued to write , becoming more seriously interested in the theater . In 1924 , he published and staged the play Handkerchief of Clouds , which was soon included in the repertoire of Serge Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes . He also collected his earlier Dada texts as the Seven Dada Manifestos . Marxist thinker Henri Lefebvre reviewed them enthusiastically ; he later became one of the author 's friends . 
 In Romania , Tzara 's work was partly recuperated by Contimporanul , which notably staged public readings of his works during the international art exhibit it organized in 1924 , and again during the " new art demonstration " of 1925 . In parallel , the short @-@ lived magazine Integral , where Ilarie Voronca and Ion Călugăru were the main animators , took significant interest in Tzara 's work . In a 1927 interview with the publication , he voiced his opposition to the Surrealist group 's adoption of communism , indicating that such politics could only result in a " new bourgeoisie " being created , and explaining that he had opted for a personal " permanent revolution " , which would preserve " the holiness of the ego " . 
 In 1925 , Tristan Tzara was in Stockholm , where he married Greta Knutson , with whom he had a son , Christophe ( born 1927 ) . A former student of painter André Lhote , she was known for her interest in phenomenology and abstract art . Around the same period , with funds from Knutson 's inheritance , Tzara commissioned Austrian architect Adolf Loos , a former representative of the Vienna Secession whom he had met in Zürich , to build him a house in Paris . The rigidly functionalist Maison Tristan Tzara , built in Montmartre , was designed following Tzara 's specific requirements and decorated with samples of African art . It was Loos ' only major contribution in his Parisian years . 
 In 1929 , he reconciled with Breton , and sporadically attended the Surrealists ' meetings in Paris . The same year , he issued the poetry book De nos oiseaux ( " Of Our Birds " ) . This period saw the publication of The Approximate Man ( 1931 ) , alongside the volumes L 'Arbre des voyageurs ( " The Travelers ' Tree " , 1930 ) , <unk> <unk> les <unk> ( " Where Wolves Drink " , 1932 ) , L <unk> ( " The <unk> " , 1933 ) and Grains et issues ( " Seed and Bran " , 1935 ) . By then , it was also announced that Tzara had started work on a screenplay . In 1930 , he directed and produced a cinematic version of Le Cœur à <unk> , starring Breton and other leading Surrealists . Five years later , he signed his name to The Testimony against Gertrude Stein , published by Eugene Jolas 's magazine transition in reply to Stein 's memoir The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas , in which he accused his former friend of being a megalomaniac . 
 The poet became involved in further developing Surrealist techniques , and , together with Breton and Valentine Hugo , drew one of the better @-@ known examples of " exquisite corpses " . Tzara also prefaced a 1934 collection of Surrealist poems by his friend René Char , and the following year he and Greta Knutson visited Char in L 'Isle @-@ sur @-@ la @-@ <unk> . Tzara 's wife was also affiliated with the Surrealist group at around the same time . This association ended when she parted with Tzara late in the 1930s . 
 At home , Tzara 's works were collected and edited by the Surrealist promoter Sașa Pană , who corresponded with him over several years . The first such edition saw print in 1934 , and featured the 1913 @-@ 1915 poems Tzara had left in Vinea 's care . In 1928 @-@ 1929 , Tzara exchanged letters with his friend Jacques G. Costin , a Contimporanul affiliate who did not share all of Vinea 's views on literature , who offered to organize his visit to Romania and asked him to translate his work into French . 
 = = = Affiliation with communism and Spanish Civil War = = = 
 Alarmed by the establishment of Adolf Hitler 's Nazi regime , which also signified the end of Berlin 's avant @-@ garde , he merged his activities as an art promoter with the cause of anti @-@ fascism , and was close to the French Communist Party ( PCF ) . In 1936 , Richter recalled , he published a series of photographs secretly taken by Kurt Schwitters in Hanover , works which documented the destruction of Nazi propaganda by the locals , ration stamp with reduced quantities of food , and other hidden aspects of Hitler 's rule . After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War , he briefly left France and joined the Republican forces . Alongside Soviet reporter Ilya Ehrenburg , Tzara visited Madrid , which was besieged by the Nationalists ( see Siege of Madrid ) . Upon his return , he published the collection of poems <unk> <unk> ( " Conquered Southern Regions " ) . Some of them had previously been printed in the brochure Les <unk> du monde <unk> le peuple <unk> ( " The Poets of the World Defend the Spanish People " , 1937 ) , which was edited by two prominent authors and activists , Nancy Cunard and the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda . Tzara had also signed Cunard 's June 1937 call to intervention against Francisco Franco . Reportedly , he and Nancy Cunard were romantically involved . 
 Although the poet was moving away from Surrealism , his adherence to strict Marxism @-@ Leninism was reportedly questioned by both the PCF and the Soviet Union . <unk> Philip Beitchman places their attitude in connection with Tzara 's own vision of Utopia , which combined communist messages with <unk> @-@ Marxist psychoanalysis and made use of particularly violent imagery . Reportedly , Tzara refused to be enlisted in supporting the party line , maintaining his independence and refusing to take the forefront at public rallies . 
 However , others note that the former Dadaist leader would often show himself a follower of political guidelines . As early as 1934 , Tzara , together with Breton , Éluard and communist writer René Crevel , organized an informal trial of independent @-@ minded Surrealist Salvador Dalí , who was at the time a confessed admirer of Hitler , and whose portrait of William Tell had alarmed them because it shared likeness with Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin . Historian Irina Livezeanu notes that Tzara , who agreed with Stalinism and shunned Trotskyism , submitted to the PCF cultural demands during the writers ' congress of 1935 , even when his friend Crevel committed suicide to protest the adoption of socialist realism . At a later stage , Livezeanu remarks , Tzara reinterpreted Dada and Surrealism as revolutionary currents , and presented them as such to the public . This stance she contrasts with that of Breton , who was more reserved in his attitudes . 
 = = = World War II and Resistance = = = 
 During World War II , Tzara took refuge from the German occupation forces , moving to the southern areas , controlled by the Vichy regime . On one occasion , the antisemitic and collaborationist publication Je <unk> <unk> made his whereabouts known to the Gestapo . 
 He was in Marseille in late 1940 @-@ early 1941 , joining the group of anti @-@ fascist and Jewish refugees who , protected by American diplomat Varian Fry , were seeking to escape Nazi @-@ occupied Europe . Among the people present there were the anti @-@ totalitarian socialist Victor Serge , anthropologist Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss , playwright Arthur <unk> , philosopher and poet René <unk> , and several prominent Surrealists : Breton , Char , and Benjamin Péret , as well as artists Max Ernst , André Masson , <unk> Lam , Jacques <unk> , Victor Brauner and Óscar Domínguez . During the months spent together , and before some of them received permission to leave for America , they invented a new card game , on which traditional card imagery was replaced with Surrealist symbols . 
 Some time after his stay in Marseille , Tzara joined the French Resistance , rallying with the Maquis . A contributor to magazines published by the Resistance , Tzara also took charge of the cultural broadcast for the Free French Forces clandestine radio station . He lived in Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , then in Souillac , and ultimately in Toulouse . His son <unk> was at the time a Resistant in northern France , having joined the Francs @-@ <unk> et Partisans . In Axis @-@ allied and antisemitic Romania ( see Romania during World War II ) , the regime of Ion Antonescu ordered bookstores not to sell works by Tzara and 44 other Jewish @-@ Romanian authors . In 1942 , with the generalization of antisemitic measures , Tzara was also stripped of his Romanian citizenship rights . 
 In December 1944 , five months after the Liberation of Paris , he was contributing to L <unk> Revue , a pro @-@ communist newspaper edited by philosopher Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , through which Sartre was publicizing the heroic image of a France united in resistance , as opposed to the perception that it had passively accepted German control . Other contributors included writers Aragon , Char , Éluard , Elsa <unk> , Eugène <unk> , Raymond <unk> , Francis <unk> , Jacques <unk> and painter Pablo Picasso . 
 Upon the end of the war and the restoration of French independence , Tzara was naturalized a French citizen . During 1945 , under the Provisional Government of the French Republic , he was a representative of the Sud @-@ Ouest region to the National Assembly . According to Livezeanu , he " helped reclaim the South from the cultural figures who had associated themselves to Vichy [ France ] . " In April 1946 , his early poems , alongside similar pieces by Breton , Éluard , Aragon and Dalí , were the subject of a midnight broadcast on Parisian Radio . In 1947 , he became a full member of the PCF ( according to some sources , he had been one since 1934 ) . 
 = = = International leftism = = = 
 Over the following decade , Tzara lent his support to political causes . Pursuing his interest in primitivism , he became a critic of the Fourth Republic 's colonial policy , and joined his voice to those who supported decolonization . Nevertheless , he was appointed cultural ambassador of the Republic by the Paul Ramadier cabinet . He also participated in the PCF @-@ organized Congress of Writers , but , unlike Éluard and Aragon , again avoided adapting his style to socialist realism . 
 He returned to Romania on an official visit in late 1946 @-@ early 1947 , as part of a tour of the emerging Eastern Bloc during which he also stopped in Czechoslovakia , Hungary , and the Federal People 's Republic of Yugoslavia . The speeches he and Sașa Pană gave on the occasion , published by <unk> journal , were noted for condoning official positions of the PCF and the Romanian Communist Party , and are credited by Irina Livezeanu with causing a rift between Tzara and young Romanian avant @-@ gardists such as Victor Brauner and <unk> Luca ( who rejected communism and were alarmed by the Iron Curtain having fallen over Europe ) . In September of the same year , he was present at the conference of the pro @-@ communist International Union of Students ( where he was a guest of the French @-@ based Union of Communist Students , and met with similar organizations from Romania and other countries ) . 
 In 1949 @-@ 1950 , Tzara answered Aragon 's call and become active in the international campaign to liberate <unk> Hikmet , a Turkish poet whose 1938 arrest for communist activities had created a cause célèbre for the pro @-@ Soviet public opinion . Tzara chaired the Committee for the Liberation of <unk> Hikmet , which issued petitions to national governments and commissioned works in honor of Hikmet ( including musical pieces by Louis Durey and Serge Nigg ) . Hikmet was eventually released in July 1950 , and publicly thanked Tzara during his subsequent visit to Paris . 
 His works of the period include , among others : Le Signe de vie ( " Sign of Life " , 1946 ) , Terre sur terre ( " Earth on Earth " , 1946 ) , Sans coup <unk> ( " Without a Need to Fight " , 1949 ) , De mémoire d 'homme ( " From a Man 's Memory " , 1950 ) , <unk> seul ( " Speaking Alone " , 1950 ) , and La Face <unk> ( " The Inner Face " , 1953 ) , followed in 1955 by À haute flamme ( " Flame out Loud " ) and Le Temps <unk> ( " The Nascent Time " ) , and the 1956 Le Fruit <unk> ( " The Permitted Fruit " ) . Tzara continued to be an active promoter of modernist culture . Around 1949 , having read Irish author Samuel Beckett 's manuscript of Waiting for Godot , Tzara facilitated the play 's staging by approaching producer Roger Blin . He also translated into French some poems by Hikmet and the Hungarian author Attila József . In 1949 , he introduced Picasso to art dealer Heinz <unk> ( thus helping start their lifelong partnership ) , and , in 1951 , wrote the catalog for an exhibit of works by his friend Max Ernst ; the text celebrated the artist 's " free use of stimuli " and " his discovery of a new kind of humor . " 
 = = = 1956 protest and final years = = = 
 In October 1956 , Tzara visited the People 's Republic of Hungary , where the government of Imre Nagy was coming into conflict with the Soviet Union . This followed an invitation on the part of Hungarian writer Gyula <unk> , who wanted his colleague to be present at ceremonies marking the rehabilitation of László Rajk ( a local communist leader whose prosecution had been ordered by Joseph Stalin ) . Tzara was receptive of the Hungarians ' demand for liberalization , contacted the anti @-@ Stalinist and former Dadaist Lajos <unk> , and deemed the anti @-@ Soviet movement " revolutionary " . However , unlike much of Hungarian public opinion , the poet did not recommend emancipation from Soviet control , and described the independence demanded by local writers as " an abstract notion " . The statement he issued , widely quoted in the Hungarian and international press , forced a reaction from the PCF : through Aragon 's reply , the party deplored the fact that one of its members was being used in support of " anti @-@ communist and anti @-@ Soviet campaigns . " 
 His return to France coincided with the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution , which ended with a Soviet military intervention . On October 24 , Tzara was ordered to a PCF meeting , where activist Laurent Casanova reportedly ordered him to keep silent , which Tzara did . Tzara 's apparent dissidence and the crisis he helped provoke within the Communist Party were celebrated by Breton , who had adopted a pro @-@ Hungarian stance , and who defined his friend and rival as " the first spokesman of the Hungarian demand . " 
 He was thereafter mostly withdrawn from public life , dedicating himself to researching the work of 15th @-@ century poet François Villon , and , like his fellow Surrealist Michel Leiris , to promoting primitive and African art , which he had been collecting for years . In early 1957 , Tzara attended a Dada retrospective on the Rive <unk> , which ended in a riot caused by the rival avant @-@ garde Mouvement <unk> , an outcome which reportedly pleased him . In August 1960 , one year after the Fifth Republic had been established by President Charles de Gaulle , at a time when French forces were confronting the Algerian rebels ( see Algerian War ) . Together with Simone de Beauvoir , Marguerite Duras , Jérôme Lindon , Alain <unk> @-@ <unk> and other intellectuals , he addressed Premier Michel Debré a letter of protest , concerning France 's refusal to grant Algeria its independence . As a result , Minister of Culture André Malraux announced that his cabinet would not subsidize any films to which Tzara and the others may contribute , and the signatories could no longer appear on stations managed by the state @-@ owned French Broadcasting Service . 
 In 1961 , as recognition for his work as a poet , Tzara was awarded the prestigious Taormina Prize . One of his final public activities took place in 1962 , when he attended the International Congress on African Culture , organized by English curator Frank McEwen and held at the National Gallery in Salisbury , Southern Rhodesia . He died one year later in his Paris home , and was buried at the Cimetière du Montparnasse . 
 = = Literary contributions = = 
 = = = Identity issues = = = 
 Much critical commentary about Tzara surrounds the measure to which the poet identified with the national cultures which he represented . Paul Cernat notes that the association between Samyro and the <unk> , who were Jews , and their ethnic Romanian colleagues , was one sign of a cultural dialogue , in which " the openness of Romanian environments toward artistic modernity " was stimulated by " young emancipated Jewish writers . " Salomon Schulman , a Swedish researcher of Yiddish literature , argues that the combined influence of Yiddish folklore and Hasidic philosophy shaped European modernism in general and Tzara 's style in particular , while American poet Andrei Codrescu speaks of Tzara as one in a Balkan line of " absurdist writing " , which also includes the Romanians Urmuz , Eugène Ionesco and Emil <unk> . According to literary historian George Călinescu , Samyro 's early poems deal with " the voluptuousness over the strong scents of rural life , which is typical among Jews compressed into ghettos . " 
 Tzara himself used elements alluding to his homeland in his early Dadaist performances . His collaboration with Maja Kruscek at <unk> <unk> Waag featured samples of African literature , to which Tzara added Romanian @-@ language fragments . He is also known to have mixed elements of Romanian folklore , and to have sung the native suburban romanza La <unk> la Hârța ( " At the Mill in Hârța " ) during at least one staging for Cabaret Voltaire . Addressing the Romanian public in 1947 , he claimed to have been captivated by " the sweet language of Moldavian peasants " . 
 Tzara nonetheless rebelled against his birthplace and upbringing . His earliest poems depict provincial Moldavia as a desolate and unsettling place . In Cernat 's view , this imagery was in common use among Moldavian @-@ born writers who also belonged to the avant @-@ garde trend , notably Benjamin Fondane and George Bacovia . Like in the cases of Eugène Ionesco and Fondane , Cernat proposes , Samyro sought self @-@ exile to Western Europe as a " modern , <unk> " means of breaking with " the peripheral condition " , which may also serve to explain the pun he selected for a pseudonym . According to the same author , two important elements in this process were " a maternal attachment and a break with paternal authority " , an " Oedipus complex " which he also argued was evident in the biographies of other Symbolist and avant @-@ garde Romanian authors , from Urmuz to Mateiu Caragiale . Unlike Vinea and the Contimporanul group , Cernat proposes , Tzara stood for radicalism and insurgency , which would also help explain their impossibility to communicate . In particular , Cernat argues , the writer sought to emancipate himself from competing <unk> , and addressed himself directly to the center of European culture , with Zürich serving as a stage on his way to Paris . The 1916 Monsieur 's Antipyrine 's Manifesto featured a cosmopolitan appeal : " <unk> remains within the framework of European weaknesses , it 's still shit , but from now on we want to shit in different colors so as to adorn the zoo of art with all the flags of all the consulates . " 
 With time , Tristan Tzara came to be regarded by his Dada associates as an exotic character , whose attitudes were intrinsically linked with Eastern Europe . Early on , Ball referred to him and the Janco brothers as " Orientals " . Hans Richter believed him to be a fiery and impulsive figure , having little in common with his German collaborators . According to Cernat , Richter 's perspective seems to indicate a vision of Tzara having a " Latin " temperament . This type of perception also had negative implications for Tzara , particularly after the 1922 split within Dada . In the 1940s , Richard Huelsenbeck alleged that his former colleague had always been separated from other Dadaists by his failure to appreciate the legacy of " German humanism " , and that , compared to his German colleagues , he was " a barbarian " . In his polemic with Tzara , Breton also repeatedly placed stress on his rival 's foreign origin . 
 At home , Tzara was occasionally targeted for his Jewishness , culminating in the ban enforced by the Ion Antonescu regime . In 1931 , Const . I. Emilian , the first Romanian to write an academic study on the avant @-@ garde , attacked him from a conservative and antisemitic position . He depicted Dadaists as " Judaeo @-@ Bolsheviks " who corrupted Romanian culture , and included Tzara among the main proponents of " literary anarchism " . Alleging that Tzara 's only merit was to establish a literary fashion , while recognizing his " formal virtuosity and artistic intelligence " , he claimed to prefer Tzara in his Simbolul stage . This perspective was deplored early on by the modernist critic Perpessicius . Nine years after Emilian 's polemic text , fascist poet and journalist Radu Gyr published an article in Convorbiri Literare , in which he attacked Tzara as a representative of the " Judaic spirit " , of the " foreign plague " and of " materialist @-@ historical dialectics " . 
 = = = Symbolist poetry = = = 
 Tzara 's earliest Symbolist poems , published in Simbolul during 1912 , were later rejected by their author , who asked Sașa Pană not to include them in editions of his works . The influence of French Symbolists on the young Samyro was particularly important , and surfaced in both his lyric and prose poems . Attached to Symbolist musicality at that stage , he was indebted to his Simbolul colleague Ion Minulescu and the Belgian Maurice Maeterlinck . Philip Beitchman argues that " Tristan Tzara is one of the writers of the twentieth century who was most profoundly influenced by symbolism — and utilized many of its methods and ideas in the pursuit of his own artistic and social ends . " However , Cernat believes , the young poet was by then already breaking with the syntax of conventional poetry , and that , in subsequent experimental pieces , he progressively stripped his style of its Symbolist elements . 
 During the 1910s , Samyro experimented with Symbolist imagery , in particular with the " hanged man " motif , which served as the basis for his poem Se <unk> un om ( " A Man <unk> Himself " ) , and which built on the legacy of similar pieces authored by Christian Morgenstern and Jules <unk> . Se <unk> un om was also in many ways similar to ones authored by his collaborators Adrian Maniu ( Balada <unk> , " The Hanged Man 's Ballad " ) and Vinea ( <unk> <unk> , " The Hanged Man 's Dream " ) : all three poets , who were all in the process of discarding Symbolism , interpreted the theme from a tragicomic and iconoclastic perspective . These pieces also include <unk> în <unk> ( " Provincial Holiday " ) and the anti @-@ war fragment <unk> și <unk> <unk> ( " The Storm and the <unk> 's Song " ) , which Vinea published in his Chemarea . The series is seen by Cernat as " the general rehearsal for the Dada adventure . " The complete text of <unk> și <unk> <unk> was published at a later stage , after the missing text was discovered by Pană . At the time , he became interested in the free verse work of the American Walt Whitman , and his translation of Whitman 's epic poem Song of Myself , probably completed before World War I , was published by Alfred Hefter @-@ Hidalgo in his magazine Versuri și Proză ( 1915 ) . 
 Beitchman notes that , throughout his life , Tzara used Symbolist elements against the doctrines of Symbolism . Thus , he argues , the poet did not cultivate a memory of historical events , " since it deludes man into thinking that there was something when there was nothing . " Cernat notes : " That which essentially unifies , during [ the 1910s ] , the poetic output of Adrian Maniu , Ion Vinea and Tristan Tzara is an acute awareness of literary conventions , a satiety [ ... ] in respect to <unk> literature , which they perceived as exhausted . " In Beitchman 's view , the revolt against cultivated beauty was a constant in Tzara 's years of maturity , and his visions of social change continued to be inspired by Arthur Rimbaud and the Comte de <unk> . According to Beitchman , Tzara uses the Symbolist message , " the birthright [ of humans ] has been sold for a mess of porridge " , taking it " into the streets , cabarets and trains where he denounces the deal and asks for his birthright back . " 
 = = = Collaboration with Vinea = = = 
 The transition to a more radical form of poetry seems to have taken place in 1913 @-@ 1915 , during the periods when Tzara and Vinea were vacationing together . The pieces share a number of characteristics and subjects , and the two poets even use them to allude to one another ( or , in one case , to Tzara 's sister ) . 
 In addition to the lyrics were they both speak of provincial holidays and love affairs with local girls , both friends intended to reinterpret William Shakespeare 's Hamlet from a modernist perspective , and wrote incomplete texts with this as their subject . However , Paul Cernat notes , the texts also evidence a difference in approach , with Vinea 's work being " meditative and melancholic " , while Tzara 's is " hedonistic " . Tzara often appealed to revolutionary and ironic images , portraying provincial and middle class environments as places of artificiality and decay , demystifying pastoral themes and evidencing a will to break free . His literature took a more radical perspective on life , and featured lyrics with subversive intent : 
 In his <unk> ( roughly , " Night Falling " ) , probably authored in Mangalia , Tzara writes : 
 Vinea 's similar poem , written in Tuzla and named after that village , reads : 
 Cernat notes that <unk> ( " Nocturne " ) and <unk> were the pieces originally performed at Cabaret Voltaire , identified by Hugo Ball as " Rumanian poetry " , and that they were recited in Tzara 's own spontaneous French translation . Although they are noted for their radical break with the traditional form of Romanian verse , Ball 's diary entry of February 5 , 1916 , indicates that Tzara 's works were still " conservative in style " . In Călinescu 's view , they announce Dadaism , given that " bypassing the relations which lead to a realistic vision , the poet associates unimaginably dissipated images that will surprise consciousness . " In 1922 , Tzara himself wrote : " As early as 1914 , I tried to strip the words of their proper meaning and use them in such a way as to give the verse a completely new , general , meaning [ ... ] . " 
 Alongside pieces depicting a Jewish cemetery in which graves " crawl like worms " on the edge of a town , chestnut trees " heavy @-@ laden like people returning from hospitals " , or wind wailing " with all the hopelessness of an orphanage " , Samyro 's poetry includes <unk> , <unk> de pension , which , Cernat argues , displays " playful detachment [ for ] the musicality of internal rhymes " . It opens with the lyrics : 
 The Gârceni pieces were treasured by the moderate wing of the Romanian avant @-@ garde movement . In contrast to his previous rejection of Dada , Contimporanul collaborator Benjamin Fondane used them as an example of " pure poetry " , and compared them to the elaborate writings of French poet Paul Valéry , thus recuperating them in line with the magazine 's ideology . 
 = = = Dada synthesis and " <unk> " = = = 
 Tzara the Dadaist was inspired by the contributions of his experimental modernist predecessors . Among them were the literary promoters of Cubism : in addition to Henri Barzun and Fernand <unk> , Tzara cherished the works of Guillaume Apollinaire . Despite Dada 's condemnation of Futurism , various authors note the influence Filippo Tommaso Marinetti and his circle exercised on Tzara 's group . In 1917 , he was in correspondence with both Apollinaire and Marinetti . Traditionally , Tzara is also seen as indebted to the early avant @-@ garde and black comedy writings of Romania 's Urmuz . 
 For a large part , Dada focused on performances and satire , with shows that often had Tzara , Marcel Janco and Huelsenbeck for their main protagonists . Often dressed up as Tyrolian peasants or wearing dark robes , they improvised poetry sessions at the Cabaret Voltaire , reciting the works of others or their spontaneous creations , which were or pretended to be in Esperanto or Māori language . Bernard Gendron describes these soirées as marked by " heterogeneity and eclecticism " , and Richter notes that the songs , often punctuated by loud shrieks or other unsettling sounds , built on the legacy of noise music and Futurist compositions . 
 With time , Tristan Tzara merged his performances and his literature , taking part in developing Dada 's " simultaneist poetry " , which was meant to be read out loud and involved a collaborative effort , being , according to Hans Arp , the first instance of Surrealist <unk> . Ball stated that the subject of such pieces was " the value of the human voice . " Together with Arp , Tzara and Walter Serner produced the German @-@ language Die <unk> vom <unk> und dem <unk> ( " The <unk> of the Crocodile 's Hairdresser and the Walking @-@ Stick " ) , in which , Arp stated , " the poet crows , curses , sighs , stutters , <unk> , as he pleases . His poems are like Nature [ where ] a tiny particle is as beautiful and important as a star . " Another noted simultaneist poem was L <unk> <unk> une maison à <unk> ( " The Admiral Is Looking for a House to Rent " ) , co @-@ authored by Tzara , Marcel Janco and <unk> . 
 Art historian Roger Cardinal describes Tristan Tzara 's Dada poetry as marked by " extreme semantic and syntactic incoherence " . Tzara , who recommended destroying just as it is created , had devised a personal system for writing poetry , which implied a seemingly chaotic reassembling of words that had been randomly cut out of newspapers . 
 = = = Dada and anti @-@ art = = = 
 The Romanian writer also spent the Dada period issuing a long series of manifestos , which were often authored as prose poetry , and , according to Cardinal , were characterized by " rumbustious tomfoolery and astringent wit " , which reflected " the language of a sophisticated savage " . Huelsenbeck credited Tzara with having discovered in them the format for " compress [ ing ] what we think and feel " , and , according to Hans Richter , the genre " suited Tzara perfectly . " Despite its production of seemingly theoretical works , Richter indicates , Dada lacked any form of program , and Tzara tried to perpetuate this state of affairs . His Dada manifesto of 1918 stated : " Dada means nothing " , adding " Thought is produced in the mouth . " Tzara indicated : " I am against systems ; the most acceptable system is on principle to have none . " In addition , Tzara , who once stated that " logic is always false " , probably approved of Serner 's vision of a " final dissolution " . According to Philip Beitchman , a core concept in Tzara 's thought was that " as long as we do things the way we think we once did them we will be unable to achieve any kind of livable society . " 
 Despite adopting such anti @-@ artistic principles , Richter argues , Tzara , like many of his fellow Dadaists , did not initially discard the mission of " <unk> the cause of art . " He saw this evident in La Revue Dada 2 , a poem " as exquisite as freshly @-@ picked flowers " , which included the lyrics : 
 La Revue Dada 2 , which also includes the onomatopoeic line <unk> , is one example where Tzara applies his principles of chance to sounds themselves . This sort of arrangement , treasured by many Dadaists , was probably connected with Apollinaire 's <unk> , and with his announcement that " Man is in search of a new language . " Călinescu proposed that Tzara willingly limited the impact of chance : taking as his example a short parody piece which depicts the love affair between cyclist and a Dadaist , which ends with their decapitation by a jealous husband , the critic notes that Tzara transparently intended to " shock the bourgeois " . Late in his career , Huelsenbeck alleged that Tzara never actually applied the experimental methods he had devised . 
 The Dada series makes ample use of contrast , ellipses , ridiculous imagery and nonsensical verdicts . Tzara was aware that the public could find it difficult to follow his intentions , and , in a piece titled Le <unk> blanc <unk> du <unk> ( " The White Leprous Giant in the Landscape " ) even alluded to the " skinny , idiotic , dirty " reader who " does not understand my poetry . " He called some of his own poems <unk> , from a French word designating storage areas for light fixtures . The <unk> poet Isidore Isou included such pieces in a succession of experiments inaugurated by Charles Baudelaire with the " destruction of the anecdote for the form of the poem " , a process which , with Tzara , became " destruction of the word for nothing " . According to American literary historian Mary Ann <unk> , Tzara 's poems may be seen as having an " internal order " , and read as " a simple spectacle , as creation complete in itself and completely obvious . " 
 = = = Plays of the 1920s = = = 
 Tristan Tzara 's first play , The Gas Heart , dates from the final period of Paris Dada . Created with what Enoch Brater calls a " peculiar verbal strategy " , it is a dialogue between characters called Ear , Mouth , Eye , Nose , Neck , and Eyebrow . They seem unwilling to actually communicate to each other and their reliance on proverbs and <unk> willingly creates confusion between metaphorical and literal speech . The play ends with a dance performance that recalls similar devices used by the proto @-@ Dadaist Alfred Jarry . The text culminates in a series of doodles and illegible words . Brater describes The Gas Heart as a " <unk> [ y ] of theatrical conventions " . 
 In his 1924 play Handkerchief of Clouds , Tzara explores the relation between perception , the subconscious and memory . Largely through exchanges between commentators who act as third parties , the text presents the tribulations of a love triangle ( a poet , a bored woman , and her banker husband , whose character traits borrow the clichés of conventional drama ) , and in part reproduces settings and lines from Hamlet . Tzara mocks classical theater , which demands from characters to be inspiring , believable , and to function as a whole : Handkerchief of Clouds requires actors in the role of commentators to address each other by their real names , and their lines include dismissive comments on the play itself , while the protagonist , who in the end dies , is not assigned any name . Writing for Integral , Tzara defined his play as a note on " the relativity of things , sentiments and events . " Among the conventions ridiculed by the dramatist , Philip Beitchman notes , is that of a " privileged position for art " : in what Beitchman sees as a comment on Marxism , poet and banker are interchangeable capitalists who invest in different fields . Writing in 1925 , Fondane rendered a pronouncement by Jean Cocteau , who , while commenting that Tzara was one of his " most beloved " writers and a " great poet " , argued : " Handkerchief of Clouds was poetry , and great poetry for that matter — but not theater . " The work was nonetheless praised by Ion Călugăru at Integral , who saw in it one example that modernist performance could rely not just on props , but also on a solid text . 
 = = = The Approximate Man and later works = = = 
 After 1929 , with the adoption of Surrealism , Tzara 's literary works discard much of their satirical purpose , and begin to explore universal themes relating to the human condition . According to Cardinal , the period also signified the definitive move from " a studied inconsequentiality " and " unreadable gibberish " to " a seductive and fertile surrealist idiom . " The critic also remarks : " Tzara arrived at a mature style of transparent simplicity , in which disparate entities could be held together in a unifying vision . " In a 1930 essay , Fondane had given a similar verdict : arguing that Tzara had infused his work with " suffering " , had discovered humanity , and had become a " clairvoyant " among poets . 
 This period in Tzara 's creative activity centers on The Approximate Man , an epic poem which is reportedly recognized as his most accomplished contribution to French literature . While maintaining some of Tzara 's preoccupation with language experimentation , it is mainly a study in social alienation and the search for an escape . Cardinal calls the piece " an extended meditation on mental and elemental impulses [ ... ] with images of stunning beauty " , while <unk> , who notes Tzara 's rebellion against the " excess baggage of [ man 's ] past and the notions [ ... ] with which he has hitherto tried to control his life " , remarks his portrayal of poets as voices who can prevent human beings from destroying themselves with their own intellects . The goal is a new man who lets intuition and spontaneity guide him through life , and who rejects measure . One of the appeals in the text reads : 
 The next stage in Tzara 's career saw a merger of his literary and political views . His poems of the period blend a humanist vision with communist theses . The 1935 Grains et issues , described by Beitchman as " fascinating " , was a prose poem of social criticism connected with The Approximate Man , expanding on the vision of a possible society , in which haste has been abandoned in favor of oblivion . The world imagined by Tzara abandons symbols of the past , from literature to public transportation and currency , while , like psychologists Sigmund Freud and Wilhelm Reich , the poet depicts violence as a natural means of human expression . People of the future live in a state which combines waking life and the realm of dreams , and life itself turns into <unk> . Grains et issues was accompanied by Personage d <unk> ( " Personage of Insomnia " ) , which went unpublished . 
 Cardinal notes : " In retrospect , harmony and contact had been Tzara 's goals all along . " The post @-@ World War II volumes in the series focus on political subjects related to the conflict . In his last writings , Tzara toned down experimentation , exercising more control over the lyrical aspects . He was by then undertaking a <unk> research into the work of <unk> and François Villon , whom he deeply admired . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Beside the many authors who were attracted into Dada through his promotional activities , Tzara was able to influence successive generations of writers . This was the case in his homeland during 1928 , when the first avant @-@ garde manifesto issued by <unk> magazine , written by Sașa Pană and <unk> , cited as its mentors Tzara , writers Breton , Ribemont @-@ Dessaignes , Vinea , Filippo Tommaso Marinetti , and Tudor Arghezi , as well as artists Constantin Brâncuși and Theo van Doesburg . One of the Romanian writers to claim inspiration from Tzara was Jacques G. Costin , who nevertheless offered an equally good reception to both Dadaism and Futurism , while Ilarie Voronca 's Zodiac cycle , first published in France , is traditionally seen as indebted to The Approximate Man . The <unk> and Surrealist author Marcel <unk> , who wrote during the 1930s , also appears to have been directly inspired by Tzara 's views on art . Other authors from that generation to have been inspired by Tzara were Polish Futurist writer Bruno <unk> , Japanese poet and Zen thinker Takahashi Shinkichi , and Chilean poet and Dadaist sympathizer Vicente Huidobro , who cited him as a precursor for his own <unk> . 
 An immediate precursor of <unk> , he was acknowledged as a mentor by Eugène Ionesco , who developed on his principles for his early essays of literary and social criticism , as well as in tragic farces such as The Bald Soprano . Tzara 's poetry influenced Samuel Beckett ( who translated some of it into English ) ; the Irish author 's 1972 play Not I shares some elements with The Gas Heart . In the United States , the Romanian author is cited as an influence on Beat Generation members . Beat writer Allen Ginsberg , who made his acquaintance in Paris , cites him among the Europeans who influenced him and William S. Burroughs . The latter also mentioned Tzara 's use of chance in writing poetry as an early example of what became the cut @-@ up technique , adopted by Brion Gysin and Burroughs himself . Gysin , who conversed with Tzara in the late 1950s , records the latter 's indignation that Beat poets were " going back over the ground we [ Dadaists ] covered in 1920 " , and accuses Tzara of having consumed his creative energies into becoming a " Communist Party bureaucrat " . 
 Among the late 20th @-@ century writers who acknowledged Tzara as an inspiration are Jerome Rothenberg , Isidore Isou and Andrei Codrescu . The former Situationist Isou , whose experiments with sounds and poetry come in succession to Apollinaire and Dada , declared his <unk> to be the last connection in the Charles Baudelaire @-@ Tzara cycle , with the goal of arranging " a nothing [ ... ] for the creation of the anecdote . " For a short period , Codrescu even adopted the pen name Tristan Tzara . He recalled the impact of having discovered Tzara 's work in his youth , and credited him with being " the most important French poet after Rimbaud . " 
 In retrospect , various authors describe Tzara 's Dadaist shows and street performances as " happenings " , with a word employed by post @-@ Dadaists and Situationists , which was coined in the 1950s . Some also credit Tzara with having provided an ideological source for the development of rock music , including punk rock , punk subculture and post @-@ punk . Tristan Tzara has inspired the songwriting technique of Radiohead , and is one of the avant @-@ garde authors whose voices were mixed by DJ Spooky on his trip hop album Rhythm Science . Romanian contemporary classical musician Cornel <unk> set to music five of Tzara 's poems , all of which date from the post @-@ Dada period . <unk> , Anatol Vieru and ten other composers contributed to the album La <unk> de l 'horizon , inspired by Tzara 's work . 
 = = = Tributes and portrayals = = = 
 In France , Tzara 's work was collected as Oeuvres complètes ( " Complete Works " ) , of which the first volume saw print in 1975 , and an international poetry award is named after him ( Prix International de <unk> Tristan Tzara ) . An international periodical titled <unk> Tristan Tzara , edited by the Tristan Tzara Cultural @-@ Literary Foundation , has been published in Moinești since 1998 . 
 According to Paul Cernat , <unk> , one of the few avant @-@ garde texts authored by Ion Vinea features a " transparent allusion " to Tristan Tzara . Vinea 's fragment speaks of " the Wandering Jew " , a character whom people notice because he sings La <unk> la Hârța , " a suspicious song from Greater Romania . " The poet is a character in Indian novelist Mulk Raj Anand 's Thieves of Fire , part four of his The Bubble ( 1984 ) , as well as in The Prince of West End Avenue , a 1994 book by the American Alan Isler . Rothenberg dedicated several of his poems to Tzara , as did the Neo @-@ Dadaist Valery <unk> . Tzara 's legacy in literature also covers specific episodes of his biography , beginning with Gertrude Stein 's controversial memoir . One of his performances is enthusiastically recorded by Malcolm Cowley in his autobiographical book of 1934 , Exile 's Return , and he is also mentioned in Harold Loeb 's memoir The Way It Was . Among his biographers is the French author François <unk> , who records some of the lesser @-@ known aspects of Tzara 's life . 
 At some point between 1915 and 1917 , Tzara is believed to have played chess in a coffeehouse that was also frequented by Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin . While Richter himself recorded the incidental proximity of Lenin 's lodging to the Dadaist milieu , no record exists of an actual conversation between the two figures . Andrei Codrescu believes that Lenin and Tzara did play against each other , noting that an image of their encounter would be " the proper icon of the beginning of [ modern ] times . " This meeting is mentioned as a fact in Harlequin at the <unk> , a poem by Tzara 's acquaintance Kurt Schwitters . German playwright and novelist Peter Weiss , who has introduced Tzara as a character in his 1969 play about Leon Trotsky ( <unk> im <unk> ) , recreated the scene in his 1975 @-@ 1981 cycle The Aesthetics of Resistance . The imagined episode also inspired much of Tom Stoppard 's 1974 play <unk> , which also depicts conversations between Tzara , Lenin , and the Irish modernist author James Joyce ( who is also known to have resided in Zürich after 1915 ) . His role was notably played by David Westhead in the 1993 British production , and by Tom Hewitt in the 2005 American version . 
 Alongside his collaborations with Dada artists on various pieces , Tzara himself was a subject for visual artists . Max Ernst depicts him as the only mobile character in the Dadaists ' group portrait Au Rendez @-@ vous des Amis ( " A Friends ' Reunion " , 1922 ) , while , in one of Man Ray 's photographs , he is shown kneeling to kiss the hand of an androgynous Nancy Cunard . Years before their split , Francis Picabia used Tzara 's calligraphed name in <unk> ( " Molecular " ) , a composition printed on the cover of 391 . The same artist also completed his schematic portrait , which showed a series of circles connected by two perpendicular arrows . In 1949 , Swiss artist Alberto Giacometti made Tzara the subject of one of his first experiments with lithography . Portraits of Tzara were also made by Greta Knutson , Robert Delaunay , and the Cubist painters M. H. Maxy and Lajos <unk> . As an homage to Tzara the performer , art rocker David Bowie adopted his accessories and mannerisms during a number of public appearances . In 1996 , he was depicted on a series of Romanian stamps , and , the same year , a concrete and steel monument dedicated to the writer was erected in Moinești . 
 Several of Tzara 's Dadaist editions had illustrations by Picabia , Janco and Hans Arp . In its 1925 edition , Handkerchief of Clouds featured etchings by Juan Gris , while his late writings <unk> seul , Le Signe de vie , De mémoire d 'homme , Le Temps <unk> , and Le Fruit <unk> were illustrated with works by , respectively , Joan Miró , Henri Matisse , Pablo Picasso , Nejad Devrim and Sonia Delaunay . Tzara was the subject of an 1949 eponymous documentary film directed by Danish filmmaker Jørgen Roos , and footage of him featured prominently in the 1953 production Les statues <unk> aussi ( " Statues Also Die " ) , jointly directed by Chris Marker and Alain Resnais . 
 = = = Posthumous controversies = = = 
 The many polemics which surrounded Tzara in his lifetime left traces after his death , and determine contemporary perceptions of his work . The controversy regarding Tzara 's role as a founder of Dada extended into several milieus , and continued long after the writer died . Richter , who discusses the lengthy conflict between Huelsenbeck and Tzara over the issue of Dada foundation , speaks of the movement as being torn apart by " petty jealousies " . In Romania , similar debates often involved the supposed founding role of Urmuz , who wrote his avant @-@ garde texts before World War I , and Tzara 's status as a communicator between Romania and the rest of Europe . Vinea , who claimed that Dada had been invented by Tzara in Gârceni ca . 1915 and thus sought to legitimize his own modernist vision , also saw Urmuz as the ignored precursor of radical modernism , from Dada to Surrealism . In 1931 the young , modernist literary critic Lucian Boz evidenced that he partly shared Vinea 's perspective on the matter , crediting Tzara and Constantin Brâncuși with having , each on his own , invented the avant @-@ garde . Eugène Ionesco argued that " before Dadaism there was <unk> " , and , after World War II , sought to popularize Urmuz 's work among aficionados of Dada . Rumors in the literary community had it that Tzara successfully sabotaged Ionesco 's initiative to publish a French edition of Urmuz 's texts , allegedly because the public could then question his claim to have initiated the avant @-@ garde experiment in Romania and the world ( the edition saw print in 1965 , two years after Tzara 's death ) . 
 A more radical questioning of Tzara 's influence came from Romanian essayist Petre Pandrea . In his personal diary , published long after he and Tzara had died , Pandrea depicted the poet as an opportunist , accusing him of adapting his style to political requirements , of dodging military service during World War I , and of being a " <unk> " . Pandrea 's text , completed just after Tzara 's visit to Romania , claimed that his founding role within the avant @-@ garde was an " illusion [ ... ] which has swelled up like a multicolored balloon " , and denounced him as " the Balkan provider of <unk> <unk> , [ together ] with narcotics and a sort of scandalous literature . " Himself an adherent to communism , Pandrea grew disillusioned with the ideology , and later became a political prisoner in Communist Romania . Vinea 's own grudge probably shows up in his 1964 novel <unk> , where Tzara is identifiable as " Dr. Barbu " , a thick @-@ <unk> charlatan . 
 From the 1960s to 1989 , after a period when it ignored or attacked the avant @-@ garde movement , the Romanian communist regime sought to recuperate Tzara , in order to validate its newly adopted emphasis on nationalist and national communist tenets . In 1977 , literary historian Edgar Papu , whose controversial theories were linked to " <unk> " , which presumes that Romanians took precedence in various areas of world culture , mentioned Tzara , Urmuz , Ionesco and Isou as representatives of " Romanian initiatives " and " road openers at a universal level . " Elements of <unk> in this area , Paul Cernat argues , could be traced back to Vinea 's claim that his friend had single @-@ handedly created the worldwide avant @-@ garde movement on the basis of models already present at home . 
 = Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy = 
 Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy , 162 U.S. 283 ( 1896 ) , was the first litigation of aboriginal title in the United States by a tribal plaintiff in the Supreme Court of the United States since Cherokee Nation v. Georgia ( 1831 ) . It was the first such litigation by an indigenous plaintiff since Fellows v. Blacksmith ( 1857 ) and its companion case of New York ex rel . Cutler v. Dibble ( 1858 ) . The New York courts held that the 1788 Phelps and Gorham Purchase did not violate the Nonintercourse Act , one of the provisions of which prohibits purchases of Indian lands without the approval of the federal government , and that ( even if it did ) the Seneca Nation of New York was barred by the state statute of limitations from challenging the transfer of title . The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the merits of lower court ruling because of the adequate and independent state grounds doctrine . 
 According to O 'Toole and Tureen , " Christy is an important case in that it revived the concept that states had special powers to deal with Indian tribes within their borders . " 
 Although the case has not been formally overruled , two Supreme Court decisions in the 1970s and 1980s have undone its effect by ruling that there is federal subject @-@ matter jurisdiction for a federal common law cause of action for recovering possession based on the common @-@ law doctrine of aboriginal title . Moreover , the New York courts ' interpretation of the Nonintercourse Act is no longer good law . Modern federal courts hold that only Congress can ratify a conveyance of aboriginal title , and only with a clear statement , rather than implicitly . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Conveyance = = = 
 The land in question , which had been part of the Seneca Nation 's traditional territory for centuries before the American Revolution , comprised part of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase , a tract of land disputed after the war between claims of New York and Massachusetts . By a December 16 , 1786 interstate compact , the states agreed that Massachusetts would retain the proprietary rights and the pre @-@ emption rights , but New York would retain governmental rights . After the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787 , the federal government ratified their compact . 
 Three private individuals — Robert Troup , Thomas L. Ogden , and Benjamin W. Rogers — obtained the proprietary and preemptive rights from Massachusetts . They executed a treaty of conveyance with the Seneca on August 31 , 1826 , purchasing 87 @,@ 000 acres for $ 48 @,@ 216 . Massachusetts approved the conveyance , but the United States Senate was never consulted and never ratified the treaty , as required for treaties with Native American nations . In 1827 , the money was deposited in Ontario Bank in Canandaigua , New York , and in 1855 it was paid to the United States treasury , which began remitting the interest to the Seneca Nation . 
 = = = Dispute = = = 
 The Seneca Nation could not have brought the lawsuit until 1845 , when the New York legislature granted the nation the right to bring suits in courts of law and equity . The Seneca filed a petition with the Bureau of Indian Affairs on January 5 , 1881 , requesting restoration and possession of certain lands related to the Phelps and Gorham Purchase . This petition was ignored by the BIA . 
 The Seneca hired the lawyer James Clark Strong to represent them , a " prominent lawyer and civic @-@ minded resident of Buffalo . " Strong was a former lieutenant colonel in the Union army ( brevetted to general after the war ) . He had a permanent limp from his wounds in the American Civil War . At the law practice of his brother , John C. Strong , he had also represented the Cayuga in a claim against New York state . 
 = = Procedural history = = 
 = = = New York trial court = = = 
 The Seneca brought suit in the Circuit Court of Erie County , New York on October 13 , 1885 . The Seneca requested the ejectment of Harrison B. Christy from 100 acres of land in the town of Brant , New York ( purchased from the Ogden Land Company ) , known as the " mile strip . " These lands were formerly part of the Cattaraugus Indian Reservation , as established by the New York Treaty of Big Tree ( 1797 ) . 
 The Seneca contended that the purchase was invalid because the treaty was not approved by the Senate , as required by the Constitution ; therefore it violated the Nonintercourse Act . Christy 's " answer consisted of a general denial , the plea of the statute of limitations of 20 years , and that the plaintiff had not the legal right , title , capacity , or authority to maintain the action . " 
 = = = New York intermediate appellate court = = = 
 The General Term of the Fifth Department of the New York Supreme Court heard the intermediate appeal . Bradley J. , writing for himself and Dwight J.J. , affirmed . The court considered whether the Indians had properly surrendered the land and whether the consideration had been paid . As to the first question , the court noted that , while " in view of the known habits of Indians they may not be supposed to represent their occupation or possession by improvements or inclosures of all or great portions of their lands " : 
 [ I ] n this case the abandonment and surrender were not only practically made , but have been characterized by such circumstances and by such recognition , not only by the Indians , but by the government , in such manner as to determine the situation , and in legal effect to sever the prior relation of the Indians to the lands from them . The quantity of land covered by the treaty of conveyance was large . 
 The court cited Johnson v. M 'Intosh ( 1823 ) for the proposition that : " [ t ] he title of the Indians was possessory , and embraced the right of occupancy only . And when abandoned by them the possession attached itself to the fee of the lands . " 
 As to the second question , the court noted : 
 The suggestion that the entire amount of the purchase money was not paid , and that such fact is in the way of supporting the claim to the Indian title , is not sustained . We are not called upon to consider the effect of default in payment of any portion of the purchase money . The treaty recites the payment of it , and as no such question seems ever before to have been raised , or full payment questioned , either by government or the Indians , it must at this late day be assumed , until the contrary is quite clearly made to appear , that the contract in that respect was performed . 
 Finally , the court noted : 
 The plaintiff not being a corporation , and having no such corporate name , could not at common law maintain an action . This right , however , was more than 40 years ago conferred by statute , which , among other things , provides that the Seneca Nation of Indians may maintain any action of ejectment to recover the possession of any part of the Allegany and Cattaraugus reservations unlawfully withheld from them . 
 As a result , the intermediate appellate court did not reach the question of whether the statute of limitation applies . 
 = = = New York Court of Appeals = = = 
 Chief Justice Charles Andrews , writing for a unanimous New York Court of Appeals , affirmed . 
 Validity of the transaction 
 After reviewing the facts , Andrews began by arguing that there were many ways to extinguish aboriginal title . He said : " It is material to observe that there was no uniform procedure on the part of the purchasers from Massachusetts in acquiring the Indian title , " and gave examples of conveyances he believed to have been implicitly ratified by the federal government . As to the Seneca argument that , after the ratification of the Constitution , only the federal government could extinguish aboriginal title , Andrews noted that : 
 These claims challenge the title not only of every purchaser and holder of lands within the boundaries of the grant of August 31 , 1826 , but also the title to many millions of acres of lands in this state , held under Indian treaties made by the state of New York with the Indian tribes within its borders , or under grants made by Indians to individuals under the authority of the state , where no treaty had been made between the United States and the Indian occupants . 
 Andrews expressed the view that the U.S. states , not the federal government , inherited from Great Britain the sole power to extinguish aboriginal title : 
 On the Declaration of Independence the colonies became sovereign states . They were so acknowledged by the treaty of peace of 1783 , and Great Britain by that treaty ‘ relinquished all claims to the government , property , and territorial rights ' within the several colonies . It is the received opinion that the colonies succeeded to the title of the crown to all the ungranted lands within their respective boundaries , with the exclusive right to extinguish by purchase the Indian title , and to regulate dealings with the Indian tribes . ‘ There was no territory in the United States , ’ said <unk> , J. , in Harcourt v. Gaillard , 12 Wheat . 523 , ‘ that was claimed in any other right than that of one of the confederated states ; therefore there could be no acquisition of territory made by the United States distinct from or independent of some one of the United States . ’ 
 Andrews rejected the argument that the federal government had acquired Indian lands by treaty out of a legal requirement to do so : 
 But the dealing by the general government with the Indian tribes through treaties was resorted to as a convenient mode of regulating Indian affairs , and not because , as with other nations , it was the only mode , independently of the <unk> of war , of dealing with them . 
 Andrews relied upon the argument of federal acquiescence : 
 The practical construction given by the state of New York to the federal constitution , as shown by the numerous treaties made by it with the Indian tribes , and the recognition by the federal authority of their validity , is very strong evidence that the clause in the federal constitution prohibiting the states from entering into treaties does not preclude a state , having the preemption right to Indian lands , from dealing with the Indian tribes directly , for the extinguishment of the Indian title . 
 Effect of the Nonintercourse Act 
 As to the Nonintercourse Act , Andrews questioned both whether it applied to purchases by a state and whether it applied to purchases within a state . However , Andrews proceed to assume that the Act applied and held that it had not been violated . Andrews proceeded to argue that the treaty requirement of the Act was satisfied by state treaties : 
 The purchase must be made at a treaty , as in other cases . This insures publicity , and affords a protection against fraud . But the proviso does not require that the treaty should be one between the United States and the tribe from whom the purchase is made , as in the cases coming under the first clause of the section . It is sufficient if the purchase is made at a treaty held ‘ under the authority of the United States , ’ and in the ‘ presence and with the approbation of the commissioner or commissioners of the United States , ’ etc . 
 Andrews also placed reliance on the fact that later versions of the Act excluded the clause " or to any state , whether having the right of pre @-@ emption or not " and instead simply prohibited acquisitions by persons . 
 Applicability of the statute of limitations 
 Independently , Andrews indicated he would have dismissed the action under the statute of limitations : 
 We are also of opinion that as the right of the plaintiff to sue was given by , and is dependent upon , the statute , the statute of limitations is a bar to the action . By the act of 1845 , the actions thereby authorized are to be brought and maintained ‘ in the same time ’ as if brought by citizens of the state . The question is not whether an Indian title can be barred by adverse possession , or by state statutes of limitation . The point is that the plaintiff cannot invoke the special remedy given by the statute , without being bound by the conditions upon which it is given . 
 Andrews emphasized this latter ground because of his desire to prevent any similar lands claims by Indian tribes : 
 In view of the numerous Indian titles in this state originating in treaties by the state , or in purchases made with its sanction by individuals , we prefer to place our judgment on the broader ground , which will remove any cloud upon the validity of those titles . 
 = = Opinion = = 
 Chief Justice Melville Fuller , for a unanimous Court , dismissed the writ of error , relying on the adequate and independent state grounds for the New York Court of Appeals ' decision . After reviewing the facts and the judgment below , he wrote that : 
 The proper construction of this enabling act , and the time within which an action might be brought and maintained thereunder , it was the province of the state courts to determine . 
 The Seneca Nation availed itself of the act in bringing this action , which was subject to the provision , as held by the court of appeals , that it could only be brought and maintained ‘ in the same manner and within the same time as if brought by citizens of this state in relation to their private individual property and rights . ’ Under the circumstances , the fact that the plaintiff was an Indian tribe cannot make federal questions of the correct construction of the act and the bar of the statute of limitations . 
 As it appears that the decision of the court of appeals was rested , in addition to other grounds , upon a distinct and independent ground , not involving any federal question , and sufficient in itself to maintain the judgment , the writ of error falls within the <unk> rule on that subject , and cannot be maintained . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A 19th @-@ century New York Times article claimed that " [ t ] he decision is one of local , state , and national importance alike . . . . " In 1998 Prof. <unk> summed up the case by the following : 
 The Treaties of 1823 and 1826 , although fraudulent at their roots , were allowed to stand . The legal obstacles to Indian land suits at the time made it almost impossible to obtain redress until monetary compensation was awarded the Senecas under the Indian Claims Commission in the late 1960s and early 1970s . 
 Seneca Nation has never been overruled . But , the effect of the decision was undone by rulings in Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State v. Oneida County ( 1974 ) , known as Oneida I , and Oneida County v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State ( 1985 ) , known as Oneida II , which held that there is a federal common law cause of action for ejectment based upon aboriginal title for which there is federal subject @-@ matter jurisdiction . Therefore , Indian tribes no longer have to rely on state statutes for a cause of action . In the words of Prof. <unk> , Oneida I " overturned one hundred forty @-@ three years of American law . " 
 = Frank Sinatra = 
 Francis Albert " Frank " Sinatra ( / <unk> / ; December 12 , 1915 – May 14 , 1998 ) was an American singer , actor , and producer who was one of the most popular and influential musical artists of the 20th century . Sinatra 's music has been considered timeless by many . He is one of the best @-@ selling music artists of all time , having sold more than 150 million records worldwide . Born in Hoboken , New Jersey , to Italian immigrants , he began his musical career in the swing era with Harry James and Tommy Dorsey . He found success as a solo artist after being signed by Columbia Records in 1943 , becoming the idol of the " bobby <unk> " . He released his first album , The Voice of Frank Sinatra , in 1946 . Sinatra 's professional career had stalled by the early 1950s , and he turned to Las Vegas , where he became one of its best known performers as part of the Rat Pack . His career was reborn in 1953 with the success of From Here to Eternity and his subsequent Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . He signed with Capitol Records and released several critically lauded albums , including In the Wee Small Hours ( 1955 ) , Songs for Swingin ' Lovers ! ( 1956 ) , Come Fly with Me ( 1958 ) , Only the Lonely ( 1958 ) and Nice ' n ' Easy ( 1960 ) . 
 Sinatra left Capitol in 1960 to start his own record label , Reprise Records , and released a string of successful albums . In 1965 he recorded the retrospective September of My Years , starred in the Emmy @-@ winning television special Frank Sinatra : A Man and His Music , and scored hits with " Strangers in the Night " and " My Way " . After releasing Sinatra at the Sands , recorded at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Vegas with frequent collaborator Count Basie in early 1966 , the following year he recorded one of his most famous collaborations with Tom Jobim , the album Francis Albert Sinatra & Antonio Carlos Jobim . It was followed by 1968 's collaboration with Duke Ellington . Sinatra retired for the first time in 1971 , but came out of retirement two years later and recorded several albums and resumed performing at Caesars Palace . In 1980 he scored a Top 40 hit with " ( Theme From ) New York , New York " . Using his Las Vegas shows as a home base , he toured both within the United States and internationally until a short time before his death in 1998 . 
 Sinatra forged a highly successful career as a film actor . After winning an Academy Award for From Here to Eternity , he starred in The Man with the Golden Arm ( 1955 ) , and received critical acclaim for his performance in The Manchurian Candidate ( 1962 ) . He appeared in various musicals such as On the Town ( 1949 ) , Guys and Dolls ( 1955 ) , High Society ( 1956 ) , and Pal Joey ( 1957 ) , and toward the end of his career he became associated with playing detectives , including the title character in Tony Rome ( 1967 ) . On television , The Frank Sinatra Show began on ABC in 1950 , and he continued to make appearances on television throughout the 1950s and 1960s . Sinatra was also heavily involved with politics from the mid 1940s , and actively campaigned for presidents such as Harry S. Truman , John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan , though before Kennedy 's death Sinatra 's alleged Mafia connections led to his being snubbed . ( The Nevada Gaming Commission stripped Sinatra of his gambling license after he failed to meet an October 7 , 1963 deadline for refuting charges of close associations with Chicago mobster Sam Giancana . ) 
 While Sinatra never formally learned how to read music , he had a fine , natural understanding of it , and he worked very hard from a young age to improve his abilities in all aspects of music . A perfectionist , renowned for his impeccable dress sense and cleanliness , he always insisted on recording live with his band . His deep blue eyes earned him the popular nickname " Ol ' Blue Eyes " . Sinatra led a colorful personal life , and was often involved in turbulent affairs with women , such as with his second wife Ava Gardner . He went on to marry Mia Farrow in 1966 and Barbara Marx in 1976 . Sinatra had several violent confrontations , usually with journalists he felt had crossed him , or work bosses with whom he had disagreements . He was honored at the Kennedy Center Honors in 1983 , was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Ronald Reagan in 1985 , and the Congressional Gold Medal in 1997 . Sinatra was also the recipient of eleven Grammy Awards , including the Grammy Trustees Award , Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . After his death , American music critic Robert Christgau called him " the greatest singer of the 20th century " , and he continues to be seen as an iconic figure . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francis Albert Sinatra was born on December 12 , 1915 , in an upstairs tenement at 415 Monroe Street in Hoboken , New Jersey . He was the only child of Italian immigrants Antonino Martino " Marty " Sinatra ( May 4 , 1892 – January 24 , 1969 ) , the son of grape growers from <unk> <unk> , and <unk> " Dolly " <unk> ( December 26 , 1896 – January 6 , 1977 ) , daughter of a lithographer from Genoa . The couple had eloped on Valentine 's Day 1913 , and married in a civil ceremony in Jersey City , New Jersey . Sinatra weighed 13 @.@ 5 pounds ( 6 @.@ 1 kg ) at birth and had to be delivered with the aid of forceps , which caused severe scarring to his left cheek , neck , and ear , and perforated his ear drum , damage that remained for life . Due to his injuries at birth , his baptism at St. Francis Church in Hoboken was delayed until April 2 , 1916 . A childhood operation on his mastoid bone left major scarring on his neck , and during adolescence he suffered from cystic acne that scarred his face and neck . Sinatra was raised Roman Catholic . 
 When Sinatra 's mother was a child , her pretty face earned her the nickname " Dolly " . Energetic and driven , biographers believe that she was the dominant factor in the development of her son 's personality traits and extraordinary self @-@ confidence . Barbara Sinatra claims that Dolly was abusive to him as a child , and " knocked him around a lot " . Dolly became influential in Hoboken and in local Democratic Party circles . She worked as a midwife , earning $ 50 for each delivery , and according to Sinatra biographer Kitty Kelley , also ran an illegal abortion service that catered to Italian Catholic girls . She also had a gift for languages and served as a local interpreter . Sinatra 's illiterate father was a bantamweight boxer who fought under the name Marty O 'Brien . He later worked for 24 years at the Hoboken Fire Department , working his way up to captain . Sinatra spent much time at his parents ' tavern in Hoboken , working on his homework and occasionally singing a song on top of the player piano for spare change . During the Great Depression , Dolly provided money to her son for outings with friends and to buy expensive clothes , resulting in neighbors describing him as the " best @-@ dressed kid in the neighborhood " . Excessively thin and small as a child and young man , Sinatra 's skinny frame later became a staple of jokes during stage shows . 
 Sinatra developed an interest in music , particularly big band jazz , at a young age . He listened to Gene Austin , Rudy Vallée , Russ Colombo , and Bob Eberly , and " idolized " Bing Crosby . Sinatra 's maternal uncle , Domenico , gave him a ukulele for his 15th birthday , and he began performing at family gatherings . Sinatra attended David E. Rue Jr . High School from 1928 , and A. J. Demarest High School in 1931 , where he arranged bands for school dances . He left without graduating , having attended only 47 days before being expelled for " general <unk> " . To please his mother , he enrolled at Drake Business School , but departed after 11 months . Dolly found Sinatra work as a delivery boy at the Jersey Observer newspaper , where his godfather Frank Garrick worked , and after that , Sinatra was a riveter at the Tietjen and Lang shipyard . He performed in local Hoboken social clubs such as The Cat 's Meow and The Comedy Club , and sang for free on radio stations such as WAAT in Jersey City . In New York , Sinatra found jobs singing for his supper or for cigarettes . To improve his speech , he began taking elocution lessons for a dollar each from vocal coach John Quinlan , who was one of the first people to notice his impressive vocal range . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = Hoboken Four and Harry James ( 1935 – 39 ) = = = 
 Sinatra began singing professionally as a teenager , but he learned music by ear and never learned to read music . He got his first break in 1935 when his mother persuaded a local singing group , the 3 Flashes , to let him join . Fred <unk> , the group 's baritone , stated that " Frank hung around us like we were gods or something " , admitting that they only took him on board because he owned a car and could chauffeur the group around . Sinatra soon learned they were auditioning for the Major Bowes Amateur Hour show , and " begged " the group to let him in on the act . With Sinatra , the group became known as the Hoboken Four , and passed an audition from Edward Bowes to appear on the Major Bowes Amateur Hour show . They each earned $ 12 @.@ 50 for the appearance , and ended up attracting 40 @,@ 000 votes and won first prize — a six @-@ month contract to perform on stage and radio across the United States . Sinatra quickly became the group 's lead singer , and , much to the jealousy of his fellow group members , garnered most of the attention from girls . Due to the success of the group , Bowes kept asking for them to return , disguised under different names , varying from " The <unk> <unk> " to " The Bayonne <unk> " . 
 In 1938 , Sinatra found employment as a singing waiter at a roadhouse called " The Rustic Cabin " in Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey , for which he was paid $ 15 a week . The roadhouse was connected to the WNEW radio station in New York City , and he began performing with a group live during the Dance Parade show . Despite the low salary , Sinatra felt that this was the break he was looking for , and boasted to friends that he was going to " become so big that no one could ever touch him " . In March 1939 , saxophone player Frank Mane , who knew Sinatra from Jersey City radio station WAAT where both performed on live broadcasts , arranged for him to audition and record " Our Love " , his first solo studio recording . In June , bandleader Harry James , who had heard Sinatra sing on " Dance Parade " , signed a two @-@ year contract of $ 75 a week one evening after a show at the Paramount Theatre in New York . It was with the James band that Sinatra released his first commercial record " From the Bottom of My Heart " in July . No more than 8 @,@ 000 copies of the record were sold , and further records released with James through 1939 , such as " All or Nothing At All " , also had weak sales on their initial release . Thanks to his vocal training , Sinatra could now sing two tones higher , and developed a repertoire which included songs such as " My Buddy " , " Willow Weep for Me " , " It 's Funny to Everyone But Me " , " Here Comes the Night " , " On a Little Street in Singapore " , " <unk> " and " Every Day of My Life " . 
 = = = Tommy Dorsey years ( 1939 – 42 ) = = = 
 Sinatra became increasingly frustrated with the status of the Harry James band , feeling that he was not achieving the major success and acclaim he was looking for . His pianist and close friend Hank Sanicola persuaded him to stay with the group , but in November 1939 he left James to replace Jack Leonard as the lead singer of the Tommy Dorsey band . Sinatra signed a contract with Dorsey for $ 125 a week at Palmer House in Chicago , and James agreed amicably to release Sinatra from his contract . On January 26 , 1940 , he made his first public appearance with the band at the Coronado Theatre in Rockford , Illinois , opening the show with " Stardust " . Dorsey recalled : " You could almost feel the excitement coming up out of the crowds when the kid stood up to sing . Remember , he was no matinée idol . He was just a skinny kid with big ears . I used to stand there so amazed I 'd almost forget to take my own solos " . Dorsey was a major influence on Sinatra and became a father figure . Sinatra copied Dorsey 's mannerisms and traits , becoming a demanding perfectionist like him , even adopting his hobby of toy trains . He asked Dorsey to be godfather to his daughter Nancy in June 1940 . Sinatra later said that " The only two people I 've ever been afraid of are my mother and Tommy Dorsey " . Though Kelley claims that Sinatra and drummer Buddy Rich were bitter rivals , other authors state that they were friends and even roommates when the band was on the road , but professional jealousy surfaced as both men wanted to be considered the star of Dorsey 's band . Later , Sinatra helped Rich form his own band with a $ 25 @,@ 000 loan and provided financial help to Rich during times of the drummer 's serious illness . 
 In his first year with Dorsey , Sinatra recorded over forty songs . Sinatra 's first vocal hit was the song " Polka Dots and <unk> " in late April 1940 . Two more chart appearances followed with " Say It " and " Imagination " , which was Sinatra 's first top @-@ 10 hit . His fourth chart appearance was " I 'll Never Smile Again " , topping the charts for twelve weeks beginning in mid @-@ July . Other records with Tommy Dorsey issued by RCA Victor include " Our Love Affair " and " Stardust " in 1940 ; " Oh ! Look at Me Now " , " Dolores " , " Everything Happens to Me " and " This Love of Mine " in 1941 ; " Just as Though You Were There " , " Take Me " and " There Are Such Things " in 1942 ; and " It Started All Over Again " , " In the Blue of Evening " and " It 's Always You " in 1943 . As his success and popularity grew , Sinatra pushed Dorsey to allow him to record some solo songs . Dorsey eventually relented , and on January 19 , 1942 , Sinatra recorded " Night and Day , " The Night We Called It a Day " , " The Song is You " and " <unk> 's Serenade " at a Bluebird recording session , with Axel Stordahl as arranger and conductor . Sinatra first heard the recordings at the Hollywood Palladium and Hollywood Plaza and was astounded at how good he sounded . Stordahl recalled : " He just couldn 't believe his ears . He was so excited , you almost believed he had never recorded before . I think this was a turning point in his career . I think he began to see what he might do on his own " . 
 After the 1942 recordings , Sinatra believed he needed to go solo , with an insatiable desire to compete with Bing Crosby , but he was hampered by his contract which gave Dorsey 43 % of Sinatra 's lifetime earnings in the entertainment industry . A legal battle ensued , eventually settled in August 1943 . On September 3 , 1942 , Dorsey bid farewell to Sinatra , reportedly saying as Sinatra left , " I hope you fall on your ass " . He replaced Sinatra with singer Dick Haymes . Rumors began spreading in newspapers that Sinatra 's mobster godfather , Willie Moretti , coerced Dorsey to let Sinatra out of his contract for a few thousand dollars , holding a gun to his head . Sinatra persuaded Stordahl to leave Dorsey with him and become his personal arranger , offering him $ 650 a month , five times the salary of Dorsey . Dorsey and Sinatra , who had been very close , never patched up their differences before Dorsey 's death in 1956 , worsened by the fact that Dorsey occasionally made biting comments to the press such as " he 's the most fascinating man in the world , but don 't put your hand in the cage " . 
 = = = Onset of <unk> and role in World War II ( 1942 – 45 ) = = = 
 By May 1941 , Sinatra topped the male singer polls in Billboard and Down Beat magazines . His appeal to bobby <unk> , as teenage girls of that time were called , revealed a whole new audience for popular music , which had been recorded mainly for adults up to that time . The phenomenon became officially known as " <unk> " after his " legendary opening " at the Paramount Theatre in New York on December 30 , 1942 . According to Nancy Sinatra , Jack Benny later said , " I thought the goddamned building was going to cave in . I never heard such a commotion ... All this for a fellow I never heard of . " Sinatra performed for four weeks at the theatre , his act following the Benny Goodman orchestra , after which his contract was renewed for another four weeks by Bob <unk> due to his popularity . He became known as " <unk> " or " The Voice " , and his fans " <unk> " . They organized meetings and sent masses of letters of adoration , and within a few weeks of the show , some 1000 Sinatra fan clubs had been reported across the US . Sinatra 's publicist , George Evans , encouraged interviews and photographs with fans , and was the man responsible for depicting Sinatra as a vulnerable , shy , Italian – American with a rough childhood who made good . When Sinatra returned to the Paramount in October 1944 only 250 persons left the first show , and 35 @,@ 000 fans left outside caused a near riot , known as the Columbus Day Riot , outside the venue because they were not allowed in . Such was the bobby @-@ soxer devotion to Sinatra that they were known to write Sinatra 's song titles on their clothing , bribe hotel maids for an opportunity to touch his bed , and accost his person in the form of stealing clothing he was wearing , most commonly his bow @-@ tie . 
 Sinatra signed with Columbia Records as a solo artist on June 1 , 1943 during the 1942 – 44 musicians ' strike . Columbia Records re @-@ released Harry James and Sinatra 's August 1939 version of " All or Nothing at All " , which reached number 2 on June 2 , and was on the best – selling list for 18 weeks . He initially had great success , and performed on the radio on Your Hit Parade from February 1943 until December 1944 , and on stage . Columbia wanted new recordings of their growing star as quickly as possible , so Alec Wilder was hired as an arranger and conductor for several sessions with a vocal group called the Bobby Tucker Singers . These first sessions were on June 7 , June 22 , August 5 , and November 10 , 1943 . Of the nine songs recorded during these sessions , seven charted on the best – selling list . That year he also made his first solo nightclub appearance at New York 's Riobamba , and a successful concert in the Wedgewood Room of the prestigious Waldorf @-@ Astoria New York that year secured his popularity in New York high society . Sinatra released " You 'll Never Know " , " Close to You " , " Sunday , Monday , or Always " and " People Will Say We 're in Love " as singles . By the end of 1943 he was more popular in a Down Beat poll than Bing Crosby , Perry Como , Bob Eberly and Dick Haymes . 
 Sinatra did not serve in the military during World War II . On December 11 , 1943 , he was officially classified 4 @-@ F ( " <unk> not acceptable for military service " ) by his draft board because of a perforated eardrum . However , army files reported that Sinatra was " not acceptable material from a psychiatric viewpoint " , but his emotional instability was hidden to avoid " undue unpleasantness for both the selectee and the induction service " . Briefly , there were rumors reported by columnist Walter Winchell that Sinatra paid $ 40 @,@ 000 to avoid the service , but the FBI found this to be without merit . Toward the end of the war , Sinatra entertained the troops during several successful overseas USO tours with comedian Phil Silvers . During one trip to Rome he met the Pope , who asked him if he was an operatic tenor . Sinatra worked frequently with the popular Andrews Sisters in radio the 1940s , and many USO shows were broadcast to troops via the Armed Forces Radio Service ( <unk> ) . In 1944 Sinatra released " I Couldn 't Sleep a Wink Last Night " as a single and recorded his own version of Crosby 's " White Christmas " , and the following year he released " I Dream of You ( More Than You Dream I Do ) " , " Saturday Night ( Is the Loneliest Night of the Week ) " , " Dream " and " Nancy ( with the Laughing Face ) " as singles . 
 = = = Columbia years and career slump ( 1946 – 52 ) = = = 
 Despite being heavily involved in political activity in 1945 and 1946 , in those two years Sinatra sang on 160 radio shows , recorded 36 times , and shot four films . By 1946 he was performing on stage up to 45 times a week , singing up to 100 songs daily , and earning up to $ 93 @,@ 000 a week . 
 In 1946 Sinatra released " Oh ! What it <unk> to Be " , " Day by Day " , " They Say It 's Wonderful " , " Five Minutes More " and " The Coffee Song " as singles , and launched his first album , The Voice of Frank Sinatra , which reached No. 1 on the Billboard chart . William Ruhlmann of AllMusic noted that Sinatra " took the material very seriously , singing the love lyrics with utter seriousness " , and that his " singing and the classically influenced settings gave the songs unusual depth of meaning " . He was soon selling ten million records a year . Such was Sinatra 's command at Columbia that his love of conducting was indulged with the release of the set Frank Sinatra Conducts the Music of Alec Wilder , an offering unlikely to appeal to Sinatra 's core fanbase at the time , which consisted of teenage girls . The following year he released his second album , Songs by Sinatra , featuring songs of a similar mood and tempo such as Irving Berlin 's " How Deep is the Ocean ? " and Harold Arlen 's and Jerome Kern 's " All The Things You Are " . " Mam <unk> " , composed by Edmund Goulding with lyrics by Mack Gordon for the film The Razor 's Edge ( 1946 ) , was released a single . Sinatra had competition ; versions by Art Lund , Dick Haymes , Dennis Day , and The Pied Pipers also reached the top ten of the Billboard charts . In December he recorded " Sweet Lorraine " with the Metronome All @-@ Stars , featuring talented jazz musicians such as Coleman Hawkins , Harry Carney and Charlie Shavers , with Nat King Cole on piano , in what Charles L. Granata describes as " one of the highlights of Sinatra 's Columbia epoch " . 
 Sinatra 's third album , Christmas Songs by Sinatra , was originally released in 1948 as a 78 rpm album set , and a 10 " LP record was released two years later . When Sinatra was featured as a priest in The Miracle of the Bells , due to press negativity surrounding his alleged Mafia connections at the time , it was announced to the public that Sinatra would donate his $ 100 @,@ 000 in wages from the film to the church . By the end of 1948 , Sinatra had slipped to fourth on Down Beat 's annual poll of most popular singers ( behind Billy Eckstine , Frankie Laine , and Bing Crosby ) . and in the following year he was pushed out of the top spots in polls for the first time since 1943 . Frankly Sentimental ( 1949 ) was panned by Down Beat , who commented that " for all his talent , it seldom comes to life " . 
 Though " The <unk> " reached the top ten , it was his last single release under the Columbia label . Sinatra 's last two albums with Columbia , Dedicated to You and Sing and Dance with Frank Sinatra , were released in 1950 . Sinatra would later feature a number of the Sing and Dance with Frank Sinatra album 's songs , including " Lover " , " It 's Only a Paper Moon " , " It All Depends on You " , on his 1961 Capitol release , Sinatra 's Swingin ' Session ! ! ! . 
 <unk> the low of his career was the death of publicist George Evans from a heart attack in January 1950 at 48 . According to Jimmy Van Heusen , Sinatra 's close friend and songwriter , Evans 's death to him was " an enormous shock which defies words " , as he had been crucial to his career and popularity with the <unk> . Sinatra 's reputation continued to decline as reports broke out in February of his affair with Ava Gardner and the destruction of his marriage to Nancy , though he insisted that his marriage had long been over even before he had met Gardner . In April , Sinatra was engaged to perform at the Copa club in New York , but had to cancel five days of the booking due to suffering a <unk> hemorrhage of the throat . Evans once noted that whenever Sinatra suffered from a bad throat and loss of voice it was always due to emotional tension which " absolutely destroyed him " . 
 In financial difficulty following his divorce and career decline , Sinatra was forced to borrow $ 200 @,@ 000 from Columbia to pay his back taxes after MCA refused to front the money . Rejected by Hollywood , he turned to Las Vegas and made his debut at the Desert Inn in September 1951 , and also began singing at the Riverside Hotel in Reno , Nevada . Sinatra became one of Las Vegas 's pioneer entertainers , and a prominent figure on the Vegas scene throughout the 1950s and 1960s onwards , a period described by Rojek as the " high @-@ water mark " of Sinatra 's " hedonism and self absorption " . Rojek notes that the Rat Pack " provided an outlet for gregarious banter and wisecracks " , but argues that it was Sinatra 's vehicle , possessing an " unassailable command over the other performers " . Sinatra would fly to Las Vegas from Los Angeles in Van Heusen 's single @-@ engine plane . On October 4 , 1953 , Sinatra made his first performance at the Sands Hotel and Casino , after an invitation by the manager Jack Entratter , who had previously worked at the Copa in New York . Sinatra typically performed there three times a year , and later acquired a share in the hotel . 
 Sinatra 's decline in popularity was evident at his concert appearances . At a brief run at the Paramount in New York he drew small audiences . At the Desert Inn in Las Vegas he performed to half @-@ filled houses of <unk> and ranchers . At a concert at Chez <unk> in Chicago , only 150 people in a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ seat capacity venue turned up to see him . By April 1952 he was performing at the Kauai County Fair in Hawaii . Sinatra 's relationship with Columbia Records was also disintegrating , with A & R executive Mitch Miller claiming he " couldn 't give away " the singer 's records . Though several notable recordings were made during this time period , such as " If I Could Write a Book " in January 1952 , which Granata sees as a " turning point " , forecasting his later work with its sensitivity , Columbia and MCA dropped him later that year . His last studio recording for Columbia , " Why Try To Change Me Now " , was recorded in New York on September 17 , 1952 , with orchestra arranged and conducted by Percy Faith . Journalist Burt Boyar observed , " Sinatra had had it . It was sad . From the top to the bottom in one horrible lesson . " 
 = = = Career revival and the Capitol years ( 1953 – 62 ) = = = 
 The release of the film From Here to Eternity in August 1953 marked the beginning of a remarkable career revival . Santopietro notes that Sinatra began to bury himself in his work , with an " unparalleled frenetic schedule of recordings , movies and concerts " , in what authors Anthony Summers and <unk> Swan describe as " a new and brilliant phase " . On March 13 , 1953 , Sinatra met with Capitol Records vice president Alan Livingston and signed a seven @-@ year recording contract . His first session for Capitol took place at KHJ studios at Studio C , <unk> Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles , with Axel Stordahl conducting . The session produced four recordings , including " I 'm Walking Behind You " , Sinatra 's first Capitol single . After spending two weeks on location in Hawaii filming From Here to Eternity , Sinatra returned to KHJ on April 30 for his first recording session with Nelson Riddle , an established arranger and conductor at Capitol who was Nat King Cole 's musical director . After recording the first song , " I 've Got the World on a String " , Sinatra offered Riddle a rare expression of praise , " Beautiful ! " , and after listening to the playbacks , he could not hide his enthusiasm , exclaiming , " I 'm back , baby , I 'm back ! " 
 In subsequent sessions in May and November 1953 , Sinatra and Riddle developed and refined their musical collaboration , with Sinatra providing specific guidance on the arrangements . Sinatra 's first album for Capitol , Songs for Young Lovers , was released on January 4 , 1954 , and included " A Foggy Day " , " I Get a Kick Out of You " , " My Funny Valentine " , " Violets for Your Furs " and " They Can 't Take That Away from Me " , songs which became staples of his later concerts . That same month , Sinatra and Doris Day released the single " Young at Heart " , which reached # 2 and was awarded Song of the Year . In March , he recorded and released the single " Three Coins in the Fountain " , a " powerful ballad " that reached # 4 . Sinatra 's second album with Riddle , Swing Easy ! , which reflected his " love for the jazz idiom " according to Granata , was released on August 2 of that year and included " Just One of Those Things " , " Taking a Chance on Love " , " Get Happy " , and " All of Me " . Swing Easy ! was named Album of the Year by Billboard , and he was also named " Favorite Male Vocalist " by Billboard , Down Beat , and Metronome that year . Sinatra came to consider Riddle " the greatest arranger in the world " , and Riddle , who considered Sinatra " a perfectionist " , offered equal praise of the singer , observing , " It 's not only that his intuitions as to tempi , phrasing , and even configuration are amazingly right , but his taste is so impeccable ... there is still no one who can approach him . " 
 In 1955 Sinatra released In the Wee Small Hours , his first 12 " LP , featuring songs such as " In the Wee Small Hours of the Morning " , " Mood Indigo " , " Glad to Be Unhappy " and " When Your Lover Has Gone " . According to Granata it was the first concept album of his to make a " single persuasive statement " , with an extended program and " melancholy mood " . Sinatra embarked on his first tour of Australia the same year . Another collaboration with Riddle resulted in the development of Songs for Swingin ' Lovers ! , sometimes seen as one of his best albums , which was released in March 1956 . It features a recording of " I 've Got You Under My Skin " by Cole Porter , something which Sinatra paid meticulous care to , taking a reported 22 takes to perfect . 
 His February 1956 recording sessions inaugurated the studios at the Capitol Records Building , complete with a 56 @-@ piece symphonic orchestra . According to Granata his recordings of " Night and Day " , " Oh ! Look At Me Now " and " From This Moment On " revealed " powerful sexual overtones , stunningly achieved through the mounting tension and release of Sinatra 's best @-@ teasing vocal lines " , while his recording of " River , Stay ' Way from My Door " in April demonstrated his " brilliance as a <unk> improviser " . Riddle noted that Sinatra took " particular delight " in singing " The Lady is a Tramp " , commenting that he " always sang that song with a certain amount of <unk> " , making " cue tricks " with the lyrics . His penchant for conducting was displayed again in 1956 's Frank Sinatra Conducts Tone Poems of Color , an instrumental album that has been interpreted to be a catharsis to his failed relationship with Gardner . Also that year , Sinatra sang at the Democratic National Convention , and performed with The Dorsey Brothers for a week soon afterwards at the Paramount Theatre . 
 In 1957 , Sinatra released Close to You , A Swingin ' Affair ! and Where Are You ? – his first album in stereo , with Gordon Jenkins . Granata considers " Close to You " to have been thematically his closest concept album to perfection during the " golden " era , and Nelson Riddle 's finest work , which was " extremely progressive " by the stands of the day . It is structured like a three @-@ act play , each commencing with the songs " With Every Breath I Take " , " Blame It On My Youth " and " It Could Happen to You " . For Granata , Sinatra 's A Swingin ' Affair ! and swing music predecessor Songs for Swingin ' Lovers ! solidified " Sinatra 's image as a ' swinger ' , from both a musical and visual standpoint " . Buddy Collette considered the swing albums to have been heavily influenced by Sammy Davis , Jr . , and noted that when he worked with Sinatra in the mid @-@ 1960s he approached a song much differently than he had done in the early 1950s . On June 9 , 1957 , he performed in a 62 @-@ minute concert conducted by Riddle at the Seattle Civic Auditorium , his first appearance in Seattle since 1945 . The recording was first released as a bootleg , but in 1999 Artanis Entertainment Group officially released it as the Sinatra ' 57 in Concert live album , after Sinatra 's death . In 1958 Sinatra released the album Come Fly with Me with Billy May . It reached the top spot on the Billboard album chart in its second week , remaining at the top for five weeks , and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year at the inaugural Grammy Awards . The title song , " Come Fly With Me " , written especially for him , would become one of his best known standards . On May 29 he recorded seven songs in a single session , more than double the usual yield of a recording session , and an eighth was planned , " Lush Life " , but Sinatra found it too technically demanding . In September , Sinatra released Frank Sinatra Sings for Only the Lonely , a stark collection of introspective saloon songs and blues @-@ tinged ballads which proved a huge commercial success , spending 120 weeks on Billboards album chart and peaking at No. 1 . Cuts from this LP , such as " Angel Eyes " and " One for My Baby ( and One More for the Road ) " , would remain staples of the " saloon song " segments of Sinatra 's concerts . 
 In 1959 , Sinatra released Come Dance with Me ! , a highly successful , critically acclaimed album which stayed on Billboard 's Pop album chart for 140 weeks , peaking at # 2 . It won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year , as well as Best Vocal Performance , Male and Best Arrangement for Billy May . He also released No One Cares in the same year , a collection of " brooding , lonely " torch songs , which critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine thought was " nearly as good as its predecessor Where Are You ? , but lacked the " lush " arrangements of it and the " grandiose melancholy " of Only the Lonely . 
 In the words of Kelley , by 1959 , Sinatra was " not simply the leader of the Rat Pack " but had " assumed the position of il padrone in Hollywood " . He was asked by 20th Century Fox to be the master of ceremonies at a luncheon attended by President Nikita Khrushchev on September 19 , 1959 . Nice ' n ' Easy , a collection of ballads , topped the Billboard chart in October 1960 and remained in the charts for 86 weeks , winning critical plaudits . Granata noted the " lifelike ambient sound " quality of Nice and Easy , the perfection in the stereo balance , and the " bold , bright and snappy " sound of the band . He highlighted the " close , warm and sharp " feel of Sinatra 's voice , particularly on the songs " September in the Rain " , " I Concentrate on You " , and " My Blue Heaven " . 
 = = = Reprise years ( 1961 – 81 ) = = = 
 Sinatra grew discontented at Capitol , and fell into a feud with Alan Livingston , which lasted over six months . He decided to part with Riddle , May and Jenkins , to form his own label , Reprise Records . Under Sinatra the company developed into a music industry " powerhouse " , and he later sold it for an estimated $ 80 million . His first album on the label , Ring @-@ a @-@ Ding @-@ Ding ! ( 1961 ) , was a major success , peaking at No.4 on Billboard . The album was released in February 1961 , the same month that Reprise Records released Ben Webster 's The Warm Moods , Sammy Davis , Jr . ' s The Wham of Sam , Mavis River 's Mavis and Joe E. Lewis 's It is Now Post Time . On September 11 and 12 , 1961 , Sinatra recorded his final songs for Capitol . In an effort to maintain his commercial viability in the 1960s , Sinatra recorded Elvis Presley 's hit " Love Me Tender " , and later recorded works by Paul Simon such as " Mrs. Robinson " , the Beatles ( " Something " , " Yesterday " ) , and Joni Mitchell ( " Both Sides , Now " ) . 
 In 1962 , Sinatra released Sinatra and Strings , a set of standard ballads which became one of the most critically acclaimed works of Sinatra 's entire Reprise period . Frank Sinatra , Jr . , who was present during the recording , noted the " huge orchestra " , which Nancy Sinatra stated " opened a whole new era " in pop music , with orchestras getting bigger , embracing a " lush string sound " . Sinatra and Count Basie collaborated for the album Sinatra @-@ Basie the same year , a popular and successful release which prompted them to rejoin two years later for the follow @-@ up It Might as Well Be Swing , arranged by Quincy Jones . The two became frequent performers together , and appeared at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1965 . Also in 1962 , as the owner of his own record label , Sinatra was able to step on the podium as conductor again , releasing his third instrumental album Frank Sinatra Conducts Music from Pictures and Plays . 
 In 1963 , Sinatra released The Concert Sinatra , an ambitious album with a 73 @-@ piece symphony orchestra led by Nelson Riddle . The concert was recorded on a motion picture scoring stage with the use of multiple synchronized recording machines that employed 35 mm magnetic film . Granata considers the album to have been " impeachable " [ sic ] , " one of the very best of the Sinatra @-@ Riddle ballad albums " , in which Sinatra displayed an impressive vocal range , particularly in " Ol ' Man River " , in which he darkened the hue . In 1964 the song " My Kind of Town " was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . Sinatra released Softly , as I Leave You , and collaborated with Bing Crosby and Fred Waring on America , I Hear You Singing , a collection of patriotic songs recorded as a tribute to the assassinated President John F. Kennedy . Sinatra increasingly became involved in charitable pursuits in this period . In 1961 and 1962 he went to Mexico , with the sole purpose of putting on performances for Mexican charities , and in July 1964 he was present for the dedication of the Frank Sinatra International Youth Center for Arab and Jewish children in Nazareth . 
 Sinatra 's phenomenal success in 1965 , coinciding with his 50th birthday , prompted Billboard to proclaim that he may have reached the " peak of his eminence " . In June 1965 , Sinatra , Sammy Davis , Jr . , and Dean Martin played live in St. Louis to benefit Dismas House , a prisoner rehabilitation and training center with nationwide programs that in particular helped serve African Americans . The Rat Pack concert was broadcast live via satellite to numerous movie theaters across America . The album September of My Years was released September 1965 , and went on to win the Grammy Award for best album of the year . Granata considers the album to have been one of the finest of his Reprise years , " a reflective throwback to the concept records of the 1950s , and more than any of those collections , distills everything that Frank Sinatra had ever learned or experienced as a vocalist " . One of the album 's singles , " It Was a Very Good Year " , won the Grammy Award for Best Vocal Performance , Male . A career anthology , A Man and His Music , followed in November , winning Album of the Year at the Grammys the following year . 
 In 1966 Sinatra released That 's Life , with both the single of " That 's Life " and album becoming Top Ten hits in the US on Billboard 's pop charts . Strangers in the Night went on to top the Billboard and UK pop singles charts , winning the award for Record of the Year at the Grammys . Sinatra 's first live album , Sinatra at the Sands , was recorded during January and February 1966 at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas . Sinatra was backed by the Count Basie Orchestra , with Quincy Jones conducting . Sinatra pulled out from the Sands the following year , when he was driven out by its new owner Howard Hughes , after a fight . 
 Sinatra started 1967 with a series of recording sessions with Antônio Carlos Jobim . He recorded one of his most famous collaborations with Jobim , the Grammy @-@ nominated album Francis Albert Sinatra & Antônio Carlos Jobim , which was one of the best @-@ selling albums of the year , behind the Beatles 's Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . According to Santopietro the album " consists of an extraordinarily effective blend of bossa nova and slightly swinging jazz vocals , and succeeds in creating an unbroken mood of romance and regret " . Writer Stan Cornyn noted that Sinatra sang so softly on the album that it was comparable to the time that he suffered from a vocal hemorrhage in 1950 . Sinatra also released the album The World We Knew , which features a chart @-@ topping duet of " Somethin ' Stupid " with daughter Nancy . In December , Sinatra collaborated with Duke Ellington on the album Francis A. & Edward K .. According to Granata , the recording of " Indian Summer " on the album was a favorite of Riddle 's , noting the " contemplative mood [ which ] is heightened by a Johnny Hodges alto sax solo that will bring a tear to your eye " . With Sinatra in mind , singer @-@ songwriter Paul Anka wrote the song " My Way " , using the melody of the French " Comme d <unk> " ( " As Usual " ) , composed by Claude François and Jacques <unk> . Sinatra recorded it just after Christmas 1968 . " My Way " , Sinatra 's best @-@ known song on the Reprise label , was not an instant success , charting at # 27 in the US and # 5 in the UK , but it remained in the UK charts for 122 weeks , including 75 non @-@ consecutive weeks in the Top 40 , between April 1969 and September 1971 , which was still a record in 2015 . Sinatra told songwriter Ervin Drake in the 1970s that he " detested " singing the song , because he believed audiences would think it was a " self @-@ aggrandizing tribute " , professing that he " hated boastfulness in others " . 
 = = = = " Retirement " and return ( 1970 – 81 ) = = = = 
 In 1970 , Sinatra released Watertown , one of his most acclaimed concept albums , with music by Bob Gaudio ( of the Four Seasons ) and lyrics by Jake Holmes . However , it sold a mere 30 @,@ 000 copies that year and reached a peak chart position of 101 . He left Caesars Palace in September that year after an incident where executive Sanford Waterman pulled a gun on him . He performed several charity concerts with Count Basie at the Royal Festival Hall in London . On November 2 , 1970 , Sinatra recorded the last songs for Reprise Records before his self @-@ imposed retirement , announced the following June at a concert in Hollywood to raise money for the Motion Picture and TV Relief Fund . He finished the concert with a " rousing " performance of " That 's Life " , and stated " Excuse me while I disappear " as he left the stage . He told LIFE journalist Thomas Thompson that " I 've got things to do , like the first thing is not to do anything at all for eight months ... maybe a year " , while Barbara Sinatra later claimed that Sinatra had grown " tired of entertaining people , especially when all they really wanted were the same old tunes he had long ago become bored by " . While he was in retirement , President Richard Nixon asked him to perform at a Young Voters Rally in anticipation of the upcoming campaign . Sinatra obliged and chose to sing " My Kind of Town " for the rally held in Chicago on October 20 , 1972 . 
 In 1973 , Sinatra came out of his short @-@ lived retirement with a television special and album . The album , entitled Ol ' Blue Eyes Is Back , arranged by Gordon Jenkins and Don Costa , was a success , reaching number 13 on Billboard and number 12 in the UK . The television special , Magnavox Presents Frank Sinatra , reunited Sinatra with Gene Kelly . He initially developed problems with his vocal cords during the comeback due to a prolonged period without singing . That Christmas he performed at the Sahara Hotel in Las Vegas , and returned to Caesars Palace the following month in January 1974 , despite previously vowing to perform there again [ sic ] . He began what Barbara Sinatra describes as a " massive comeback tour of the United States , Europe , the Far East and Australia " . In July , while on a second tour of Australia , he caused an uproar by describing journalists there – who were aggressively pursuing his every move and pushing for a press conference – as " bums , parasites , fags , and buck @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hookers " . After he was pressured to apologize , Sinatra instead insisted that the journalists apologize for " fifteen years of abuse I have taken from the world press " . In the end , Sinatra 's lawyer , Mickey Rudin , arranged a final concert which was televised to the nation , and Sinatra was given the opportunity to say " I love your attitude , I love your booze " to the Australian people . In October 1974 he appeared at New York City 's Madison Square Garden in a televised concert that was later released as an album under the title The Main Event – Live . Backing him was bandleader Woody Herman and the Young Thundering Herd , who accompanied Sinatra on a European tour later that month . 
 In 1975 , Sinatra performed in concerts in New York with Count Basie and Ella Fitzgerald , and at the London Palladium with Basie and Sarah Vaughan , and in Tehran at <unk> Stadium , giving 140 performances in 105 days . In August he held several consecutive concerts at Lake Tahoe together with the newly @-@ risen singer John Denver , who became a frequent collaborator . Sinatra had recorded Denver 's " Leaving on a Jet Plane " and " My Sweet Lady " for Sinatra & Company ( 1971 ) , and according to Denver , his song " A Baby Just Like You " was written at Sinatra 's request for his new grandchild , Angela . During the Labor Day weekend held in 1976 , Sinatra was responsible for reuniting old friends and comedy partners Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis for the first time in nearly twenty years , when they performed at the " Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon " . That year , the Friars Club selected him as the " Top Box Office Name of the Century " , and he was given the Scopus Award by the American Friends of Hebrew University in Israel and an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from the University of Nevada . 
 Sinatra continued to perform at Caesars Palace in the late 1970s , and was performing there in January 1977 when his mother Dolly died in a plane crash on the way to see him . He cancelled two weeks of shows and spent time recovering from the shock in Barbados . In March , he performed in front of Princess Margaret at the Royal Albert Hall in London , raising money for the NSPCC . On March 14 he recorded with Nelson Riddle for the last time , recording the songs " Linda " , " Sweet Loraine " and " Barbara " . The two men had a major falling out , and later patched up their differences in January 1985 at a dinner organized for Ronald Reagan , when Sinatra asked Riddle to make another album with him . Riddle was ill at the time , and died that October , before they had a chance to record . 
 In 1978 , Sinatra filed a $ 1 million lawsuit against a land developer for using his name in the " Frank Sinatra Drive Center " in West Los Angeles . During a party at Caesars in 1979 , he was awarded the Grammy Trustees Award , while celebrating 40 years in show business and his 64th birthday . That year , former President Gerald Ford awarded Sinatra the International Man of the Year Award , and he performed in front of the Egyptian pyramids for Anwar Sadat , which raised more than $ 500 @,@ 000 for Sadat 's wife 's charities . 
 In 1980 , Sinatra 's first album in six years was released , Trilogy : Past Present Future , a highly ambitious triple album that features an array of songs from both the pre @-@ rock era and rock era . It was the first studio album of Sinatra 's to feature his touring pianist at the time , Vinnie Falcone , and was based on an idea by Sonny Burke . The album garnered six Grammy nominations – winning for best liner notes – and peaked at number 17 on Billboard 's album chart , and spawned yet another song that would become a signature tune , " Theme from New York , New York " . That year , as part of the Concert of the Americas , he performed in the <unk> Stadium in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , which broke records for the " largest live paid audience ever recorded for a solo performer " . The following year , Sinatra built on the success of Trilogy with She Shot Me Down , an album that was praised for embodying the dark tone of his Capitol years . Also in 1981 , Sinatra was embroiled in controversy when he worked a ten @-@ day engagement for $ 2 million in Sun City , in the internationally unrecognized <unk> , breaking a cultural boycott against apartheid @-@ era South Africa . President Lucas <unk> awarded Sinatra with the highest honor , the Order of the Leopard , and made him an honorary tribal chief . 
 = = = Later career ( 1982 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Santopietro stated that by the early 1980s , Sinatra 's voice had " <unk> , losing much of its power and flexibility , but audiences didn 't care " . In 1982 , he signed a $ 16 million three @-@ year deal with the Golden Nugget of Las Vegas . Kelley notes that by this period Sinatra 's voice had grown " darker , tougher and <unk> " , but he " continued to captivate audiences with his immutable magic " . She added that his baritone voice " sometimes cracked , but the gliding intonations still aroused the same raptures of delight as they had at the Paramount Theater " . That year he made a reported further $ 1 @.@ 3 million from the Showtime television rights to his " Concert of the Americas " in the Dominican Republic , $ 1 @.@ 6 million for a concert series at Carnegie Hall , and $ 250 @,@ 000 in just one evening at the Chicago Fest . He donated a lot of his earnings to charity . He put on a performance at the White House for the Italian Prime Minister , and performed at the Radio City Music Hall with Luciano Pavarotti and George Shearing . 
 Sinatra was selected as one of the five recipients of the 1983 Kennedy Center Honors , alongside Katherine Dunham , James Stewart , Elia Kazan , and Virgil Thomson . Quoting Henry James , President Reagan said in honoring his old friend that " art was the shadow of humanity " and that Sinatra had " spent his life casting a magnificent and powerful shadow " . On September 21 , 1983 , Sinatra filed a $ 2 million court case against Kitty Kelley , suing her in punitive damages , before her unofficial biography , His Way , was even published . The book became a best @-@ seller for " all the wrong reasons " and " the most eye @-@ opening celebrity biography of our time " , according to William Safire of The New York Times . Sinatra was always adamant that such a book would be written on his terms , and he himself would " set the record straight " in details of his life . According to Kelley , the family detested her and the book , which took its toll on Sinatra 's health . Kelley claims that Tina Sinatra blamed her for her father 's colon surgery in 1986 . He was forced to drop the case on September 19 , 1984 , with several leading newspapers expressing concerns about his views on censorship . 
 In 1984 , Sinatra worked with Quincy Jones for the first time in nearly two decades on the album , L.A. Is My Lady , which was well received critically . The album was a substitute for another Jones project , an album of duets with Lena Horne , which had to be abandoned . In 1986 , Sinatra collapsed on stage while performing in Atlantic City and was hospitalized for diverticulitis , which left him looking frail . Two years later , Sinatra reunited with Martin and Davis , Jr. and went on the Rat Pack Reunion Tour , during which they played a number of large arenas . When Martin dropped out of the tour early on , a rift developed between them and the two never spoke again . 
 In 1990 , Sinatra was awarded the second " Ella Award " by the Los Angeles @-@ based Society of Singers , and performed for a final time with Ella Fitzgerald at the award ceremony . Sinatra maintained an active touring schedule in the early 1990s , performing 65 concerts in 1990 , 73 in 1991 and 84 in 1992 in seventeen different countries . 
 In 1993 , Sinatra returned to Capitol Records and the recording studio for Duets , which became his best @-@ selling album . The album and its sequel , Duets II , released the following year , would see Sinatra remake his classic recordings with popular contemporary performers , who added their vocals to a pre @-@ recorded tape . During his tours in the early 1990s , his memory failed him at times during concerts , and he happened to faint onstage in Richmond , Virginia , in March 1994 . His final public concerts were held in Fukuoka Dome in Japan on December 19 – 20 , 1994 . The following year , Sinatra sang for the very last time on February 25 , 1995 , before a live audience of 1200 select guests at the Palm Desert Marriott Ballroom , on the closing night of the Frank Sinatra Desert Classic golf tournament . Esquire reported of the show that Sinatra was " clear , tough , on the money " and " in absolute control " . Sinatra was awarded the Legend Award at the 1994 Grammy Awards , where he was introduced by Bono , who said of him , " Frank 's the chairman of the bad attitude ... Rock ' n roll plays at being tough , but this guy is the boss – the chairman of boss ... I 'm not going to mess with him , are you ? " 
 In 1995 , to mark Sinatra 's 80th birthday , the Empire State Building glowed blue . A star @-@ studded birthday tribute , Sinatra : 80 Years My Way , was held at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles , featuring performers such as Ray Charles , Little Richard , Natalie Cole and Salt @-@ N @-@ Pepa singing his songs . At the end of the program Sinatra graced the stage for the last time to sing the final notes of the " Theme from New York , New York " with an ensemble . In recognition of his many years of association with Las Vegas , Frank Sinatra was elected to the Gaming Hall of Fame in 1997 . 
 = = Sinatra , the musician = = 
 While Sinatra never formally learned how to read music , he had a fine , natural understanding of it , and he worked very hard from a young age to improve his abilities in all aspects of music . He did , however , learn to follow a lead sheet during a performance by " carefully following the patterns and groupings of notes arranged on the page " and made his own notations to the music , using his ear to detect semi @-@ tonal differences . Granata states that some of the most accomplished classically trained musicians soon noticed his musical understanding , and remarked that Sinatra had a " sixth sense " , which " demonstrated unusual proficiency when it came to detecting incorrect notes and sounds within the orchestra " . Sinatra was an aficionado of classical music , and would often request classical strains in his music , inspired by composers such as Puccini and Impressionist masters . His personal favorite was Ralph Vaughan Williams . He would insist on always recording live with the band because it gave him a " certain feeling " to perform live surrounded by musicians . By the mid 1940s , such was his understanding of music that after hearing an air check of some compositions by Alec Wilder which were for strings and woodwinds , he became the conductor at Columbia Records for six of Wilder 's compositions : " Air for Oboe " , " Air for English Horn " , " Air for Flute " , " Air for Bassoon " , " Slow Dance " and " Theme and Variations " . The works , which combine elements of jazz and classical music were considered by Wilder to have been among the finest renditions and recordings of his compositions @-@ past or present . At one recording session with arranger Claus <unk> and an orchestra , Sinatra heard " a couple of little strangers " in the string section , prompting <unk> to make corrections to what were thought to be copyist 's errors . Critic Gene Lees , a lyricist and the author of the words to the Jobim melody " This Happy Madness " , expressed amazement when he heard Sinatra 's recording of it on Sinatra & Company ( 1971 ) , considering him to have worded the lyrics in the way that he had intended when writing them to perfection . 
 Voice coach John Quinlan was impressed by Sinatra 's vocal range , remarking , " He has far more voice that people think he has . He can vocalize to a B @-@ flat on top in full voice , and he doesn 't need a mic either " . As a singer , early on he was primarily influenced by Bing Crosby , but later believed that Tony Bennett was " the best singer in the business " . Bennett also praised Sinatra himself , claiming that as a performer , he had " perfected the art of intimacy . " According to Nelson Riddle , Sinatra had a " fairly rangy voice " , remarking that " His voice has a very strident , insistent sound in the top register , a smooth lyrical sound in the middle register , and a very tender sound in the low . His voice is built on infinite taste , with an overall inflection of sex . He points everything he does from a sexual standpoint " . Despite his heavy New Jersey accent , according to Richard Schuller , when Sinatra sang his accent was " virtually undetectable " , with his diction becoming " precise " and articulation " meticulous " . His timing was impeccable , allowing him , according to Charles L. Granata , to " toy with the rhythm of a melody , bringing tremendous excitement to his reading of a lyric " . Tommy Dorsey observed that Sinatra would " take a musical phrase and play it all the way through seemingly without breathing for eight , ten , maybe sixteen bars . " Dorsey was a considerable influence on Sinatra 's techniques for his vocal phrasing with his own exceptional breath control on the trombone , and Sinatra regularly swam and held his breath underwater , thinking of song lyrics to increase his breathing power . 
 Arranger Nelson Riddle found Sinatra to be a " perfectionist who drove himself and everybody around him relentlessly " , and stated that his collaborators approached him with a sense of uneasiness because of his unpredictable and often volatile temperament . Granata comments that Sinatra was almost fanatically obsessed with perfection to the point that people began wondering if he was genuinely concerned about the music or showing off his power over others . On days when he felt that his voice was not right , he would know after only a few notes and would postpone the recording session until the following day , yet still pay his musicians . After a period of performing , Sinatra tired of singing a certain set of songs and was always looking for talented new songwriters and composers to work with . Once he found ones that he liked , he actively sought to work with them as often as he could , and made friends with many of them . He once told Sammy Cahn , who wrote songs for Anchor 's Away , " if you 're not there Monday , I 'm not there Monday " . Over the years he recorded 87 of Cahn 's songs , of which 24 were composed by Jule Styne , and 43 by Jimmy Van Heusen . The Cahn @-@ Styne partnership lasted from 1942 until 1954 , when Van Heusen succeeded him as Sinatra 's main composer . Unlike many of his contemporaries , Sinatra insisted upon direct input regarding arrangements and tempos for his recordings . He would spend weeks thinking about the songs he wanted to record , and would keep an arranger in mind for each song . If it were a mellow love song , he would ask for Gordon Jenkins . If it were a " rhythm " number , he would think of Billy May , or perhaps Neil Hefti or some other favored arranger . Jenkins considered Sinatra 's musical sense to be unerring . His changes to Riddle 's charts would frustrate Riddle , yet he would usually concede that Sinatra 's ideas were superior . Barbara Sinatra notes that Sinatra would almost always credit the songwriter at the end of each number , and would often make comments to the audience , such as " Isn 't that a pretty ballad " or " Don 't you think that 's the most marvelous love song " , delivered with " childlike delight " . She states that after each show , Sinatra would be " in a buoyant , electrically charged mood , a post @-@ show high that would take him hours to come down from as he quietly relived every note of the performance he 'd just given " . 
 Sinatra 's split with Gardner in the fall of 1953 had a profound impact on the types of songs he sang and his voice . He began to console himself in songs with a " brooding melancholy " , such as " I 'm a Fool to Want You " , " Don 't Worry ' Bout Me " , " My One and Only Love " and There Will Never Be Another You " , which Riddle believed was the direct influence of Ava Gardner . Lahr comments that the new Sinatra was " not the gentle boy balladeer of the forties . Fragility had gone from his voice , to be replaced by a virile adult 's sense of happiness and hurt " . Author Granata considered Sinatra to have been a " master of the art of recording " , noting that his work in the studio " set him apart from other gifted vocalists " . During his career he made over 1000 recordings . Recording sessions would typically last three hours , though Sinatra would always prepare for it by spending at least an hour by the piano beforehand to vocalize , followed by a short rehearsal with the orchestra to ensure the balance of sound . During his Columbia years Sinatra would use a RCA 44 microphone , which Granata describes as " the ' old @-@ fashioned ' microphone which is closely associated with Sinatra 's crooner image of the 1940s " , though when performing on talk shows later he would use a bullet @-@ shaped RCA 77 . At Capitol he used a Neumann U47 , an " ultra @-@ sensitive " microphone which better captured the timbre and tone of his voice . 
 In the 1950s , Sinatra 's career was facilitated by developments in technology . As disc jockey Jonathan Schwartz said , " Never before had there been an opportunity for a popular singer to express emotions at an extended length " . In the words of author John Lahr , " as many as sixteen songs could be held by the twelve @-@ inch L.P. , and this allowed Sinatra to use song in a novelistic way , turning each track in a kind of chapter , which built and <unk> moods to illuminate a larger theme " . Santopietro writes that through the 1950s , well into the 1960s , " every Sinatra LP was a masterpiece of one sort of another , whether uptempo , torch song , or swingin ' affairs . Track after track , the brilliant concept albums redefined the nature of pop vocal art " . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Debut , musical films and career slump ( 1941 – 52 ) = = = 
 Sinatra attempted to pursue an acting career in Hollywood in the early 1940s . While films appealed to him , being exceptionally self @-@ confident , he was rarely enthusiastic towards his own acting , once remarking that " pictures stink " . Sinatra made his film debut in 1941 , performing in an uncredited sequence in Las Vegas Nights , singing " I 'll Never Smile Again " with Tommy Dorsey 's The Pied Pipers . In 1943 he had a cameo role along with Duke Ellington and Count Basie in Charles Barton 's Reveille with Beverly , making a brief appearance singing " Night and Day " . The following year he was given his leading roles in Higher and Higher and Step Lively for RKO Pictures . 
 In 1945 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer cast Sinatra opposite Gene Kelly and Kathryn Grayson in the Technicolor musical Anchors Aweigh , in which he played a sailor on leave in Hollywood for four days . A major success , it garnered several Academy Award wins and nominations , and the song " I Fall in Love Too Easily " , sung by Sinatra in the film , was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . In 1946 , Sinatra briefly appeared at the end of Richard Whorf 's commercially successful Till the Clouds Roll By , a Technicolor musical biopic of Jerome Kern , in which he sang " Ol ' Man River . 
 In 1949 , Sinatra co @-@ starred with Gene Kelly in the Technicolor musical Take Me Out to the Ball Game , a film set in 1908 , in which Sinatra and Kelly play baseball players who are part @-@ time vaudevillians . He teamed up with Kelly for a third time in On the Town , playing a sailor on leave in New York City . Today the film is rated very highly by critics , and in 2006 it ranked No. 19 on the American Film Institute 's list of best musicals . Both Double Dynamite ( 1951 ) , an RKO Irving Cummings comedy produced by Howard Hughes , and Joseph Pevney 's Meet Danny Wilson ( 1952 ) failed to make an impression . The New York World Telegram and Sun ran the headline " Gone on Frankie in ' 42 ; Gone in ' 52 " . 
 = = = Career comeback and prime ( 1953 – 59 ) = = = 
 Fred Zinnemann 's From Here to Eternity deals with the tribulations of three soldiers , played by Burt Lancaster , Montgomery Clift , and Sinatra , stationed on Hawaii in the months leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor . Sinatra had long been desperate to find a film role which would bring him back into the spotlight , and Columbia Pictures boss Harry Cohn had been inundated by appeals from people across Hollywood to give Sinatra a chance to star as " Maggio " in the film . During production , Montgomery Clift became a close friend , and Sinatra later professed that he " learned more about acting from him than anybody I ever knew before " . After several years of critical and commercial decline , his Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor win helped him regain his position as the top recording artist in the world . The Los Angeles Examiner wrote that Sinatra is " simply superb , comical , pitiful , childishly brave , pathetically defiant " , commenting that his death scene is " one of the best ever photographed " . 
 In 1954 Sinatra starred opposite Doris Day in the musical film Young at Heart , and earned critical praise for his performance as a psychopathic killer posing as an FBI agent opposite Sterling Hayden in the film noir Suddenly . 
 Sinatra was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor and BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his role as a heroin addict in The Man With The Golden Arm ( 1955 ) . After roles in Guys and Dolls , and The Tender Trap , Sinatra was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his role as hospital orderly in Stanley Kramer 's début picture , Not as a Stranger . During production , Sinatra got drunk with Robert Mitchum and Broderick Crawford and trashed Kramer 's dressing room . Kramer vowed to never hire Sinatra again at the time , and later regretted casting him as a Spanish guerrilla leader in The Pride and the Passion ( 1957 ) . 
 In 1956 Sinatra featured alongside Bing Crosby and Grace Kelly in High Society for MGM , earning a reported $ 250 @,@ 000 for the picture . The public rushed to the cinemas to see Sinatra and Crosby together on @-@ screen , and it ended up earning over $ 13 million at the box office , becoming one of the highest @-@ grossing pictures of 1956 . In 1957 , Sinatra starred opposite Rita Hayworth and Kim Novak in George Sidney 's Pal Joey , for which he won for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . Santopietro considers the scene in which Sinatra sings " The Lady Is a Tramp " to Hayworth to have been the finest moment of his film career . He next portrayed comedian Joe E. Lewis in The Joker Is Wild ; the song " All the Way " won the Academy Award for Best Original Song . By 1958 Sinatra was one of the ten biggest box office draws in the United States , appearing with Dean Martin and Shirley MacLaine in Vincente Minnelli 's Some Came Running and Kings Go Forth with Tony Curtis and Natalie Wood . " High Hopes " , sung by Sinatra in the Frank Capra comedy , A Hole in the Head ( 1959 ) , won the Academy Award for Best Original Song , and became a chart hit , lasting on the Hot 100 for 17 weeks . 
 = = = Later career ( 1960 – 88 ) = = = 
 Due to an obligation he owed to 20th Century Fox for walking off the set of Henry King 's Carousel ( 1956 ) , in 1960 Sinatra starred opposite Shirley MacLaine , Maurice Chevalier and Louis Jourdan in Can @-@ Can . He earned $ 200 @,@ 000 and 25 % of the profits for the performance . Later that year he starred in the Las Vegas @-@ set Ocean 's 11 , the first film to feature the Rat Pack together and the start of a " new era of screen cool " for Santopietro . Sinatra personally financed the film , and paid Martin and Davis Jr. fees of $ 150 @,@ 000 and $ 125 @,@ 000 respectively , sums considered exorbitant for the period . In 1962 , Sinatra had a leading role opposite Laurence Harvey in the The Manchurian Candidate , which he considered to be the role he was most excited about and the high point of his film career . Vincent Canby , writing for the magazine Variety , found the portrayal of Sinatra 's character to be " a wide @-@ awake pro creating a straight , quietly humorous character of some sensitivity . " He appeared with the Rat Pack in the western Sergeants 3 , following it with 4 for Texas in 1963 . For his performance in Come Blow Your Horn , he was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . 
 Though 1965 's Von Ryan 's Express was a major success , and he had directed None but the Brave that year , in the mid 1960s , Brad Dexter wanted to " breathe new life " in Sinatra 's film career by helping him display the same professional pride in his films as he did his recordings . On one occasion , he gave Sinatra Anthony Burgess 's novel A Clockwork Orange ( 1962 ) to read , with the idea of making a film , but Sinatra thought it had no potential and did not understand a word . 
 In the late 1960s , Sinatra became known for playing detectives , including Tony Rome in Tony Rome ( 1967 ) and its sequel Lady In Cement ( 1968 ) . He also played a similar role in 1968 's The Detective . 
 In 1970 , Sinatra starred opposite George Kennedy in the western Dirty Dingus Magee , an " abysmal " affair according to Santopietro , which was panned by the critics . Sinatra had intended to play Detective Harry Callahan in Dirty Harry ( 1971 ) , but had to turn the role down due to developing Dupuytren 's contracture in his hand . Sinatra 's last major film role was opposite Faye Dunaway in Brian G. Hutton 's The First Deadly Sin ( 1980 ) . Santopietro noted that as a troubled New York City homicide cop , Sinatra gave an " extraordinarily rich " , heavily layered characterization , one which " made for one terrific farewell " to his film career . 
 = = Television and radio career = = 
 After beginning on the Major Bowes Amateur Hour radio show with the Hoboken Four in 1935 , and later WNEW and WAAT in Jersey City , Sinatra became the star of various radio shows of his own on NBC and CBS from the early 1940s to the mid 1950s . In 1942 Sinatra hired arranger Axel Stordahl away from Tommy Dorsey before he began his first radio program that year , keeping Stordahl with him for all of his radio work . By the end of 1942 he was named the " Most Popular Male Vocalist on Radio " in a Down Beat poll . Early on he frequently worked with the popular Andrews Sisters on radio , and they would appear as guests on each other 's shows , as well as on many USO shows broadcast to troops via the Armed Forces Radio Service ( <unk> ) . He appeared as a special guest in the sisters ' ABC Eight @-@ to @-@ the @-@ Bar Ranch series , while the trio in turn guested on his Songs by Sinatra series on CBS . Sinatra had two stints as a regular member of cast of Your Hit Parade ; his first was from 1943 to 1945 , and second was from 1946 to May 28 , 1949 , during which he was paired with the then @-@ new girl singer , Doris Day . Starting in September 1949 , the BBD & O advertising agency produced a radio series starring Sinatra for Lucky Strike called Light Up Time – some 176 15 @-@ minute shows which featured Frank and Dorothy Kirsten singing – which lasted through to May 1950 . 
 In October 1951 , the second season of The Frank Sinatra Show began on CBS Television . Ultimately , Sinatra did not find the success on television for which he had hoped . Santopietro writes that Sinatra " simply never appeared fully at ease on his own television series , his edgy , impatient personality conveying a pent up energy on the verge of exploding " . In 1953 Sinatra starred in the NBC radio program Rocky Fortune , portraying Rocco Fortunato ( a.k.a. Rocky Fortune ) , a " footloose and fancy free " temporary worker for the Gridley Employment Agency who stumbles into crime @-@ solving . The series aired on NBC radio Tuesday nights from October 1953 to March 1954 . 
 In 1957 , Sinatra formed a three @-@ year $ 3 million contract with ABC to launch The Frank Sinatra Show , featuring himself and guests in 36 half hour shows . ABC agreed to allow Sinatra 's Hobart Productions to keep 60 % of the residuals , and bought stock in Sinatra 's film production unit , Kent Productions , guaranteeing him $ 7 million . Though an initial critical success upon its debut on October 18 , 1957 , it soon attracted negative reviews from Variety and The New Republic , and The Chicago Sun @-@ Times thought that Sinatra and frequent guest Dean Martin " performed like a pair of adult delinquents " , " sharing the same cigarette and leering at girls " . In return , Sinatra later made numerous appearances on The Dean Martin Show and Martin 's TV specials . 
 Sinatra 's fourth and final Timex TV special , Welcome Home Elvis was broadcast in March 1960 , which earned massive viewing figures . Sinatra had previously been highly critical of Elvis Presley and rock and roll in the 1950s , describing it as a " deplorable , a rancid smelling aphrodisiac " which " fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people . " A CBS News special about the singer 's 50th birthday , Frank Sinatra : A Man and His Music , was broadcast on November 16 , 1965 , and garnered both an Emmy award and a Peabody Award . 
 According his musical collaboration with Jobim and Ella Fitzgerald in 1967 , Sinatra appeared in the TV special , A Man and His Music + Ella + Jobim , which was broadcast on CBS on November 13 . When Sinatra came out of retirement in 1973 , he released both an album and appeared in a TV special named " Ol ' Blue Eyes Is Back " . The TV special was highlighted by a dramatic reading of " Send in the Clowns " and a song @-@ and @-@ dance sequence with former co @-@ star Gene Kelly . In the late 1970s , John Denver appeared as a guest in the Sinatra and Friends ABC @-@ TV Special , singing " September Song " as a duet . 
 In 1977 , Sinatra starred as a detective in Contract on Cherry Street , cited as his " one starring role in a dramatic television film " . Ten years later , he made a guest appearance opposite Tom Selleck in Magnum , P.I. , playing a retired policeman who teams up with Selleck to find his granddaughter 's murderer . Shot in January 1987 , the episode aired on CBS on February 25 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sinatra had three children , Nancy ( born 1940 ) , Frank Jr . ( 1944 – 2016 ) , and Tina ( born 1948 ) , all with his first wife , Nancy Sinatra ( née Barbato ; born September 11 , 1917 ) ( m . 1939 – 1951 ) . Sinatra had met Barbato in Long Branch , New Jersey in the late 1930s , where he spent most of the summer working as a lifeguard . 
 He agreed to marry her after an incident at " The Rustic Cabin " which led to his arrest . Sinatra had numerous extra @-@ marital affairs , and gossip magazines published details of affairs with women including Marilyn Maxwell , Lana Turner , and Joi Lansing . 
 Sinatra was married to Hollywood actress Ava Gardner from 1951 to 1957 . It was a turbulent marriage , with many well @-@ publicized fights and altercations , and Gardner aborted a child in November 1952 . The couple formally announced their separation on October 29 , 1953 , through MGM . Gardner filed for divorce in June 1954 , at a time when she was dating matador Luis Miguel <unk> , but the divorce was not settled until 1957 . Sinatra continued to feel very strongly for her , and they remained friends for life . He was still dealing with her finances in 1976 . 
 Sinatra reportedly broke off engagements to Lauren Bacall in 1958 , and Juliet Prowse in 1962 . He married Mia Farrow on July 19 , 1966 , a short marriage which ended with divorce in Mexico in August 1968 . They remained close friends for life , and in a 2013 interview Farrow admitted that Sinatra might be the father of her son , Ronan Farrow ( born 1986 ) . 
 Sinatra was lastly married to Barbara Marx from 1976 until his death . The couple married at Sunnylands , in Rancho Mirage , California , the estate of media magnate Walter Annenberg , on July 11 , 1976 . 
 Sinatra was close friends with Jilly Rizzo , songwriter Jimmy Van Heusen , golfer Ken Venturi , comedian Pat Henry and baseball manager Leo Durocher . In his spare time , Sinatra enjoyed listening to classical music , and would attend concerts when he could . He swam daily in the Pacific Ocean , finding it to be therapeutic and giving him much @-@ needed solitude . He would often play golf with Venturi at the course in Palm Springs , where he lived , and liked painting , reading , and building model railways . Though Sinatra was critical of the church on numerous occasions , and had an Albert Einstein @-@ like view of God in his earlier life , he turned to the Roman Catholic Church for healing after his mother died in a plane crash in 1977 . He died as a practicing Catholic and had a Catholic burial . 
 = = = Style and personality = = = 
 Sinatra was noted for his impeccable sense of style . He always dressed immaculately , both in his professional and private life . He believed that as he was the best , he had to give his best to the audience , and would wear expensive custom @-@ tailored tuxedos on stage as a sign of respect and to look important . He spent lavishly on stylish pin @-@ striped suits and other clothing , and later admitted that clothing made him feel wealthy and important , bolstering his ego . He was also obsessed with cleanliness — while with the Tommy Dorsey band he developed the nickname " Lady Macbeth " , because of frequent showering and switching his outfits . His deep blue eyes earned him the popular nickname " Ol ' Blue Eyes " . 
 For Santopietro , Sinatra was the personification of America in the 1950s : " cocky , eye on the main chance , optimistic , and full of the sense of possibility " . Barbara Sinatra wrote that " A big part of Frank 's thrill was the sense of danger that he exuded , an underlying , ever @-@ present tension only those closest to him knew could be defused with humor " . Cary Grant , a good friend of Sinatra 's , stated that Sinatra was the " most honest person he 'd ever met " , who spoke " a simple truth , without artifice which scared people " , and was often moved to tears by his performances . Jo @-@ Caroll Dennison commented that he possessed " great inner strength " , and that his energy and drive was " enormous " . A workaholic , he reportedly only slept for four hours a night on average . Throughout his life , Sinatra had mood swings and bouts of mild to severe depression , admitting to an interviewer in the 1950s that " I have an over @-@ acute capacity for sadness as well as elation " . Barbara Sinatra stated that he would " snap at anyone for the slightest misdemeanor " , while Van Heusen said that when Sinatra got drunk it was " best to disappear " . 
 Sinatra 's mood swings often developed into violence , directed at people he felt had crossed him , particularly journalists who gave him scathing reviews , publicists and photographers , According to Rojek he was " capable of deeply offensive behavior that smacked of a persecution complex " . He received negative press for fights with Lee Mortimer in 1947 , photographer Eddie <unk> in Houston in 1950 , Judy Garland 's publicist Jim Byron on the Sunset Strip in 1954 , and for a confrontation with Washington Post journalist Maxine Cheshire in 1973 , in which he implied that she was a cheap prostitute . Yet Sinatra was known for his generosity , particularly after his comeback . Kelley notes that when Lee J. Cobb nearly died from a heart attack in June 1955 , Sinatra flooded him with " books , flowers , delicacies " , paid his hospital bills , and visited him daily , telling him that his finest acting was yet to come . In another instance , after a heated argument with manager Bobby Burns , rather than apologize , Sinatra bought him a brand new Cadillac . 
 = = = Alleged organized @-@ crime links and Cal Neva Lodge = = = 
 Sinatra became the stereotype of the " tough working @-@ class Italian American " , something which he embraced . Sinatra commented that if it had not been for his interest in music he would " probably have ended in a life of crime " . In his early days , Mafia boss Willie Moretti , Sinatra 's godfather and notorious underboss of the Genovese crime family , helped him for kickbacks and was reported to have intervened in releasing him from his contract with Tommy Dorsey . Sinatra was present at the Mafia Havana Conference in 1946 , and when the press learned of Sinatra being in Havana with Lucky Luciano , one newspaper published the headline , " Shame , Sinatra " . He was reported to be a good friend of Sam Giancana , and the two were seen playing golf together . Kelley quotes Jo @-@ Carrol Silvers in saying that Sinatra " adored " Bugsy Siegel , and would boast about him to friends and how many people he had killed . Kelley claims that Sinatra and mobster Joseph Fischetti had been good friends from 1938 onward , and acted like " Sicilian brothers " . She also states that Sinatra and Hank Sanicola were financial partners with Mickey Cohen in the gossip magazine Hollywood Night Life . 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) kept records amounting to 2 @,@ 403 pages on Sinatra , becoming a natural target with his alleged Mafia ties , his ardent New Deal politics and his friendship with John F. Kennedy . The FBI kept Sinatra under surveillance for almost five decades beginning in the 1940s . The documents include accounts of Sinatra as the target of death threats and extortion schemes . The FBI documented that Sinatra was losing esteem with the Mafia as he grew closer to President Kennedy , whose brother Bobby was leading a crackdown on organized crime . Sinatra denied Mafia involvement , declaring that " any report that I fraternized with goons or racketeers is a vicious lie " . 
 In 1960 , Sinatra bought a share in the Cal Neva Lodge & Casino , a casino hotel which straddles the border between Nevada and California on the north shores of Lake Tahoe . Though it only opened between June and September , Sinatra built the Celebrity Room theater , which attracted the other Rat Pack members , Red Skelton , Marilyn Monroe , Victor Borge , Joe E. Lewis , Lucille Ball , Lena Horne , Juliet Prowse , the McGuire Sisters and others . By 1962 he reportedly held a 50 % share in the hotel . Sinatra 's gambling license was temporarily stripped by the Nevada Gaming Control Board in 1963 after Giancana was spotted on the premises . Due to ongoing pressure from the FBI and Nevada Gaming Commission on mobster control of casinos , Sinatra agreed to give up his share in Cal Neva and the Sands . That year , Sinatra 's son , Frank Sinatra , Jr . , was kidnapped , but was eventually released unharmed . Sinatra was restored his gaming license in February 1981 , following support from Ronald Reagan . 
 = = Politics and activism = = 
 Sinatra held differing political views throughout his life . His mother , Dolly Sinatra ( 1896 – 1977 ) , was a Democratic Party ward leader . Sinatra met President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 , and subsequently heavily campaigned for the Democrats in the 1944 presidential election . According to Jo Carroll Silvers , in his younger years Sinatra had " ardent liberal " sympathies , and was " so concerned about poor people that he was always quoting Henry Wallace " . He was outspoken on racism , particularly toward blacks and Italians from early on . In November 1945 Sinatra was invited by the mayor of Gary , Indiana , to try to settle a strike by white students of Froebel High School against the " Pro @-@ Negro " policies of the new principal . His comments , while praised by liberal publications , led to accusations by some that he was a Communist , which he strongly denied . In the 1948 presidential election , Sinatra actively campaigned for President Harry S. Truman . In 1952 and 1956 , he also campaigned for Adlai Stevenson . 
 Of all the U.S. Presidents he associated with during his career , he was closest to John F. Kennedy . Sinatra often invited Kennedy to Hollywood and Las Vegas , and the two would <unk> and enjoy parties together . In January 1961 Sinatra and Peter Lawford organized the Inaugural Gala in Washington , D.C. , held on the evening before President Kennedy was sworn into office . In 1962 , Sinatra was snubbed by Kennedy during his visit to Palm Springs when he decided to stay with the Republican Bing Crosby , due to FBI concerns about Sinatra 's alleged connections to organized crime . Sinatra had invested a lot of his own money in upgrading the facilities at his home in anticipation of the President 's visit , fitting it with a heliport , which he later reportedly smashed up with a sledgehammer upon being rejected . Despite the snub , when he learned of Kennedy 's assassination he reportedly sobbed in his bedroom for three days . 
 Sinatra worked with Hubert H. Humphrey in 1968 , and remained a supporter of the Democratic Party until the early 1970s . Although still a registered Democrat , Sinatra endorsed Republican Ronald Reagan for a second term as Governor of California in 1970 . He officially changed allegiance in July 1972 when he supported Richard Nixon for re @-@ election in the 1972 presidential election . 
 In the 1980 presidential election , Sinatra supported Ronald Reagan and donated $ 4 million to Reagan 's campaign . Sinatra arranged Reagan 's Presidential gala , as he had done for Kennedy 20 years previously . In 1985 , Reagan presented Sinatra with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , remarking , " His love of country , his generosity for those less fortunate ... make him one of our most remarkable and distinguished Americans . " 
 Santopietro notes that Sinatra was a " lifelong sympathizer with Jewish causes " . He was awarded the <unk> Memorial Award by the Los Angeles Jewish Community in 1949 . He gave a series of concerts in Israel in 1962 , and donated his entire $ 50 @,@ 000 fee for appearing in a cameo role in Cast a Giant Shadow ( 1966 ) to the Youth Center in Jerusalem . On November 1 , 1972 , he raised $ 6 @.@ 5 million in bond pledges for Israel , and was given the Medallion of Valor for his efforts . The Frank Sinatra Student Center at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem was dedicated in his name in 1978 . 
 From his youth , Sinatra displayed sympathy for African Americans and worked both publicly and privately all his life to help them win equal rights . He blamed racial prejudice on the parents of children . Sinatra played a major role in the desegregation of Nevada hotels and casinos in the 1950s and 1960s . At the Sands in 1955 , Sinatra went against policy by inviting Nat King Cole into the dining room , and in 1961 , after an incident where an African @-@ American couple entered the lobby of the hotel and were blocked by the security guard , Sinatra and Sammy Davis , Jr. forced the hotel management to begin hiring black waiters and <unk> . On January 27 , 1961 , Sinatra played a benefit show at Carnegie Hall for Martin Luther King , Jr. and led his fellow Rat Pack members and Reprise label mates in boycotting hotels and casinos that refused entry to black patrons and performers . According to his son , Frank Sinatra , Jr . , King sat weeping in the audience at one of his father 's concerts in 1963 as Sinatra sang " Ol ' Man River " , a song from the musical Show Boat that is sung by an African @-@ American stevedore . When he changed his political affiliations in 1970 , Sinatra became less outspoken on racial issues . Though he did much towards racial causes , it did not stop the occasional racist jibe from him and the other Rat Pack members toward Davis at concerts . 
 = = Death = = 
 Sinatra died with his wife at his side at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles on May 14 , 1998 , aged 82 , after suffering a severe heart attack . 
 Sinatra suffered from ill health during the last few years of his life , and was frequently hospitalized for heart and breathing problems , high blood pressure , pneumonia and bladder cancer . He was further diagnosed as suffering from dementia . He had made no public appearances following a heart attack in February 1997 . Sinatra 's wife encouraged him to " fight " while attempts were made to stabilize him , and his final words were , " I 'm losing . " Sinatra 's daughter , Tina , later wrote that she and her sister , Nancy , had not been notified of their father 's final hospitalization , and it was her belief that " the omission was deliberate . Barbara would be the grieving widow alone at her husband 's side . " The night after Sinatra 's death , the lights on the Empire State Building in New York City were turned blue . Also right after Sinatra 's death , the lights on the Las Vegas Strip were dimmed in his honor , and the casinos stopped spinning for a minute . 
 Sinatra 's funeral was held at the Roman Catholic Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills , California , on May 20 , 1998 , with 400 mourners in attendance and thousands of fans outside . Gregory Peck , Tony Bennett , and Sinatra 's son , Frank Jr . , addressed the mourners , who included many notable people from film and entertainment . Sinatra was buried in a blue business suit with mementos from family members including cherry @-@ flavored Life Savers , Tootsie Rolls , a bottle of Jack Daniel 's , a pack of Camel cigarettes and a Zippo lighter , stuffed toys , and a dog biscuit , next to his parents in section B @-@ 8 of Desert Memorial Park in Cathedral City , California . 
 His close friends , Jilly Rizzo and Jimmy Van Heusen , are buried nearby . The words " The Best Is Yet to Come " , plus " Beloved Husband & Father " are imprinted on Sinatra 's grave marker . Significant increases in sales worldwide were reported by Billboard in the month of his death . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 American music critic Robert Christgau referred to Sinatra as " the greatest singer of the 20th century " . His popularity was later matched only by Elvis Presley , Michael Jackson , and the Beatles . For Santopietro , Sinatra was the " greatest male pop singer in the history of America " , who amassed " unprecedented power onscreen and off " , and " seemed to exemplify the common man , an ethnic twentieth @-@ century American male who reached the ' top of the heap ' , yet never forgot his roots " . Santopietro argues that Sinatra created his own world , which he was able to dominate — his career was centred around power , perfecting the ability to capture an audience . 
 Composer Gus Levene commented that Sinatra 's strength was that when it came to lyrics , telling a story musically , Sinatra displayed a " genius " ability and feeling , which with the " rare combination of voice and showmanship " made him the " original singer " which others who followed most tried to emulate . George Roberts , a trombonist in Sinatra 's band , remarked that Sinatra had a " charisma , or whatever it is about him , that no one else had " . Biographer Arnold Shaw considered that " If Las Vegas had not existed , Sinatra could have invented it " . He quoted reporter James Bacon in saying that Sinatra was the " swinging image on which the town is built " , adding that no other entertainer quite " embodied the glamour " associated with Las Vegas as him . Sinatra continues to be seen as one of the icons of the 20th century , and has three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in film and music . There are stars on east and west sides of the 1600 block of Vine Street respectively , and one on the south side of the 6500 block of Hollywood Boulevard for his work in television . 
 In Sinatra 's native New Jersey , Hoboken 's Frank Sinatra Park , the Hoboken Post Office , and a residence hall at Montclair State University were named in his honor . Other buildings named for Sinatra include the Frank Sinatra School of the Arts in Astoria , Queens , the Frank Sinatra International Student Center at Israel 's Hebrew University in Jerusalem dedicated in 1978 , and the Frank Sinatra Hall at the USC School of Cinematic Arts in Los Angeles , California , dedicated in 2002 . Wynn Resorts ' Encore Las Vegas resort features a restaurant dedicated to Sinatra which opened in 2008 . Items of memorabilia from Sinatra 's life and career are displayed at USC 's Frank Sinatra Hall and Wynn Resort 's Sinatra restaurant . Near the Las Vegas Strip is a road named Frank Sinatra Drive in his honor . The United States Postal Service issued a 42 @-@ cent postage stamp in honor of Sinatra in May 2008 , commemorating the tenth anniversary of his death . The United States Congress passed a resolution introduced by Representative Mary Bono Mack on May 20 , 2008 , designating May 13 as Frank Sinatra Day to honor his contributions to American culture . 
 Sinatra received three honorary degrees during his lifetime . In May 1976 , he was invited to speak at the University of Nevada , Las Vegas ( UNLV ) graduation commencement held at Sam Boyd Stadium . It was at this commencement that he was bestowed an Honorary Doctorate <unk> <unk> by the university . During his speech , Sinatra noted that his education had come from " the school of hard knocks " and was suitably touched by the award . He went on to describe that " this is the first educational degree I have ever held in my hand . I will never forget what you have done for me today " . A few years later in 1984 and 1985 , Sinatra also received an Honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from Loyola Marymount University as well as an Honorary Doctorate of Engineering from the Stevens Institute of Technology . 
 = = Film and television portrayals = = 
 Sinatra has been portrayed on numerous occasions in film and on television . A television miniseries based on Sinatra 's life , titled Sinatra , was aired by CBS in 1992 . Sinatra was directed by James Steven <unk> , who won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Directing for a Miniseries or a Special , and starred Philip Casnoff as Sinatra . Sinatra was written by Abby Mann and Philip <unk> , and produced by Sinatra 's daughter , Tina . 
 Sinatra has subsequently been portrayed on screen by Ray Liotta ( The Rat Pack , 1998 ) , James Russo ( Stealing Sinatra , 2003 ) , Dennis Hopper ( The Night We Called It a Day , 2003 ) , and Robert Knepper ( My Way , 2012 ) , and spoofed by Joe Piscopo and Phil Hartman on Saturday Night Live . A biographical film directed by Martin Scorsese has long been in production . A 1998 episode of the BBC documentary series Arena , The Voice of the Century , focused on Sinatra . Alex Gibney directed a four @-@ part biographical series on Sinatra , All or Nothing At All , for HBO in 2015 . A musical tribute was aired on CBS television in December 2015 to mark Sinatra 's centenary . 
 = 2006 Subway 500 = 
 The 2006 Subway 500 was the 32nd stock car race of the 2006 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series and the sixth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Nextel Cup . It was held on October 22 , 2006 , before a crowd of 65 @,@ 000 , at Martinsville Speedway in Martinsville , Virginia , one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races . The 500 @-@ lap race was won by Jimmie Johnson of the Hendrick Motorsports team , after he started from ninth position ; Denny Hamlin finished second , and Bobby Labonte came in third . 
 Although Kurt Busch won the pole position , he was immediately passed by Jeff Gordon at the start of the race . 143 laps later Johnson took the lead for one lap . Gordon regained the lead on the next lap , only to lose it to Johnson again on the 153rd lap . Labonte moved into the lead on lap 406 and held it with 55 laps remaining , when he was passed by Johnson . At the race 's final restart on lap 495 Hamlin challenged Johnson for the lead , but the latter resisted Hamlin 's passing maneuver and won the race . There were 18 cautions and 16 lead changes by five different drivers during the race . 
 It was Johnson 's fifth win of the 2006 season , and the 23rd of his career . The result advanced him to third in the Drivers ' Championship , 41 points behind Matt Kenseth ( who took over the championship lead when Jeff Burton retired during the race ; this caused Burton to fall to fifth in the championship , one point behind Hamlin ) . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , 53 points ahead of Dodge and 61 ahead of Ford with four races left in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Subway 500 was the 32nd of 36 scheduled stock car races of the 2006 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series and the sixth in the ten @-@ race season @-@ ending Chase for the Nextel Cup . It was held on October 22 , 2006 at Martinsville Speedway in Martinsville , Virginia , one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Richmond International Raceway , Dover International Speedway , Bristol Motor Speedway and Phoenix International Raceway . The standard track at Martinsville Speedway is a four @-@ turn , 0 @.@ 526 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 847 km ) oval . Its turns are banked at eleven degrees , and neither the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) nor the back stretch is banked . 
 Before the race Jeff Burton led the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 763 points , with Matt Kenseth second and Kevin Harvick third . Mark Martin and Dale Earnhardt , Jr. were fourth and fifth , and Denny Hamlin , Jimmie Johnson , Kasey Kahne , Kyle Busch and Jeff Gordon rounded out the top ten drivers competing for the 2006 Chase for the Nextel Cup . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet led with 237 points ; Dodge was second with 189 , followed by Ford with 183 . Gordon was the race 's defending champion . 
 After falling from seventh to tenth in the Drivers ' Championship at the previous race ( at Charlotte Motor Speedway ) , Gordon said he would try and win races to return to contention for the championship . Jeff Burton called the Subway 500 " another volatile race in the Chase " , and thought it would significantly impact the chase contenders . Although Kenseth felt that the race would be the toughest for his team , he believed that a good finish would put him in a better position for the championship because of his good results at the tracks following the Martinsville race . After a good finish at Charlotte , Earnhardt felt he was in " good shape " : " Jeff has been at this a long time , but I don 't look at him as indestructible . If he has a mistake or even a couple of bad runs , it will completely shake up the points . " After winning the Busch Series championship , Harvick focused on the Nextel Cup championship : " We 're excited about it , proud of what we 've done this year , and , hopefully , we can do what we need to do on the Cup side in the next five weeks . I have never had a season like this . " Hamlin thought he would perform well at Martinsville , where he felt comfortable , and he and his team did not rule themselves out of contention for the title . 
 In preparation for the race , NASCAR held the last of its test days for Nextel Cup entrants on October 16 – 18 at Homestead @-@ Miami Speedway . Sessions began at 1 : 00 p.m. EDT , paused from 5 : 00 to 6 : 00 p.m. and concluded at 9 : 00 p.m. Fifty @-@ eight cars , a mix of Cars of Tomorrow and 2006 cars , participated in the October 16 afternoon session . Reed Sorenson was quickest with a speed of 171 @.@ 652 miles per hour ( 276 @.@ 247 km / h ) , and Casey Mears had the highest speed of 173 @.@ 077 miles per hour ( 278 @.@ 540 km / h ) in the evening session . During the third session ( with 75 cars ) , Kyle Busch had the fastest speed of 175 @.@ 382 miles per hour ( 282 @.@ 250 km / h ) ; Gordon had the highest speed of the three days , at 175 @.@ 553 miles per hour ( 282 @.@ 525 km / h ) in the fourth session . During the fifth session , on the afternoon of October 18 , 23 cars were tested . Scott Wimmer had the highest speed of 172 @.@ 364 miles per hour ( 277 @.@ 393 km / h ) , and Jeff Green had the highest speed of 174 @.@ 639 miles per hour ( 281 @.@ 054 km / h ) in the evening session . 
 One team substituted for its regular driver . Morgan @-@ McClure Motorsports driver Todd Bodine decided to concentrate on the Craftsman Truck Series title , and was replaced by Ward Burton , the 2002 Daytona 500 champion . Burton , who had not raced since 2004 , went to Motor Mile Speedway to <unk> himself with NASCAR . According to crew chief Chris Carrier , Burton expressed a large amount of interest in driving at Martinsville : " He 's a Virginia driver and we 're a Virginia team . That makes for a great combination at Martinsville . " On October 18 , Roush Racing announced that Craftsman Truck Series driver David Ragan would drive the No. 06 car in four of the season 's five remaining races beginning with the Subway 500 . Ragan said that the experience would help him prepare for his full @-@ time début in 2007 . 
 = = = Practice and qualification = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race : one on Friday and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes , the second 60 minutes and the third 45 minutes . In the first practice session , Gordon was fastest with a time of 19 @.@ 478 seconds ; Ryan Newman was second and Hamlin third . Johnson took fourth position , and Dave Blaney placed fifth . Kurt Busch , Sterling Marlin , Green , Sorenson and Kahne rounded out the session 's top ten drivers . Martin switched to a back @-@ up car after he crashed . 
 Although fifty cars were entered in the qualifier , according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Kurt Busch clinched his sixth pole position of the season , the ninth of his career and his first at Martinsville , with a time of 19 @.@ 408 . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Gordon , who was 0 @.@ 038 seconds slower and had the pole position until Kurt Busch 's lap . Hamlin qualified third , Newman fourth and Tony Stewart fifth . Blaney was sixth , with Earnhardt and Green seventh and eighth . Johnson , a Chase for the Nextel Cup driver , qualified ninth and Ken Schrader rounded out the top ten qualifiers . Harvick , another driver in the Chase , set the twelfth @-@ fastest time . The seven drivers who failed to qualify were Mike Bliss , Hermie Sadler , Chad Chaffin , Morgan Shepherd , Ted Christopher , Derrike Cope and Stanton Barrett . After the qualifier Kurt Busch said , " It was a great lap , unexpected for me , but this team has always qualified well at this track , Martinsville is the kind of track that you either love or hate , and I 've learned to do both . It 's a tough , challenging short track . " 
 On Saturday morning Marlin was fastest in the second practice session with a time of 19 @.@ 668 seconds , ahead of Kahne and Gordon . Dale Jarrett was fourth @-@ fastest ; Mears was fifth and Johnson sixth . Hamlin , Brian Vickers , Greg Biffle and Jeff Burton followed in the top ten . Of the other drivers in the Chase , Kyle Busch was 13th @-@ fastest and Martin set the 19th @-@ fastest time . During the second practice session , Scott Riggs ( who had the forty @-@ third quickest time ) had an engine failure in the session 's opening minutes and changed engines . Later that day , Johnson paced the final practice session with a time of 19 @.@ 722 ; Harvick was second and Biffle third . Marlin was fourth @-@ fastest , ahead of David Stremme and Hamlin . Earnhardt was seventh @-@ fastest , Kyle Busch eighth , Gordon ninth and Mears tenth . Other Chase drivers included Jeff Burton in 17th and Kahne in 17th ; all were within one @-@ tenth of a second of Johnson 's time . The session was suspended when Kenny Wallace 's engine blew up , since the track then needed to be checked and cleaned , and Wallace changed engines . Jarrett spun out with a brake problem , but since he made only minor contact with the wall he did not have to switch to a back @-@ up car . After a similar collision , Michael Waltrip also did not have to switch cars . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Live television coverage of the race began at 12 : 32 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time in the United States on NBC . Rain showers were forecast for the day of the race , and at the start weather conditions were overcast and some rain had already fallen . The air temperature was around 48 ° F ( 9 ° C ) . Cleaning trucks cleared the track before the start . <unk> Davis of Raceway Ministries began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation , the Martinsville High School marching band performed the national anthem and Subway spokesperson Jared Fogle commanded the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Riggs and Wallace moved to the rear of the grid because they had changed their engines . 
 The race began at 1 : 00 p.m. Gordon accelerated faster than Kurt Busch off the line , and was ahead of him by the second turn . The first caution was given two laps later when Martin Truex Jr. spun sideways in turn four and Marlin , Sorenson and Kyle Petty sustained damage to their cars . Jeff Burton had front @-@ end damage to his vehicle when he contacted the rear of Joe Nemechek 's car . At the lap ten restart , Gordon maintained his lead over Kurt Busch and Denny Hamlin . Seven laps later , Hamlin passed Kurt Busch for second place . Earnhardt passed Kurt Busch for fourth place on the 44th lap . On lap 45 , he reported that one of his engine 's cylinders was misfiring and was worse coming out of the turns . Five laps later Gordon had a 1 @.@ 8 @-@ second lead over Hamlin , which grew to 2 @.@ 4 seconds on lap 60 ; Earnhardt had moved into second by that lap . On lap 64 , a collision between Mears and Newman in turn four prompted the second caution ; although Mears was spun around , he was able to continue . During the caution , all the leaders made pit stops for fuel and tires . Jeff Burton 's pit crew repaired his loose hood with tape on the right front . Biffle left the track on lap 67 with brake problems . Newman was sent to the rear of the longest line by NASCAR two laps later for his role in the incident with Mears , and Gordon maintained the top position at the lap @-@ 71 restart . 
 Eight laps later Earnhardt passed Raines for second position , and Gordon had a 1 @.@ 7 @-@ second advantage over Earnhardt by lap 80 . Raines was passed by Stewart for third on lap 83 , and Johnson took third place from Stewart six laps later . J.J. Yeley drove to pit road on the 94th lap with a flat left @-@ rear tire . On lap 106 , Burton ( whose car was hot because of the tape on his hood ) made contact with Gordon and escaped with minor damage after a three @-@ lap battle . Twenty @-@ four laps later Johnson passed Earnhardt for second place , and on lap 144 he passed Gordon for the lead . One lap later Gordon reclaimed first place , and built a quarter @-@ second lead by lap 150 . Johnson moved back into the lead on lap 153 . Two laps later Stremme spun sideways , prompting the third caution , and all the leaders made pit stops . Johnson remained the leader at the lap @-@ 161 restart , ahead of Gordon and Stewart . After the caution ended , Burton switched to a second ignition after feeling he had a problem with his engine . Forty @-@ two laps later Waltrip 's turn @-@ four spin prompted the fourth caution , although he was able to continue . During the caution , the leaders again made pit stops . Johnson , who had minor air @-@ pressure adjustments because of sunlight exposure at his pit stop , maintained his lead at the restart . 
 Jeff Burton drove to his garage on lap 218 when a carburetor problem caused him to run slower than his rivals ; Earnhardt and Stewart avoided a wreck on that lap . Four laps later , the fifth caution came out when David Gilliland made contact with Ward Burton in turn two ; although Burton spun , he avoided hitting the wall . Johnson maintained his lead at the lap @-@ 227 restart . The sixth caution was given on lap 231 when Sorenson spun after colliding with Riggs , causing Mike Skinner to contact the left front quarter of Harvick 's car and Travis Kvapil to spin sideways . Biffle sustained damage to his car 's nose , and turn three was temporarily blocked . Harvick , Kahne , Vickers and Biffle went to pit road for repairs , while the leaders remained on the track . Johnson led on the lap @-@ 238 restart . Four laps later Kvapil made heavy contact with the wall after being bumped and Tony Raines ' car had a cut tire from contact with Ragan , prompting the seventh caution . Most of the leaders , including Johnson , again made pit stops . On lap 244 , it was announced that Jeff Burton had retired from the race . Gordon became the leader at the restart , ahead of Hamlin , Elliott Sadler , Kurt Busch and Nemechek . 
 Hamlin passed Gordon for the lead on lap 256 . Twenty @-@ three laps later Bowyer made contact with Kenseth , spinning him in turn four ( although he kept his car off the wall ) and prompting the race 's eighth caution . During the caution , most of the leaders ( including Hamlin ) made pit stops . Kyle and Kurt Busch 's pit crews made track @-@ bar adjustments to their cars . Hamlin had tape added to the front of his car to fix a handling problem , and Sadler narrowly avoided a collision with Kahne . Johnson regained the lead after the pit stops , maintaining it at the lap @-@ 286 restart . Fourteen laps later Kurt Busch passed Earnhardt for second place , and Gordon moved back up to fifth by lap 318 . On lap 331 , the ninth caution was given ; Schrader collided with the wall , made contact with Ragan going into turn two and both drivers hit Jarrett . Schrader retired from the race because of the collision , but Ragan and Jarrett continued . The leaders , including Johnson , made pit stops during the caution . Kurt Busch gained the lead after the pit stops , maintaining it at the lap @-@ 341 restart . Six laps later Raines made contact with Skinner , forcing him to collide with the inside wall and prompting the tenth caution . With severe damage to his car 's rear end quarter , Skinner stopped before the start @-@ finish line . Kurt Busch maintained his lead at the lap @-@ 353 restart , ahead of Johnson and Earnhardt . 
 Johnson moved into the lead on the same lap after passing Kurt Busch , who dropped two more places on the lap . Two laps later Ragan spun after contact with Elliott Sadler , prompting the eleventh caution ; none of the leaders made pit stops . Johnson led at the lap @-@ 361 restart , ahead of Earnhardt and Hamlin . The twelfth caution came out two laps later when Kurt Busch tried to pass Riggs and the drivers made contact coming off turn four . Kurt Busch was spun while crossing the start @-@ finish line and hit the inside wall , requiring a pit stop for repairs . Johnson maintained his lead at the lap @-@ 371 restart and was followed by Earnhardt , Hamlin , Kurt Busch and Gordon ( who made a pit stop for an air @-@ pressure adjustment during the caution ) . Hamlin passed Earnhardt for second place ten laps later . The thirteenth caution was prompted on lap 399 when Bobby Labonte made contact with Jamie McMurray in turn two , sending him spinning sideways but avoiding the wall . Most of the leaders , including Johnson , made pit stops . Johnson adjusted his air pressure , and Hamlin 's pit crew removed a front fender . 
 Labonte led on the lap @-@ 406 restart , followed by Mears and Gordon . Elliott Sadler went to his garage with motor problems on lap 411 . By lap 437 , Johnson had moved into second position . Seven laps later he passed Labonte for the lead , and Hamlin passed Gordon for fourth a lap later . Lap 447 saw the fourteenth caution ; Ragan spun sideways at turn four and Kyle Busch collided with the wall to avoid him , sustaining minor damage to his car 's right side . One lap later , Kyle Busch went to pit road for repairs . The race restarted on lap 453 , with Johnson leading Labonte and Hamlin . On the 460th lap <unk> caused Mears to spin sideways coming out of turn four , prompting the fifteenth caution ; Johnson maintained his lead at the restart . On lap 468 , Bowyer triggered the sixteenth caution after spinning sideways at turn three . Four laps later , Martin drove to pit road for engine troubleshooting . 
 The race restarted on lap 476 , when a seventeenth caution was issued because Earnhardt made contact with Kahne after trying to pass him ; Earnhardt spun at turn three . Martin again went to pit road because of water problems , and Johnson maintained the lead at the restart . On lap 484 , Hamlin passed Labonte for second place . Five laps later Wallace spun coming out of turn two after being hit by McMurray , prompting the race 's eighteenth ( and final ) caution , but was able to continue . Johnson remained the leader at the lap @-@ 495 restart , with Hamlin close behind . Hamlin bumped Johnson coming out of turn two , causing Johnson to move to the outside lane , and went to the inside lane to draw alongside him on the back stretch . They remained side by side for one lap , when Johnson drew ahead of Hamlin at turn four . He pulled away , holding the lead for the remaining six laps to win the race . Hamlin finished second , ahead of Labonte in third , Stewart in fourth and Gordon in fifth . Mears , Kahne , Green , Harvick and Petty rounded out the top ten finishers . The race had a total of 18 cautions and 16 lead changes by five drivers . Johnson led seven times for a total of 245 laps , more than any other competitor . The win was the 23rd of Johnson 's Cup Career , as well as his final of five victories he posted in the 2006 season . 
 = = = Post @-@ race comments = = = 
 Johnson appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to celebrate his fifth win of the season in front of the crowd ; the win earned him $ 191 @,@ 886 . He was pleased with the result , saying he was happy to have taken the victory : " We 've been running up front the last three of four races and haven 't been able to close the deal . Today we did . " Hamlin was disappointed with his finish as he felt he had a faster car after the race 's final restart but admitted Johnson would not be beaten : " It was my only shot to get around him . I wasn 't going to get under him completely . There was no way possible . I was doing the best I could to win the race . " He later admitted that he made contact with Johnson and that it was on purpose . Labonte said about his third @-@ place finish , " I feel like I stole something . " Jeff Burton was philosophical about his retirement from the race : " These things happen . Everybody has had an issue in this Chase , and we had ours today . This thing is not over for us by any means . " Kenseth , who finished eleventh , was optimistic about his chances of winning the Drivers ' Championship : " It 's great to be the leader , but we 've got to start running good , It 's still pretty wide open . It 's going to be pretty exciting , I think , coming down to the last race . " 
 Earnhardt admitted that he was to blame for the collision with Kahne on lap 476 . He said was anxious to pass him and was underneath him when he made the maneuver but his rear brakes locked which caused him to spin . Kahne thought Earnhardt was driving too hard in turn three : " I guess I need to get somebody on [ the radio ] to preach to me to have more patience because I definitely can 't take control of myself . " After retiring from the race , Schrader said of his collision with Ragan , " I moved him earlier because you can 't run like that two laps down . Got back around him and he paid me back for moving him , but he was two laps down . " Ragan denied intentionally wrecking Schrader , saying that he over @-@ drove his car going into the first corner and his brakes locked . Stewart saw Ragan 's lap @-@ 447 spin ( which caused Kyle Busch to collide with the wall ) , and believed that NASCAR should have disqualified Ragan from the race . 
 According to Mears , who was involved in an incident with Newman on the 64th lap , " [ Newman ] was kind of holding everyone up . When I got up to him , he tried to park me in the center of the corner . [ He ] just got on the brakes and I got into the back of him . Got him a little loose . He didn 't wreck , but he came around the next lap and wrecked me . " Although Mears was also angry about the incident with Gilliland 396 laps later , he praised his car 's handling and said it was the first time a car had worked in his favor . Three days after the race , NASCAR announced that Waltrip @-@ Jasper Racing crew chief Tommy Baldwin , Jr. was fined $ 5 @,@ 000 for violating four NASCAR rules . The fines were for " actions detrimental to stock car racing " , car , car parts , components and / or equipment used in the race that was not compliant to NASCAR rules and for entering the car @-@ servicing area without a fire @-@ resistant uniform or helmet . 
 The result left Kenseth leading the Drivers ' Championship with 5 @,@ 848 points , ahead of Harvick with 5 @,@ 812 . Johnson moved into third with 5 @,@ 807 , six points ahead of Hamlin . After the race , Jeff Burton ( who fell to fifth ) was still upbeat about his championship chances : " We have as good a shot as anybody . We 've run well enough to win the championship ; we just got to put the next four races together . " Earnhardt , Martin , Kahne , Gordon and Kyle Busch rounded out the top ten . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet maintained the lead with 246 points . Dodge remained in second with 195 , eight points ahead of Ford . The race took three hours and forty @-@ four minutes to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 544 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Doxorubicin = 
 Doxorubicin , sold under the trade names Adriamycin among others , is a medication used in cancer chemotherapy . It is derived by chemical <unk> from a bacterial species . It is an anthracycline antitumor antibiotic ( note : in this context , this does not mean it is used to treat bacterial infections ) closely related to the natural product <unk> and like all anthracyclines , it works by <unk> DNA , with the most serious adverse effect being life @-@ threatening heart damage . It is commonly used in the treatment of a wide range of cancers , including hematological malignancies ( blood cancers , like leukaemia and lymphoma ) , many types of carcinoma ( solid tumours ) and soft tissue sarcomas . It is often used in combination chemotherapy as a component of various chemotherapy regimens . 
 Common adverse effects of doxorubicin include hair loss ( seen in most of those treated with the drug ) , <unk> ( a compromised ability of the body 's bone marrow to produce new blood cells ) , nausea and vomiting ( which are seen in roughly 30 @-@ 90 % of people treated with the drug ) , oral <unk> , <unk> , diarrhoea , skin reactions ( including hand @-@ foot syndrome ) and localised swelling and redness along the vein in which the drug is delivered . Less common , yet serious reactions include hypersensitivity reactions ( including anaphylaxis ) , radiation recall , heart damage and liver dysfunction . Some people experience red discoloration of their urine , sometimes for up to 1 to 2 days after treatment . 
 Doxorubicin is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most important medication needed in a basic health system . The drug is administered intravenously as a hydrochloride salt . Doxorubicin is photosensitive , and containers are often covered by an aluminum bag and / or brown wax paper to prevent light from affecting it . Doxorubicin is also available in liposome @-@ encapsulated forms as Doxil ( pegylated form ) , Myocet ( <unk> form ) , and <unk> , although these forms must also be given by intravenous injection . 
 = = Medical use = = 
 Doxorubicin is commonly used to treat some leukemias and Hodgkin 's lymphoma , as well as cancers of the bladder , breast , stomach , lung , ovaries , thyroid , soft tissue sarcoma , multiple myeloma , and others . Commonly used doxorubicin @-@ containing regimens are AC ( Adriamycin , cyclophosphamide ) , TAC ( <unk> , AC ) , <unk> ( Adriamycin , bleomycin , vinblastine , <unk> ) , <unk> , CHOP ( cyclophosphamide , <unk> , vincristine , prednisone ) and FAC ( 5 @-@ fluorouracil , <unk> , cyclophosphamide ) . 
 Doxil ( see below ) is used primarily for the treatment of ovarian cancer where the disease has progressed or recurred after platinum @-@ based chemotherapy , or for the treatment of AIDS @-@ related Kaposi 's sarcoma . 
 = = = <unk> formulations = = = 
 There is a pegylated ( polyethylene glycol coated ) liposome @-@ encapsulated form of doxorubicin , sold as Doxil . It was developed to treat Kaposi 's sarcoma , an AIDS @-@ related cancer that causes lesions to grow under the skin , in the lining of the mouth , nose and throat , or in other organs . The polyethylene glycol coating results in preferential concentration of doxorubicin in the skin . However , this also results in a side effect called palmar plantar <unk> ( PPE ) , more commonly known as hand @-@ foot syndrome . Following administration of this form of doxorubicin , small amounts of the drug can leak from capillaries in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . The result of this leakage is redness , tenderness , and peeling of the skin that can be uncomfortable and even painful . In clinical testing at 50 mg / m2 dosing every 4 weeks , half of people developed hand @-@ foot syndrome . The rate of this side effect limits the dose of this formulation that can be given as compared with plain doxorubicin in the same treatment regimen , thereby limiting potential substitution . Substitution would be desirable because liposome @-@ encapsulated doxorubicin is less <unk> than <unk> doxorubicin . This form is also approved by the FDA for treatment of ovarian cancer and multiple myeloma . 
 A non @-@ pegylated liposomal doxorubicin , called Myocet , is approved in Europe and Canada for treatment of metastatic breast cancer in combination with cyclophosphamide , but has not been approved by the FDA for use in the United States . Unlike Doxil , the Myocet liposome does not have a polyethylene glycol coating , and therefore does not result in the same rate of hand @-@ foot syndrome . The minimization of this side effect may allow for one for one substitution with doxorubicin in the same treatment regimen , thereby improving safety with no loss of efficacy . Like Doxil , the liposomal encapsulation of the doxorubicin limits the cardiotoxicity . In theory , by limiting the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin through liposomal encapsulation , it can be used safely in concurrent combination with other <unk> chemotherapy drugs , such as trastuzumab . There is an FDA black box warning that trastuzumab cannot be used in concurrent combination with doxorubicin , only in sequential combination . Though concurrent combination of trastuzumab and doxorubicin in clinical studies found superior tumor response , the combination resulted in unacceptable cardiotoxicity , including risk of cardiac failure manifesting as congestive heart failure ( CHF ) . Published phase II study results have shown that Myocet , trastuzumab , and paclitaxel can safely be used concurrently without the cardiac risk , as measured by reduction in <unk> function , while still achieving superior tumor response . This finding is the basis for the ongoing phase III trial for FDA approval . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 The most dangerous side effect of doxorubicin is cardiomyopathy , leading to congestive heart failure . The rate of cardiomyopathy is dependent on its cumulative dose , with an incidence about 4 % when the dose of doxorubicin is 500 – 550 mg / m ² , 18 % when the dose is 551 – 600 mg / m ² and 36 % when the dose exceeds 600 mg / m ² . There are several ways in which doxorubicin is believed to cause cardiomyopathy , including oxidative stress , downregulation of genes for contractile proteins , and p53 mediated apoptosis . The drug <unk> is used to mitigate doxorubicin 's cardiotoxicity . 
 Another common and potentially fatal complication of doxorubicin is <unk> , an acute life @-@ threatening infection of the bowel . 
 Additionally , some patients may develop PPE , characterized by skin eruptions on the palms of the hand or soles of the feet , swelling , pain , and erythema . 
 Due to these side effects and its red color , doxorubicin has earned the nickname " red devil " or " red death . " 
 Chemotherapy can cause reactivation of hepatitis B , and doxorubicin @-@ containing regimens are no exception . 
 Doxorubicin and several chemotherapeutic drugs ( including cyclophosphamide ) cause <unk> . Other groups of drugs that cause this problem include antimalarials , amiodarone , heavy metals ( but not iron ) , tetracyclines , and antipsychotics . 
 = = Biosynthesis = = 
 Doxorubicin ( DXR ) is a 14 @-@ <unk> version of daunorubicin , the immediate precursor of DXR in its biosynthetic pathway . <unk> is more abundantly found as a natural product because it is produced by a number of different wild type strains of Streptomyces . In contrast , only one known non @-@ wild type species , Streptomyces <unk> subspecies <unk> ATCC <unk> , was initially found to be capable of producing the more widely used doxorubicin . This strain was created by <unk> et al. in 1969 by mutating a strain producing daunorubicin , but not DXR , at least in detectable quantities . Subsequently , Hutchinson 's group showed that under special environmental conditions , or by the introduction of genetic modifications , other strains of Streptomyces can produce doxorubicin . His group has also cloned many of the genes required for DXR production , although not all of them have been fully characterized . In 1996 , Strohl 's group discovered , isolated and characterized dox A , the gene encoding the enzyme that converts daunorubicin into DXR . By 1999 , they produced recombinant dox A , a cytochrome P450 oxidase , and found that it catalyzes multiple steps in DXR biosynthesis , including steps leading to daunorubicin . This was significant because it became clear that all daunorubicin @-@ producing strains have the necessary genes to produce DXR , the much more therapeutically important of the two . Hutchinson 's group went on to develop methods to improve the yield of DXR , from the fermentation process used in its commercial production , not only by introducing dox A encoding plasmids , but also by introducing mutations to deactivate enzymes that shunt DXR precursors to less useful products , for example <unk> @-@ like glycosides . Some triple mutants , that also over @-@ expressed dox A , were able to double the yield of DXR . This is of more than academic interest , because at that time DXR cost about $ 1 @.@ 37 million per kg and current production in 1999 was 225 kg per annum . More efficient production techniques have brought the price down to $ 1 @.@ 1 million per kg for the <unk> formulation . Although DXR can be produced semi @-@ synthetically from daunorubicin , the process involves electrophilic bromination and multiple steps , and the yield is poor . Since daunorubicin is produced by fermentation , it would be ideal if the bacteria could complete DXR synthesis more effectively . 
 = = Mechanism of action = = 
 Doxorubicin interacts with DNA by intercalation and inhibition of macromolecular biosynthesis . This inhibits the progression of the enzyme topoisomerase II , which relaxes <unk> in DNA for transcription . Doxorubicin stabilizes the topoisomerase II complex after it has broken the DNA chain for replication , preventing the DNA double helix from being resealed and thereby stopping the process of replication . It may also increase quinone type free radical production , hence contributing to its cytotoxicity . 
 The planar aromatic <unk> portion of the molecule intercalates between two base pairs of the DNA , while the six @-@ membered <unk> sugar sits in the minor groove and interacts with flanking base pairs immediately adjacent to the intercalation site , as evidenced by several crystal structures . 
 By intercalation , doxorubicin can also induce histone eviction from transcriptionally active chromatin . As a result , DNA damage response , <unk> and <unk> are deregulated in doxorubicin @-@ exposed cells . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1950s , an Italian research company , <unk> Research Laboratories , began an organized effort to find anticancer compounds from soil @-@ based microbes . A soil sample was isolated from the area surrounding the Castel del Monte , a 13th @-@ century castle . A new strain of Streptomyces <unk> , which produced a red pigment , was isolated , and an antibiotic from this bacterium was effective against tumors in mice . Since a group of French researchers discovered the same compound at about the same time , the two teams named the compound daunorubicin , combining the name <unk> , a pre @-@ Roman tribe that occupied the area of Italy where the compound was isolated , with the French word for ruby , <unk> , describing the color . Clinical trials began in the 1960s , and the drug was successful in treating acute leukemia and lymphoma . However , by 1967 , it was recognized that daunorubicin could produce fatal cardiac toxicity . 
 Researchers at <unk> soon discovered that changes in biological activity could be made by minor changes in the structure of the compound . A strain of Streptomyces was mutated using N @-@ <unk> @-@ N @-@ methyl urethane , and this new strain produced a different , red @-@ colored antibiotic . They named this new compound Adriamycin , after the Adriatic Sea , and the name was later changed to doxorubicin to conform to the established naming convention . Doxorubicin showed better activity than daunorubicin against mouse tumors , and especially solid tumors . It also showed a higher therapeutic index , yet the cardiotoxicity remained . 
 Doxorubicin and daunorubicin together can be thought of as prototype compounds for the anthracyclines . Subsequent research has led to many other anthracycline antibiotics , or analogs , and there are now over 2 @,@ 000 known analogs of doxorubicin . By 1991 , 553 of them had been evaluated in the screening program at the National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) . In 2016 <unk> @-@ 150 was granted Orphan Drug designation by US FDA . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Names = = = 
 It is also known as <unk> and <unk> . 
 It is sold under a number of different brand names , including Adriamycin PFS , Adriamycin RDF , or <unk> . 
 = = = Shortage = = = 
 As of February 2014 , Doxil was available in limited supply . In 2011 , Doxil became available only in very limited supply due to production problems with the third @-@ party manufacturer . Johnson & Johnson ( <unk> ) , through its subsidiary Janssen Products , LP , had been receiving its Doxil supply from contract manufacturer Ben Venue Laboratories ( located in Bedford , Ohio ) , a unit of Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH of Germany . The problems began when Ben Venue temporarily shut down their manufacturing facility due to quality control issues . 
 In February 2012 , to address the Doxil shortage , the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) allowed for the temporary importation of <unk> , which contains the same active ingredient as Doxil and is made by Sun Pharma Global <unk> ( Sun ) , a subsidiary of India 's Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd . The agency said it intends to continue allowing the importation of <unk> until Sun has made enough generic Doxil to meet demand . 
 The FDA approved the first generic version of Doxil , made by Sun , in February 2013 . It will be available in 20 milligram and 50 milligram vials . 
 = = Research = = 
 Combination therapy experiments with <unk> ( rapamycin ) and doxorubicin have shown promise in treating Akt @-@ positive lymphomas in mice . 
 Recent animal research coupling a murine monoclonal antibody with doxorubicin has created an immunoconjugate that was able to eliminate HIV @-@ 1 infection in mice . Current treatment with antiretroviral therapy ( ART ) still leaves pockets of HIV within the host . The immunoconjugate could potentially provide a complementary treatment to ART to eradicate antigen @-@ expressing T cells . 
 = = = Antimalarial activity = = = 
 There is some evidence for antimalarial activity for doxorubicin and similar compounds . In 2009 , a compound similar in structure to doxorubicin was found to inhibit <unk> II , an enzyme unique to the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum . The pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline ( <unk> ) later identified doxorubicin in a set of compounds that inhibit parasite growth 
 = Seth @-@ Peribsen = 
 Seth @-@ Peribsen ( also known as Ash @-@ Peribsen , Peribsen and <unk> ) is the serekh name of an early Egyptian monarch ( pharaoh ) , who ruled during the Second Dynasty of Egypt ( c . 2890 – c . 2686 BC ) . His chronological position within this dynasty is unknown and it is disputed who ruled both before and after him . The duration of his reign is also unknown . 
 Peribsen 's royal name is a subject of curiosity for Egyptologists because it is connected to the deity Seth rather than Horus , as was traditional for the name of a pharaoh . The debate continues over why Peribsen chose this name . Earlier theories have favoured the idea that Egypt was split in two realms during Peribsen 's time or that he was a heretic , who sought to start a new monotheistic religion with Seth as the only worshipped god . However , newer evidence and evaluations tend to show that the Egyptian kingdom was unified , but witnessed a vast and profound reform during the second dynasty . Seal impressions from tombs of this era reveal great changes in the titles held by high officials , pointing to a reduction of their power . Further seal impressions show that several deities were worshipped under Peribsen , refuting the monotheism theory , with other contemporary inscriptions indicating that the Egyptian grammar was perfected during his reign : In particular , the earliest seal impressions with complete sentences date back to Peribsen 's reign . Thus , Peribsen 's reign was in fact a time of cultural and religious advancement . 
 Existing negative views about Peribsen 's existence are based on Ramesside king lists , such as the Abydos King List , the Saqqara King List and the Royal Canon of Turin , which all omit Peribsen 's name . These , however , are known to have been redacted nearly 1500 years after his death and several 4th dynasty tombs of priests performing the funerary cult for Peribsen have been uncovered . These tombs report Peribsen 's name correctly and their existence demonstrate that Peribsen was seen as a legitimate pharaoh , not subject to damnatio memoriae as Akhenaten later would be . Historians and Egyptologists therefore consider the possibility that Peribsen 's name was actually forgotten in time or that his name was preserved in a distorted , misspelled form . 
 Peribsen 's Tomb was discovered in 1898 at Abydos . It was well preserved and showed traces of restoration undertaken during later dynastic periods . 
 = = Archaeological evidence = = 
 The serekh for Peribsen was found pressed in earthen jar seals made of clay and mud and in inscriptions on alabaster , sandstone , porphyry and black schist vessels . These seals and vessels were excavated from Peribsen 's tomb and at an excavation site in Elephantine . One clay seal with Peribsen 's name was found inside the mastaba tomb K1 at Beit <unk> . 
 Two large tomb stelae made of granite were found at his burial site . Their shape is unusual and they appear unfinished and rough . Egyptologists suspect that this was done deliberately , but the reasons are unknown . A cylinder seal of unknown provenance shows Peribsen 's name inside a cartouche and gives the epithet <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " beloved of the gods " ) . This arrangement leads Egyptologists and archaeologists to the conclusion that the seal must have been created later , in memoriam , because the use of royal cartouches began long after Peribsen 's reign . Another seal of the same material shows Peribsen 's name without a cartouche , but with the royal title <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " king of <unk> and Upper Egypt " ) instead . 
 = = Peribsen 's name = = 
 Peribsen 's name is unusual , in that Seth , not Horus , was his patron deity . This goes against the Egyptian tradition of a king choosing the falcon @-@ shaped deity Horus as his royal patron . Traditionally , the Horus name of the king was written within a serekh : the image of the facade of the royal palace beneath a falcon representing the god Horus ( see Hieroglyphics ) . Instead , Peribsen chose to have the Set animal , representing Seth , on his serekh . Like Horus , Seth was a popular deity during the early dynastic period . He became the god of darkness and chaos afterward , during the much later Late Period of Ancient Egypt . Although Peribsen is the only known pharaoh to have the Set animal preside alone over his serekh , he is not the only king to associate himself with Seth . Examples include the 13th dynasty pharaoh Seth <unk> , the 19th dynasty rulers Seti I and Seti II and the 20th dynasty king Setnakhte . 
 Peribsen 's choice of patron , and his rule during the shadowy period of the mid Second dynasty , led Egyptologists and historians to search for possible explanations for both his name and the troubled times he lived in . The following sections discuss some of the theories that they put forth . 
 = = = Religious theories uniting Peribsen with Seth = = = 
 Older theories 
 A theory that was popular until the mid 20th century , supported by Egyptologists Percy Newberry , Jaroslav Černý , Walter Bryan Emery and Bernhard Grdseloff held that Peribsen was a heretic who sought to introduce a new , monotheistic state religion to Egypt , with Seth as the only worshipped god . Peribsen 's actions were thought to be similar to those of the much later 18th dynasty pharaoh Akhenaten , who had required Egyptians to serve only Aten . Newberry proposed that the priests of Horus and Seth fought each other " in the Manner of a war of the roses " during the second half of the Second dynasty . 
 The " heretic Peribsen " theory was based on three observations : that the name " Peribsen " was excluded from later king lists , that the king 's tomb had been destroyed and plundered during antiquity and finally that the tomb stelae of Peribsen , that once displayed the Set animal , were badly scratched with the clear intention of effacing the Seth image . Egyptologists hypothesized these were the actions of religious opponents to the <unk> priest @-@ caste . Lauer and Firth relied on the " heretic Peribsen " theory to explain the enormous quantity of stone vessels inscribed with the name of First and Second dynasty kings found beneath Djoser 's pyramid in bags bearing seals of Khasekhemwy and Djoser . They proposed that Peribsen had plundered the tombs of his predecessors , followers of Horus , and scattered their funerary equipment . These vessels were gathered in the royal treasury during Khasekhemwy 's reign following his reunification of Egypt , and finally put beneath the step pyramid by Djoser , in an act of pious devotion . 
 Contemporary theories 
 Today this theory , as well as Lauer and <unk> ' conclusions , is widely questioned . Archaeological evidence of Peribsen has almost entirely been found in Upper Egypt . In particular , his name does not appear in Lower Egyptian records surviving from that time . It is argued that Peribsen may not have ruled over all of Egypt and therefore did not have the authority to force a change in state religion . Another piece of evidence that argues against the " heretic Peribsen " theory is the false door of the priest Shery at Saqqara . Shery held office during the early Fourth dynasty . The inscription on the false door connects the name of Peribsen in one sentence with another shadowy king of the Second dynasty , Senedj . According to the addendum , Shery was " overseer of all <unk> @-@ priests of king Peribsen in the necropolis of king Senedj , in his mortuary temple and at all other places " . This implies that the funerary cult of Peribsen continued at least until the Fourth dynasty , inconsistent with the assumption that Peribsen 's name was not allowed to be mentioned . Additionally , Egyptologists such as Herman te Velde point out that Shery was not the only Fourth dynasty priest participating in the funerary cult of Peribsen . <unk> , possibly a brother or cousin of Shery , also held the title of a " supervisor of Ka @-@ priests of Peribsen " . 
 Seal impressions found in Peribsen 's tomb at Abydos show several deities : Ash , Min and Bastet , suggesting they were venerated during Peribsen 's time on the throne . This finding argues against Peribsen worshipping a single god , or promoting monotheism . The heretic theory of Newberry , Černý , Grdseloff and others was devised from the very limited archaeological information available during their lifetimes . Most of the found clay seal impressions were still undeciphered and untranslated at their time . 
 According to the Egyptologists Jean Sainte Fare Garnot and Herman te Velde , the name of " Peribsen " accords religious meaning , even before association with a deity . The name " Peribsen " literally means " He who comes forth by their will " or " His heart and will comes forth for them . " The Egyptian syllable sn means " them , their , those " , revealing a clear plural writing . Te Velde and Garnot are convinced that Peribsen used the heraldic Seth animal as a serekh patron , but also linked his name to Horus . If true , it would prove that Peribsen worshipped Horus and Seth on an equal footing during his lifetime . An ostentatious plural meaning with religious ambiguity was not uncommon for pharaohs ' names in the early Egyptian dynasties . Peribsen may have been perceived as a living incarnation of both Horus and Seth in equal measure , just like his predecessors on the throne . Therefore , Peribsen 's name may actually show no break in the sacred tradition ; he added the power of Seth to Horus . As further examples , the titles of early dynastic queens used plural patron deities , such as " she who is allowed to see Horus and Seth " and " she who carries Horus and Seth " . Similarly , the unusual serekh of king Khasekhemwy , the last ruler of the Second dynasty , shows the deities Horus and Seth together atop the serekh . Horus wears the White Crown of Upper Egypt and Seth wears the Red Crown of Lower Egypt . Both gods are depicted facing each other in a kissing gesture . This special name was meant to illustrate the dual incarnation of the king as the representative of Horus and Seth , with power over all Egypt . Khasekhemwy 's name can be interpreted as an advanced form of Peribsen 's serekh name . 
 Egyptologists Ludwig David Morenz and Wolfgang Helck remark that the targeted gouging of Seth @-@ animals did not occur until the New Kingdom of Egypt . The erasure of the Seth chimera on Peribsen 's tomb stelae had been attributed to activity shortly after his death under the " heretic " theory ; new discoveries suggested the defamation occurred centuries later . Historian Dietrich Wildung states that the necropolis of Abydos was not the only one plundered in antiquity : the tombs at Saqqara and Giza were also ransacked . Thus , he concludes that any targeted action against one particular pharaoh can be excluded . 
 = = = Political theories = = = 
 The earlier theories of Newberry , Černý and Grdseloff said that the Egyptian state under Peribsen suffered from several civil wars , either economic or political in origin . If he was held responsible for the putative misery in the past , this could explain why later king lists excluded Peribsen . 
 In contrast , more recent theories now hold that , if the Egyptian kingdom was divided , the division happened peacefully . Egyptologists such as Michael Rice , Francesco Tiradritti and Wolfgang Helck point to the once palatial and well preserved mastaba tombs at Sakkara and Abydos belonging to high officials such as <unk> and Nefer @-@ <unk> . These are all dated from the reign of Nynetjer to that of Khasekhemwy , the last ruler of the Second dynasty . Egyptologists consider the archaeological record of the mastabas ' condition and the original architecture as proof that the statewide mortuary cults for kings and noblemen successfully took place during the entire dynasty . If true , their preservation is inconsistent with the theory of civil wars and economic problems during Peribsen 's reign . Rice , Tiradritti and Helck think that Nynetjer decided to leave a divided realm because of private or political reasons and that the split was a formality sustained by Second Dynasty kings . 
 The origin of the political division is unknown . It might have happened at the beginning of Peribsen 's rule or shortly before . Because Peribsen chose the deity Seth as his new throne patron , Egyptologists are of the view that Peribsen was a chieftain from Thinis or a prince of the Thinite royal house . This theory is based on Seth being a deity of Thinite origin , which would explain Peribsen 's choice : his name changing may have been nothing more than smart political ( and religious ) propaganda . Peribsen is thought to have gained the Thinite throne and ruled only Upper Egypt , whilst other rulers held the Memphite throne and ruled Lower Egypt . 
 = = Identity = = 
 Egyptologists Walter Bryan Emery , Kathryn A. Bard and Flinders Petrie believe that Peribsen was also known as Sekhemib @-@ <unk> , another Second Dynasty ruler that had connected his name with the falcon @-@ god Horus . As evidence , clay seals of Sekhemib found in the entrance of Peribsen 's tomb support this hypothesis . Sekhemib 's tomb has not yet been found . 
 This theory is debatable ; Hermann Alexander Schlögl , Wolfgang Helck , Peter Kaplony and <unk> Kahl argue that the clay seals were only found at the entrance area of Peribsen 's tomb and none of them depict Peribsen and Sekhemib 's names together in one inscription . Furthermore , they remark that it was customary for a pharaoh to bury and seal his predecessor 's tomb ; the presence of Sekhemib 's seals show the line of dynastic inheritance . Similar inferences can be drawn from the ivory tablets of king Hotepsekhemwy found at the entrance of king Qa <unk> tomb and the clay seals of Djoser found at the entrance of Khasekhemwy 's tomb . Schlögl , Helck , Kaplony and Kahl are convinced that the discovery of Sekhemib 's seals support the view that Sekhemib immediately succeeded Peribsen and buried him . 
 Scholars Toby Wilkinson and Helck believe that Peribsen and Sekhemib could have been related . Their theory is based on the stone vessel inscriptions and seal impressions that show strong similarities in their typography and grammar . The vessels of Peribsen show the notation " ini @-@ setjet " ( " tribute of the people of <unk> " ) , whilst Sekhemib 's inscriptions have the notation " ini @-@ <unk> " ( " tribute of the desert nomads " ) . A further indication that Peribsen and Sekhemib were related is by serekh @-@ name ; they use the syllables " Per " and " ib " in their names . 
 The false door inscription of Shery might indicate that Peribsen is identical with king Senedj ( " Senedj " means " the frightening " ) and that this name was used in the king lists by proxy , as the Seth name was forbidden mention . In contrast , Dietrich Wildung and Wolfgang Helck identify Peribsen with the Ramesside cartouche name Wadjenes . They think it is possible that the name Per @-@ ib @-@ sen was misread from a sloppy hieratic inscription of <unk> @-@ sen . 
 = = Reign = = 
 As some archaeological records support the view that the Egyptian state was divided during Peribsen 's reign , there is continued debate as to why his predecessors decided to divide the realm , and whether Peribsen ruled part or all of Egypt . 
 = = = Proponents of the divided @-@ realm @-@ theory = = = 
 Egyptologists Wolfgang Helck , Nicolas Grimal , Hermann Alexander Schlögl and Francesco Tiradritti believe that king Nynetjer , the third ruler of the Second dynasty and predecessor to Peribsen , ruled an Egypt that was suffering from an overly complex state administration . Nynetjer decided to split Egypt to leave it to two chosen successors who would rule two separate kingdoms , in the hope that the state administration could improve . Archaeological evidence , such as the imprinted clay seals and inscribed jars , appear to support the claim that Peribsen ruled only in Upper Egypt . A great number of these were found in Abydos , Naqada and at Elephantine , with only a single clay seal bearing his name found in Lower Egypt , at Beit <unk> . Historians think Peribsen 's realm would have extended from Naqada to the Isle of Elephantine . The rest of Egypt would therefore have been controlled by a different , coexisting ruler . 
 Egyptologist Dimitri B. <unk> supports his theory with notations on the famous Palermo stone concerning the year events of king Nynetjer . From the twelfth year event onward , " The king of <unk> and Lower Egypt appears " was amended to " The king of Lower Egypt appears " . <unk> sees this as a strong indication that Nynetjer 's power over Egypt had diminished . Egyptologists compare the situation to that of king Qa 'a , one of the last rulers of the First dynasty . When Qa 'a died , obscure claimants appeared and battled for the throne of Egypt . The struggles reached an apex with the plundering of the royal cemetery at Abydos , whereupon the cemetery was abandoned and Saqqara became the new royal burial site . The conflict was ended by the ascension of king Hotepsekhemwy , the founder of the Second dynasty . 
 Barbara Bell , another scholar , believes that an economic catastrophe such as a famine or a long @-@ lasting drought affected Egypt . To better address the problem of feeding the Egyptian population , Nynetjer split the realm into two and his successors founded two independent realms , perhaps with intent to reunite after the famine . Bell points to the inscriptions of the Palermo stone , where , in her opinion , the records of the annual Nile floods show constantly low levels during this period . Bell 's theory is refuted today by Egyptologists such as Stephan <unk> , who asserts her calculations were incorrect . <unk> has shown that the annual Nile floods were at usual levels at Nynetjer 's time up to the period of the Old Kingdom . Bell overlooked that the heights of the Nile floods in the Palermo stone inscription take into account the measurements of the <unk> around Memphis , but not elsewhere along the river . A state @-@ wide drought was unlikely . 
 = = = Opponents of the divided @-@ realm @-@ theory = = = 
 Scholars such as Herman TeVelde , I. E. S. Edwards and Toby Wilkinson believe the inscription of the famous Annal stone of Fifth dynasty , a black <unk> @-@ basalt <unk> displaying a very detailed king list , argues against the division of the realm . On the stone the kings from 1st to 7th dynasty are listed by their Horus name , their gold name and their cartouche name , their name banderoles end with the name of their royal mother . The lists also contain rectangular windows presenting year events from the day of king 's coronation up to his death . The most famous fragments of the Annal stone are called Palermo Stone and Cairo Stone . On the Cairo stone , in line IV , the nine last years of king Nynetjer are preserved ( but most of the year windows are illegible now ) . The date of Nynetjer 's death is followed by a new king . Recent investigations reveal that the serekh of that new king is surmounted by a four @-@ legged animal , not by the Horus @-@ falcon . Since the only four @-@ legged heraldic serekh animal in early Egypt was the chimera of the god Seth , despite passionate disagreement , the indicated ruler is likely to be Peribsen . Egyptologists such as TeVelde , Barta and Edwards do not agree ; Peribsen might have not been the only king with a Seth @-@ name . The year events under Nynetjer show increasing references to Seth , suggesting the tradition of a Horus name as the sole name of kings might have already evolved . The rise of a king allied with Seth was thus unsurprising . TeVelde , Barta and Edwards think that , in addition to Peribsen , the rulers Wadjenes , Nubnefer or <unk> might have been Seth @-@ kings as well ; one of them surely was the true direct successor of Nynetjer . The comparatively large amount of archaeological finds from Peribsen 's reign contradict the brief estimated length of rulership , only 10 to 12 years , as presented on the Annal stone . 
 The Annal stone gives absolutely no indication of a division of the Egyptian realm . Barta , TeVelde , Wilkinson and Edwards argue that the theory of state division is untenable . An administrative reorganization or split in the priesthood sects is more likely . 
 = = = Political accomplishments = = = 
 During his time on the throne , Peribsen founded an administrative center called " The white house of treasury " as well as a new royal residence , called the " protection of <unk> " , located near Ombos ( " <unk> " being the Ancient Egyptian name of Naqada ) . The administrative titles of scribes , seal @-@ bearers and overseers were adjusted to correspond to the divided bureaucratic state administration . For example , titles like " sealer of the king " were changed into " sealer of the king of Upper Egypt " . This bureaucratic reform may indicate an attempt by Peribsen to limit the power of these officials , further evidence for a bloated and unwieldy state administration under Nynetjer . 
 The administration system under Peribsen and Sekhemib had a clear and well @-@ defined hierarchy ; as an example , from highest to the lowest rank : Treasury house ( royal and therefore highest in ranking ) → pension office → property → vineyards → private vineyard ( property of citizens and therefore lowest in ranking ) . King Khasekhemwy , the last ruler of the Second dynasty , was able to re @-@ unify the state administration of Egypt and therefore unite the whole of Ancient Egypt . He brought the two treasury houses of Egypt under the control of the " House of the King " , bringing them into a new , single administration centre . 
 Peribsen also founded royal edifices such as Per @-@ <unk> ( " house of Ombos " ) and Per @-@ <unk> ( " house of meetings " ) and created several cities of economic importance . Their names , <unk> ( " city of the headdress @-@ makers " ) , <unk> ( " protector 's city " ) , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " city of the red granite jars " ) and Huj @-@ setjet ( " city of the Asians ' ) , are mentioned on numerous clay seals alongside Peribsen 's serekh , often preceded by the phrase " visit of the king at ... " . Inscriptions on stone vessels also mention an " ini @-@ setjet " ( " tribute of the people of <unk> " ) , which might indicate that Peribsen founded a cult centre for the deity Seth in the Nile Delta . This may suggest Peribsen ruled over the whole of Egypt , or , at least , that he was accepted as king across all of Egypt . 
 One official from Peribsen 's reign , Nefer @-@ <unk> ( " Seth is beautiful " ) , the " <unk> @-@ priest of the king " , is known to Egyptologists by his stela . His name may highlight the appearance and popularity of Seth as a royal deity . 
 In Peribsen 's tomb at Abydos , clay seals were found that demonstrate the first complete written sentence in recorded Egyptian history . The inscription reads : 
 " The golden one / He of Ombos hath unified / handed over the two realms for / to his son , the king of Lower and Upper Egypt , Peribsen " . 
 The title " The golden one " , also read as " He of Ombos " , is considered by Egyptologists to be a religious form of address to the deity Seth . 
 = = = Religious changes = = = 
 Despite his alignment with Seth , numerous deities were worshipped by the populace under Peribsen . Numerous clay seal impressions and jar inscriptions mention the gods Ash , Horus , Nekhbet , Min , Bastet and <unk> . The depictions of the deities are followed by the name of the place or town where they had their principal cult center . On the Cairo stone , a statue of Ash and a fetish of Seth are credited to Peribsen , complementing the clay seal impressions . Curiously , several seal impressions show a sun disc over the Seth chimera atop the royal serekh : the ancient symbol for the god Ra . There is no <unk> proof that the sun god Ra was part of the Egyptian pantheon at this early date ; the appearance of the disc may be the first evidence of the evolving sun cult and theistic change . The sun disc appears in connection to one of the state patrons ( for example , under Peribsen 's predecessor <unk> the sun was connected to Horus ) ; under Peribsen it was connected to Seth . Under king Khasekhemwy the sun finally received its own name ( ra ) and , at the time of throne change between Khasekhemwy and his follower Djoser , several priests and officials also connected their name to Ra . 
 = = Rulers of Lower and Upper Egypt = = 
 Egyptian historians such as Helck , Tiradritti , Schlögl , Emery and Grimal are convinced that Peribsen was a co @-@ ruler . The investigation into the rulers of Lower Egypt is ongoing . The <unk> king lists differ in their order of royal names from king Senedj onward . The royal table of Sakkara and the royal canon of Turin reflect Memphite traditions , which only allowed Memphite rulers to be mentioned . The Abydos king list reflects instead the Thinite traditions and therefore only Thinite rulers appear on that list . Until king Senedj , all the king lists are in agreement . After him , the Sakkara list and the Turin list mention three kings as successors : <unk> I , <unk> and <unk> I. The Abydos king list jumps forward to Khasekhemwy , calling him " <unk> " . The discrepancies are considered by Egyptologists to be the result of the division of Egypt during the Second dynasty . 
 Additional contradictory findings are the Horus and Nebty names of kings discovered in the Great Southern Gallery in the necropolis of the ( Third dynasty ) king Djoser at Sakkara . Stone vessel inscriptions mention the kings Nubnefer , <unk> @-@ Nebty , Horus Ba , Horus " Bird " and Za ; each of these is mentioned only a few times , suggesting their reigns were short . King <unk> might be identical with king Qa 'a or an ephemeral successor of his . King <unk> @-@ Nebty might be identical with the Ramesside cartouche name Wadjenes . But kings such as " Nubnefer " , " Bird " and " Za " remain a mystery . They never appear anywhere else and the number of objects surviving from their lifetimes is very limited . Schlögl , Helck and Peter Kaplony postulate , that Nubnefer , Za and Bird were contemporaries of Peribsen and Sekhemib and ruled over Lower Egypt , whilst the latter two ruled Upper Egypt . 
 = = The tomb of Peribsen = = 
 Peribsen was buried in the tomb P of the royal cemetery at Umm el @-@ Qa 'ab near Abydos . The first excavation of the tomb started in 1898 under the supervision of French archaeologist and Egyptologist Émile Amélineau . This first foray was followed by excavations in 1901 and 1902 under the supervision of British archaeologist Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie . Further exploration of the tomb was undertaken in 1928 by the Swiss Egyptologist Edouard <unk> . 
 The tomb 's construction is straightforward and , compared to the size of other royal tombs in the same area , surprisingly small . The design model was the tomb of king Djer ( third pharaoh of the First dynasty ) , thought to be the ' Tomb of Osiris ' from the Middle Kingdom . The architecture of Peribsen 's tomb is similar to the residential palace . The tomb measures 16 metres ( 52 ft ) x 13 metres ( 43 ft ) and comprises three independent structures nested into one another : in the center is the main burial chamber , measuring 7 @.@ 3 metres ( 24 ft ) x 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 @.@ 5 ft ) , and which is made of mud bricks , reeds , and wood . On the north , east and west sides the burial chamber is surrounded by nine small storage rooms leading into one another ; on the south face is a long antechamber . A passageway runs between the inner structures and the outer wall . 
 Excavations under the supervision of the Deutsches <unk> Institut Kairo ( <unk> ) in 2001 and 2004 revealed that the tomb had been erected and completed in a great hurry . The building works took place in a single phase ; the walls were plastered roughly ; and the monument had collapsed several times over the centuries . During the Middle Kingdom , Peribsen 's tomb was restored at least twice together with the tomb of Djer , which was thought to be that of Osiris . 
 = = = Findings = = = 
 The tomb had been extensively plundered by tomb robbers during antiquity , yet numerous stone vessels and earthen jars remained . Some of the stone vessels had copper @-@ coated rims and are similar to the better known finds from tomb of Khasekhemwy . Vessels from preceding rulers such as Nynetjer and <unk> were also found . Beads and bracelets made of <unk> and carnelian and tools made of copper were excavated . Special findings include a silver needle engraved with the name of king Hor Aha and clay seal fragments with the name of king Sekhemib . The two stone stelae from the entrance , common to burial chambers of the First and Second dynasties , are now on display in two different museums . 
 = = = Royal funerary enclosure = = = 
 A royal funerary enclosure made of mud bricks was found close to Peribsen 's tomb . Clay seals with Peribsen 's serekh name on them were located near the eastern entrance and inside a destroyed offering shrine . The findings support the view that the building was part of Peribsen 's burial site . The funerary enclosure is commonly known as " Middle Fort " . This was first discovered in 1904 under the supervision of Canadian archaeologist Charles Trick <unk> and British Egyptologist Edward Russell Ayrton . The enclosure wall was located at the north @-@ west site of Khasekhemwy 's funerary enclosure " Shunet ez <unk> " ( " raisin barn " ) . Peribsen 's measures 108 metres ( 354 ft ) x 55 metres ( 180 ft ) and housed only a few cult buildings . The enclosure has three entrances : one to the east , one to the south and one to the north . A small shrine , measuring 12 @.@ 3 metres ( 40 ft ) x 9 @.@ 75 metres ( 32 @.@ 0 ft ) was located at the south @-@ east corner of the funerary enclosure . It once comprised three small chapels . No subsidiary tombs were found . 
 The tradition of burying the family and court of the king when he died was abandoned at the time of Qa 'a , one of the last rulers of the First dynasty . 
 = Who We Are ( Lifehouse album ) = 
 Who We Are is the fourth studio album by American alternative rock band Lifehouse . It was first released via compact disc in the United States on June 18 , 2007 by Geffen Records . It was released via digital download the next day on June 19 , 2007 . The band entered the studio without any demos recorded and only had lyrics from Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade . The songs on the album were mostly inspired by different emotions of love , bliss , struggles , and pain . Musically , the album is a combination of rock , alternative , and adult alternative . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics , and peaked at number fourteen on the Billboard 200 , selling 49 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It also managed to chart in the top twenty of Billboard 's Alternative Albums , Digital Albums , and Rock Albums charts the first week it was released . It was certified Gold in the United States by the RIAA on October 22 , 2008 . 
 The album 's lead single , " First Time " , was released May 7 , 2007 , and charted in several countries . The second single , " Whatever It Takes " , was released on November 13 , 2007 , and charted on several Billboard charts . The third single , " Broken " was released July 8 , 2008 , and had commercial success in the United States and Canada , and eventually other countries . 
 = = Background = = 
 The album was produced by American record producer Jude Cole , Lifehouse , and John Fields . Lifehouse started recording Who We Are without any demos , and only had lyrics from Jason Wade when they entered the studio . When asked about creating a song for the album , Lifehouse lead percussionist Rick <unk> , Jr. said , " Nobody really knew what they would be playing . We just cut it , listened to it and realized it was pretty electric … the kind of song where you just turn up the radio . " The album focused on the different emotions of love , bliss , struggles , and pain . Musically , the album was a combination of rock , alternative , and adult alternative . After being asked about the title of the album , Wade stated , " We established camaraderie on the road and gelled as a unit . This record defines ' Who We Are , ' which is why that ’ s the title . The sound fits where we ’ re at right now . " 
 Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade had many inspirations when writing songs for Who We Are . When asked about the background of lead single " First Time " , Wade said , " It just felt urgent , like a first kiss , a first love . Like the first time you realize there 's more to that relationship than you thought . I had to dig a little for that one , but I find myself at a place where I can write stuff that 's a little deeper than your average love song in terms of emotion . " Wade was inspired to write " The Joke " after he read a newspaper article that detailed the story of a British boy who hung himself as a result of being bullied by his fellow schoolmates . The song " Broken " was written by Wade after he visited a friend in Nashville that needed a kidney transplant . 
 " Make Me Over " was inspired by the band 's love of British rock , while strains of " Learn You Inside Out " were inspired by the Plastic Ono Band . When asked about the song " Learn You Inside Out " , Wade said , " I wrote it really quick . We decided just to freestyle . It was one of those moments when we really grew as a band , being able to reach each other and know where we 're going . " The song " Disarray " was inspired by Wade 's strict and religious family . When asked about the song , he said , " Angels , demons . We all fight them both , and anyone who pretends they don ’ t is not someone I want to hang out with . " " Storm " was originally written by Wade at the age of sixteen , when he was going through difficult times . When asked about the song in an interview , Wade said , " That was fun to record because of its starkness . We love the idea of the title , surrounded by negative space , like the a cappella beginning . Because when you ’ re lost in confusion , no matter how much is going on around you , you ’ re still alone . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " First Time " was released as the album 's lead single on May 7 , 2007 and was solicited to mainstream radio on May 15 , 2007 . The song peaked at number twenty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 and at number forty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 . It also appeared on the Billboard Pop Songs , Radio Songs , Digital Songs , and Adult Contemporary charts . In 2007 , the song was nominated for the " Choice Music : Love Song " award at the Teen Choice Awards . " Whatever It Takes " was released as the album 's second single on November 13 , 2007 . The song peaked at number thirty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 during its twenty weeks on the chart . It also placed on the Billboard Pop Songs , Radio Songs , Digital Songs , Adult Contemporary , and Christian Songs charts . " Broken " was released as the album 's third and final single on July 8 , 2008 . It appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 , Canadian Hot 100 , and Digital Songs charts . On October 10 , 2007 , " Broken " was played in the Criminal Minds episode " Scared to Death " . Several months later , the song appeared in the Grey 's Anatomy episode " Lay Your Hands On Me " on January 10 , 2008 . It featured in the One Tree Hill episode " For Tonight You 're Only Here to Know " on February 26 , 2008 . 
