 Saman was released in 1998 after winning the 1997 Jakarta Art Institute novel writing contest . In 1998 , Saman won the Jakarta Arts Council Novel Competition . In 2000 , it received the Prince Claus Award . By 2005 , it had been translated into Dutch and English ; the English translation took a long time to write because Utami was concerned that an <unk> of the novel caused it to lose all of its sensuality . It has also been translated into French , Czech , and Japanese ( by two separate translators ) . As of 2008 , a translation into Korean is underway . By 2004 , the book had sold 100 @,@ 000 copies , a large figure for an Indonesian novel . 
 Critical reception was mixed . Some critics praised the " rich language " used in the novel . However , others disapproved of the open sexuality of the novel , and its explicit use of the words " penis " , " vagina " , " orgasm " and " condoms " was considered " too much " ; other controversial terms include " rape me " , " I am still a virgin " , and " masturbation " . Utami 's own mother refused to read the novel aloud to her nearly blind husband , stating that it is " not meant for those of their generation " . Campbell notes that the use of language in Saman reflects the positioning of the female characters as self @-@ empowered and independent , capable of making their own decisions . 
 In Saman Utami became one of the first female Indonesian authors to explicitly discuss sexuality , generally a taboo subject for women , in her work . However , when it was first released Utami faced charges that she was not the actual writer ; among those suggested as the author was poet Goenawan Mohamad , known as Utami 's mentor . Mohamad denied the rumours and said that he wished he " could write the kind of prose which Ayu uses " . Utami suggests that the rumours were based on a belief that only men could write good novels ; the literature scene before Saman had indeed been dominated by male writers . 
 The novel started a new era of literature after the downfall of President Suharto and ignited the sastra wangi ( literally ' fragrant literature ' ) literary movement as well as an influx of sexually themed literary works by women . Utami disagrees with the label sastra wangi , stating that it reflects the obsession of the press with the women writers and not their work . 
 A film adaptation is in the works , with Dutch director <unk> <unk> expressing interest to be involved with the project . However , <unk> and Utami have had creative differences regarding which characters should be kept . 
 = History of a Six Weeks ' Tour = 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour through a part of France , Switzerland , Germany , and Holland ; with Letters Descriptive of a Sail Round the Lake of Geneva and of the Glaciers of Chamouni is a travel narrative by the English Romantic authors Mary Shelley and Percy Bysshe Shelley . Published in 1817 , it describes two trips taken by Mary , Percy , and Mary 's stepsister , Claire Clairmont : one across Europe in 1814 , and one to Lake Geneva in 1816 . Divided into three sections , the text consists of a journal , four letters , and Percy Shelley 's poem " Mont Blanc " . Apart from the poem , the text was primarily written and organised by Mary Shelley . In 1840 she revised the journal and the letters , republishing them in a collection of Percy Shelley 's writings . 
 Part of the new genre of the Romantic travel narrative , History of a Six Weeks ' Tour exudes spontaneity and enthusiasm ; the authors demonstrate their desire to develop a sense of taste and distinguish themselves from those around them . The romantic elements of the work would have hinted at the text 's radical politics to nineteenth @-@ century readers . However , the text 's frank discussion of politics , including positive references to the French Revolution and praise of Enlightenment philosopher Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , was unusual for a travel narrative at the time , particularly one authored primarily by a woman . 
 Although it sold poorly , History of a Six Weeks ' Tour received favourable reviews . In proposing another travel narrative to her publisher in 1843 , Mary Shelley claimed " my 6 weeks tour brought me many compliments " . 
 = = Biographical background = = 
 Mary Godwin and Percy Shelley met and fell in love in 1814 . Percy Shelley initially visited the Godwin household because he was interested in meeting his philosophical hero , Mary 's father , William Godwin . However , Mary and Percy soon began having secret rendezvous , despite the fact that Percy was already married . To Mary 's dismay , her father disapproved of their extramarital affair and tried to thwart the relationship . On 28 July 1814 , Mary and Percy secretly left for France , taking Mary 's stepsister , Claire Clairmont , with them . 
 The trio travelled for six weeks , from 28 July to 13 September 1814 , through France , Switzerland , Germany , and the Netherlands ( which is referred to as " Holland " ) ; however , they were forced to return to England due to financial considerations . The situation upon their return was fraught with complications : Mary had become pregnant with a child who would soon die , she and Percy now found themselves penniless , and , to Mary 's genuine surprise , her father refused to have anything to do with her . 
 In May 1816 , Mary Godwin , Percy Shelley , and their second child travelled to Geneva with Claire Clairmont . They spent the summer months with the Romantic poet Lord Byron , but , as Mary Shelley later wrote of the year without a summer , " [ i ] t proved a wet , <unk> summer and incessant rain often confined us for days to the house " . The group spent their time writing , boating on Lake Geneva , and talking late into the night . Sitting around a log fire at Byron 's villa , the company also amused themselves by reading German ghost stories , prompting Byron to suggest they each write their own supernatural tale . Mary Godwin began writing what she assumed would be a short story , but with Percy Shelley 's encouragement and collaboration , she expanded this tale into her first novel , Frankenstein : or , The Modern Prometheus . 
 Mary , Percy , and Claire returned to England in September and on 30 December 1816 Percy and Mary married ( two weeks after the death of Percy 's first wife ) , healing the family rift . In March 1817 , the Shelleys and Claire moved to Marlow , Buckinghamshire . At Marlow , they entertained friends , worked hard at their writing , and often discussed politics . Early in the summer of 1817 , Mary Shelley finished Frankenstein , which was published anonymously in January 1818 . She also began work on History of a Six Weeks ' Tour , which was published in November 1817 . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 In the summer of 1817 , Mary Shelley started to assemble the couple 's joint diary from their 1814 journey into a travel book . At what point she decided to include the letters from the 1816 Geneva trip and Percy Shelley 's poem " Mont Blanc " is unclear , but by 28 September the journal and the letters were a single text . By the middle of October she was making fair copies for the press and correcting and transcribing Frankenstein for publication while Percy was working on The Revolt of Islam . Percy probably corrected and <unk> the journal section while Mary did the same for his letters . Advertisements for the work appeared on 30 October in the Morning Chronicle and on 1 November in The Times , promising a 6 November release . However , the work was not actually published until 12 and 13 November . It was Mary Shelley 's first published work . ( Frankenstein was not published until January 1818 . ) 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour begins with a " Preface " , written by Percy Shelley , followed by the journal section . The journal consists of edited entries from the joint diary that Percy and Mary Shelley kept during their 1814 trip to the Continent , specifically those from 28 July to 13 September 1814 . Of the 8 @,@ 500 words in the journal section , 1 @,@ 150 are from Percy 's entries and either copied verbatim or only slightly paraphrased . Almost all of the passages describing the sublime are in Percy 's words — passages describing God in nature , experiences of terror and awe , the transportation of the soul , and particularly the feeling of being overwhelmed by the majesty of nature , are Percy 's . When Mary turned to her own entries , however , she significantly revised them ; according to Jeanne Moskal , the editor of the recent definitive edition of the Tour , " almost nothing of her original phrasing remains " . She even included sections of Claire Clairmont 's journal . 
 The second section of the text consists of four " Letters written during a Residence of Three Months in the Environs of Geneva , in the Summer of the Year 1816 " . The first two letters are signed " M " and the second two " S " . The first two are attributed to Mary Shelley , but their origin is obscure . As Moskal writes , " the obvious inference is that they are literary versions of lost private epistles to Fanny Godwin " , Mary Shelley 's stepsister who remained in England and with whom she corresponded during the journey . However , Moskal also notes that there is a missing Mary Shelley notebook from precisely this time , from which the material in these letters could have come : " It is extremely likely that this notebook contained the same kind of mix of entries made by both Shelleys that the surviving first ( July 1814 – May 1815 ) and second ( July 1816 – June 1819 ) journal notebooks exhibit .... Furthermore , Letter I contains four short passages found almost verbatim in P. B. Shelley 's letter of 15 May to T. L. Peacock . " The third and fourth letters are composites of Mary 's journal entry for 21 July and one of Percy 's letters to Peacock . 
 The third section of the text consists only of Percy 's poem " Mont Blanc . Lines written in the vale of Chamouni " ; it was the first and only publication of the poem in his lifetime . It has been argued by leading Percy Shelley scholar Donald Reiman that the History of a Six Weeks ' Tour is arranged so as to lead up to " Mont Blanc " . However , those who see the work as primarily a picturesque travel narrative argue that the descriptions of Alpine scenes would have been familiar to early nineteenth @-@ century audiences and they would not have expected a poetic climax . 
 In 1839 , History of a Six Weeks ' Tour was revised and republished as " Journal of a Six Weeks ’ Tour " and " Letters from Geneva " in Essays , Letters from Abroad , Translations and Fragments , by Percy Bysshe Shelley , Edited by Mrs. Shelley ( 1840 ) . Although these works were not by her husband , she decided to include them because they were " part of his life " , as she explained to her friend Leigh Hunt . She appended her initials to the works to indicate her authorship . As Moskal explains , " the unity of the 1817 volume as a volume was dissolved " to make way for a biography of Percy Shelley . After Percy Shelley drowned in 1822 , his father forbade Mary Shelley from writing a memoir or biography of the poet . She therefore added significant biographical notices to the edited collections of his works . The 1840 version of History of a Six Weeks ' Tour has four major types of changes according to Moskal : " ( i ) modernization and correction of spelling , punctuation and French ( ii ) self @-@ distancing from the familial relationship with Claire Clairmont ( iii ) a heightened sensitivity to national identity ( iv ) presentation of the travelers as a writing , as well as reading , circle " . As a result of these changes , more of Percy Shelley ’ s writing was included in the 1840 version than in the 1817 version . In 1845 , Mary Shelley published a one @-@ volume edition with additional minor changes , based on the 1840 version . 
 = = Description = = 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour consists of three major sections : a journal , letters from Geneva , and the poem " Mont Blanc " . It begins with a short preface , which claims " nothing can be more <unk> than this little volume " and makes it clear that the couple in the narrative is married ( although Mary and Percy were not at the time ) . 
 The journal , which switches between the first @-@ person singular and plural but never identifies its narrators , describes Percy , Mary , and Claire 's 1814 six @-@ week tour across the Continent . It is divided by country : France , Switzerland , Germany , and the Netherlands . After the group arrives in Calais and proceeds to Paris , they decide on a plan : " After talking over and rejecting many plans , we fixed on one eccentric enough , but which , from its romance , was very pleasing to us . In England we could not have put it in execution without sustaining continual insult and impertinence : the French are far more tolerant of the vagaries of their neighbours . We resolved to walk through France " . Each day they enter a new town ; but even while travelling , they spend time writing and reading . The journal comments on the people they meet , the countryside , and the current events that have shaped the environment . Some of what they see is beautiful and some is " barren and wretched " . Percy sprains his ankle , which becomes an increasing problem — the group is forced to hire a carriage . By the time the trio reaches Lucerne , they are nearly out of money and decide to return home . They return by boat along the Rhine , the cheapest mode of travel . Despite problems with unreliable boats and dangerous waters , they see some beautiful scenery before landing in England . 
 The four " Letters from Geneva " cover the period between May and July 1816 , which the Shelleys spent at Lake Geneva and switch between the singular and plural first @-@ person . Letters I , II , and IV describe the sublime aspects of Mont Blanc , the Alps , Lake Geneva , and the glaciers around Chamonix : 
 Mont Blanc was before us , but it was covered with cloud ; its base , furrowed with dreadful gaps , was seen above . Pinnacles of snow intolerably bright , part of the chain connected with Mont Blanc , shone through the clouds at intervals on high . I never knew — I never imagined what mountains were before . The immensity of these serial summits excited , when they suddenly burst upon the sight , a sentiment of <unk> [ sic ] wonder , not <unk> to madness . 
 Letter III describes a tour around the environs of Vevey and other places associated with the Enlightenment philosopher Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau : " This journey has been on every account delightful , but most especially , because then I first knew the divine beauty of Rousseau 's imagination , as it exhibits itself in Julie . " 
 " Mont Blanc " compares the sublime aspect of the mountain to the human imagination : 
 While emphasising the ability of the human imagination to uncover truth through a study of nature , the poem also questions religious certainty . However , according to the poem only a privileged few are able to see nature as it truly is and reveal its secrets to the world . 
 = = Genre = = 
 History of a Six Weeks ’ Tour is a travel narrative , part of a literary tradition begun in the seventeenth century . Through the sixteenth , seventeenth , and eighteenth centuries , Continental travel was considered educational : young , aristocratic gentlemen completed their studies by learning European languages abroad and visiting foreign courts . In the early seventeenth century , however , the emphasis shifted from classical learning to empirical experience , such as knowledge of topography , history , and culture . Detailed travel books , including personal travel narratives , began to be published and became popular in the eighteenth century : over 1 @,@ 000 individual travel narratives and travel <unk> were published between 1660 and 1800 . The empiricism that was driving the scientific revolution spread to travel literature ; for example , Lady Mary Wortley Montagu included information she learned in Turkey regarding smallpox inoculation in her travel letters . By 1742 , critic and essayist Samuel Johnson was recommending that travellers engage in " a moral and ethical study of men and manners " in addition to a scientific study of topography and geography . 
 Over the course of the eighteenth century , the Grand Tour became increasingly popular ; travel to the Continent for Britain 's elite was not only educational but also nationalistic . All aristocratic gentlemen took similar trips and visited similar sites , often devoted to developing an appreciation of Britain from abroad . The Grand Tour was celebrated as educational travel when it involved exchanging scientific information with the intellectual elite , learning about other cultures , and preparing oneself to lead . However , it was condemned as trivial when the tourist simply purchased curio collectibles , acquired a " superficial social polish " , and pursued fleeting sexual relationships . During the Napoleonic Wars , the Continent was closed to British travellers and the Grand Tour came under increasing criticism , particularly from radicals such as William Godwin who scorned its aristocratic connections . Young Romantic writers criticised its lack of spontaneity ; they celebrated Madame de <unk> 's novel Corinne ( 1807 ) , which depicts proper travel as " immediate , sensitive , and above all [ an ] enthusiastic experience " . 
 A new form of travel emerged — Romantic travel — which focused on developing " taste " , rather than acquiring objects , and having " enthusiastic experiences " . History of a Six Weeks ' Tour embodies this new style of travel . It is a specifically Romantic travel narrative because of its enthusiasm and the writers ' desire to develop a sense of " taste " . The travellers are open to new experiences , changing their itinerary frequently and using whatever vehicles they can find . For example , at one point in the journal , Mary Shelley muses : 
 The money we had brought with us from Paris was nearly exhausted , but we obtained about £ 38 @.@ in silver upon discount from one of the bankers in the city , and with this we resolved to journey towards the lake of Uri , and seek in that romantic and interesting country some cottage where we might dwell in peace and solitude . Such were our dreams , which we should probably have realized , had it not been for the deficiency of that <unk> article money , which obliged us to return to England . 
 Not everything she encounters is beautiful , however , and she juxtaposes her distaste for the German working class with her delight with French servants . Although politically liberal , Mary Shelley is aesthetically repelled by the Germans and therefore excludes them . Unlike the non @-@ discriminating Claire Clairmont , Shelley feels free to make judgments of the scenes around her ; Shelley writes that Claire " on looking at this scene ... exclaimed , ' Oh ! this is beautiful enough ; let us live here . ' This was her exclamation on every new scene , and as each surpassed the one before , she cried , ' I am glad we did not stay at Charenton , but let us live here ' " . Shelley also compares herself positively to the French peasants who are unaware that Napoleon has been deposed . As scholar Angela Jones contends , " Shelley may be said to figure herself as a more knowledgeable , disinterested English outsider capable of rendering impartial judgment " — an Enlightenment value . 
 However , as Romanticist Jacqueline Labbe argues , Mary Shelley challenges the conventions of the Romantic travel narrative as well . For example , one reviewer wrote , " now and then a French phrase drops sweetly enough from [ the author 's ] fair mouth " , and as Labbe explains , these phrases are supposed to lead the reader to imagine a " beautiful heroine and her group passing easily from village to village " . However , both French quotations in History of a Six Weeks ' Tour undercut this Romantic image . The first describes the overturning of a boat and the drowning of its occupants ; the second is a warning not to travel on foot through France , as Napoleon 's army has just been disbanded and the women are in danger of rape . 
 While the overarching generic category for History of a Six Weeks ' Tour is that of the travel narrative , its individual sections can be considered separately . The first journey is told as a " continuous , undated diary entry " while the second journey is told through epistolary and lyric forms . Moskal agrees with Reiman that the book was constructed to culminate in " Mont Blanc " and she notes that this was accomplished using a traditional hierarchy of genres — diary , letters , poem — a hierarchy that is gendered as Mary Shelley 's writings are superseded by Percy 's . However , these traditional gender @-@ genre associations are undercut by the implicit acknowledgment of Mary Shelley as the primary author , with her journal giving the entire work its name and contributing the bulk of the text . 
 The journal is also threaded through with elements of the medieval and Gothic romance tradition : " accounts of ruined castles , enchanting valleys , and sublime views " . In fact , in " The English in Italy " , Mary Shelley writes of the journey that " it was acting in a novel , being an incarnate romance " . However , these romantic descriptions are often ambiguous . Often single sentences contain juxtapositions between " romance " and " reality " : " Many villages , ruined by war , occupied the most romantic spots " . She also references Don Quixote , but he was " famous for his delusions of romance " , as Labbe points out . Mary Shelley 's allusions to Cervantes 's Don Quixote ( 1605 ) not only places her text in a romance tradition , they would also have hinted at its radicalism to contemporary readers . During the 1790s , Mary Shelley 's father , William Godwin , connected his support for the French Revolution with the romance tradition , specifically Don Quixote and any allusion to the novel would have signalled Godwinian radicalism to readers at the time . It would also have suggested support for reform efforts in Spain , which was rebelling against Napoleon . The beginning of the journal is dominated by romance conventions , but this style disappears when the travellers run out of money . However , romance conventions briefly return during the trip down the Rhine . As Labbe argues , " it would appear that while [ Shelley ] seems to be industriously salting her narrative with romance in order , perhaps , to garner public approval , she also ... exposes the falsity of such a scheme . " 
 One of the most important influences on History of a Six Weeks ' Tour was Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) , written by Mary Shelley 's mother Mary Wollstonecraft . A travel narrative that reflects on topography , politics , society , aesthetics , and the author 's personal feelings , it provided a model for Mary Shelley 's work . Like her mother , Mary Shelley revealed her liberalism by boldly discussing politics ; however , this political tone was unusual for travel works at the time and was considered inappropriate for women writers . Like Wollstonecraft 's Letters , History of a Six Weeks ' Tour blurs the line between private and public spheres by using intimate genres such as the journal and the letter , allowing Mary Shelley to present political opinions through personal anecdote and the picturesque . 
 = = Themes = = 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour is part of a liberal reaction to recent history : its trajectory begins with a survey of the devastation of the Napoleonic Wars and ends by celebrating the sublime in nature . William Wordsworth 's 1850 The Prelude and the third canto of Byron 's Childe Harold 's Pilgrimage follow a similar course . As Moskal explains , " nature is <unk> as the repository of a sublimity , once incarnated in Napoleon , that will re @-@ emerge in politics " . The book is therefore not only a liberal political statement but also a Romantic celebration of nature . 
 The journal begins with , as Moskal describes , a " view of Napoleon 's shattered political power " . He had just been exiled to Elba a few months before the Shelleys arrived in Europe . Surveying the devastation caused by the Napoleonic Wars , Mary Shelley worries about how the British will handle Paris and grieves over the " ruin " brought to the small French town of Nogent by the Cossacks . Between the two journeys recorded in the text , Napoleon returned to power in the so @-@ called Hundred Days and was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 . The four letters from Geneva reflect obliquely on this event . As Moskal argues , " the Shelleys focus on the forms of sublimity and power that outlast Napoleon : the literary genius of Rousseau and the natural sublimity of Lake Geneva and Mont Blanc " . Both Shelleys use their works in History of a Six Weeks ’ Tour to assess and evaluate the French Revolution , making it a highly political travel narrative . In Letter II , Mary Shelley writes : 
 Here a small obelisk is erected to the glory of Rousseau , and here ( such is the mutability of human life ) the magistrates , the successors of those who exiled him from his native country , were shot by the populace during that revolution , which his writing mainly contributed to mature , and which , notwithstanding the temporary bloodshed and injustice with which it was polluted , has produced enduring benefits to mankind . 
 Mary Shelley also includes positive portrayals of the French people . As Mary Shelley scholar Betty T. Bennett explains , " politically pointed , these accolades underscore the link between the 1814 defeated enemy of Britain and the pre @-@ Napoleon democratic spirit of the 1789 Revolution , a spirit the Shelleys wished to reactivate " . 
 Lives of people interested Mary Shelley and she recorded them , but she also recorded a great deal of the travellers ’ own feelings , suggesting to the reader the appropriate reaction . For example , she wrote of the French town Nogent : 
 Nothing could be more entire than the ruin which these barbarians had spread as they advanced ; perhaps they remembered Moscow and the destruction of the Russian villages ; but we were now in France , and the distress of the inhabitants , whose houses had been burned , their cattle killed , and all their wealth destroyed , has given a sting to my detestation of war , which none can feel who have not travelled through a country pillaged and wasted by this plague , which , in his pride , man inflicts upon his fellow . 
 = = Reception = = 
 History of a Six Weeks ' Tour received three major reviews , mostly favourable . However , the book did not sell well . Percy Shelley discovered in April or May 1820 that there were no profits to pay the printer and when Charles Ollier , the co @-@ publisher , went out of business in 1823 , his inventory included 92 copies of the work . Still , Mary Shelley believed the work was successful , and when she proposed another travel narrative , Rambles in Germany and Italy , to publisher Edward Moxon in 1843 , she wrote " my 6 weeks tour brought me many compliments " . Her comments may have been self @-@ interested , however . 
 The first review of History of a Six Weeks ' Tour was published by The Eclectic Review in May 1818 , which reviewed the book along with publisher Thomas <unk> 's account of a Swiss tour , A Walk through Switzerland in September 1816 . Although both works share the same fascination with Rousseau and his liberal ideas , only <unk> is attacked ; as scholar Benjamin Colbert explains , " Shelley tends to remain on more neutral territory " , such as the cult of sensibility and the novel Julie . However , the reviewer questions the authenticity of the work : " To us ... the value of the book is considerably lessened by a strong suspicion that the dramatis personae are fictitious , and that the little adventures introduced for the purpose of giving life and interest to the narration , are the mere invention of the Author . " He identifies passages that remind him of similar travel narratives by Patrick <unk> , Ann Radcliffe , and John Carr , effectively identifying the generic tradition in which the Shelleys were writing . 
 The second and most positive review was published by Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine in July 1818 . The reviewer was most impressed with the journal section , particularly its informality and concision : " the perusal of it rather produces the same effect as a smart walk before breakfast , in company with a lively friend who hates long stories " . <unk> comparing the work to bluestocking Lady Morgan 's recent France ( 1817 ) , the reviewer found the female writer of History of a Six Weeks ' Tour much more favourable : " The writer of this little volume , too , is a Lady , and writes like one , with ease , gracefulness , and vivacity . Above all , there is something truly delightful in the colour of her stockings ; they are of the purest white , and much more becoming than the brightest blue . " The Monthly Review published a short review in January 1819 ; they found the first journey " hurried " but the second one better described . 
 For most of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , Mary Shelley was known as the author of Frankenstein and the wife of famous Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley . It was not until the 1970s , with the rise of feminist literary criticism , that scholars began to pay attention to her other works . In fact , with the exception of Frankenstein and The Last Man , until the 1990s almost all of Mary Shelley 's writings had gone out of print or only been available in expensive , scholarly editions . It was not until the publication of scholarship by Mary Poovey and Anne K. Mellor in the 1980s that Mary Shelley 's " other " works — her short stories , essays , reviews , dramas , biographies , travel narratives , and other novels — began to be recognised as literary achievements . 
 = Robotomy = 
 Robotomy is an American animated television series created by Michael Buckley and Joe Deasy for Cartoon Network . The series revolves around Thrasher and Blastus , two teenage outcast robots who enter high school at their home planet Insanus . It was produced by World Leaders Entertainment in New York ( in association with Cartoon Network Studios ) , and co @-@ executively produced by Christy Karacas , co @-@ creator of Superjail ! . 
 The series was the result of numerous failed pitches to the network by the creators . Production proved difficult for World Leaders , who were simultaneously working on The Venture Bros. The series premiered on October 25 , 2010 on Cartoon Network . The network marketed it to an older demographic , as the channel was attempting to blend its Adult Swim brand with its primary youth demographic . It saw its finale on January 24 , 2011 after ten episodes , and is the shortest @-@ running original series on the network . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Thrasher and Blastus are two teenage robots who live on the planet of Insanus . Their planet is inhabited by murderous robots who seek to kill one another for no apparent reason . Slightly less horrific than their peers , the duo seek to make it through high school , and navigate their lives with mixed results . Thrasher ( Patton Oswalt ) , a tall and lanky robot , wishes to gain the affections of an attractive female robot named <unk> ( Jessie Cantrell ) . Meanwhile , Blastus ( John <unk> ) , a small and rotund robot , just wants to be popular . As with Blastus , unlike most robots on Insanus , he is mostly sensitive and non @-@ criminal , much to the disapproval of his mother . In his quest to be cool , however , he is incredibly impulsive and overconfident in his abilities . Thrasher , though calm and reserved , often falls prey to Blastus ' badly @-@ thought out plans . 
 Other characters include various schoolmates and staff members . <unk> ( Michael Sinterniklaas ) is a nerdy , psychopathic robot who is even lower on the social pyramid than the protagonists . <unk> ( Dana Snyder ) is a teacher at Harry S. Apocalypse who finds joy in torturing and invoking pain into his students . Their principal , <unk> ( also voiced by Snyder ) , is an oversized , skull @-@ shaped robot who , when not causing pain , acts sweet and motherly to the students . <unk> ( also voiced by Sinterniklaas ) is a spoiled rich kid who is attractive to the female robots , most of whom he blows up ; to Thrasher 's disdain , he is dating <unk> . <unk> ( Roger Craig Smith ) , <unk> 's friend and <unk> jock , acts violent and hostile toward the protagonists . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was created by Michael Buckley and Joe Deasy and produced by World Leaders Entertainment in New York . It was originally created with the working title <unk> . The network had contacted Buckley to create a series three years prior to the broadcast of Robotomy . He asked for Deasy 's help , and together they pitched five ideas , to which all were rejected . Six months later , a second wave of ideas proved equally unsuccessful . Reaching their third trial , also six months later , the two pinpointed the rejections on them thinking within the network 's mindset as opposed to their own . Frustrated with the project , they submitted a rough premise of Robotomy , which was accepted , much to their surprise . Buckley described the plot as when " Superbad meets the Transformers meets WWE . " 
 According to crew , the style of animation required a distinct set of skills , compared to another production by World Leaders , The Venture Bros. While that series was animated by the same team that did Batman : The Animated Series , Robotomy was done by the Chowder production team . In an interview , it was said that the style of the former team follows " perspective , anatomy , and real @-@ world physics in animation " , while the latter team laid its focus on " the humor of the movement and timing , squash and stretch , " among other principles . Co @-@ executive producer Christy Karacas 's unique art style also proved laborious for them in that it provided " very clean polished lines " over more organic drawings . Karacas stated that the look and feel lent itself to science fiction , robotics as a whole and rock and roll . For its fictional universe , the planet of Insanus ( originally called <unk> ) , the production crew thought of it in unending chaos . This made way for weaponry covering the ground , a constant state of <unk> and the scarring of the land . Karacas particularly enjoyed designing and diversifying the robots in regard to their size and shape . 
 The show 's color has been described by Karacas as a major part of the visuals ; inspirations included Paul Klee and Katsuhiro Otomo , as well as the concept of fluorescence . The team wanted to create " a bold , fresh look " that reflected the universe , and so they chose to be minimal with their palette to attract attention to the line work . In addition , they eschewed the use of vivid primary colors and instead chose more secondary colors . However , they took to accentuate the scenes with " pop colors " that mimic the glow of neon lighting , and lastly they added vertical reflections to the floors and grunge textures to the backgrounds . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Robotomy premiered on October 25 , 2010 on Cartoon Network , following a new episode of Mad . A crew member from World Leaders established that the network was doing more to blend its Adult Swim brand with its primary youth demographic . The series was ultimately targeted for an older demographic than other series on the network , although it still had to be appropriate to the " broad age range . " The debut broadcast was seen by 1 @.@ 7 million viewers in the United States , acquiring a 0 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating for adults aged 18 to 49 . The season received an average of 1 @.@ 5 million viewers , also with a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 2 . After ten episodes , the series concluded on January 24 , 2011 , making it the shortest run of any original series on the network . 
 Renn Brown of Cinematic Happenings Under Development noted Oswalt , a high @-@ profile actor , as contradictory to the show 's short @-@ lived run . Will Wade of Common Sense Media gave the series a lukewarm review , finding it suitable for older teens while calling it appealing to those who struggled to gain popularity in high school . Wade called the storylines " pretty thin " and its focus on " the imagery that sells the metaphor of school as a battlefield " . Aaron Simpson of <unk> called the storylines " irreverent " and the chaos similar to Superjail ! , " minus the dismembered bodies " . The series was eventually added to Netflix in 2013 after the service announced a deal with Warner Bros. to include programming from Cartoon Network series , among other shows . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = Arular = 
 Arular is the debut studio album by English recording artist M.I.A .. It was released on 22 March 2005 in the United States , and one month later in the United Kingdom , with a slightly different track listing . In 2004 , the album 's release was preceded by two singles and a mixtape . M.I.A. wrote or co @-@ wrote all the songs on the album and created the basic backing tracks using a Roland MC @-@ 505 sequencer / drum machine given to her by long @-@ time friend Justine Frischmann . Collaborators included Switch , Diplo , Richard X and Ant Whiting . The album 's title is the political code name used by her father , Arul Pragasam , during his involvement with Sri Lankan Tamil militant groups , and themes of conflict and revolution feature heavily in the lyrics and artwork . Musically , the album incorporates styles that range from hip hop and electroclash to funk carioca and punk rock . 
 Arular was hailed by critics for its blending of styles and integration of political lyrics into dance tunes . It was nominated for the Mercury Prize in 2005 and was included in the 2005 edition of the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Although it only reached number 98 on the UK Albums Chart and number 190 on the US Billboard 200 , several publications named it as one of the best albums of the year . By mid @-@ 2007 , the album had sold 129 @,@ 000 copies in the US , Arular spawned the singles " Sunshowers " , " Bucky Done Gun " and " Galang " , which was released twice . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 In 2001 , M.I.A. ( Mathangi " Maya " Arulpragasam ) had worked exclusively in the visual arts . While filming a documentary on Elastica 's 2001 tour of the US , she was introduced to the Roland MC @-@ 505 sequencer / drum machine by electroclash artist Peaches , whose minimalistic approach to music inspired her . She found Peaches ' decision to perform without additional instrumentation to be brave and liberating and felt that it emphasised the artist . Returning to London , she unexpectedly gained access to a 505 owned by her friend , former Elastica singer Justine Frischmann . M.I.A. used the 505 to make demo recordings in her bedroom . She initially planned to work as a producer . To this end , she approached Caribbean girls in clubs to see if they would provide vocals for the songs , but without success . 
 M.I.A. secured a record deal with XL Recordings after Frischmann 's manager overheard the demo . M.I.A. began work on the album by composing lyrics and melodies , and she programmed drum beats at home on the drum machine . Having produced rough tracks via trial and error , she honed the finished songs in collaboration with other writer @-@ producers . Through these collaborations , she sought to produce a diverse style and " drag [ her collaborators ] out of their boxes , musically " . 
 DJ Diplo introduced elements of Brazilian baile funk to " Bucky Done Gun " . Fellow composer @-@ producer Richard X worked on the track " Hombre " , which featured a drum pattern created from the sounds made by toys that M.I.A. had bought in India , augmented with sounds produced by objects such as pens and mobile phones . Steve Mackey and Ross Orton , known professionally as Cavemen , worked on " Galang " , which M.I.A. had initially produced with her 505 and a basic four @-@ track tape recorder . Working with Cavemen in a professional studio , she added a bass line and new vocals to give the song " a more analogue sound " than was possible with the 505 . The track was co @-@ written by Frischmann , whose input M.I.A. described as " refreshing " . She initially hoped to feature guest vocalists on the album , but was unable due to budget constraints and other artists ' unfamiliarity with her work . She chose to perform all the vocals herself , saying , " I just quietly got on with it ... I didn 't wanna convince anyone it was good . I felt it was much better to prove that I could be an individual . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Arular takes its title from the political code name employed by M.I.A. ' s father , Arul Pragasam , during his involvement with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , popularly known as the Tamil Tigers ; she contends that her father 's " revolutionary ideals " are the album 's thematic base . " In Sri Lankan , <unk> means ' enlightenment from the sunshine ' or something " , she remarked , " but a friend pointed out that it was a pun in English – ' a ruler ' – which is funny because he is a politician . And my mum always used to say about my father , ' He was so useless , all he ever gave you was his name ' . So I turned it around and turned that something into nothing . And at the same time I thought it would be a good way to find him . If he really was an egomaniac , he 'd be looking himself up and he 'd get this pop album stealing his name that would turn out to be me , and he 'd have to get in touch " , a prediction which ultimately came true . ) 
 The album is influenced by music that M.I.A. listened to as a child in London , including hip hop , dancehall , and punk rock . She cited as particular influences Eric B. & Rakim , Public Enemy , and London Posse , whom she described as " the best of British hip hop " . Her work on the album drew on the punk music of The Clash and music from genres such as Britpop and electroclash , to which she was exposed during her time studying at Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design . Living in West London , she met many musicians who to her defined an era of British music that was " actually credible " . In a 2008 interview , she elaborated on the importance of the west London punk scene , citing acts such as The Slits , The Clash , and Don Letts ; she claimed that Bow Wow Wow and Malcolm McLaren had a similar cultural impact in England to that of Public Enemy in America . 
 Before the album 's release , M.I.A. said that audiences found it hard to dance to political songs . This made her keen to produce music that sounded like pop but addressed important issues . " Sunshowers " , with its lyrical references to snipers , murder and the PLO , was written in response to the Tamil Tigers being considered terrorists in some quarters . She said , " you can 't separate the world into two parts like that , good and evil . America has successfully tied all these pockets of independence struggles , revolutions and extremists into one big notion of terrorism . " The lyrics caused controversy ; MTV censored the sounds of gunshots in the song and MTV US refused to broadcast the video unless a disclaimer that disavowed the lyrics was added . The BBC described the lyrics as " always fluid and never too rhetorical " and sounding like " snatches of overheard conversation " . The songs deal with topics ranging from sex to drug dealing . 
 Musically , the album incorporates elements of baile funk , grime , hip hop , and ragga . Peter Shapiro , writing in The Times , summed up the album 's musical influences as " anything as long as it has a beat " . Some tracks drew on Tamil film music , which M.I.A. listened to while growing up . Shapiro described her music as a " multi @-@ genre pile @-@ up " and likened it to her graphic art , calling it " vivid , gaudy , lo @-@ fi and deceptively <unk> " . In a 2005 interview , when asked about the difficulty in categorising her sound , M.I.A. explained , " Influences are crossing over into each other 's puddles . I just accept where I 'm at , I accept where the world is at and I accept how we receive and digest information . I get that somebody in Tokyo is on the internet instant messaging , and someone in the favelas is on the internet . Everybody seems to know a little bit about everything and that 's how we process information now . This just reflects that . " 
 = = Artwork = = 
 M.I.A. and Steve Loveridge created all the album 's artwork , using what Spin writer Lorraine Ali called a " guerrilla " style . The CD booklet features motifs of tanks , bombs and machine guns , and depictions of tigers , which writers connected with the Tamil Tigers . Village Voice critic Robert Christgau connected the album 's imagery with the artist 's " obsession " with the organisation , but claimed that its use was purely artistic and not propaganda . In his view , the images were considered controversial only because " rock and roll fans are assumed to be stupid " and would not be expected to ascertain their true significance . Similarly , PopMatters writer Robert Wheaton observed that tiger imagery " does predominate M.I.A. ' s vision of the world " , but noted that the tiger is more widely associated with Tamil nationalism and that the singer 's use of such imagery did not necessarily indicate her support for the Tamil Tigers . Joshua Chambers @-@ <unk> determined that the imagery was perhaps " a means of negotiating the violence necessary " and described the controversy as " an attempt to disengage " from the performative intervention that M.I.A. ' s album 's made , through what he called " the complicated negotiation " of M.I.A. ' s own autobiographical trauma , violence , and loss , as well as the geopolitical trauma , violence , and loss that her audience are engaged in from different subject positions . 
 = = Release = = 
 Arular was to be released in September 2004 , but was delayed . M.I.A. ' s record label stated that the delay was caused by problems obtaining permission to use an unspecified sample . Revised release dates of December 2004 and February 2005 were publicised , but the album remained unreleased ; at one point , Pitchfork Media announced that it had been shelved indefinitely . It was eventually released on 22 March 2005 , when XL Recordings made it available in the US , albeit with the track " <unk> " omitted as the issues with a sample had not been resolved . The UK edition was released the following month with the track included , and this edition was released in the US by Interscope Records on 17 May . Arular sparked internet debates on the rights and wrongs of the Tamil Tigers . By the time it was released , a " near hysterical buzz " on the internet had created " slavish anticipation " for the album . Despite this , M.I.A. claimed in late 2005 that she had little comprehension of her prior popularity with music bloggers , stating that she did not even own a computer . 
 = = Promotion and accolades = = 
 The first track from the album to be made available was " Galang " . It was initially released in late 2003 by independent label Showbiz Records , which pressed and distributed 500 promotional copies before M.I.A. signed with XL Recordings . The song was re @-@ released on XL as the second official single from the album in September 2004 , and again in October 2005 , under the title " Galang ' 05 " , with a remix by Serj Tankian . The first official single , " Sunshowers " , was M.I.A. ' s first on XL and was released on 5 July 2004 . It was supported by a music video directed by Indian filmmaker Rajesh <unk> . Following the re @-@ release of " Galang " , the third single from the album , " Bucky Done Gun " , was released on 26 July 2005 . The video was directed by Anthony Mandler . 
 In December 2004 , M.I.A. independently released a mixtape titled Piracy Funds Terrorism , produced by M.I.A. and Diplo , as a " teaser " for the album . The release featured rough mixes of tracks from Arular mashed up with songs by other artists , and was promoted by word @-@ of @-@ mouth . In early 2005 , after the release of Arular , an extensive collection of fan @-@ made remixes of M.I.A. ' s work was uploaded , expanded and made available as an " online mixtape " on XL 's official website , under the banner Online Piracy Funds Terrorism . M.I.A. toured extensively during 2005 to promote the album . The Arular Tour included concerts in North America supporting LCD Soundsystem and appearances at music festivals in Europe , Japan and South America . In November 2005 , she appeared as the support act at a number of dates on Gwen Stefani 's Harajuku Lovers Tour . 
 Arular was nominated for the Mercury Prize and the Shortlist Music Prize , and was named as the best album of the year by Stylus Magazine . It was number two on The Village Voice 's 33rd annual Pazz & Jop poll for the Best Album of 2005 . The Washington City Paper chose it as the second best album of the year , and Pitchfork Media and Slant Magazine named Arular the fourth best of 2005 . The Observer listed it as one of the year 's five best albums . Arular was featured in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , where it was described as " the most sparkling debut since Madonna 's first album " . The singer Nelly Furtado expressed her admiration for M.I.A. ' s style , flow and dancing on Arular , having listened to it during the recording of her album Loose . Thom Yorke of alternative rock band Radiohead cited M.I.A. ' s method of music making on Arular as an influence on his own work , saying that it reminded him of " just picking up a guitar and [ liking ] the first three chords you write " as opposed to " agonizing over the hi @-@ hat sound which seems to happen with programming and electronica a lot of the time " . In 2009 , the NME placed the album at number 50 in its list of the 100 greatest albums of the decade . In 2009 , online music service Rhapsody ranked the album at number four on its " 100 Best Albums of the Decade " list . In 2011 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 52 on its list of the 100 best albums of the 2000s . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Arular received widespread acclaim from music critics . Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , reported an average score of 88 based on 33 reviews , described as " universal acclaim " . Julianne Shepherd of Spin appreciated the album 's fusion of " hip hop 's cockiness with dancehall 's shimmy and the cheap and noisy aesthetics of punk " and claimed that Arular would be regarded as the best political album of the year . Adam Webb , writing for Yahoo ! Music , described the album 's style as " professionally amateurish " and M.I.A. ' s approach as " scattergun " , but said that she " effortlessly appropriates the music of various cultures and filters them through the most elementary equipment " . He said , " dancehall is the primary influence , but also one of many seismic collisions with several other genres . " 
 In his review for Stylus Magazine , Josh Timmermann described Arular as " a swaggering , spitting , utterly contemporary album " and went on to say , " We 've not heard its like before . " Rolling Stone writer Rob Sheffield found Arular " weird , playful , unclassifiable , sexy , brilliantly addictive " . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones , writing in The New Yorker , described the album as " genuine world music " , based on " the weaving of the political into the fabric of what are still , basically , dance tunes " . Other reviewers were not as complimentary . Paste 's Jeff Leven said that the album , although strong , was not as " mindblowing " as many critics were saying . Q characterised the album as " style mag @-@ cool pop @-@ rap " and claimed that it lacked the substance suggested by M.I.A. ' s decision to name it after her father . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Arular peaked at number 190 on the Billboard 200 , while reaching number three on the Top Electronic Albums chart and number 16 on the Top Independent Albums . By April 2007 , it had sold 129 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album peaked at number 92 on the UK Albums Chart , while in mainland Europe , it reached number 20 in Norway , number 47 in Sweden , number 71 in Germany and number 97 in Belgium . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital bonus tracks 
 " You 're Good " – 4 : 13 
 " Lady Killa " – 3 : 32 
 " Do Ya " – 3 : 22 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 ^ b signifies a co @-@ producer 
 " Bucky Done Gun " is inspired by " <unk> " by <unk> <unk> and incorporates elements of " Gonna Fly Now " by Bill Conti . 
 " <unk> " contains a sample from " Sanford and Son Theme ( The <unk> ) " by Quincy Jones . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Arular . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = David Evans ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Marshal David Evans , AC , DSO , AFC ( born Selwyn David Evans on 3 June 1925 ) is a retired senior commander of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , and a writer and consultant on defence matters . He served as Chief of the Air Staff from 1982 until 1985 . Since leaving the RAAF he has published two military treatises , A Fatal Rivalry : Australia 's Defence at Risk and War : A Matter of Principles , as well as an autobiography . 
 Enlisting in the Air Force in 1943 , Evans graduated from flying school as a sergeant pilot , and was converting to Beaufort bombers when World War II ended . He gained his commission as a pilot officer in 1947 . From 1948 to 1949 , he was a member of the Australian contingent operating C @-@ 47 Dakota transports in the Berlin Airlift . He was a flying instructor in the early 1950s , before becoming a VIP captain with the Governor @-@ General 's Flight in 1954 . His service in the flight earned him the Air Force Cross in 1957 . In the 1960s Evans was twice posted to No. 2 Squadron , flying Canberra jet bombers : first as a flight commander when the unit was based in Malaysia from 1960 to 1962 and then as its commanding officer during the Vietnam War from 1967 to 1968 . The Canberras achieved a high degree of accuracy on their bombing missions under his leadership , and he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order after completing his tour in Vietnam . 
 Evans held senior staff positions in the early 1970s , before serving as Officer Commanding RAAF Base Amberley from 1975 until 1977 . Promoted to air vice marshal , he then became Chief of Air Force Operations . In this role he worked to improve the RAAF 's strategy for the defence of Australia , to fully exploit the " air @-@ sea gap " on the northern approaches to the continent . Appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia in 1981 , he was Chief of Joint Operations and Plans for the Australian Defence Force before his promotion to air marshal and elevation to Chief of the Air Staff in April 1982 . As head of the Air Force he focussed on morale , air power doctrine , and improving defensive capabilities in northern Australia . He was raised to Companion of the Order of Australia in 1984 . Retiring from the RAAF in May 1985 , Evans began to write and lecture on defence matters , and also stood for election in Federal politics . He was a board member of and defence advisor to British Aerospace Australia ( later BAE Systems Australia ) from 1990 to 2009 , and chairman of the National Capital Authority from 1997 until 2003 . In 2001 he was awarded the Centenary Medal for his services to the ADF and the Canberra community . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Selwyn Evans , known by his middle name of David , was born in the Sydney suburb of Paddington on 3 June 1925 . The son of policeman Selwyn Douglas Evans and his wife Eileen , David was educated at Marist Brothers College in Mosman . A schoolboy when war was declared , he avidly followed reports of Allied fighter aces during the Battle of Britain , and resolved that , once he was old enough , he would serve as a pilot . He subsequently became one of the earliest recruits to the Air Training Corps , established in 1941 to facilitate basic training for youths aged 16 to 18 whose ambition was to become aircrew in the Royal Australian Air Force . After spending a short time as a bank clerk , Evans duly enlisted in the RAAF on 5 June 1943 . He received instruction under the Empire Air Training Scheme , firstly at No. 2 Initial Training School in Bradfield Park , Sydney , then at No. 5 Elementary Flying Training School in Narromine , New South Wales , and finally at No. 8 Service Flying Training School in Bundaberg , Queensland . After graduating as a sergeant pilot , he was posted in October 1944 to the flying staff of No. 1 Air Observer School at Evans Head , New South Wales . Promoted to flight sergeant , Evans was in the middle of a Bristol Beaufort light bomber conversion course at No. 1 Operational Training Unit in East Sale , Victoria , when the war ended on 14 August 1945 . His Air Force career should have finished then and there , as he was slated for demobilisation along with thousands of other wartime enlistees . Evans was determined to remain and travelled to RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne to take his case to the officer responsible for discharges . He found a sympathetic ear and within days was transferred to No. 38 Squadron , with which he flew C @-@ 47 Dakota transports on a regular courier service to Japan between October 1945 and May 1948 . 
 Evans was commissioned as a pilot officer on 3 March 1947 , becoming the most junior name in the 1947 Air Force List of serving officers according to seniority . On 23 August 1948 he married Dorothy ( Gail ) Campbell , the daughter of a Merchant Navy captain ; the couple had three daughters and a son . They had planned to wed on 29 August but had to bring the ceremony forward when Evans was selected to take part in Australia 's contribution to the Berlin Airlift . Having been promoted to flying officer , he departed Sydney on 28 August , bound for London . From there he joined RAAF Squadron Berlin Air Lift — which comprised crews from Nos. 36 and 38 Squadrons and was based in Lübeck , West Germany — and over the next 14 months flew over 250 sorties in Royal Air Force Dakotas . Airlift operations were considered particularly challenging , as aircraft were expected to fly on instruments their entire route , often in inclement weather , and keep just three minutes separation . On one occasion , Evans and his crew discovered that boxes of condoms were their main cargo . According to Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " as they took off into a bleak , snow @-@ filled night they found themselves questioning the worth of the sortie , an attitude which doubtless was not shared by the eventual recipients " . Evans ' worst moment was when one of his engines failed just after take @-@ off , with 23 passengers — mostly children — aboard , but he was able to land safely . 
 Returning to Australia in November 1949 , Evans was posted to Central Flying School ( CFS ) at RAAF Base East Sale , Victoria , where he qualified as a flying instructor . He served in this capacity for the next four years , including an exchange posting with the Royal New Zealand Air Force from May 1951 to July 1953 . As he was preparing to depart New Zealand , he received word that his next posting would be to the Korean War as a pilot with No. 77 Squadron ; the armistice prevented this and he returned to No. 38 Squadron as an instructor . In 1954 he was assigned to transporting VIPs , serving with the Governor @-@ General 's Flight ( later No. 34 ( Special Transport ) Squadron } until 1956 . As well as Governor @-@ General Sir William Slim and Lady Slim , his passengers included Prime Minister Robert Menzies and Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh . Promoted to squadron leader , Evans ' service with the VIP flight earned him the Air Force Cross in the Queen 's Birthday Honours promulgated in the London Gazette on 13 June 1957 . The same year , he attended RAAF Staff College at Point Cook , Victoria . He became personal staff officer to the Minister for Air in 1958 , a position he found valuable for the insight he gained into Australia 's political culture . In November 1959 , he took a refresher course at CFS , qualifying on De Havilland Vampire and English Electric Canberra jets . He underwent further training on Canberra bombers with No. 1 Operational Conversion Unit at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , graduating in May 1960 . From then until 1962 he served as a flight commander in No. 2 Squadron , operating Canberras out of RAAF Base Butterworth , Malaysia . He subsequently attended the RAF College of Air Warfare . In January 1963 , Evans was transferred to Air Staff Division , Canberra , where he helped formulate operational requirements for a new RAAF bomber . His final specification included a payload of 14 @,@ 000 lb ( 6 @,@ 400 kg ) , speed of Mach 2 , and range of 1 @,@ 100 nmi ( 2 @,@ 000 km ) . This requirement was met by the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C , 24 of which were ordered by the Australian government in October 1963 . As an interim measure until delivery of the F @-@ 111 , the US government offered 24 Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojets to the RAAF . Though the offer was never seriously considered , a B @-@ 47 was test flown from Amberley to Darwin in November 1963 by the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Val Hancock , with Evans as passenger . Evans had been assigned to fly the plane but was replaced at the last moment by Hancock ; the take @-@ off almost ended in disaster after Hancock unknowingly switched off the engines ' water injection — needed to ensure sufficient thrust in hot conditions — that Evans had switched on before vacating the pilot 's seat . In January 1965 , Evans was posted to Washington , DC , as Assistant Air Attaché , having " had quite enough of writing Air Staff Requirements " . 
 = = Vietnam War and senior command = = 
 In April 1967 , the Australian government committed No. 2 Squadron and its Canberra bombers to action in the Vietnam War . Operating from Phan Rang Air Base outside Saigon , under the direction of the US 35th Tactical Fighter Wing ( TFW ) , the Canberras were initially engaged in medium @-@ altitude missions against Viet Cong forces , guided by Sky Spot ground radar , usually at night . Promoted to wing commander , Evans assumed control of the squadron in December 1967 . Having never heard a shot fired in anger in his 24 years of service , he was anxious for a combat assignment . The Japanese surrender in August 1945 had prevented him from seeing action in World War II , and the Korean War had ended just as he was on the verge of a posting for active duty with No. 77 Squadron . " Vietnam " , he reasoned , " would be my last chance " . By the time he took command , the Canberras were flying a greater proportion of their missions at lower levels in daylight , using visual bomb @-@ aiming methods honed during their earlier service in Malaysia ; this gave the bombers an average circular error probability ( CEP ) of 50 metres . Evans introduced intensive post @-@ mission analysis to refine their technique , and permitted his pilots to bomb at the lowest level possible at which the bombsight would operate . The CEP was eventually reduced to 20 metres , making the Canberras the most accurate bombing force in the region . In January 1968 , the unit participated in the air campaigns to defend Huế and Khe Sanh during the Tet Offensive . Phan Rang itself was often subjected to harassing attacks and mortar fire from the Viet Cong , requiring Evans to undertake improvements to the airfield 's ground defences . He completed his posting to Vietnam in November 1968 and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his performance as commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron . The decoration was gazetted on 2 May 1969 and backdated to 13 March . 
 Evans was promoted to group captain in January 1969 and appointed Director of Air Force Plans . In this position he proposed and organised the gift of 23 of the RAAF 's old CAC Sabres to the Indonesian Air Force , following an earlier presentation of 10 Sabres to the Royal Malaysian Air Force . He completed studies at the Royal College of Defence Studies , London , in 1972 . Returning to Australia , he was promoted to air commodore and appointed Director @-@ General Plans and Policy , Air Force , in January 1973 . He served as Officer Commanding RAAF Base Amberley from February 1975 until April 1977 . In this role he qualified as a pilot on the recently delivered F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber , as well as the UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopter . Following his tour as Amberley base commander , Evans was promoted to air vice marshal and became Chief of Air Force Operations ( CAFOPS ) . He held this newly created position for the next two years , broken by a temporary posting as Deputy Chief of the Air Staff between January and August 1978 . As CAFOPS , Evans played a major part in developing the RAAF 's plans for the defence of Australia . Following America 's announcement in the 1969 Guam Doctrine that its allies would have to assume greater self @-@ reliance in their military affairs , Australia 's strategic thought underwent a change from its earlier policy of " forward defence " to a more localised defensive posture . While the consensus among RAAF planning staff was to adopt a " repulsion " concept of attacking an enemy force along the air and sea approaches to northern Australia , Evans considered that this did not go far enough in exploiting the long @-@ range offensive capabilities of such aircraft as the F @-@ 111 . Convinced that Australia 's numerically small forces would be hard @-@ pressed to dislodge an invader that had gained a foothold on the continent , he refined the " repulsion " stance into what he termed an " anti @-@ lodgement " strategy , focussing on defeating the enemy at its potential staging bases north of Australia and then , as a last resort , on the approaches closer to home . The Air Force 's role in shaping an overall strategy that took advantage of the " air @-@ sea gap " was later acknowledged in the Federal government paper The Defence of Australia 1987 . Evans was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia on 26 January 1981 for his achievements as CAFOPS . 
 In 1980 , Evans was appointed Chief of Joint Operations and Plans for the Australian Defence Force ( ADF ) . He was promoted to air marshal and became Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) on 21 April 1982 , succeeding Air Marshal Sir Neville McNamara . As CAS , Evans took steps to enhance discipline , bearing and morale in the Air Force , demanding high personal standards . He sponsored the development of an Australian air power doctrine , eventually published as the Air Power Manual under one of his successors , Air Marshal Ray Funnell , in 1990 . Evans also commissioned a marching tune especially for the RAAF , later to be called " Eagles of Australia " , to replace the Royal Air Force march that had been in use previously . As early as 1969 , he had advocated permanently basing a squadron of fighter aircraft at RAAF Tindal in the Northern Territory . Tindal was one of a series of forward air bases initiated by Air Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger when he was CAS in 1959 , but a defence committee decision prior to Evans becoming CAS had determined to locate the RAAF 's northernmost fighter squadron at Darwin . His chance remark in mid @-@ 1982 to the new Minister of Defence , Ian Sinclair , regarding the suitability of Tindal over Darwin led to the former base being chosen as the home of No. 75 ( Fighter ) Squadron . Alan Stephens described the permanent manning of Tindal as having " formalised the shift to the strategy of defence @-@ in @-@ depth — of defending Australia by controlling its air @-@ sea gap " . Late in 1983 , Evans selected the site for the last of the Air Force 's northerly " bare bases " , RAAF Scherger , near Weipa on Cape York Peninsula . For his service as CAS , he was raised to a Companion of the Order of Australia on 11 June 1984 . On 2 May 1985 , he became the first serving member of the ADF to be invited to speak at the National Press Club in Canberra . During his speech he reiterated the need for Australia to acquire an airborne early warning capability to enhance the effectiveness of the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ delivered F / A @-@ 18 Hornet multirole fighter , declaring that " Jindalee is not sufficient " . Later that month two Hornets , whose acquisition Evans had supported while CAFOPS , were handed over to No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , following a record non @-@ stop flight from Naval Air Station Lemoore in California . Evans had pushed for the long @-@ distance flight , employing a McDonnell Douglas KC @-@ 10 tanker to refuel the Hornets in flight , to demonstrate the RAAF 's capability and the benefit of tanker aircraft . Six Mirage fighters from No. 77 Squadron intercepted the Hornets and the KC @-@ 10 and escorted them to their landing at Williamtown , an action the CAS considered " icing on the cake — a touch of class " . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Evans retired as CAS on 30 May 1985 , having flown in excess of 8 @,@ 600 hours during his RAAF career . He was praised by his successor , Air Marshal Jake Newham , for his " extraordinary zeal and robustness " that helped instil " a renewed sense of pride in the Service " . In retirement Evans became a consultant on defence and aviation matters , and wrote and lectured extensively on air power . As a visiting fellow at the Australian National University 's Strategic and Defence Studies Centre in 1986 , he produced a working paper focussing on the RAAF 's concept of operations , Air Operations in Northern Australia . The same year , he was publicly critical of the Federal government 's Dibb Report , claiming that while it contained " sensible policy for the defence of Australia " , it did not recognise the ADF 's offensive capabilities : " People win wars by taking the initiative . In war the aim must be to win . ... If you are a small force you cannot afford to wait , and otherwise you will be defeated . " Evans also stood for political office , running as the Liberal candidate for the seat of Eden @-@ Monaro , New South Wales , in the 1987 Australian federal election . He was competing for the conservative vote with National candidate Peter Cochran , whose party advertising was considered to have outperformed the Liberals ' . The seat was retained by incumbent Labor member Jim Snow . 
 In 1990 , Evans published his critique of Australian defence policies , A Fatal Rivalry : Australia 's Defence at Risk ; he followed this in 2000 with War : A Matter of Principles , featuring contributions from senior soldiers and military analysts . Also in 1990 , Evans joined the Board of British Aerospace Australia as a non @-@ executive director , and was later appointed senior defence advisor to BAE Systems Australia , retiring in 2009 . From 1997 until 2003 , he was chairman of the National Capital Authority , and from 1999 until 2003 was national president of the Royal United Services Institute Australia . Evans has been the patron of numerous organisations including the Airfield Defence Guards Association , the Royal Australian Air Force Association ( ACT Division ) , The Celtic Club Australia , and the Royal Australian Air Force Staff College Association . He was one of three former members of Australia 's Berlin Airlift squadron to be specially honoured by the City of Berlin on the 50th anniversary of the Berlin Blockade in 1998 . In January 2001 he was awarded the Centenary Medal for " service to Australian society through Australian Defence Force and to the Canberra community " . He was chairman of the 60th Anniversary Victory in the Pacific Steering Committee in 2005 . His autobiography , Down to Earth , was launched on 19 July 2011 by former Prime Minister John Howard at Old Parliament House , Canberra . 
 = Westinghouse Air Brake Company General Office Building = 
 The Westinghouse Air Brake Company General Office Building ( Known locally as The Castle or Library Hall ) in Wilmerding , Pennsylvania is a building from 1890 . It was listed on the Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation in 1975 , National Register of Historic Places in 1987 . Originally built as an office building for the Westinghouse Air Brake Company , it now houses The George Westinghouse Museum . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Constructed by architect Frederick J. <unk> , the building has a four @-@ sided clock tower , which was operated by a system of chains and pulleys . Additional designs and remodeling were done by Janssen & <unk> in 1927 , which added the " Executive Wing " , containing executive offices as well as conference and dining rooms . 
 The architectural style is a mix of Renaissance Revival and Romanesque . It was destroyed by a fire on 8 April 1896 ; the foundation , being made of brick , stone , and cement survived , however , and the structure was rebuilt upon the same foundation . It was during this reconstruction that the clock tower was added . At the time , the entire first floor was designed for employees ' use , with accommodations such as a library , fully equipped gymnasium , restaurant , swimming pool , and bowling alleys . This brought the total area inside the building to 55 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 100 m2 ) . 
 The building also housed a boiler house and light station , that supplied both steam and power to the plant , as well as various businesses in the community , such as the Wilmerding YMCA . 
 = = Business history = = 
 This building contained the offices of the Westinghouse Air Brake Company for well over a century . The company was originally established by George Westinghouse in 1869 . Westinghouse had developed many companies during this time of industrial growth at the beginning of the twentieth century . The Air Brake plant , that made for improved performance and increased speed on the nations railways , was moved to its new location in Wilmerding , Pennsylvania in 1889 . Wilmerding is a small town about 14 miles ( 23 km ) outside of Pittsburgh which , at the time , was only inhabited by about 5 @,@ 000 people . Socialism was strong in Wilmerding and it was a peaceful non @-@ violent farming borough . It was thought to be “ The Ideal Town ” for the company because of its location right along the Pennsylvania Railroad and its mainly blue collar inhabitants . The Air Brake Company employed 3 @,@ 000 citizens from the surrounding Pittsburgh area , but its work force was composed almost entirely of individuals from Wilmerding . 
 The office buildings were used until the building was vacated in 1985 . It was then donated to the American Production and Inventory Control Society . The Westinghouse Air Brake Company merged with <unk> Industries Corporation in 1999 to form the Wabtec Corporation ( NYSE : WAB ) . Wabtec still provides employment for more than 1 @,@ 000 residents of the borough . 
 = = Effect on the community = = 
 When the Westinghouse Plant was also moved to Wilmerding , housing for the employees became hard to come by . In response to this , the Westinghouse Air Brake Home Building Company was formed in 1919 with $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 USD as startup capital . The 400 houses and large amounts of vacant land that were previously owned by the Westinghouse Air Brake Company were transferred to the new company . The new homes were specifically built with different variations to avoid the lack of variety commonly seen in industrial housing at the time . The Westinghouse Air Brake Home Building Company was so successful that within ten years , there were no vacant lots left on the Southern side of Turtle Creek . The extensive town @-@ building , employment , and prosperity that George Westinghouse brought to Wilmerding is still celebrated today in the community , with a festival called " George Westinghouse Days " , which takes place in early June each year . 
 = = Inside The Castle = = 
 The building used to house The George Westinghouse Museum , a model train display , and a Depression glass room , and is operated by Wilmerding Renewed , Inc . The Westinghouse Castle is operated by a non @-@ profit organization and volunteers . In 2007 , the artifacts that were in the Castle museum went to join the Heinz History Center . Since 2007 , the Westinghouse Castle has gathered a collection of Westinghouse products and are now on display in their Westinghouse Museum room . 
 = Arrowhead ( Herman Melville House ) = 
 Arrowhead , also known as the Herman Melville House , was the home of American author Herman Melville during his most productive years , 1850 – 1863 . In this Pittsfield , Massachusetts house , Melville wrote some of his major work : the novels Moby @-@ Dick , Pierre ( dedicated to nearby Mount Greylock ) , The Confidence @-@ Man , and Israel Potter ; The Piazza Tales ( a short story collection named for Arrowhead 's porch ) ; and magazine stories such as " I and My Chimney " . 
 The house , located at 780 Holmes Road in Pittsfield , was built in the 1780s as a farmhouse and inn . It was adjacent to a property owned by Melville 's uncle Thomas , where Melville had developed an attachment to the area through repeated visits . He purchased the property in 1850 with borrowed money and spent the next twelve years farming and writing there . Financial considerations prompted his family 's return to New York City in 1863 , and Melville sold the property to his brother . 
 The house remained in private hands until 1975 , when the Berkshire County Historical Society acquired the house and a portion of the original 160 @-@ acre ( 65 ha ) property . The Society restored most of the house to Melville 's period and operates it as a house museum ; it is open to the public during warmer months . It has been designated a National Historic Landmark and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Construction and early history = = 
 Construction of the oldest portions of the house known as Arrowhead took place in the 1780s . Built by Captain David Bush , the wood frame and clapboard house was apparently used as an inn . The Bush family sold the property to Pittsfield doctor John Brewster in 1844 , who in 1850 sold the 160 acres ( 65 ha ) property to the writer Herman Melville . The house at that time consisted of a simple rectangular structure with five window bays across and two deep , with a large central chimney . There is some evidence that the house may originally have had three stories , but at the time of the Melville purchase in 1850 , it only had two and a half . 
 = = Melville in Pittsfield = = 
 Herman Melville was born in New York City in 1819 . His maternal grandparents lived in Albany , New York , where his parents took their family in 1830 after a series of financial setbacks . His uncle Thomas Melvill owned property in Pittsfield that the family had visited a few times when Melville was younger . The first significant visit Melville made to his uncle was a brief one in August 1831 . After his father died in January 1832 , Melville 's mother took the family to Pittsfield to escape an outbreak of cholera in July 1832 . It is from the time of this brief stay that Melville 's interest in the Berkshires developed . In 1837 he ran his uncle 's farm while the latter traveled to Illinois to pursue business opportunities . According to Melville 's cousin Priscilla , during this time his attachment to the area deepened considerably . 
 In the summer of 1850 , Melville , his wife Lizzie , and their son Malcolm vacationed in Pittsfield . The visit to his uncle 's farm was bittersweet , for his uncle had agreed to sell the property , and it would be the family 's last visit there . On August 5 , 1850 , Melville met Nathaniel Hawthorne for the first time , having only recently read his short story collection Mosses from an Old Manse . The two were among several invited to a picnic on Monument Mountain south of Pittsfield with a group that also included Evert Augustus Duyckinck and Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. Melville and Hawthorne struck up an instant friendship . Attracted by the <unk> , and apparently unwilling to abandon the Berkshires , Melville decided on impulse to purchase the Brewster farm , which abutted his uncle 's property . According to a news report of his purchase , the property " commands one of the most extensive and <unk> views in Berkshire . " He secured a $ 3 @,@ 000 loan from his father @-@ in @-@ law Lemuel Shaw ( a Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court Chief Justice who was in Lenox for a court session at the time ) , received a $ 1 @,@ 500 mortgage from Brewster , and promised to pay the rest of the $ 6 @,@ 500 purchase price when his New York lease was sold . The sale was finalized on September 14 , 1850 . To raise funds , Melville sold off 80 acres ( 32 ha ) in the 1850s . Shaw assumed the mortgage in 1856 , took title to the property in 1857 , and transferred it to Melville 's wife in 1860 . 
 = = Melville at Arrowhead = = 
 Melville called his new home Arrowhead because of the arrowheads that were dug up around the property during planting season . New York publisher Evert Augustus Duyckinck wrote that its " grounds would satisfy an English nobleman — for the noble maples and elms and various seclusions and outlooks " . 
 It was at Arrowhead that Melville finished his novel Moby @-@ Dick ; though the work was not recognized during the author 's lifetime , it has since become known as one of the greatest American literary masterpieces . Hawthorne 's influence on Melville while writing the book is significant . Melville wrote a review of Mosses from an Old Manse , published by Duyckinck , and in it he believed that these stories revealed a dark side to Hawthorne , " shrouded in blackness , ten times black " . Moby @-@ Dick was dedicated to Hawthorne : " In token of my admiration for his genius , this book is inscribed to Nathaniel Hawthorne . " Hawthorne , in turn , referenced Melville in his book A Wonder @-@ Book for Girls and Boys : " On the higher side of Pittsfield , sits Herman Melville , shaping out the gigantic conception of his ' White Wale ' while the gigantic shape of <unk> [ sic ] looms upon him from his study @-@ window . " 
 Melville incorporated domestic features of Arrowhead into several stories . The piazza ( or porch ) , after which The Piazza Tales were named , was added to the north side of Arrowhead shortly after Melville purchased the property . Unlike the more typical Berkshires properties that located the porch facing south , Melville chose to face it toward Mount Greylock , to which he dedicated Pierre . Of the piazza he wrote : 
 Now , for a house , so situated in such a country , to have no piazza for the convenience of those who might desire to feast upon the view , and take their time and ease about it , seemed as much of an omission as if a picture @-@ gallery should have no bench ; for what but picture @-@ galleries are the marble halls of these same limestone hills ? — galleries hung , month after month anew , with pictures ever fading into pictures ever fresh . 
 In " I and My Chimney " , published in Putnam 's Monthly Magazine in 1856 , he described Arrowhead 's large chimney : 
 It need hardly be said , that the walls of my house are entirely free from fire @-@ places . These all congregate in the middle — in the one grand central chimney , upon all four sides of which are hearths — two tiers of hearths — so that when , in the various chambers , my family and guests are warming themselves of a cold winter ’ s night , just before retiring , then , though at the time they may not be thinking so , all their faces mutually look towards each other , yea , all their feet point to one centre ; and when they go to sleep in their beds , they all sleep round one warm chimney . 
 Melville lived , farmed , and wrote at Arrowhead for 13 years , receiving visitors including Hawthorne , Holmes , and Catharine Maria Sedgwick . Other well @-@ known works that he wrote there include the novels Israel Potter and The Confidence @-@ Man , and the stories " Bartleby , the Scrivener " and " Benito <unk> " ( which were collected in The Piazza Tales ) . During that time , however , his writing was not providing him much income . In order to improve the family finances , the Melvilles moved into Pittsfield in 1862 , and sold Arrowhead the following year to his brother Allan . The Melvilles then returned to New York City , where Herman eventually found work as a customs inspector . 
 = = After Herman Melville = = 
 Melville continued to visit Arrowhead occasionally during his brother 's ownership of the property . Members of the Melville family owned the house until 1927 . It remained in private hands until 1975 , when the Berkshire County Historical Society purchased the house . In the years between Melville 's ownership and the historical society acquisition , major portions of the property were sold off until only 14 @.@ 2 acres ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) remained , although a significant amount of it remains open land ; the society later acquired another 30 @.@ 7 acres ( 12 @.@ 4 ha ) . Owners after Herman Melville made substantial additions to the house , principally two ells . The piazza was removed in the 20th century , but a large window was added on the north side of the house to maintain the view of Mount Greylock . Arrowhead was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1962 . 
 = = Museum = = 
 The Historical Society , after acquiring the property , worked to restore it to the condition it was in Melville 's time . Numerous interior alterations were undone , windows that had been changed were restored to their original size and configuration , and the piazza was restored . The Society also restored the upstairs study in which Melville did his writing to its original state . 
 Arrowhead is now a non @-@ profit historic house museum operated by the Berkshire County Historical Society , which uses a portion of the house as office space . The remainder is open to the public for guided tours during the warmer months of the year . It is located at 780 Holmes Road , and is open from Memorial Day to Columbus Day . 
 = China ( The Office ) = 
 " China " is the tenth episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 136th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC on December 2 , 2010 . The episode was written by Halsted Sullivan and Warren Lieberstein , and directed by Charles McDougall . The episode guest stars Mark Proksch as Nate and Hugh Dane as Hank . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) reads an article about China growing as a global power and decides it must be stopped before it takes over the United States . Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) threatens to move Dunder Mifflin to a new building after everyone in the office complains about Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) building standards . Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) is sick of Andy Bernard 's ( Ed Helms ) annoying text messages . 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics , many of whom felt that the confrontation between Oscar and Michael was realistic and humorous . " China " was viewed by 7 @.@ 31 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 7 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 , marking a slight drop in the ratings when compared to the previous week . Despite this , the episode was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night that it aired , as well as the highest @-@ rated non @-@ sports NBC broadcast for the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While at the dentist , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) reads an article about China 's growing global power , and he decides that China must be stopped before it takes over the United States . Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) tries to correct one of the statements , but when Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) checks the fact online , it turns out Michael 's statement was correct . Everyone mocks Oscar for his mistake , as Oscar is usually the smartest one in the office , having built this reputation by often correcting his coworkers . Oscar invites Michael for a cup of coffee , but the other employees realize that Oscar wants to discuss China in more detail , in order to reestablish himself as the office 's intellectual heavyweight . Seeing an opportunity to give Oscar a taste of his own medicine , they start quizzing Michael on different facts about China , but he cannot answer , so he makes note cards to keep track . When Michael and Oscar have their conversation , Ryan , Erin , Jim , Andy , and Kelly also sit in to watch . Michael blanks on one topic , but then changes the subject to conversation itself . The employees toast him , while Oscar is left infuriated . 
 Everyone in the office complains about Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) building standards , such as un @-@ plying toilet paper , adding motion sensors to the lights , and placing a roach billboard over the windows to the office . Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) , as office administrator , threatens to move everyone to a different building if nothing is done . She leaves and comes back with pictures of a newer office space and says they can move in three months . Dwight investigates and finds that the office building does not exist . When Dwight plays coy around Pam , she admits to Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) that she lied about the office building and that she is afraid of failing again after failing as an artist and a salesperson . Jim tries in vain to reassure her , and she breaks down in tears . Later Nate ( Mark Proksch ) , Dwight 's building assistant , discreetly gives Pam a book on the state building regulations . Pam shows Dwight that his policies are in violation of the laws written in the book , so Dwight puts everything back to normal . The camera crew confronts Dwight with footage showing that he overheard Pam 's conversation with Jim and instructed Nate to give her the book on the building regulations . Dwight admits that he allowed her to win , but mocks the idea that he did so out of compassion . 
 Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) is sick of Andy Bernard 's ( Ed Helms ) pointless text messages . After one text , Darryl tells Andy that he is one bad text away from being blocked , but Andy wagers that he is one good text from a high five , to which Darryl agrees . Darryl then gets a text from Andy telling him to come to the parking lot , where there are pigeons eating an ice cream cone . Darryl laughs and gives Andy a high five . 
 = = Production = = 
 " China " was written by producers Halsted Sullivan and Warren Lieberstein , their fourth writing credit on the series . Warren Lieberstein is the brother of Paul Lieberstein , who was the showrunner of the show at the time . The entry was directed by Charles McDougall , his fifth directing credit on the series . " China " is the third episode to feature Nate , played by YouTube star Mark Proksch . After the producers of The Office saw a series of prank videos that Proksch did under the name " Kenny Strasser " , they hired him to become a recurring character . 
 The Season Seven DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael talking more about his fear of China , Nate swapping an " energy @-@ saving cord " for an " un @-@ energy @-@ saving cord " , Dwight making fun of Pam 's concerns , Pam discussing the new office space with Dwight , Jim criticizing Pam 's plan to the camera , Erin talking about moving , and Michael furthering his argument with Oscar in the coffee shop . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael is initially worked up about China after reading an article in Newsweek , an American weekly news magazine . Michael notes that he was forced to read Newsweek in the waiting room at his dentist 's office because some " kid had the magazine I wanted to read " , hinting that the magazine Michael wanted to read was the children 's magazine Highlights for Children . Andy sends Darryl a text that only reads " Megan Fox " , a reference to the actress . Creed notes that he understands , but cannot speak , Pirate slang . Andy attempts to motivate Michael with a pep talk taken from the 1979 movie Rocky II . During Michael and Oscar 's discussion in the lobby of the office building , a copy of Call of Duty can be seen behind the counter . Fans have speculated that this may be a reference to the third season episode " The Coup " , which used the game as a plot device . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 2 , 2010 , " China " was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 31 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 10 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight drop in the ratings after one week off due to Thanksgiving . The episode became the highest @-@ rated non @-@ sports related NBC program for the original week it aired and also became the ninth most @-@ watched show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 This episode got overwhelmingly positive reviews . Phoebe Reilly of Vulture wrote highly of the episode and called it " the best of the season so far . " James <unk> of Time compared the episode and the season at large to the later work of The Beatles ; he noted that , " after becoming known for a string of ambitious " entries , they both " decide [ d ] to take a step backward stylistically " . For this reason , he enjoyed " China " , and opined that " The China plot , which thankfully focused less on Michael 's craziness than his ( and his coworkers ' ) relationship with Oscar , demonstrated how well @-@ drawn the show has been even when it comes to its more peripheral characters . " He also said the episode was " vintage Office . " 
 Bonnie Stiernberg of Paste magazine wrote highly of the episode and called it " a half hour of heartwarming comedy " . She was particularly pleased with how Michael was able to overcome Oscar with pathos , and she enjoyed the episode 's subplots . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic praised the episode and awarded it five stars out of five . He wrote that " If my favorite thing for Jim to do is prank Dwight , my second favorite is when he backs Michael . " Furthermore , he wrote that " While this A story was filled with plenty of laughs , [ ... ] Dwight 's B story was absolutely murderous [ and ] all gold " . He also felt that the C plot was enjoyable , because " Andy is great in small doses " . 
 Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " grade . He noted that The Office was not suited for political examination , because , as the show is grounded in reality , the concept of the office as " a microcosm for global politics is … uneven . " However , McNutt argued that because the show used the conceit of China as a " red herring [ ... ] to introduce a story about Oscar as ' Actually , ' and the gap between Michael ’ s rhetorical potential and his actual knowledge of just about any subject " , the story " steps back and finds a small moment within [ the larger ] conflict . " McNutt also enjoyed the B @-@ plot with Pam and Dwight , noting that the ending was " honestly quite sweet " . 
 = Arena Corinthians = 
 The Arena Corinthians is a sports stadium located in São Paulo , Brazil and owned , operated , and used by Sport Club Corinthians Paulista . It has a seating capacity of 49 @,@ 205 , making it the fifth @-@ largest stadium used by teams in the top tier of the Brazilian League and the eleventh @-@ largest in Brazil . 
 It hosted six matches during the 2014 FIFA World Cup , including the opening match on 12 June 2014 . Because of a requirement for it to have at least 65 @,@ 000 seats for the World Cup opening match , temporary seats were added to the stadium for the tournament . The temporary seats started to be removed shortly after the last World Cup match . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1980 , Corinthians was planning to build a new 201 @,@ 304 @-@ capacity stadium , as their own Alfredo <unk> Stadium held fewer than 14 @,@ 000 people and city 's Pacaembu Stadium had to be shared with other teams . Plans to build a new stadium required a large area . The club 's president Vicente Matheus asked for a concession from São Paulo 's mayor Olavo Setúbal in the Itaquera region , east of the city centre . The mayor accepted the request 10 November 1978 and a concession for 90 years was granted on 26 December 1978 for a 197 @,@ 095 @.@ 14 square metres ( 2 @,@ 121 @,@ 514 @.@ 4 sq ft ) property . The area was owned at the time by <unk> , an agency for public housing controlled by the São Paulo City government . The original plan was to build the stadium in three to five years . The concession was renewed in 1988 for 90 years , with the condition that any construction made in the area would revert to the city at no cost . However , funding was not obtained and other alternatives were considered , such as a concession for the Pacaembu Stadium and demolishing the Alfredo <unk> Stadium making room for another . 
 On 31 August 2010 , Corinthians announced the construction of the stadium with an estimated cost of R $ 335 million and an expected gross revenue of R $ 100 million per year . The original plans allow for an expansion to 70 @,@ 000 seats . The club expected to get financing from BNDES and sell the naming rights for the stadium to pay for the construction costs . The main architect of the project was Aníbal Coutinho ; he was assisted by Antônio Paulo Cordeiro from Coutinho , <unk> , Cordeiro ( DDG ) , partnering with Werner Sobek , who rendered structural engineering services . The stadium was planned to be completed by March 2013 . 
 = = = FIFA World Cup 2014 hosting = = = 
 Accenture estimated that the World Cup opening would bring R $ 30 @.@ 75 Billion over 10 years to the city 's economy ; the study 's results encouraged Brazil to site the opening match in São Paulo . A study from Fundação Getúlio Vargas estimated R $ 1 Billion in revenue during the World Cup , as 290 thousand tourists were expected for the event . After Morumbi Stadium was deemed unsuitable by FIFA , the Local World Cup Committee looked for alternatives and set on offering Arena Corinthians to host the opening game ; FIFA accepted the suggestion and confirmed the decision on 10 October 2011 . Hosting the opening game required modifications to the project that raised the cost from the original R $ 335 million to R $ 1 @.@ 07 billion to accommodate FIFA 's requirements . Cuts in equipment , furniture and construction costs reduced the cost . Because of FIFA 's agreements with Brazil , none of the construction work related to the World Cup was taxed by the Federal Government ; the final price agreed upon was R $ 820 million . 
 A new contract was signed on 19 July 2011 with Odebrecht ; R $ 400 million of the total would be financed by BNDES and the remaining R $ 420 million would come from tax credits granted by the City . A 2007 law stated the tax credits could be used by any company that established itself in the Eastern region of the city , providing a credit of R $ 0 @.@ 60 per R $ 1 @.@ 00 invested . A new law was passed by the city legislature to deal specifically with this stadium and reduce the incentives , linking the concession of the credits to hosting the World Cup opening match and limiting the total amount of credits to R $ 420 million . The concession was justified by the expectation that the stadium will generate R $ 950 million in city taxes during the six years after its opening . R $ 530 million in excess of the tax credits were given . The financing contract with BNDES was signed on 29 November 2013 , under their <unk> Arenas World Cup program . Caixa <unk> Federal is the distributing agent . 
 The estimated construction cost did not include the R $ 38 @.@ 1 million required for adding temporary bleachers , which were removed after the World Cup was over . They were set on one of the sides and on the north and south ends . The addition of the bleachers would raise the stadium 's capacity up to 72 @,@ 000 seats , but would necessitate the relocation of VIP areas and television equipment reducing capacity . Corinthians paid for additional temporary infrastructure required exclusively for the World Cup , which was estimated to cost between R $ 60 million and 100 million . 
 The World Cup brought more than 500 @,@ 000 tourists and an estimated R $ 1 billion in revenue to the city . 
 = = = Project costs and revenue = = = 
 The stadium eventually cost R $ 965 million , 15 % more than originally estimated . The two @-@ year delay in receiving BNDES funds caused an increase of R $ 108 million to the cost because of the difference in interest between loans taken from regular banks and from the government agency . Temporary structures were included in the total cost , currently estimated to be R $ 77 million . After the sale of the tax credits received , Corinthians will have to pay between R $ 700 and R $ 750 million spread over 12 years . Aníbal Coutinho projected the stadium to generate R $ 150 million per year . Andres Sanchez expects revenue to reach R $ 200 million per year and expenses to be up to R $ 35 million per year . Revenue will come from ticket sales and commercial properties in the arena , especially corporate conventions , fairs and events . On 25 August 2013 , Andres said that out of 16 naming rights properties , he had already secured seven buyers , although no deals had yet been formalised . The club plans to sell the stadium naming rights for R $ 400 million for 20 years . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The stadium was delivered to Corinthians on 15 April 2014 . Modifications for hosting the World Cup were still underway until the club handed the arena to FIFA for the competition on 20 May 2014 . The peak number of workers on site was 2 @,@ 300 , recorded in November 2012 . The enterprise generated 26 thousand jobs during its construction . 
 = = = Renovations = = = 
 After the World Cup , Corinthians is preparing the stadium for their use ; they consider it is 92 % ready for their use just after the tournament . It is expected to be completely retrofitted by February 2015 . The estimated cost is R $ 20 million . One of the largest changes will be the construction of large balconies and the installation of scoreboards behind the goals where the temporary seating installed for the FIFA World Cup stands . 
 = = = = Landscaping = = = = 
 The west side will have a large , tree @-@ lined , pedestrian mall with a reflecting pool and new illumination . The reflecting pools will also work as a performance fountain , providing splash and spectacle at programmed moments during stadium events . Around the complex , granite flooring will have stripes evocative of the club 's second uniform , in synchronisation with the external illumination . There will be benches and large gardens ; the media centre will be housed in one of them . The landscaping was designed by John Loomis , who headed the Burj Khalifa project . Lighting was projected by the American firm T. <unk> . 
 = = = Stadium firsts = = = 
 The first event held in the arena was an Ivete Sangalo show for 3 @,@ 000 , celebrating the club 's 103rd anniversary on 29 September 2013 . The first public football matches at the stadium consisted of friendlies between former Corinthians ' players on 10 May <unk> than 100 players played at the event . 
 The first goal of the new stadium was scored by <unk> shooting a penalty kick suffered by Palhinha . <unk> shot at his own goal because all the players on the pitch insisted that the first goal at the Arena was his . The kick went past Ronaldo . The first competitive game was a 2014 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A match between Corinthians and <unk> on 18 May 2014 . The first international match was the opening match for the FIFA World Cup 2014 between Brazil and Croatia on 12 June 2014 . 
 = = International events = = 
 = = = 2014 FIFA World Cup = = = 
 The stadium was one of the venues for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . Because of FIFA rules , it was called Arena de São Paulo during the tournament . The stadium hosted the opening ceremony followed by the opening match between Brazil and Croatia , three other group stage matches , a Round 16 match and a semi @-@ final . Due to the request of at least 65 @,@ 000 seats for the World Cup opening match , temporary seats were added to the stadium for the tournament , although the final usable capacity only reached 62 @,@ 200 for the opening match . 
 The addition of temporary seats implied that screens for the World Cup had to be rented specially for the event , because the original screens were too large to be used with the temporary seating installed . FIFA requires screens smaller than the originally projected , with a 90 square metres ( 970 sq ft ) area . Because subsequent matches had lower VIP and press demands , 4 @,@ 000 more seats were added , raising the usable capacity to 66 @,@ 200 . 
 = = = 2016 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Arena Corinthians will be one of the venues of the 2016 Summer Olympics football tournament . It was chosen instead of competitors Morumbi Stadium — the chosen venue before Arena Corinthians was built — and Allianz Parque . Sixteen games will be played in the stadium from 3 to 16 August 2016 ; they will be divided equally between men 's and women 's tournaments . Two matches will be played at 17 : 00 and 21 : 30 hours on competition days . Twelve matches will be valid for the preliminary stages and four for the quarterfinals . Semifinals and finals will be played in the Maracanã stadium . 
 = = Names = = 
 The stadium was called Estádio do Corinthians by Corinthians when it was announced . The name being used on the club 's official website is Arena Corinthians . The Brazilian Football Confederation uses the name Arena Corinthians . FIFA refers to the Stadium as Arena de São Paulo during the World Cup , but recognises the name Arena Corinthians . The largest media company in Brazil , Rede Globo , uses Arena Corinthians like sports diary Lance ! Local media have tried to give it nicknames . For example , newspaper Folha refer to Arena Corinthians as <unk> ; O Estado de S. Paulo uses both the neighbourhood @-@ based nickname and the official name . Rede Record uses <unk> . 
 The club plans to sell the stadium naming rights for R $ 400 million for 20 years . A study by <unk> Sports Business estimated that the value should be R $ 21 million per year . Companies Petrobras , <unk> , Grupo Petrópolis , Etihad Airways , Qatar Foundation , Caixa <unk> Federal , Emirates Airlines , <unk> , <unk> , BMG , <unk> <unk> , Santander Group , Kalunga and Zurich Insurance Group have all been named as possible buyers , but no deal has been announced yet . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Aníbal Coutinho designed the stadium to be one " that would help the supporters , that would help the team to win matches , I wanted to make the supporters get on the pitch " . Aníbal led a team of 25 architects . The complex is in a 197 @,@ 095 @.@ 14 square metres ( 2 @,@ 121 @,@ 514 @.@ 4 sq ft ) property . The built up area is 189 @,@ 000 square metres ( 2 @,@ 030 @,@ 000 sq ft ) with 17 @,@ 500 cubic metres ( 620 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete . 80 % of the structural construction is made of precast elements , 40 % manufactured on a 7 @,@ 500 square metres ( 81 @,@ 000 sq ft ) plant on @-@ site . 
 The rectangular , 267 by 228 metres ( 876 by 748 ft ) , 43 metres ( 141 ft ) tall stadium has two buildings ; the main building on the west side and another on the east side . When measurements are taken from the pitch , the east side height is 51 metres ( 167 ft ) , the west side is 57 metres ( 187 ft ) and the north and south ends are 15 metres ( 49 ft ) tall . The pitch sits at exactly 777 metres ( 2 @,@ 549 ft ) ; Aníbal Coutinho said , " The number 77 is considered lucky for the club . The club is located at 777 São Jorge St. and it brings to mind the 1977 that they won one of their most celebrated championships of all time . " ( the Campeonato Paulista of 1977 ) . 
 = = = West and east sectors = = = 
 The west side has a 6 @,@ 200 square metres ( 67 @,@ 000 sq ft ) façade . VIP seats , television crew equipment , press and most box seats are in the west building . The glass has been designed with a curvature intended to simulate the visual effect of a ball hitting the net . Special , seamless , 26 metres ( 85 ft ) beams have been developed to support the structure . The geometry consulting company <unk> GmbH developed panelling that rationalised the 5 @,@ 400 square metres ( 58 @,@ 000 sq ft ) double @-@ curved freeform glass surface into 855 planar and cylindrical panels , all in hot bent toughened glass . This solution allowed for minimising the number of shapes necessary by 93 % , reducing costs considerably . The photo @-@ voltaic glass powers the air conditioning . The complete glass structure is 6 @,@ 900 square metres ( 74 @,@ 000 sq ft ) counting the sides ; the façade width is 220 metres ( 720 ft ) by 24 metres ( 79 ft ) tall . 
 The east side of the stadium houses one of the largest video screens of the world , 170 by 20 metres ( 558 by 66 ft ) — 3 @,@ 400 square metres ( 37 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . It has 210 @,@ 000 individual LEDs ; 1 @,@ 320 custom made luminaires are fitted in 4 metres ( 13 ft ) long glass sheets . The screen is manufactured by Osram <unk> and is controlled by an E : cue lighting control . Glass for both façades were provided by Italian company <unk> SRL , using Asahi Glass Co . ' s <unk> Clear glass . 
 External walls are covered by 12 @,@ 000 square metres ( 130 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of white <unk> <unk> ceramic tiles , A 12 metres ( 39 ft ) Corinthians symbol , constructed from stainless steel and <unk> , will be mounted on the south wall of the east side . 
 The public circulates using 10 escalators , 15 lifts , two ramps and 13 staircases . 59 concession stands are available , as is an auditorium for 360 people and a 25 @,@ 000 square metres ( 270 @,@ 000 sq ft ) convention center under the west building . A museum dedicated to Corinthians will be set up in the east building . 
 Interior design is designed by Gensler . There are six changing rooms . Home team changing rooms occupy 1 @,@ 300 square metres ( 14 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , with jacuzzis , cryotherapy and a private area for the coach . The warm @-@ up area has seating for 86 VIP ticket holders , and is separated by soundproof glass . All the public areas have air conditioning and are finished in marble , granite or top tier ceramic tile . 
 = = = Seating = = = 
 There are 49 @,@ 205 seats . The stadium has 6 @,@ 000 second tier covered seating and 10 @,@ 000 VIP seats . 89 luxury boxes accommodate 1 @,@ 414 spectators . Distributed on the West building 's 5th and 6th floors , 87 % have 12 seats , 10 % between 21 and 33 seats and 4 units more than 70 seats . The largest units will cover more than 470 square metres ( 5 @,@ 100 sq ft ) . The lowest ring of bleachers encircle the entire arena . It holds 10 @,@ 500 seats on each side , 6 @,@ 000 behind the south goal and 9 @,@ 000 behind the north goal for a total of 35 @,@ 000 + places . 
 The distance between the first row of seating and the field is 9 metres ( 30 ft ) on all sides . General seating is provided by <unk> ³ using an exclusive design based on the Integra model . There are four different finishes , ranging from straight chairs without arms to stuffed chairs in leather . Most seats are white . Business level and box seats are finished in black leather and made by <unk> Frau . The 600 seats have laser @-@ engraved club crests . 
 = = = Roof = = = 
 Werner Sobek designed the roof , which is held in place by 48 75 metres ( 246 ft ) -long trusses . The west and east sides are joined by two identical structures that have a free span of 170 metres ( 560 ft ) . The total east @-@ west roof length is 245 @.@ 75 metres ( 806 @.@ 3 ft ) . Aníbal Coutinho intended to bring a <unk> flair to the construction using structures that resemble the São Paulo Museum of Art , a symbol of the city . The height of the roof and weight of the trusses required the use of the largest crawler crane available in Latin America . The steel beams together weigh 4 @,@ 000 tons . 
 The roof has four layers . On the underside is a layer of corrugated steel sheets . Above them , thermal and acoustic insulation is provided by <unk> sheets . A layer of plasterboard is above it . Finally , the entire roof is covered with 40 @,@ 000 square metres ( 430 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of Firestone <unk> TPO . On the underside , a flexible membrane covers the structure . This final layer helps to collect rainwater for reuse in other areas of the stadium . 
 The structure was redesigned to duplicate the current noise level supporters create during games . Measurements taken on Pacaembu show that sound levels reach a peak of <unk> when goals are scored . 4 @,@ 500 square metres ( 48 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of glass will be installed on the end closest to the pitch of the west and east roofing . The entire structure measures 32 @,@ 300 square metres ( 348 @,@ 000 sq ft ) and weights 6 @,@ 500 tons . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Osram will install four scoreboards in the stadium , on the north and south ends , above the bleachers . They will be set in pairs , with one facing the pitch and one facing outside . Each screen is 225 square metres ( 2 @,@ 420 sq ft ) and measures 30 by 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 98 by 25 ft ) . The inside @-@ facing screen will have a <unk> dot pitch and the outside @-@ facing screens will have a 20mm dot pitch . 3 @,@ 500 flat panel televisions are installed throughout the stadium , individually or as video walls , comprising 3 @,@ 100 stations . 
 = = = Lighting = = = 
 The pitch lighting is going to use 352 Osram <unk> 2000 @-@ Watt Metal @-@ halide <unk> <unk> lamps , guaranteeing over 90 % colour fidelity . The 5 @,@ 000 lux lighting is completely uniform and is 50 % brighter than FIFA 's recommendation . Osram provides lighting for the entire complex . 
 = = = Pitch = = = 
 The field has recommended FIFA dimensions of 105 by 68 metres ( 115 by 74 yd ) . It was prepared by World Sports in partnership with Desso . The field is made up of Perennial <unk> , which is grown directly at the site . The original idea was to use black grass to avoid the colours of Palmeiras — Corinthians ' biggest rivals — but it was proved to be technically impossible and the club chose to use grass with a darker hue . To improve fixation , the grass is intertwined with 22 million artificial fibres . Ultraviolet lights are used nightly to ensure that all parts of the pitch will receive equal lighting ; the field is exposed to only two hours of direct sunlight per day . 
 World Sports uses a blend of three cultivars from DLF @-@ Trifolium , Ph.D. <unk> <unk> , from Oregon , US . DLF states that this grass has strong cold and wear tolerance and is disease resistant , combined with fast growth rate . The hue is 8 @.@ 7 on a scale of 1 to 9 , where 9 is dark green . The choice of using <unk> instead of the most common and usually recommended Bermuda brought advantages like having longitudinal roots , avoiding the cleats to tangle with them , and resistance to yellowing . It also brought challenges ; <unk> is native to cooler climates and needs temperatures of 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) for optimum growth . Because the temperature in São Paulo rarely falls below 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) , a heating system is not used . A cooling <unk> cold water through 40 @,@ 000 metres ( 130 @,@ 000 ft ) of drainage pipes , reducing the grass roots temperature to 6 ° C ( 43 ° F ) . The grass is mowed to between 2 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) and 2 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) . 
 The drainage system has two operating modes ; gravitational and vacuum @-@ enhanced ( <unk> System ) . The vacuum draining system can handle up to 400 @,@ 000 litres ( 88 @,@ 000 imp gal ) per hour , improving oxygen levels in the rooting system and cooling the pitch , even during matches . This is equivalent to 56 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) of rain drained in one hour . The irrigation system has individual sprinkler controls , which are controlled by a computerised system . The system comprises 48 sprinklers — twice the minimum FIFA recommendation . 
 = = = Information technology and communications = = = 
 The stadium will have wi @-@ fi and 4G LTE in all its sectors . Using smartphones , the public will be able to access game statistics and watch replays that will be published on a website maintained by the stadium crew . A dedicated team will control centrally all the screens and scoreboards . Supporters will be monitored by a computer system connected to hundreds of security cameras . All services are contracted with <unk> IT . 
 = = = Hospitality and stores = = = 
 There are plans for 75 bars — including 13 in the VIP areas — two restaurants and two sport bars in the stadium . All the restaurants and bars are managed by <unk> Arena on a 10 @-@ year contract . <unk> is expected to invest R $ 40 million in the stadium ; all the properties will be fully operational in 2015 . Other commercial properties inside the stadium complex are two clothing stores and kiosks whose operators have not yet been decided upon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The project received awards for the Best Commercial Project and the Grand Prize as the Best Overall Project in Brazil in the largest Corporate Architecture events in Latin America in 2011 ; it competed against 1 @,@ 116 projects . Reception by Corinthians supporters was enthusiastic according to a poll , with 83 % approval of the stadium . Opposition fans have good approval rates of the stadium . Hundreds of supporters frequently visited the construction site . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The stadium is 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) east of the city centre and 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) away from the São Paulo – <unk> International Airport . The nearest subway station is Corinthians @-@ Itaquera , 500 metres ( 550 yd ) from the stadium . It connects to a railway station with the same name . The Artur <unk> subway station is 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) away . If all the stadium 's users boarded trains to leave it , the stadium would be empty in 30 minutes . Created for World Cup matches , an express train connects Luz and the Corinthians @-@ Itaquera <unk> Station , making the trip in 17 minutes . Due to its success , the service was extended to local matches , renamed to ' Expresso Corinthians ' . The metro and train stations can accommodate 114 @,@ 000 passengers per hour . Each metro train can carry 1 @,@ 600 passengers ; trains depart at 85 @-@ second intervals . 
 The site has 1 @,@ 620 covered parking spaces and 929 open air parking spaces , with another 2 @,@ 214 spaces provided by a shopping mall nearby . There are 61 bus routes that stop close to Arena Corinthians . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Corinthians does not plan to host concerts or other sport events in the stadium because the use for non @-@ football events can destroy the pitch and football ticket sales will compensate for the loss of revenue . The club plans to use the structure to host conventions and trade shows , and to promote tours of the stadium . A 2 @,@ 500 square metres ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) convention centre will be located under the west building . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 EA Sports added all 12 venues used at the 2014 FIFA World Cup , including the Arena Corinthians , to the 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil video game . 
 The Arena Corinthians is featured on " You Don 't Have to Live Like a Referee " , the sixteenth episode of the 25th season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons , and the <unk> episode of the series . Homer Simpson acts as a FIFA World Cup 2014 referee in a game played at Arena Corinthians . 
 The second episode of Discovery <unk> three @-@ episode series Building the World Cup is dedicated to Arena Corinthians . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 The circumstances in which Arena Corinthians was chosen as the World Cup stadium for São Paulo , and the resources used for its construction , have been criticised . 
 = = = World Cup hosts = = = 
 Jose Serra , governor of São Paulo in 2007 , planned to bring the opening game to his state — specifically to the Morumbi Stadium — as soon as Brazil was confirmed as the host nation of FIFA World Cup 2014 . Mayor Gilberto Kassab supported the option of Morumbi and was assured that president Luis Inácio da Silva wanted the same . Unhappy with Morumbi , FIFA 's secretary general Jérôme Valcke said the Morumbi Stadium could not host the opening game and was the worst among the 12 venues presented to FIFA . He recommended that the city should build a new stadium . FIFA technicians stated that the maximum capacity of the current structure would be 46 @,@ 000 spectators — below the FIFA minimum of 60 @,@ 000 . São Paulo Futebol Clube 's director João Paulo de Jesus Lopes said this was " a lie " . FIFA 's president Sepp Blatter stated that Morumbi could not host the opening game or semifinals without an extensive renovations plan . 
 The Morumbi Stadium failed to provide proof of funding for a R $ 630 million renovation plan requested by FIFA to secure its status as a World Cup venue ; the stadium was then excluded from the tournament on 16 June 2010 . The Local World Cup Committee suggested to use Arena Corinthians instead . FIFA accepted the suggestion and confirmed the decision on 10 October 2011 . Journalist Wagner <unk> from O Estado de S. Paulo deemed the exclusion of the Morumbi Stadium from the World Cup and the subsequent choice of Arena Corinthians as a venue for the event to be politically charged . After receiving several negative responses from FIFA about the renovation project for Morumbi , then @-@ CBF @-@ president Ricardo Teixeira lost patience with São Paulo Futebol Clube officers ; he considered that they were delaying the decision by purposely failing to meet the requirements to force the government to spend money on the construction . São Paulo 's opposition to Teixeira in the now defunct Clube dos 13 election — which was won by ruling @-@ side Fábio <unk> , aligned with São Paulo 's Juvenal <unk> — irritated the CBF president . At the same time , an affinity between Teixeira and then @-@ president of Corinthians , Andrés Sanchez — who was chosen as the head of delegation for the national team during the 2010 FIFA World Cup and on the same side on Clube dos 13 's election — was noticed . 
 São Paulo 's mayor Gilberto Kassab supported the selection of the Morumbi Stadium and guaranteed that president Luis Inácio da Silva wanted the same ; he blamed FIFA for vetoing the selection . He said Corinthians could not influence FIFA and that CBF wanted Morumbi Stadium to host the opening game . The senior management of São Paulo F.C. criticised the chosen stadium and the selection process on numerous occasions after Morumbi Stadium was excluded from the World Cup . President Juvenal <unk> said the region had no city structures , hospitals or hotels ; the only way to enter or leave the area would be to use a fire engine and that there was no way to create a VIP area around the stadium . Juvenal blamed ex @-@ governor José Serra for Morumbi Stadium 's deselection . Serra denied the accusations . 
 Carlos Miguel <unk> , then a candidate for the SPFC presidency , said Arena Corinthians exists because Brazil 's president demanded the construction of a new stadium in São Paulo ; he also said Corinthians will never repay the loans for the stadium , that Odebrecht was the real owner , that FIFA and the Brazilian government only wanted to make money for construction companies , and that Itaquera was " another world , another country , nobody can get there " . Later he visited the Arena by car , recanted his opinion and said the stadium was " marvelous " and could be reached easily . 
 = = = Public funding allegations = = = 
 <unk> <unk> from <unk> said tax credits and BNDES resources are public money and that the concession of those resources to Corinthians are unclear . The federal government dismissed the notion , saying that tax credits are intended to encourage economical growth and work opportunities for the areas surrounding the stadia . The city government said tax credits are not subsidies and the stadium will be a boon to the city , especially the east zone . They also said subsidies given to the Brazilian Grand Prix and Carnaval among others also bring benefits to the city . Public Prosecutor Marcelo Milani contested the validity of tax credits issued by the city and sued then @-@ mayor Gilberto Kassab for R $ 1 @.@ 74 billion ; the judges said Milani 's case was without merit and dismissed it . 
 = = = Project changes = = = 
 The project executed is not the project approved by the city council in 2011 . Amendments were made to the final project , which was submitted on 25 July 2013 and approved on 13 February 2014 . 
 = = = Construction accidents = = = 
 Two people were killed in an accident on 27 November 2013 , which destroyed part of the east building . A crane fell while carrying a part of the roof , destroying eight columns of the LED screen and part of an internal slab . The structure was not affected because anti @-@ vandalism glass was installed on the east façade . An area of 5 @,@ 000 square metres ( 54 @,@ 000 sq ft ) was closed for investigation . Initial hypotheses were human error , crane mechanical failure and unstable ground under the crane . Liebherr said the crane 's " black box " data recorder did not record anything on the day of the accident , although it should have done . 
 As of August 2014 , the case has not yet been concluded . Liebherr paid for a study from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro , which concluded that the cause was unstable ground — the same conclusion reached by police experts ; based on this , police indicted nine construction workers . Odebrecht refuted the conclusions , and showed a study by private company <unk> as proof . Another report on the incident provided by IPT / University of São Paulo blamed the accident on the counterweights being heavier than what was specified on the rigging plan . Crane operations in the stadium were suspended at the time ; all cranes on the site were inspected and approved to continue work 16 days later . The families of the deceased workers received R $ 2 @.@ 9 million in compensation . 
 Another worker died in an accident on the site while working on the temporary seating . Local authorities ' initial assessment was that the worker caused the accident by not following the required safety procedures . As of March 2014 , an investigation into the death was underway . 
 = Fredmans epistlar = 
 Fredmans epistlar ( English : Fredman 's Epistles or Epistles of Fredman ) is a collection of 82 poems set to music by Carl Michael Bellman , a major figure in Swedish 18th century song . Though first published in 1790 , it was created over a period of twenty years from 1768 onwards . A companion volume , Fredmans sånger ( Fredman 's Songs ) was published the following year . 
 The Epistles vary widely in style and effect , from Rococo @-@ themed pastorale with a cast of gods and demigods from classical antiquity to laments for the effects of <unk> @-@ drinking , tavern @-@ scenes , and apparent improvisations . The lyrics , based on the lives of Bellman 's contemporaries in Gustavian @-@ age Sweden , describe a gallery of fictional and semi @-@ fictional characters and events taking place in Stockholm . Jean Fredman , an alcoholic former watchmaker , is the central character and fictional narrator . The " soliloquy " of Epistle 23 , a description of Fredman lying drunk in the gutter and then recovering in the Crawl @-@ In Tavern , was described by Oscar Levertin as " the to @-@ be @-@ or @-@ not @-@ to @-@ be of Swedish literature " . Ulla Winblad , based on one of Bellman 's friends , is the chief of the fictional " nymphs " . She is half goddess , half prostitute , a key figure among the demimonde characters of Fredman 's Epistles . 
 The Epistles are admired for the way that their poetry and music fit so well together . Bellman chose not to compose the tunes , instead borrowing and adapting existing melodies , most likely to exploit the humour of contrasting the associations of well @-@ known tunes with the meanings he gave them . This may also have been intended to provide historical depth to his work ; he sometimes devoted considerable energy to adapting melodies to fit an Epistle 's needs . 
 Many of the Epistles have remained culturally significant in Scandinavia , especially in Sweden . They are widely sung and recorded : by choirs such as the Orphei Drängar , by professional solo singers such as Fred Åkerström and Cornelis Vreeswijk , and by ensemble singers such as Sven @-@ Bertil Taube and William Clauson . The Epistles have been translated into German , French , English , Russian , Polish , Finnish , Italian and Dutch . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Bellman wrote a total of 82 Fredman 's Epistles , starting in 1768 . The overall theme of the Epistles is , on the surface , drinking , and its effects , but the Epistles are very far from being drinking songs . Instead , they are a diverse collection of songs , often telling stories . They are sometimes romantically pastoral , sometimes serious , even mournful , but always dramatic , full of life . Together , they " paint in words and music a canvas of their age " . They are populated by a lengthy cast of characters , and set firmly in Bellman 's time and place , eighteenth century Stockholm , but are simultaneously decorated , for romantic or humorous effect , in Rococo style . As a result , listeners are confronted with both striking realism and classical imagery . Within these general themes , the Epistles follow no discernible pattern , and do not join together to tell any single story . Their tunes , too , are borrowed from a variety of sources , often French . The words that are fitted to the tunes are often in parodic contrast to their original themes , very likely achieving humorous effects on their eighteenth @-@ century audiences . Fredman 's Epistles are thus not easy to categorise , and the critic Johan Henric Kellgren stated that Bellman 's songs " had no model and can have no successors " . 
 Bellman was a skilful and entertaining performer of his songs , accompanying himself on the cittern , putting on different voices , and imitating the sounds made by a crowd of people . He is unusual , even unique , among major poets in that almost all of his work was " conceived to music " . His achievement has been compared to Shakespeare , Beethoven , Mozart , and Hogarth . Bellman , however , was no great playwright , nor a major classical composer . His biographer , Paul Britten Austin , suggests that the comparison with Hogarth is closer to the mark . Bellman had a gift for using elegant classical references in comic contrast to the sordid realities of drinking and prostitution . The way he does this , at once regretting and celebrating these excesses in song , achieves something of what Hogarth achieved in engravings and paint . The art historian Axel <unk> describes Bellman 's sensibility as if he had been a painter : " An unusual swiftness of apprehension , both optical and aural , must have distinguished him . " Britten Austin agrees with this , noting that " When [ Bellman 's ] words and music have faded into silence it is the visual image which remains . " Jan <unk> comments in the Historical Dictionary of Scandinavian Literature and Theater that " Bellman 's achievement consists in taking this humble and unrecognized literary form [ the drinking song ] and raising it to a genre that became impossible to ignore , while in the process creating songs and characters that have become an indispensable part of Sweden 's literary and cultural heritage . " 
 = = The Epistles = = 
 Many of the 82 Fredman 's Epistles remain popular in Sweden . Their diverse styles and themes may be illustrated with examples of some of the best @-@ known songs . To begin with No. 23 , Ach du min Moder ! ( Alas , thou my mother ) , which has been described as " the to @-@ be @-@ or @-@ not @-@ to @-@ be of Swedish literature " , tells , in realist style , the story of a drunk who wakes in a Stockholm gutter outside the Crawl @-@ In Tavern . He curses his parents for conceiving him " perhaps upon a table " as he looks at his torn clothes . Then the tavern door opens , and he goes in and has his first drink . The song ends with loud thanks to the drunk 's mother and father . In contrast , the Rococo No. 28 , I <unk> <unk> jag <unk> barn , min Fröja ( Yesterday I saw thy child , my Freya ) , tells the tale of an attempt to arrest the " nymph " Ulla Winblad , based on a real event . Bellman here combines realism – Ulla wearing a black embroidered bodice , and losing her watch in a named street ( <unk> ) in Stockholm 's Gamla stan – with images from classical mythology , such as a myrtle crown and an allusion to the goddess Aphrodite . 
 Quite a different tone is set in No. 40 , Ge rum i <unk> @-@ <unk> din <unk> ! ( Make room in the wedding @-@ hall , you dog ! ) , as some unruly soldiers interfere in a chaotic wedding , mixing roughly with the musicians and the wedding @-@ party . Shouts of " Shoulder arms ! " and panic at a chimney fire combine with a complex rhyming pattern to create a humorous picture of the disastrous event . The story ends with the priest pocketing some of the collection money . A later Epistle , No. 48 , Solen <unk> blank och <unk> ( The sun gleams smooth and round ) , narrates the relaxed and peaceful journey of a boat bringing Ulla Winblad home to Stockholm across Lake Mälaren on a lovely spring morning , after a night of carousing . The boatmen call to each other , apparently haphazardly , but each detail helps to create a pastoral vision as " Gradually the wind blows up / In the fallen sails ; / The pennant stretches , and with an oar / Olle stands on a <unk> ; " . The song is " one of Bellman 's greatest " , creating " an incomparable panorama of that eighteenth @-@ century Stockholm which meets us in Elias Martin 's canvasses . " 
 No. 71 , Ulla ! min Ulla ! <unk> <unk> jag dig <unk> ( Ulla ! My Ulla ! Say , may I offer thee ) is another of the best @-@ loved pastoral Epistles , and the melody may well be by Bellman himself . It imagines how Fredman , sitting on horseback outside Ulla 's window at <unk> on a summer 's day , invites her to come and dine with him on " reddest strawberries in milk and wine " . The following Epistle , No. 72 , Glimmande <unk> ( Gleaming nymph ) , is a night @-@ piece , set to an Andante melody from a French opéra comique . It describes in erotic detail the " nymph " asleep in her bed . To create the desired mood of rising excitement , Bellman creates a rainbow — after sunset . Britten Austin comments that the audience " does not even notice " . Meanwhile , No. 80 , <unk> en <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( Like a shepherdess in her best dress ) , is a pastorale , almost paraphrasing Nicolas Boileau @-@ <unk> 's French guide to the construction of pastoral verse , starting with " As a Shepherdess splendidly dressed / By the spring one day in June / gathers from the grass 's rosy bed / adornments and accents for her dress " . The effect is of an " almost religious invocation " . 
 The final Epistle , No. 82 , <unk> vid denna <unk> ( Rest by this spring ) , is both pastoral and Rococo , depicting a " little breakfast " in the Stockholm countryside . Red wine flows ; there is roast chicken , and an almond tart . Flowers " of a thousand kinds " are all around ; a stallion parades in a field " with his mare and foal " ; a bull roars ; a cockerel hops on the roof , and a magpie <unk> . Meanwhile , the musicians are exhorted to blow along with the wind god <unk> , small love @-@ sprites are asked to sing , and Ulla is called a nymph . The final chorus asks everyone to drink their dram of brandy . 
 = = Cast of characters = = 
 The lyrics of the Epistles describe a gallery of fictional and semi @-@ fictional characters who take part in more or less real events in and around the Stockholm of Bellman 's time . This cast includes some 44 named personages , many of whom appear only once or twice . Some , like the principal characters Jean Fredman and Ulla Winblad , are based on real people , and in Fredman 's case his real name was used . The Fredman of the Epistles is an alcoholic former watchmaker , and is the central character and fictional narrator . He is thus supposedly present in all the Epistles , but is only named in a few of them . The backdrop of many of the Epistles , Stockholm 's taverns , is also frequented by musicians including Christian <unk> on flute , Father Berg on various instruments , Father Movitz , and the dance master Corporal <unk> . 
 A particular group is the Order of Bacchus ( Bacchi Orden ) : to become a member , one must be seen lying in a drunken stupor in a Stockholm gutter at least twice . Among the more minor characters is the brandy @-@ distiller Lundholm . Another is <unk> , Ulla Winblad 's husband ; the real Eric Nordström did in fact marry the " real Ulla Winblad " , Maria Kristina <unk> , a silk @-@ spinner and fallen woman made pregnant by a passing nobleman . In the Epistles , Ulla Winblad is the chief of the " nymphs " . She is half goddess , half prostitute , chief among the demimonde characters of the Epistles . 
 = = Rococo theme = = 
 Many of the Epistles have a Rococo theme , especially the pastorale pieces with a cast of gods and demigods from classical mythology . Thus , Epistle 25 , " <unk> nu alla ( All blow now ! ) " , a short crossing of the Stockholm waterway to Djurgården , is peopled with billowing waves , thunder , Venus , Neptune , tritons , <unk> , angels , dolphins , <unk> " and Paphos 's whole might " , as well as water @-@ nymphs splashing about the " nymph " – in other words , Ulla Winblad . 
 The principal figures , given that the Epistles focus on drinking and its effects , along with " nymphs " , are Bacchus and Venus / Fröja , but the cast is wider , including : 
 Amaryllis – a nymph of the countryside ( from Virgil 's Eclogues ) 
 Bacchus – god of wine and drinking 
 Charon – the ferryman of Hades , carrying souls to the place of the dead 
 Chloris / Flora – the nymph or goddess of springtime , flowers and growth 
 Clotho – one of the three fates , spinning the thread of human life ( which is suddenly cut off ) 
 Cupid / <unk> – god of desire and erotic love , <unk> being a late Nordic invention 
 Jupiter / <unk> – king of the gods on Mount Olympus , god of thunder 
 Morpheus – god of sleep 
 Neptune – god of the sea , accompanying the birth of Venus from the waves 
 Nymph – a ( beautiful ) female nature deity 
 Pan – god of wildness and rough countryside 
 Themis – <unk> of divine law and justice 
 Triton – messenger of the sea , accompanying Neptune 
 Venus / Fröja / Aphrodite at Paphos – goddesses of love 
 = = Realism = = 
 Alongside the frankly mythological , Fredman 's Epistles have a convincing realism , painting pictures of moments of low life in Bellman 's contemporary Stockholm . Bellman himself provided a list of descriptions of his characters , giving a brief pen @-@ portrait of each one , like " Anders <unk> , a former clothier in <unk> , very cheerful and full of commonsense " . Different characters appear in different Epistles , making them realistically episodic . There is a fire in Epistle 34 ; a funeral is busily prepared in Epistles 46 and 47 ; and a fight breaks out in Epistle 53 . Many of the songs are about the effects of strong drink , from the damage to the Gröna Lund Tavern in Epistle 12 to the masterly portrait of a drunkard lying in the gutter of Epistle 23 , described by Oscar Levertin as " the to @-@ be @-@ or @-@ not @-@ to @-@ be of Swedish literature " . 
 The pastoral Epistles , too , give the impression of being in real places , with flesh @-@ and @-@ blood people , at specific times of day . Epistle 48 tells how the friends return to Stockholm by boat after a night out on Lake Mälaren , one summer morning in 1769 . Each of its twenty @-@ one verses paints a picture of a moment in the peaceful journey , from the wind stirring the fallen sails , the skipper 's daughter coming out of her cabin , the cockerel crowing , the church clock striking four in the morning , the sun glimmering on the calm water . The effects may seem to be haphazard , but " each stanza is a little picture , framed by its melody . We remember it all , seem to have lived through it , like a morning in our own lives . " Britten Austin calls it " a new vision of the natural and urban scene . Fresh as Martin 's . Detailed as Hogarth 's . Frail and ethereal as Watteau 's . " 
 Britten Austin tempers his praise for Bellman 's realism with the observation that the effects are chosen to work in song , rather than to be strictly correct or even possible . Thus in Epistle 72 , " Glimmande <unk> " , the memorable rainbow with its glowing colours " of purple , gold and green " is seen after nightfall . He comments " Never mind . It is a beautiful scene , even if its chronology calls for much poetic license . " Or in Epistle 80 , " <unk> en <unk> " , the farmer is for some reason going to or coming from market on a Sunday , when the market would be closed ; and his cart " heavy on staggering wheel " must have been absurdly full if it contained chickens , lambs , and calves all at once . But it had to be a Sunday to allow Ulla Winblad to step out of her swaying chaise , on an outing from the city . Britten Austin remarks that " until such solecisms are actually pointed out , one does not even notice them . " It is the same with the meals , which would cause " terrible indigestion " if the listener actually had to eat them , but " as a feast for mind , eye and ear they are highly satisfactory " , the imagination filled with " all the poetic wealth " that Bellman provides . 
 The literary historian Lars <unk> observes that Bellman 's sharp eye for detail has brought him praise for being the first Swedish realist , but at once balances this by saying that 
 his particular brand of ' realism ' carries with it a heaping measure of pure fantasy , grotesque humor , and — not least — an elegant veneer of classical mythology . 
 <unk> credits Bellman with a good knowledge of a literary craftsman 's tools , using rhetoric and classical knowledge " to provide a theatrical backdrop for his tavern folk . " The result is an " astonishing mixture of realism and wild mythological fantasy " , set to complicated musical structures : 
 marches and <unk> , operatic <unk> , and graceful minuets . The result is related to a drinking song only by derivation . As an artistic achievement it stands alone in the history of Swedish poetry . 
 = = Fitted to music = = 
 The critic Johan Henric Kellgren , in his introduction to the first edition , found that the songs could not be known fully only as poems . Never before , he stated , had the art of poetry and the art of music been more <unk> united . They were not , Kellgren argued , verse that had been set to music ; not music , set to verse ; but the two were so thoroughly melted together into One beauty that it was impossible to see which would most miss the other for its fulfilment . Quoting this in the final paragraph of his thesis , the musicologist James Massengale commented " That is how it ought to be said ! " 
 <unk> argues that , given that music is so important in the Epistles , and that Bellman had more than enough musical skill to write a tune , it is remarkable that all or almost all the tunes are borrowed . He suggests that this " seems to indicate that Bellman wanted to preserve some vestige of the borrowing . " That the borrowing was not just about saving effort or making up for absent skill , Massengale argues , is demonstrated by the fact that the amount of work Bellman had to put into the melodies for Epistles 12 ( " <unk> Fader Berg och <unk> " ) and 24 ( " <unk> <unk> ! " ) was " surely tantamount to the production of new melodies . " Borrowing was accepted , even encouraged at the time , but that does not explain why Bellman would have done it so consistently . The " poetic possibility " , Massengale suggests , is that Bellman wished to exploit the humorous contrast between a melody of one type and a story of another , or between an existing image associated with the melody , and a fresh one presented in an Epistle . In addition , Bellman was able to use what his audience knew to be borrowed music to reinforce the historical flavour of the Epistles , introducing exactly the kind of ambiguity that he was seeking . 
 Massengale points out that in the Epistles , Bellman employs a variety of methods to make the poetry work . For example , in Epistle 35 , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ibland , Bellman uses a panoply of metrical devices to counteract the " metrically plodding melody " . He uses the rhetorical figure <unk> ( repeating the last word of a clause at the start of the next ) in verse 3 with " ... <unk> jag barnet ; barnet det dog , ... " ( ... got I the child ; the child died ... ) and again in verse 4 . He uses <unk> ( repeating the first word of a clause at its end ) in verse 3 , with " Men , min Anna Greta , men ! " ( But , my Anna Greta , but ! ) , and again in verse 5 . And he uses anaphora ( repeating a word at the starts of neighbouring clauses ) in verse 4 , " <unk> den på <unk> , <unk> man <unk> ! " ( pour ... pour out four ! ) , and again in verse 5 . Massengale observes that good musical poetry , like this Epistle , is always a compromise , as it has both to fit its music or be no good as a musical setting , and to contrast with its music , or be no good as poetry . The final verse , containing all three metrical devices , is not , argues Massengale , an example of " decay " , but shows Bellman 's freedom , change of focus ( from lament to acceptance ) , and the closure of the Epistle . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = In Bellman 's lifetime = = = 
 King Gustav III called Bellman " Il signor <unk> " ( The master improviser ) . Bellman is said to have had an " enormous reputation " in his lifetime . The critic Kellgren however objected both to Bellman 's fame and to his flouting of the rules of good literary taste . Kellgren put his objections into verse : 
 <unk> ! Where is thy fame ? 
 Thy lyre another 's hand has seized 
 Whose wit , with drunken sallies pleas 'd , Priapus ' court delights ; the same 
 Grows wild apace as e 'er <unk> , 
 And full as rich his <unk> vein . 
 In other words , Bellman was a " tavern <unk> " , admittedly with a wonderful gift of improvisation , who wildly ignored the rules of literary genres . For example , within the classical tradition odes and satires were supposed to have different metres and different use of language . Kellgren did not mind the amoral attitude : " indeed he shared it " . But an Epistle like No. 28 traversed all moods , " from lyrical to humorous , tragic , descriptive and dramatic . " It was too much for critics such as Kellgren . 
 = = = In later times = = = 
 Bellman was sung " with delight " by students and schoolchildren from the start of the 19th century . The Romantic movement treated Bellman as an inspired genius , whereas later he was admired more for his artistic skill and literary innovation . Research into Bellman 's work began in the 19th century ; the Bellman Society formalised Bellman studies with their standard edition and their <unk> publications in the 20th century . Towards the end of the 20th century , an increasing number of doctoral theses have been written on Bellman 's life and work . 
 Many of the songs have remained culturally significant in Scandinavia , especially in Sweden , where Bellman remains " widely popular to this day " . In 1989 , the Swedish government subsided an edition of Bellman 's Epistles and Songs , with illustrations by Peter Dahl , to bring the texts to a wide audience . 
 Bellman has been compared with poets and musicians as diverse as Shakespeare and Beethoven . Åse Kleveland notes that he has been called " Swedish poetry 's Mozart , and Hogarth " , observing that 
 The comparison with Hogarth was no accident . Like the English portrait painter , Bellman drew detailed pictures of his time in his songs , not so much of life at court as of ordinary people 's everyday . 
 Britten Austin says instead simply that : 
 Bellman is unique among great poets , I think , in that virtually his entire opus is conceived to music . Other poets , of course , notably our Elizabethans , have written songs . But song was only one branch of their art . They did not leave behind , as Bellman did , a great musical @-@ literary work nor paint in words and music a canvas of their age . Nor are their songs dramatic . 
 Charles Wharton Stork commented in his 1917 anthology of Swedish verse that " The anthologist finds little to pause over until he comes to the poetry of Karl Mikael Bellman ( 1740 @-@ 1795 ) , but here he must linger long . " Describing him as a " master of improvisation " , he wrote : 
 Like all great masters , Bellman reconciles the opposing elements of style and substance , of form and fire . His content reminds one somewhat of the pictures of Rome in Horace 's Epistles . Fredman , who is the poet himself , introduces his readers to an intimate circle of friends : to Movitz , to <unk> , to Amaryllis , to Ulla <unk> , and the rest . With them we witness the life of Stockholm : the world awakening at daybreak after rain , a funeral , a concert , a visit to a sick friend , and various idyllic excursions into the neighboring parks and villages . The little world lives and we live in it . Considering this phase of Bellman 's genius , the critic will pronounce him a realist of the first order . But when one notes his dazzling mastery of form , his prodigal variety of meter and stanza , his ease and spontaneity , one is equally tempted to call him a virtuoso of lyric style . " 
 = = = Performance and recordings = = = 
 The Epistles are widely sung and recorded by amateur choirs and professional singers alike . The Orphei Drängar ( Orpheus 's farmhands ) are a choir named for a phrase in Epistle 14 , and set up to perform Bellman 's works ; they give concerts ( of music by many composers ) around the world . 
 Several professional solo singers in the Swedish ballad tradition largely made their name in the 1960s singing Bellman , while accompanying themselves in <unk> style with a guitar . They were the members of the " Storks " artistic community ( " <unk> <unk> " ) in Stockholm , and they include Fred Åkerström ( 1937 – 1985 ) with his albums Fred <unk> Bellman , Glimmande <unk> and Vila vid denna <unk> , and Cornelis Vreeswijk with his albums Spring mot Ulla , spring ! and Movitz ! Movitz ! Other singers , such as Sven @-@ Bertil Taube and William Clauson , used the less authentic accompaniment of an ensemble ; Clauson was also the first to release a recording of Bellman in English , alongside his Swedish recordings . 
 Singers from other traditions sometimes sing Bellman ; for example , the folk singer Sofia Karlsson and the rock musician Kajsa <unk> . 
 = = Editions = = 
 The 1790 edition was the only one to appear in Bellman 's lifetime . It was published by Olof Åhlström , by royal privilege ; he held a monopoly on the printing of sheet music in Sweden . Åhlström arranged the songs for piano , and Kellgren edited the song texts and wrote an introduction , but the extent of their influence on the shape of Fredman 's Epistles cannot be fully determined . The edition was illustrated with a frontispiece by the leading Swedish artist Johan Tobias Sergel , engraved by Johan Fredrik Martin . 
 The corpus of published Epistles did not change after Bellman 's death . Many minor selections from the Epistles have been published , sometimes with illustrations and introductions . The Epistles have been translated , at least partially , into German , French , English , Russian , Polish , Finnish , Italian and Dutch , as shown below . 
 The English edition by Britten Austin is a selection of the Epistles , and is in rhyming verse in the original metre . Britten Austin describes the challenge of translation as difficult or impossible , and admits that in one way his translations are inevitably " a little faint . " He explains this is because " Bellman 's colloquialisms which offended his contemporaries still strike Swedish ears as the language of everyday speech . My renderings , therefore , may seem a trifle too antique in flavour ; but to have jumbled up , as Bellman brilliantly does , modern @-@ sounding slang with the graces of Rococo diction , would have produced a horrid effect . 
 Editions and selections of the Epistles , some with illustrations , some with music , some printed together with Fredman 's Songs , include : 
 1790 : Fredmans epistlar , Stockholm : Olof Åhlström , by Royal Privilege . 
 --- facsimile reprint , 1976 : Uddevalla . 
 1816 : Fredmans epistlar , Stockholm : <unk> . 
 1844 : Fredmans epistlar , Copenhagen : Jaeger . With 24 coloured lithographs . 
 1858 : Fredmans epistlar , Text och musik , Copenhagen : J. <unk> . ( In Danish ) 
 1869 : Fredmans epistlar och sånger , Stockholm : <unk> and <unk> . 
 1889 : Fredmans epistlar , Stockholm : Bonniers . Arranged for piano solo . 
 1899 : Fredmans epistlar af Carl Michael Bellman , Stockholm : <unk> . <unk> by Oscar Levertin . <unk> by Alf Wallander . 
 1909 : Fredmans <unk> , Jena : E. Diederichs . ( In German ) 
 1920 : Fredmans epistlar , Ord och musik , Stockholm : Bonniers . 
 1927 : Carl Michael Bellmans <unk> . 1 . Fredmans Epistlar , Stockholm : <unk> . ( " Standard Edition " ) 
 1953 : Les <unk> de Fredman , Stockholm : <unk> . ( In French ) 28 Epistles trans . Nils <unk> and Pierre <unk> . Illus . Elias Martin . 
 --- reprinted , 1984 : La Ferté @-@ Milon . 
 1958 : Das <unk> Lied , Munich : Desch . ( In German ) . trans . Hanns von <unk> , Felix <unk> , Georg Schwarz . 
 1977 : Fredman 's Epistles and songs , Stockholm : Reuter and Reuter . ( In English ) trans . Paul Britten Austin . 
 1982 : <unk> <unk> ; <unk> <unk> , Leningrad : <unk> . ( In Russian ) 
 1991 : <unk> <unk> i <unk> , Kraków : Polskie Wydawnictwo <unk> . ( In Polish ) 
 1991 : <unk> ja <unk> , Helsinki : <unk> . ( In Finnish ) 
 1994 : Fredmans epistlar , Stockholm : Proprius . 
 2002 : Ulla , mia Ulla : <unk> <unk> in italiano cantabile , Rome : <unk> <unk> e <unk> <unk> . ( In Italian ) . A selection . 
 2003 : <unk> van <unk> en leven van <unk> : een <unk> uit de <unk> & <unk> van Fredman , ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch : Voltaire . ( In Dutch ) . A selection . 
 = Music of Italy = 
 The music of Italy ranges across a broad spectrum of opera and instrumental classical music and a body of popular music drawn from both native and imported sources . Music has traditionally been one of the cultural markers of Italian national and ethnic identity and holds an important position in society and in politics . Italian innovation in musical scales , harmony , notation , and theatre enabled the development of opera in the late 16th century , and much of modern European classical music , such as the symphony and concerto . 
 Instrumental and vocal classical music is an iconic part of Italian identity , spanning experimental art music and international fusions to symphonic music and opera . Opera is integral to Italian musical culture , and has become a major segment of popular music . The Neapolitan song , canzone Napoletana , and the cantautori singer @-@ songwriter traditions are also popular domestic styles that form an important part of the Italian music industry , alongside imported genres like jazz , rock and hip hop . Italian folk music is an important part of the country 's musical heritage , and spans a diverse array of regional styles , instruments and dances . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Italian music has been held up in high esteem in history and many pieces of Italian music are considered high art . More than other elements of Italian culture , Italian music is generally eclectic , but unique from other nations ' music . No parochial protectionist movement has ever attempted to keep Italian music pure and free from foreign influence , except briefly under the Fascist regime of the 1920s and 30s . As a result , Italian music has kept elements of the many peoples that have dominated or influenced the country , including French , German , and Spanish . The country 's historical contributions to music are also an important part of national pride . The relatively recent history of Italy includes the development of an opera tradition that has spread throughout the world ; prior to the development of Italian identity or a unified Italian state , the Italian peninsula contributed to important innovations in music including the development of musical notation and Gregorian chant . 
 = = = Social identity = = = 
 Italy has a strong sense of national identity through distinctive culture - a sense of an appreciation of beauty and emotionality , which is strongly evidenced in the music . Cultural , political and social issues are often also expressed through music in Italy . Allegiance to music is integrally woven into the social identity of Italians but no single style has been considered a characteristic " national style " . Most folk musics are localized , and unique to a small region or city . Italy 's classical legacy , however , is an important point of the country 's identity , particularly opera ; traditional operatic pieces remain a popular part of music and an integral component of national identity . The musical output of Italy remains characterized by " great diversity and creative independence ( with ) a rich variety of types of expression " . 
 With the growing industrialization that accelerated during the 20th and 21st century , Italian society gradually moved from an agricultural base to an urban and industrial center . This change weakened traditional culture in many parts of society ; a similar process occurred in other European countries , but unlike them , Italy had no major initiative to preserve traditional musics . Immigration from North Africa , Asia , and other European countries led to further diversification of Italian music . Traditional music came to exist only in small pockets , especially as part of dedicated campaigns to retain local musical identities . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Music and politics have been intertwined for centuries in Italy . Just as many works of art in the Italian Renaissance were commissioned by royalty and the Roman Catholic Church , much music was likewise composed on the basis of such commissions — incidental court music , music for coronations , for the birth of a royal heir , royal marches , and other occasions . Composers who strayed ran certain risks . Among the best known of such cases was the Neapolitan composer Domenico Cimarosa , who composed the Republican hymn for the short @-@ lived Neapolitan Republic of 1799 . When the republic fell , he was tried for treason along with other revolutionaries . Cimarosa was not executed by the restored monarchy , but he was exiled . 
 Music also played a role in the unification of the peninsula . During this period , some leaders attempted to use music to forge a unifying cultural identity . One example is the chorus " Va <unk> " from Giuseppe Verdi 's opera Nabucco . The opera is about ancient Babylon , but the chorus contains the phrase " O mia Patria " , ostensibly about the struggle of the Israelites , but also a thinly veiled reference to the destiny of a not @-@ yet @-@ united Italy ; the entire chorus became the unofficial anthem of the Risorgimento , the drive to unify Italy in the 19th century . Even Verdi 's name was a synonym for Italian unity because " Verdi " could be read as an acronym for Vittorio Emanuele Re d 'Italia , Victor Emanuel King of Italy , the Savoy monarch who eventually became Victor Emanuel II , the first king of united Italy . Thus , " Viva Verdi " was a rallying cry for patriots and often appeared in graffiti in Milan and other cities in what was then part of Austro @-@ Hungarian territory . Verdi had problems with censorship before the unification of Italy . His opera Un ballo in maschera was originally entitled Gustavo III and was presented to the San Carlo opera in Naples , the capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies , in the late 1850s . The Neapolitan censors objected to the realistic plot about the assassination of Gustav III , King of Sweden , in the 1790s . Even after the plot was changed , the Neapolitan censors still rejected it . 
 Later , in the Fascist era of the 1920s and 30s , government censorship and interference with music occurred , though not on a systematic basis . Prominent examples include the notorious anti @-@ modernist manifesto of 1932 and Mussolini 's banning of G.F. Malipiero 's opera La favola del <unk> <unk> after one performance in 1934 . The music media often criticized music that was perceived as either politically radical or insufficiently Italian . General print media , such as the Enciclopedia Moderna Italiana , tended to treat traditionally favored composers such as Giacomo Puccini and Pietro Mascagni with the same brevity as composers and musicians that were not as favored — modernists such as Alfredo Casella and Ferruccio Busoni ; that is , encyclopedia entries of the era were mere lists of career milestones such as compositions and teaching positions held . Even the conductor Arturo Toscanini , an avowed opponent of Fascism , gets the same neutral and distant treatment with no mention at all of his " anti @-@ regime " stance . Perhaps the best @-@ known episode of music colliding with politics involves Toscanini . He had been forced out of the musical directorship at La Scala in Milan in 1929 because he refused to begin every performance with the fascist song , <unk> . For this insult to the regime , he was attacked and beaten on the street outside the Bologne opera after a performance in 1931 . During the Fascist era , political pressure stymied the development of classical music , although censorship was not as systematic as in Nazi Germany . A series of " racial laws " was passed in 1938 , thus denying to Jewish composers and musicians membership in professional and artistic associations . Although there was not a massive flight of Italian Jews from Italy during this period ( compared to the situation in Germany ) composer Mario Castelnuovo @-@ Tedesco , an Italian Jew , was one of those who emigrated . Some non @-@ Jewish foes of the regime also emigrated — Toscanini , for one . 
 More recently , in the later part of the 20th century , especially in the 1970s and beyond , music became further enmeshed in Italian politics . A roots revival stimulated interest in folk traditions , led by writers , collectors and traditional performers . The political right in Italy viewed this roots revival with disdain , as a product of the " unprivileged classes " . The revivalist scene thus became associated with the opposition , and became a vehicle for " protest against free @-@ market capitalism " . Similarly , the avant @-@ garde classical music scene has , since the 1970s , been associated with and promoted by the Italian Communist Party , a change that can be traced back to the 1968 student revolts and protests . 
 = = Classical music = = 
 Italy has long been a center for European classical music , and by the beginning of the 20th century , Italian classical music had forged a distinct national sound that was decidedly Romantic and melodic . As typified by the operas of Verdi , it was music in which " ... The vocal lines always dominate the tonal complex and are never overshadowed by the instrumental accompaniments ... " Italian classical music had resisted the " German harmonic juggernaut " — that is , the dense harmonies of Richard Wagner , Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss . Italian music also had little in common with the French reaction to that German music — the impressionism of Claude Debussy , for example , in which melodic development is largely abandoned for the creation of mood and atmosphere through the sounds of individual chords . 
 European classical music changed greatly in the 20th century . New music abandoned much of the historical , nationally developed schools of harmony and melody in favor of experimental music , atonality , minimalism and electronic music , all of which employ features that have become common to European music in general and not Italy specifically . These changes have also made classical music less accessible to many people . Important composers of the period include Ottorino Respighi , Ferruccio Busoni , Alfredo Casella , Gian Francesco Malipiero , Franco Alfano , Bruno Maderna , Luciano Berio , Luigi Nono , <unk> <unk> , Salvatore <unk> , Luigi Dallapiccola , Carlo <unk> , Gian Carlo Menotti , Jacopo Napoli , and Goffredo <unk> . 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 Opera originated in Italy in the late 16th century during the time of the Florentine Camerata . Through the centuries that followed , opera traditions developed in Naples and Venice ; the operas of Claudio Monteverdi , Alessandro Scarlatti , and , later , of Gioacchino Rossini , Vincenzo Bellini , and Gaetano Donizetti flourished . Opera has remained the musical form most closely linked with Italian music and Italian identity . This was most obvious in the 19th century through the works of Giuseppe Verdi , an icon of Italian culture and pan @-@ Italian unity . Italy retained a Romantic operatic musical tradition in the early 20th century , exemplified by composers of the so @-@ called Giovane Scuola , whose music was anchored in the previous century , including Arrigo Boito , Ruggiero Leoncavallo , Pietro Mascagni , and Francesco Cilea . Giacomo Puccini , who was a realist composer , has been described by Encyclopaedia Britannica Online as the man who " virtually brought the history of Italian opera to an end " . 
 After World War I , however , opera declined in comparison to the popular heights of the 19th and early 20th centuries . Causes included the general cultural shift away from Romanticism and the rise of the cinema , which became a major source of entertainment . A third cause is the fact that " internationalism " had brought contemporary Italian opera to a state where it was no longer " Italian " . This was the opinion of at least one prominent Italian musicologist and critic , Fausto <unk> , who , in a 1912 pamphlet entitled <unk> Puccini and International Opera , accused Puccini of " commercialism " and of having deserted Italian traditions . Traditional Romantic opera remained popular ; indeed , the dominant opera publisher in the early 20th century was Casa Ricordi , which focused almost exclusively on popular operas until the 1930s , when the company allowed more unusual composers with less mainstream appeal . The rise of relatively new publishers such as <unk> and <unk> <unk> also helped to fuel the diversification of Italian opera . Opera remains a major part of Italian culture ; renewed interest in opera across the sectors of Italian society began in the 1980s . Respected composers from this era include the well @-@ known Aldo Clementi , and younger peers such as Marco <unk> and Lorenzo Ferrero . 
 = = = Sacred music = = = 
 Italy , being one of Catholicism 's seminal nations , has a long history of music for the Roman Catholic Church . Until approximately 1800 , it was possible to hear Gregorian Chant and Renaissance polyphony , such as the music of Palestrina , Lassus , <unk> , and others . Approximately 1800 to approximately 1900 was a century during which a more popular , operatic , and entertaining type of church music was heard , to the exclusion of the aforementioned chant and polyphony . In the late 19th century , the <unk> Movement was started by musicians who fought to restore this music . This movement gained impetus not in Italy but in Germany , particularly in Regensburg . The movement reached its apex around 1900 with the ascent of Don Lorenzo <unk> and his supporter ( and future saint ) , Pope Pius X. The advent of Vatican II , however , nearly obliterated all Latin @-@ language music from the Church , once again substituting it with a more popular style . 
 = = = Instrumental music = = = 
 The dominance of opera in Italian music tends to overshadow the important area of instrumental music . Historically , such music includes the vast array of sacred instrumental music , instrumental concertos , and orchestral music in the works of Andrea Gabrieli , Giovanni Gabrieli , Tomaso Albinoni , Arcangelo Corelli , Antonio Vivaldi , Luigi Boccherini , Luigi Cherubini and Domenico Scarlatti . ( Even opera composers occasionally worked in other forms — Giuseppe Verdi 's String Quartet in E minor , for example . Even Donizetti , whose name is identified with the beginnings of Italian lyric opera , wrote 18 string quartets . ) In the early 20th century , instrumental music began growing in importance , a process that started around 1904 with Giuseppe <unk> 's Second Symphony , a work that Malipiero called " the starting point of the <unk> of non @-@ operatic Italian music . " Several early composers from this era , such as Leone <unk> , used native folk traditions . 
 The early 20th century is also marked by the presence of a group of composers called the <unk> dell <unk> ( generation of 1880 ) , including Franco Alfano , Alfredo Casella , Gian Francesco Malipiero , Ildebrando Pizzetti , and Ottorino Respighi . These composers usually concentrated on writing instrumental works , rather than opera . Members of this generation were the dominant figures in Italian music after Puccini 's death in 1924 . New organizations arose to promote Italian music , such as the Venice Festival of Contemporary Music and the Maggio Musicale Fiorentino . Guido Gatti 's founding of the periodical il Piano and then La <unk> musicale also helped to promote a broader view of music than the political and social climate allowed . Most Italians , however , preferred more traditional pieces and established standards , and only a small audience sought new styles of experimental classical music . 
 = = = Ballet = = = 
 Italian contributions to ballet are less known and appreciated than in other areas of classical music . Italy , particularly Milan , was the European center of court choreography as early as the 15th century in the form of such things as ritual masked balls . Early choreographers and composers of ballet include <unk> <unk> and Cesare Negri . The style of ballet known as the " spectacles all ’ italiana " imported to France from Italy caught on , and the first ballet performed in France ( 1581 ) , Ballet comique de la <unk> , was composed by an Italian , <unk> di <unk> , better known by the French version of his name , Balthasar de <unk> . Early ballet was accompanied by considerable instrumentation , with the playing of horns , trombones , kettle drums , dulcimers , bagpipes , etc . Although the music has not survived , there is speculation that dancers , themselves , may have played instruments onstage . Then , in the wake of the French Revolution , Italy again became a center of ballet , largely through the efforts of Salvatore Viganò , a choreographer who worked with some of the most prominent composers of the day . He was made the <unk> of La Scala in 1812 . The best @-@ known example of Italian ballet from the 19th century is probably Excelsior , with music by Romualdo <unk> and choreography by Luigi <unk> . It was composed in 1881 and is a lavish tribute to the scientific and industrial progress of the 19th century . It is still performed and was staged as recently as 2002 . 
 Currently , major Italian opera theaters maintain ballet companies . They exist to provide incidental and ceremonial dancing in many operas , such as Aida or La Traviata . These dance companies usually maintain a separate ballet season and perform the standard repertoire of classical ballet , little of which is Italian . The Italian equivalent of the Russian Bolshoi Ballet and similar companies that exist only to perform ballet , independent of a parent opera theater is La Scala Ballet , which is under the direction of <unk> Olivieri . Since 1979 there has existed in Italy a modern dance company , the <unk> , based in Reggio Emilia . The company performs worldwide under the leadership of choreographer Mauro <unk> . 
 = = = Experimental music = = = 
 Experimental music is a broad , loosely defined field encompassing musics created by abandoning traditional classical concepts of melody and harmony , and by using the new technology of electronics to create hitherto impossible sounds . In Italy , one of the first to devote his attention to experimental music was Ferruccio Busoni , whose 1907 publication , Sketch for a New Aesthetic of Music , discussed the use of electrical and other new sounds in future music . He spoke of his dissatisfaction with the constraints of traditional music : 
 " We have divided the octave into twelve equidistant degrees … and have constructed our instruments in such as way that we can never get in above or below or between them … our ears are no longer capable of hearing anything else … yet Nature created an infinite gradation — infinite ! Who still knows it nowadays ? " 
 Similarly , Luigi Russolo , the Italian Futurist painter and composer , wrote of the possibilities of new music in his 1913 manifestoes The Art of Noises and Musica <unk> . He also invented and built instruments such as the intonarumori , mostly percussion , which were used in a precursor to the style known as musique concrète . One of the most influential events in early 20th century music was the return of Alfredo Casella from France in 1915 ; Casella founded the Società Italiana di Musica Moderna , which promoted several composers in disparate styles , ranging from experimental to traditional . After a dispute over the value of experimental music in 1923 , Casella formed the <unk> delle <unk> <unk> to promote modern experimental music . 
 In the 1950s , Luciano Berio experimented with instruments accompanied by electronic sounds on tape . In modern Italy , one important organization that fosters research in <unk> and electronic music is <unk> , the Federation of Italian <unk> Music Centers . It was founded in 1996 in Rome and is a member of the <unk> , the Confédération Internationale de Musique <unk> . <unk> promotes the activities of the " Sonora " project , launched jointly by the Department for Performing Arts , Ministry for Cultural Affairs and the Directorate for Cultural Relations , Ministry for Foreign Affairs with the object of promoting and diffusing Italian contemporary music abroad . 
 = = = Classical music in society = = = 
 Italian classical music grew gradually more experimental and progressive into the mid @-@ 20th century , while popular tastes have tended to stick with well established composers and compositions of the past . The 2004 @-@ 2005 program at the Teatro San Carlo in Naples is typical of modern Italy : of the eight operas represented , the most recent was Puccini . In symphonic music , of the 26 composers whose music was played , 21 of them were from the 19th century or earlier , composers who use the melodies and harmonies typical of the Romantic era . This focus is common to other European traditions , and is known as postmodernism , a school of thought that draws on earlier harmonic and melodic concepts that pre @-@ date the conceptions of atonality and dissonance . This focus on popular historical composers has helped to maintain a continued presence of classical music across a broad spectrum of Italian society . When music is part of a public display or gathering , it is often chosen from a very eclectic repertoire that is as likely to include well @-@ known classical music as popular music . 
 A few recent works have become a part of the modern repertoire , including scores and theatrical works by composers such as Luciano Berio , Luigi Nono , Franco <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . These composers are not part of a distinct school or tradition , though they do share certain techniques and influences . By the 1970s , avant @-@ garde classical music had become linked to the Italian Communist Party , while a revival of popular interest continued into the next decade , with foundations , festivals and organization created to promote modern music . Near the end of the 20th century , government sponsorship of musical institutions began to decline , and several RAI choirs and city orchestras were closed . Despite this , a number of composers gained international reputations in the early 21st century . 
 = = Folk music = = 
 Italian folk music has a deep and complex history . Because national unification came late to the Italian peninsula , the traditional music of its many hundreds of cultures exhibit no homogeneous national character . Rather , each region and community possesses a unique musical tradition that reflects the history , language , and ethnic composition of that particular locale . These traditions reflect Italy 's geographic position in southern Europe and in the centre of the Mediterranean ; Celtic , Roma , and Slavic influences , as well as rough geography and the historic dominance of small city states , have all combined to allow diverse musical styles to coexist in close proximity . 
 Italian folk styles are very diverse , and include monophonic , polyphonic , and responsorial song , choral , instrumental and vocal music , and other styles . Choral singing and polyphonic song forms are primarily found in northern Italy , while south of Naples , solo singing is more common , and groups usually use unison singing in two or three parts carried by a single performer . Northern ballad @-@ singing is syllabic , with a strict tempo and intelligible lyrics , while southern styles use a rubato tempo , and a strained , tense vocal style . Folk musicians use the dialect of their own regional tradition ; this rejection of the standard Italian language in folk song is nearly universal . There is little perception of a common Italian folk tradition , and the country 's folk music never became a national symbol . 
 = = = Regions = = = 
 Folk music is sometimes divided into several spheres of geographic influence , a classification system of three regions , southern , central and northern , proposed by Alan Lomax in 1956 and often repeated . Additionally , Curt Sachs proposed the existence of two quite distinct kinds of folk music in Europe : continental and Mediterranean , and others have placed the transition zone from the former to the latter roughly in north @-@ central Italy , approximately between <unk> and La Spezia . The central , northern and southern parts of the peninsula each share certain musical characteristics , and are each distinct from the music of Sardinia . 
 In the Piedmontese valleys and some Ligurian communities of northwestern Italy , the music preserves the strong influence of ancient Occitania . The lyrics of the <unk> troubadours are some of the oldest preserved samples of vernacular song , and modern bands like Gai Saber and Lou <unk> preserve and contemporize Occitan music . The <unk> culture retains characteristics of the ancient Celtic influence , through the use of six- or seven @-@ hole flutes ( <unk> ) or the bagpipes ( <unk> ) . The music of Friuli @-@ Venezia Giulia , in northeastern Italy , shares much more in common with Austria and Slovenia including variants of the waltz and the polka . Much of northern Italy shares with areas of Europe further to the north an interest in ballad singing ( called canto <unk> <unk> in Italian ) and choral singing . Even ballads — usually thought of as a vehicle for a solo voice — may be sung in choirs . In the province of Trento " folk choirs " are the most common form of music making . 
 Noticeable musical differences in the southern type include increased use of interval part singing and a greater variety of folk instruments . The Celtic and Slavic influences on the group and open @-@ voice choral works of the north yield to a stronger Arabic , Greek , and North African @-@ influenced strident monody of the south . In parts of Apulia ( <unk> <unk> , for example ) the Griko dialect is commonly used in song . The Apulian city of Taranto is a home of the tarantella , a rhythmic dance widely performed in southern Italy . Apulian music in general , and <unk> music in particular , has been well researched and documented by ethnomusicologists and by <unk> . 
 The music of the island of Sardinia is best known for the polyphonic chanting of the <unk> . The sound of the <unk> recalls the roots of Gregorian chant , and is similar to but distinctive from the Ligurian <unk> . Typical instruments include the launeddas , a Sardinian <unk> used in a sophisticated and complex manner . <unk> Melis was a well @-@ known master launeddas player of the 1930s . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Italian folk songs include ballads , lyrical songs , lullabies and children 's songs , seasonal songs based around holidays such as Christmas , life @-@ cycle songs that celebrate weddings , baptisms and other important events , dance songs , cattle calls and occupational songs , tied to professions such as fishermen , shepherds and soldiers . Ballads ( <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and lyric songs ( <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) are two important categories . Ballads are most common in northern Italy , while lyric songs prevail further south . Ballads are closely tied to the English form , with some British ballads existing in exact correspondence with an Italian song . Other Italian ballads are more closely based on French models . Lyric songs are a diverse category that consist of lullabies , serenades and work songs , and are frequently improvised though based on a traditional repertoire . 
 Other Italian folk song traditions are less common than ballads and lyric songs . <unk> , religious laude , sometimes in Latin , are still occasionally performed , and epic songs are also known , especially those of the maggio celebration . Professional female singers perform dirges similar in style to those elsewhere in Europe . <unk> exists in northern Italy , though it is most commonly associated with the folk musics of other Alpine nations . The Italian Carnival is associated with several song types , especially the Carnival of <unk> , Brescia . Choirs and brass bands are a part of the mid @-@ Lenten holiday , while the begging song tradition extends through many holidays throughout the year . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 Instrumentation is an integral part of all facets of Italian folk music . There are several instruments that retain older forms even while newer models have become widespread elsewhere in Europe . Many Italian instruments are tied to certain rituals or occasions , such as the <unk> bagpipe , typically heard only at Christmas . Italian folk instruments can be divided into string , wind and percussion categories . Common instruments include the <unk> , an accordion most closely associated with the saltarello ; the diatonic button <unk> is most common in central Italy , while chromatic accordions prevail in the north . Many municipalities are home to brass bands , which perform with roots revival groups ; these ensembles are based around the clarinet , accordion , violin and small drums , adorned with bells . 
 Italy 's wind instruments include most prominently a variety of folk flutes . These include duct , globular and transverse flutes , as well as various variations of the pan flute . Double flutes are most common in Campania , Calabria and Sicily . A ceramic pitcher called the <unk> is also used as a wind instrument , by blowing across an opening in the narrow bottle neck ; it is found in eastern Sicily and Campania . <unk> ( <unk> ) and double @-@ reed ( <unk> ) pipes are commonly played in groups of two or three . Several folk bagpipes are well @-@ known , including central Italy 's <unk> ; dialect names for the bagpipe vary throughout <unk> <unk> in Bergamo , <unk> in Lombardy , <unk> in Alessandria , Genoa , Pavia and Piacenza , and so forth . 
 Numerous percussion instruments are a part of Italian folk music , including wood blocks , bells , castanets , drums . Several regions have their own distinct form of rattle , including the <unk> cog rattle and the Calabrian <unk> , a spinning or shepherd 's staff with permanently attached seed rattles with ritual fertility significance . The Neapolitan rattle is the <unk> , made out of several mallets in a wooden frame . <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , as are various kinds of drums , such as the friction drum <unk> . The Tamburello , while appearing very similar to the contemporary western tambourine , is actually played with a much more articulate and sophisticated technique ( influenced by Middle Eastern playing ) , giving it a wide range of sounds . The mouth @-@ harp , <unk> or care @-@ chaser , is a distinctive instrument , found only in northern Italy and Sicily . 
 String instruments vary widely depending on locality , with no nationally prominent representative . <unk> is home to a harp tradition , which has a historical base in Abruzzi , Lazio and Calabria . 
 Calabria , alone , has 30 traditional musical instruments , some of which have strongly archaic characteristics and are largely extinct elsewhere in Italy . It is home to the four- or five @-@ stringed guitar called the <unk> <unk> , and a three @-@ stringed , bowed fiddle called the lira , which is also found in similar forms in the music of Crete and Southeastern Europe . A one @-@ stringed , bowed fiddle called the <unk> , is common in the northeast of the country . The largely German @-@ speaking area of South Tyrol is known for the zither , and the <unk> ( hurdy @-@ gurdy ) is found in Emilia , Piedmont and Lombardy . Existing , rooted and widespread traditions confirm the production of ephemeral and toy instruments made of bark , reed ( <unk> donax ) , leaves , fibers and stems , as it emerges , for example , from Fabio Lombardi 's research . 
 = = = Dance = = = 
 Dance is an integral part of folk traditions in Italy . Some of the dances are ancient and , to a certain extent , persist today . There are magico @-@ ritual dances of propitiation as well as harvest dances , including the " sea @-@ harvest " dances of fishing communities in Calabria and the wine harvest dances in Tuscany . Famous dances include the southern tarantella ; perhaps the most iconic of Italian dances , the tarantella is in 6 / 8 time , and is part of a folk ritual intended to cure the poison caused by tarantula bites . Popular Tuscan dances ritually act out the hunting of the hare , or display blades in weapon dances that simulate or recall the moves of combat , or use the weapons as stylized instruments of the dance itself . For example , in a few villages in northern Italy , swords are replaced by wooden half @-@ hoops embroidered with green , similar to the so @-@ called " garland dances " in northern Europe . There are also dances of love and courting , such as the <unk> @-@ <unk> dance in Sardinia . 
 Many of these dances are group activities , the group setting up in rows or circles ; some — the love and courting dances — involve couples , either a single couple or more . The <unk> ( performed to the sound of the tambourine ) is a couple dance performed in southern Italy and accompanied by a lyric song called a <unk> . Other couples dances are collectively referred to as saltarello . There are , however , also solo dances ; most typical of these are the " flag dances " of various regions of Italy , in which the dancer passes a town flag or pennant around the neck , through the legs , behind the back , often tossing it high in the air and catching it . These dances can also be done in groups of solo dancers acting in unison or by coordinating flag passing between dancers . Northern Italy is also home to the <unk> , an accompanied dance that was incorporated in Western art music by the composer Muzio Clementi . 
 Academic interest in the study of dance from the perspectives of sociology and anthropology has traditionally been neglected in Italy but is currently showing renewed life at the university and post @-@ graduate level . 
 = = Popular music = = 
 The earliest Italian popular music was the opera of the 19th century . Opera has had a lasting effect on Italy 's classical and popular music . Opera tunes spread through brass bands and itinerant ensembles . Canzone Napoletana , or Neapolitan song , is a distinct tradition that became a part of popular music in the 19th century , and was an iconic image of Italian music abroad by the end of the 20th century . Imported styles have also become an important part of Italian popular music , beginning with the French Café @-@ chantant in the 1890s and then the arrival of American jazz in the 1910s . Until Italian Fascism became officially " allergic " to foreign influences in the late 1930s , American dance music and musicians were quite popular ; jazz great Louis Armstrong toured Italy as late as 1935 to great acclaim . In the 1950s , American styles became more prominent , especially rock . The singer @-@ songwriter cantautori tradition was a major development of the later 1960s , while the Italian rock scene soon diversified into progressive , punk , funk and folk @-@ based styles . 
 = = = Early popular song = = = 
 Italian opera became immensely popular in the 19th century and was known across even the most rural sections of the country . Most villages had occasional opera productions , and the techniques used in opera influenced rural folk musics . Opera spread through itinerant ensembles and brass bands , focused in a local village . These civic bands ( banda <unk> ) used instruments to perform operatic arias , with trombones or <unk> for male vocal parts and cornets for female parts . 
 Regional music in the 19th century also became popular throughout Italy . Notable among these local traditions was the Canzone Napoletana — the Neapolitan Song . Although there are anonymous , documented songs from Naples from many centuries ago , the term , canzone Napoletana now generally refers to a large body of relatively recent , composed popular music — such songs as " ' O sole mio " , " Torna a <unk> " , and " <unk> <unk> " . In the 18th century , many composers , including Alessandro Scarlatti , Leonardo Vinci , and Giovanni Paisiello , contributed to the Neapolitan tradition by using the local language for the texts of some of their comic operas . Later , others — most famously Gaetano Donizetti — composed Neapolitan songs that garnered great renown in Italy and abroad . The Neapolitan song tradition became formalized in the 1830s through an annual songwriting competition for the yearly <unk> festival , dedicated to the Madonna of <unk> , a well @-@ known church in the <unk> area of Naples . The music is identified with Naples , but is famous abroad , having been exported on the great waves of emigration from Naples and southern Italy roughly between 1880 and 1920 . Language is an extremely important element of Neapolitan song , which is always written and performed in Neapolitan , the regional minority language of Campania . Neapolitan songs typically use simple harmonies , and are structured in two sections , a refrain and narrative verses , often in contrasting relative or parallel major and minor keys . In non @-@ musical terms , this means that many Neapolitan songs can sound joyful one minute and melancholy the next . 
 The music of Francesco Tosti was popular at the turn of the 20th century , and is remembered for his light , expressive songs . His style became very popular during the Belle Époque and is often known as salon music . His most famous works are Serenata , Addio and the popular Neapolitan song , <unk> , the lyrics of which are by the prominent Neapolitan dialect poet , Salvatore di Giacomo . 
 Recorded popular music began in the late 19th century , with international styles influencing Italian music by the late 1910s ; however , the rise of <unk> , the Fascist policy of cultural isolationism in 1922 led to a retreat from international popular music . During this period , popular Italian musicians traveled abroad and learned elements of jazz , Latin American music and other styles . These musics influenced the Italian tradition , which spread around the world and further diversified following liberalization after World War II . 
 Under the isolationist policies of the fascist regime , which rose to power in 1922 , Italy developed an insular musical culture . Foreign musics were suppressed while Mussolini 's government encouraged nationalism and linguistic and ethnic purity . Popular performers , however , travelled abroad , and brought back new styles and techniques . American jazz was an important influence on singers such as Alberto Rabagliati , who became known for a swinging style . Elements of harmony and melody from both jazz and blues were used in many popular songs , while rhythms often came from Latin dances like the tango , rumba and <unk> . Italian composers incorporated elements from these styles , while Italian music , especially Neapolitan song , became a part of popular music across Latin America . 
 = = = Modern pop = = = 
 Among the best @-@ known Italian pop musicians of the last few decades are Domenico Modugno , Mina , Patty <unk> , Mia Martini , Adriano Celentano and , more recently , Zucchero , Mango , Vasco Rossi , Irene Grandi , Gianna Nannini and international superstar Laura Pausini and Andrea Bocelli . Musicians who compose and sing their own songs are called cantautori ( singer @-@ songwriters ) . Their compositions typically focus on topics of social relevance and are often protest songs : this wave began in the 1960s with musicians like Fabrizio De André , Paolo Conte , Giorgio Gaber , Umberto Bindi , Gino Paoli and Luigi Tenco . Social , political , psychological and intellectual themes , mainly in the wake of Gaber and De André 's work , became even more predominant in the 1970s through authors such as Lucio Dalla , Pino Daniele , Francesco De Gregori , Ivano Fossati , Francesco <unk> , Edoardo <unk> , Rino Gaetano and Roberto <unk> . Lucio Battisti , from the late 1960s until the mid @-@ 1990s , merged the Italian music with the British rock and pop and , lately in his career , with genres like the synthpop , rap , techno and eurodance , while Angelo <unk> and Franco <unk> pursued careers more oriented to the tradition of Italian pop music . There is some genre cross @-@ over between the cantautori and those who are viewed as singers of " protest music " . 
 Film scores , although they are secondary to the film , are often critically acclaimed and very popular in their own right . Among early music for Italian films from the 1930s was the work of Riccardo <unk> with scores for the films La <unk> <unk> ( 1937 ) and Caravaggio ( 1941 ) . Post @-@ war examples include Goffredo <unk> with Non c 'e pace tra gli <unk> ( 1950 ) and Roman Vlad with Giulietta e Romeo ( 1954 ) . Another well @-@ known film composer was Nino Rota whose post @-@ war career included the scores for films by Federico Fellini and , later , The Godfather series . Other prominent film score composers include Ennio Morricone , Riz Ortolani and Piero <unk> . 
 = = = Modern dance = = = 
 Italy has been an important country with regards to electronic dance music , especially ever since the creation of Italo disco in the late 1970s to early 1980s . The genre , originating from disco , blended " melancholy melodies " with pop and electronic music , making usage of synthesizers and drum machines , which often gave it a futuristic sound . According to an article in The Guardian , in cities such as Verona and Milan , producers would work with singers , using mass @-@ made synthesizers and drum machines , and incorporating them into a mix of experimental music with a " classic @-@ pop sensibility " which would be aimed for nightclubs . The songs produced would often be sold later by labels and companies such as the Milan @-@ based <unk> . Italo disco influenced several electronic groups , such as the Pet Shop Boys , Erasure and New Order , as well as genres such as Eurodance , Eurobeat and freestyle . By circa 1988 , however , the genre had merged into other forms of European dance and electronic music , one of which was Italo house . Italo house blended elements of Italo disco with traditional house music ; its sound was generally uplifting , and made strong usage of piano melodies . By the latter @-@ half of the 1990s , a subgenre of Eurodance known as Italo dance emerged . Taking influences from Italo disco and Italo house , Italo dance generally included synthesizer riffs , a melodic sound , and the usage of vocoders . Over the years , there have been several important Italian dance music composers and producers , such as Giorgio Moroder , who won three Academy Awards for his music . He is credited by Allmusic as " One of the principal architects of the disco sound " . 
 = = = Imported styles = = = 
 During the Belle Époque , the French fashion of performing popular music at the café @-@ chantant spread throughout Europe . The tradition had much in common with cabaret , and there is overlap between café @-@ chantant , café @-@ concert , cabaret , music hall , vaudeville and other similar styles , but at least in its Italian manifestation , the tradition remained largely apolitical , focusing on lighter music , often risqué , but not bawdy . The first café @-@ chantant in Italy was the Salone Margherita , which opened in 1890 on the premises of the new Galleria Umberto in Naples . Elsewhere in Italy , the Gran Salone Eden in Milan and the Music Hall Olympia in Rome opened shortly thereafter . Café @-@ chantant was alternately known as the <unk> <unk> @-@ concerto . The main performer , usually a woman , was called a chanteuse in French ; the Italian term , <unk> , is a direct coinage from the French . The songs , themselves , were not French , but were lighthearted or slightly sentimental songs composed in Italian . That music went out of fashion with the advent of World War I. 
 The influence of US pop forms has been strong since the end of World War II . Lavish Broadway @-@ show numbers , big bands , rock and roll , and hip hop continue to be popular . Latin music , especially Brazilian bossa nova , is also popular , and the Puerto Rican genre of reggaeton is rapidly becoming a mainstream form of dance music . It is now not uncommon for modern Italian pop artists such as Laura Pausini , Eros Ramazzotti , Zucchero or Andrea Bocelli to release new songs in English or Spanish in addition to , or instead of , Italian . Thus , musical revues , which are standard fare on current Italian television , can easily go , in a single evening , from a big @-@ band number with dancers to an Elvis impersonator to a current pop singer doing a rendition of a Puccini aria . 
 Jazz found its way into Europe during World War I through the presence of American musicians in military bands playing syncopated music . Yet , even before that , Italy received an inkling of new music from across the Atlantic in the form of Creole singers and dancers who performed at the Eden Theater in Milan in 1904 ; they billed themselves as the " creators of the cakewalk . " The first real jazz orchestras in Italy , however , were formed during the 1920s by bandleaders such as Arturo <unk> and enjoyed immediate success . In spite of the anti @-@ American cultural policies of the Fascist regime during the 1930s , American jazz remained popular . 
 In the immediate post @-@ war years , jazz took off in Italy . All American post @-@ war jazz styles , from bebop to free jazz and fusion have their equivalents in Italy . The universality of Italian culture ensured that jazz clubs would spring up throughout the peninsula , that all radio and then television studios would have jazz @-@ based house bands , that Italian musicians would then start nurturing a home grown kind of jazz , based on European song forms , classical composition techniques and folk music . Currently , all Italian music conservatories have jazz departments , and there are jazz festivals each year in Italy , the best known of which is the Umbria Jazz Festival , and there are prominent publications such as the journal , Musica Jazz . 
 Italian pop rock has produced major stars like Zucchero , and has resulted in many top hits . The industry media , especially television , are important vehicles for such music ; the television show Sabato Sera is characteristic . Italy was at the forefront of the progressive rock movement of the 1970s , a style that primarily developed in Europe but also gained audiences elsewhere in the world . It is sometimes considered a separate genre , Italian progressive rock . Italian bands such as The Trip , Area , <unk> <unk> Marconi ( <unk> ) , Arti e <unk> , Banco del <unk> <unk> , New Trolls , Goblin , Osanna , Saint Just and Le Orme incorporated a mix of symphonic rock and Italian folk music and were popular throughout Europe and the United States as well . Other progressive bands such as <unk> , <unk> di Bronzo , Museo Rosenbach , <unk> della Medaglia , <unk> per l <unk> or <unk> remained little known , but their albums are today considered classics by collectors . A few avant @-@ garde rock bands or artists ( Area , Picchio dal Pozzo , Opus <unk> , Stormy Six , Saint Just , Giovanni Lindo Ferretti ) gained notoriety for their innovative sound . Progressive rock concerts in Italy tended to have a strong political undertone and an energetic atmosphere . 
 The Italian hip hop scene began in the early 1990s with Articolo 31 from Milan , whose style was mainly influenced by East Coast rap . Other early hip hop crews were typically politically oriented , like 99 Posse , who later became more influenced by British trip hop . More recent crews include gangster rappers like Sardinia 's La Fossa . Other recently imported styles include techno , trance , and electronica performed by artists including <unk> Ponte , Eiffel 65 , and Gigi <unk> . Hip hop is especially characteristic of southern Italy , a fact which some observers have contributed to the view of southern culture as more " African " than " European " , as well as the southern concept of <unk> ( respect , honor ) , a form of verbal jousting ; both facts have helped identify southern Italian music with the African American hip hop style . Additionally , there are many bands in Italy that play a style called <unk> , which is characterized by a mixture of traditional music , punk , reggae , rock and political lyrics . Modena City Ramblers are one of the more popular bands known for their mix of Irish , Italian , punk , reggae and many other forms of music . 
 Italy has also become a home for a number of Mediterranean fusion projects . These include Al <unk> , a multicultural band based in Sicily and led by Palestinian Nabil Ben <unk> . The Luigi Cinque Tarantula Hypertext Orchestra is another example , as is the <unk> project by <unk> and Nour Eddine . Mango is one of the best @-@ known artists who fused pop with world and mediterranean sounds , albums such as <unk> , <unk> and Come l <unk> are examples of his style . The Neapolitan popular singer , Massimo Ranieri has also released a CD , Oggi o <unk> , of traditional canzone Napoletana with North African rhythms and instruments . 
 = = Industry = = 
 A recent economics report says that the music industry in Italy made € 2 @.@ 3 billion in 2004 . That sum refers to the sale of CDs , music electronics , musical instruments , and ticket sales for live performances ; it represents a 4 @.@ 35 % growth over 2004 . The actual sale of music albums has decreased slightly , but there has been a compensatory increase in paid @-@ for digitally downloaded music from industry @-@ approved sites . By way of comparison , the Italian recording industry ranks eighth in the world ; Italians own 0 @.@ 7 music albums per capita as opposed to the USA , in first @-@ place with 2 @.@ 7 . The report cites a 20 % increase in 2004 over 2003 in paid royalties for on @-@ air as well as live music . 
 Nationwide , there are three state @-@ run and three private TV networks . All provide live music at least some of the time , thus giving work to musicians , singers , and dancers . Many large cities in Italy have local TV stations , as well , which may provide live folk or dialect music often of interest only to the immediate area . Book and CD superstores have entered the Italian market over the last decade . The largest of these chains is <unk> , originally a publishing house in the 1950s . In 2001 , it geared up to the level of Multimedia Store and now sells massive quantities of recorded music . There are , as of 2006 , 14 such mega @-@ stores in Italy , with more planned . <unk> is another large chain , originally French . It has six large outlets in Italy . These stores also serve as venues for music performance , hosting several concerts a week . 
 = = Venues , festivals and holidays = = 
 Venues for music in Italy include concerts at the many music conservatories , symphony halls and opera houses . Italy also has many well @-@ known international music festivals each year , including the Festival of Spoleto , the Festival Puccini and the Wagner Festival in Ravello . Some festivals offer venues to younger composers in classical music by producing and staging winning entries in competitions . The winner , for example , of the " Orpheus " International Competition for New Opera and Chamber music — besides winning considerable prize money — gets to see his or her musical work performed at The Spoleto Festival . There are also dozens of privately sponsored master classes in music each year that put on concerts for the public . Italy is also a common destination for well @-@ known orchestras from abroad ; at almost any given time during the busiest season , at least one major orchestra from elsewhere in Europe or North America is playing a concert in Italy . Additionally , public music may be heard at dozens of pop and rock concerts throughout the year . Open @-@ air opera may even be heard , for example , at the ancient Roman amphitheater , the Arena of Verona . Military bands , too , are popular in Italy . At a national level , one of the best @-@ known of these is the concert band of the Guardia di <unk> ( Italian Customs / Border Police ) ; it performs many times a year . 
 Many theaters also routinely stage not just Italian translations of American musicals , but true Italian musical comedy , which are called by the English term musical . In Italian , that term describes a kind of musical drama not native to Italy , a form that employs the American idiom of jazz @-@ pop @-@ and rock @-@ based music and rhythms to move a story along in a combination of songs and dialogue . 
 Music in religious rituals , especially Roman Catholic , manifests itself in a number of ways . Parish bands , for example , are quite common throughout Italy . They may be as small as four or five members to as many as 20 or 30 . They commonly perform at religious festivals specific to a particular town , usually in honor of the town 's patron saint . The historic orchestral / choral masterpieces performed in church by professionals are well @-@ known ; these include such works as the Stabat Mater by Giovanni Battista <unk> and Verdi 's Requiem . The Second Vatican Council from 1962 to 1965 revolutionized music in the Roman Catholic Church , leading to an increase in the number of amateur choirs that perform regularly for services ; the Council also encouraged the congregational singing of hymns , and a vast repertoire of new hymns has been composed in the last 40 years . 
 There is not a great deal of native Italian Christmas music . The most popular Italian Christmas carol is " Tu <unk> dalle stelle " , the modern Italian words to which were written by Pope Pius IX in 1870 . The melody is a major @-@ key version of an older , minor @-@ key Neapolitan carol " <unk> <unk> <unk> " . Other than that , Italians largely sing translations of carols that come from the German and English tradition ( " Silent Night " , for example ) . There is no native Italian secular Christmas music , which accounts for the popularity of Italian @-@ language versions of " Jingle Bells " and " White Christmas " . 
 The Sanremo Music Festival is an important venue for popular music in Italy . It has been held annually since 1951 and is currently staged at the Teatro Ariston in Sanremo . It runs for one week in February , and gives veteran and new performers a chance to present new songs . Winning the contest has often been a springboard to industry success . The festival is televised nationally for three hours a night , is hosted by the best @-@ known Italian TV personalities , and has been a vehicle for such performers as Domenico Modugno , perhaps the best @-@ known Italian pop singer of the last 50 years . 
 Television variety shows are the widest venue for popular music . They change often , but Buona Domenica , Domenica In , and I <unk> are popular . The longest running musical broadcast in Italy is La Corrida , a three @-@ hour weekly program of amateurs and would @-@ be musicians . It started on the radio in 1968 and moved to TV in 1988 . The studio audience bring cow @-@ bells and sirens and are encouraged to show good @-@ natured disapproval . The city with the highest number of rock concerts ( of national and international artists ) is Milan , with a number close to the other European music capitals , as Paris , London and Berlin . 
 = = Education = = 
 Many institutes of higher education teach music in Italy . About 75 music conservatories provide advanced training for future professional musicians . There are also many private music schools and workshops for instrument building and repair . Private teaching is also quite common in Italy . Elementary and high school students can expect to have one or two weekly hours of music teaching , generally in choral singing and basic music theory , though extracurricular opportunities are rare . Though most Italian universities have classes in related subjects such as music history , performance is not a common feature of university education . 
 Italy has a specialized system of high schools ; students attend , as they choose , a high school for humanities , science , foreign languages , or art — and music ( in the " <unk> musicale " , where instruments , musical theory , composing and musical history are taught as the main subject ) . Italy does have ambitious , recent programs to expose children to more music . Furthermore , with the recent education reform a specific Liceo musicale e <unk> ( 2nd level secondary school , ages 14 – 15 to 18 @-@ 19 ) is explicitly indicated by the law decrees . Yet this kind of school has not been set up and is not effectively operational . The state @-@ run television network has started a program to use modern satellite technology to broadcast choral music into public schools . 
 = = Scholarship = = 
 Scholarship in the field of collecting , preserving and cataloguing all varieties of music is vast . In Italy , as elsewhere , these tasks are spread over a number of agencies and organizations . Most large music conservatories maintain departments that oversee the research connected with their own collections . Such research is coordinated on a national and international scale via the internet . One prominent institution in Italy is <unk> , the Istituto di <unk> Musicale , in Rome . It works with other agencies on an international scale through <unk> , the Répertoire International des Sources Musicales , an inventory and index of source material . Also , the <unk> di Stato ( National Archives of Recordings ) in Rome , founded in 1928 , holds the largest public collection of recorded music in Italy with some 230 @,@ 000 examples of classical music , folk music , jazz , and rock , recorded on everything from antique wax cylinders to modern electronic media . 
 The scholarly study of traditional Italian music began in about 1850 , with a group of early philological ethnographers who studied the impact of music on a pan @-@ Italian national identity . A unified Italian identity only just started to develop after the political integration of the peninsula in 1860 . The focus at that time was on the lyrical and literary value of music , rather than the instrumentation ; this focus remained until the early 1960s . Two folkloric journals helped to encourage the burgeoning field of study , the <unk> Italiana delle <unk> <unk> and Lares , founded in 1894 and 1912 , respectively . The earliest major musical studies were on the Sardinian launeddas in 1913 @-@ 1914 by Mario Giulio Fara ; on Sicilian music , published in 1907 and 1921 by Alberto Favara ; and studies of the music of Emilia Romagna in 1941 by Francesco <unk> <unk> . 
 The earliest recordings of Italian traditional music came in the 1920s , but they were rare until the establishment of the Centro Nazionale Studi di Musica <unk> at the National Academy of Santa Cecilia in Rome . The Center sponsored numerous song collection trips across the peninsula , especially to southern and central Italy . Giorgio <unk> was an instrumental figure in the Center , and also made numerous recordings himself . The American scholar Alan Lomax and the Italian , Diego Carpitella , made an exhaustive survey of the peninsula in 1954 . By the early 1960s , a roots revival encouraged more study , especially of northern musical cultures , which many scholars had previously assumed maintained little folk culture . The most prominent scholars of this era included Roberto Leydi , Ottavio <unk> and Leo Levi . During the 1970s , Leydi and Carpitella were appointed to the first two chairs of ethnomusicology at universities , with Carpitella at the University of Rome and Leydi at the University of Bologna . In the 1980s , Italian scholars began focusing less on making recordings , and more on studying and synthesizing the information already collected . Others studied Italian music in the United States and Australia , and the folk musics of recent immigrants to Italy . 
 = Azure @-@ hooded jay = 
 The azure @-@ hooded jay ( Cyanolyca cucullata ) is a species of bird in the family Corvidae . It is found in Middle America . Its natural habitat is subtropical or tropical moist montane forest . This species is known to have four subspecies . It is 11 to 12 inches ( 28 to 30 cm ) in length and is dark blue with a black head and upper chest . The back of the head and neck are sky blue with a white border . 
 The jays travel in groups of two to ten individuals and may join mixed @-@ species flocks . It is a secretive species and therefore difficult to observe in the wild . As an omnivore , this jay eats berries , seeds , and small , dead animals . Females lay three to four eggs , and the young fledge after twenty days . This species is listed as Least Concern , meaning it is not threatened with extinction . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by the American ornithologist Robert Ridgway in 1885 . Its specific epithet , cucullata , is the Latin word for " hooded " . Its closest relative is the beautiful jay ( C. pulchra ) of Colombia and Ecuador ; in his 1934 study , <unk> treated these species as conspecific . Phylogenetic analysis published in 2009 confirmed the close relationship between the two species ; <unk> speculates that the geographic ( and subsequent genetic ) separation between these species and others in the Cyanolyca genus may have been initiated by the formation of the Río Cauca Valley in western Colombia . 
 The azure @-@ hooded jay has four subspecies . Cyanolyca cucullata <unk> is found in eastern Mexico , from San Luis Potosí to north central Oaxaca . This subspecies was initially treated as a separate species by Ridgway , but it was later merged into the azure @-@ hooded jay . C. c. <unk> ranges from southern Mexico in Chiapas to central Guatemala . C. c. <unk> resides in western Honduras . C. c. cucullata , the nominate subspecies , is found in Costa Rica and western Panama . 
 = = Description = = 
 The azure @-@ hooded jay ranges in length from 11 to 12 inches ( 28 to 30 cm ) , and it tends to weigh 35 @.@ 2 ounces ( 1 @,@ 000 g ) . Its large size and frame help the bird manage the large amount of flying it does . The adult is dark blue with black on the head and upper chest , while the rear of the crown and nape , or back of the neck , are sky blue with a white border . The legs and bill are black and the eyes are dark red . Both sexes are similar in appearance . Juveniles are duller than adults and their sky blue hood does not possess the white bordering . 
 Its voice has been described as a loud and bright <unk> @-@ <unk> that is typically repeated four to five times . It is also known to repeat a nasal <unk> @-@ <unk> or eh ’ <unk> noise twice and give off a low , gruff , hard <unk> @-@ r . The alarm and flock @-@ social calls of this species , characterized as a reek ! sound , are " nasal , querulous , and upwardly or double inflected . " 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species is known from Costa Rica , Guatemala , Honduras , southeastern Mexico , and western Panama . It lives in humid evergreen forests that are sometimes interspersed with pine trees . It can be found at the edges of these forests typically in the middle and higher levels within these trees . It is also normally found only where cloud forest is uninterrupted . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 This corvid is known to join mixed @-@ species flocks with other species including unicolored jays and emerald <unk> . It is also known to travel in groups with two to ten other azure @-@ hooded jays . It is a skulking and secretive species , rarely coming out into the open . Because of this habit , the bird is extremely difficult to observe in the wild and not much is known about its ecology . Mates are known to preen each other , a process which entails one bird bending over in front of the other and tugging on its throat feathers . The feathers of the crown are often moving swiftly , and it is believed that the condition of a mate can be determined by this movement . 
 Like other jays , this species is likely extremely intelligent . Similar species are known to use ants to keep their feathers clean , store seeds and nuts for later consumption , and use their toes to hold food . However , due to its secretive nature , these characteristics have not yet been observed in the species . 
 The bird 's bright plumage makes it easy for predators to find this species . Whenever the jay feels threatened , it gives off a warning alarm call . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The azure @-@ hooded jay is omnivorous , eating berries , seeds , and small , dead animals . This species has been known to steal and eat bait from traps set for small mammals . The bird tends to forage in the forest canopy . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The jay ’ s nest is typically built 16 @.@ 4 to 23 feet ( 5 to 7 m ) above the ground next to a tree trunk . The base of the azure @-@ hooded jay 's first studied nest was coarsely made out of twigs that were 0 @.@ 08 to 0 @.@ 12 inches ( 2 to 3 mm ) long . That nest was about 4 @.@ 3 inches ( 11 cm ) wide inside and 7 @.@ 4 to 13 inches ( 19 to 33 cm ) wide overall depending on the length of the exterior twigs . The nest is 2 inches ( 5 cm ) deep and has an interior constructed with woven thin fibrils and twigs , and no feathers or other softening devices are used in the nest ’ s construction . In addition to building its own nest , this jay is known to reuse old , abandoned nests made by other species . Three to four eggs are normally laid . The young are typically raised in the nest between April and June and they take at least 20 days to fledge . Both parents care for the young and feed them a variety of insects , including katydids . After the young fledge , they stay close to their parents . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 This jay is treated as a species of Least Concern , or not threatened with extinction , by BirdLife International due to its large geographical range of about 42 @,@ 500 square miles ( 110 @,@ 000 km2 ) , population which , while unsurveyed , is believed to be above 10 @,@ 000 individuals , and lack of a 30 % population decline over the last ten years . However , the azure @-@ hooded jay is uncommon in some parts of its range . It is also believed that deforestation may have an effect on this bird . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Although this species has not been observed doing this , closely related jays are known to destroy and eat human @-@ planted crops such as orchards , cane , pineapples , and potatoes . The azure @-@ hooded jay has appeared on one stamp in Mexico in 1996 . 
 = Dnestr radar = 
 Dnestr radar ( Russian : <unk> ) and Dnepr radar ( Russian : <unk> ) , both known by the NATO reporting name Hen House are the first generation of Soviet space surveillance and early warning radars . Six radars of this type were built around the periphery of the Soviet Union starting in the 1960s to provide ballistic missile warnings for attacks from different directions . They were the primary Soviet early warning radars for much of the later Cold War . In common with other Soviet and Russian early warning radars they are named after rivers , the Dnestr and the Dnepr . 
 The Dnestr / Dnepr radars were intended to be replaced by the newer <unk> radars starting in the 1990s . Only two of the planned <unk> radars became operational , due to issues such as the dissolution of the Soviet Union . As of 2012 , the Russian early warning network still consists of some radars of this vintage . It is likely that all the existing radars will be replaced by the third generation Voronezh radars by 2020 . 
 = = TsSO @-@ P = = 
 The Dnestr radar came from work on ballistic missile defence undertaken in the late 1950s and early 1960s . System A , the prototype for the A @-@ 35 anti @-@ ballistic missile system , was set up in the Sary Shagan testing grounds , in the Kazakh SSR . : 123 Work on the system was led by design bureau KB @-@ 1 which proposed using VHF radar <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ) and the <unk> @-@ 2 UHF radar . Other alternatives were sought from Soviet industry and RTI proposed using VHF radar TsSO @-@ P ( Russian : <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and UHF radar <unk> @-@ 30 ( Russian : <unk> @-@ 30 ) . 
 TsSO @-@ P ( standing for Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> – <unk> meaning central detection station – test site ) was selected for further development , together with the <unk> @-@ 2 . TsSO @-@ P had a long horn antenna 250 metres ( 820 ft ) long and 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high . It had an array with an open ribbed structure and used 200 microseconds pulses . Hardware methods were designed for signal processing as the intended M @-@ 4 computer could not run . It was built at area 8 in Sary Shagan and was located at 46 ° 00 ′ 04 @.@ 65 ″ N 73 ° 38 ′ 52 @.@ 11 ″ E. It first detected an object on 17 September 1961 . 
 TsSO @-@ P took part in the 1961 and 1962 Soviet Project K nuclear tests tests above the Sary Shagan range to examine the effects of high altitude nuclear explosions on missile defence hardware . 
 = = Dnestr = = 
 TsSO @-@ P was effective at satellite tracking and was chosen as the radar of the Istrebitel Sputnik ( IS ) anti @-@ satellite programme . This programme involved the construction of two sites separated in latitude to form a radar field 5 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) long and 3 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) high . The two sites chosen were at the village of Mishelevka near Irkutsk in Siberia , which was called OS @-@ 1 , and at Cape <unk> on Lake Balkhash near Sary Shagan , which was called OS @-@ 2 . Each site received four Dnestr radar systems in a fan arrangement . : 421 : 433 
 A Dnestr radar was composed of two TsSO @-@ P radar wings joined together by a two story building containing a joint computer system and command post . Each radar wing covered a 30 @-@ degree sector with a 0 @.@ 5 degree scanning beam . The elevation scanning pattern was a ' spade ' with a width of 20 degrees . The radar systems were arranged to create a fan shaped barrier . Of the four radars , called cells ( Russian : <unk> , tr . <unk> roughly radio location cell ) , two faced to the west and two faced to the east . All scanned between + 10 degrees and + 90 degrees in elevation . 
 Construction at the two sites started between 1962 and 1963 with improvements in the TsSO @-@ P test model being fed back into the deployed units . They gained an M @-@ 4 2 @-@ M computer with semiconductors , although the rest of the radar used Vacuum tubes . The radar systems were completed in late 1966 with the fourth Dnestr at Balkhash being used for testing . In 1968 the Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik target satellite , DS @-@ P1 @-@ Yu , was used to test the ability of the system . 
 The Dnestr radars were accepted for service by the Soviet Air Defence Forces in April 1967 and became part of the space surveillance network <unk> . : 434 
 = = Dnestr @-@ M = = 
 Parallel with the implementation of the Dnestr space surveillance units , a modified version of the original Dnestr units , Dnestr @-@ M radar , was being developed to act as an early warning radar to identify attacks by ballistic missiles . The first two were built at Murmansk in northern Russia ( Olenegorsk – RO @-@ 1 ) and near Riga in the then Latvian SSR ( Skrunda – RO @-@ 2 ) . They constituted the beginning of the Soviet <unk> network , the equivalent of the NATO BMEWS . : 421 
 The first Dnestr @-@ M at Olenegorsk was completed by 1968 . In 1970 , the radars at Olenegorsk and Skrunda , and an associated command centre at Solnechnogorsk , were accepted for service . According to <unk> ( 2002 ) , it seems they were positioned to identify missile launches from NATO submarines in the Norwegian and North Seas . 
 The Dnestr @-@ M included many improvements over the previous versions such as an increase in the pulse length from <unk> to <unk> which increased the range of objects identified , more semiconductors , and many other scanning and processing changes . 
 A version of this radar was built at the Sary Shagan test site and was called TsSO @-@ PM ( Russian : <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . After this had completed tests in 1965 it was decided to upgrade nodes 1 and 2 of the two OS sites to Dnestr @-@ M , keeping nodes 3 and 4 as Dnestr . These radars remained as space surveillance radars which scanned between + 10 and + 90 degrees , comparative to scanning between + 10 and + 30 degrees for the missile warning radars . A space surveillance network of four <unk> and four Dnestr @-@ Ms , and two command posts was formally commissioned in 1971 . 
 = = Dnepr = = 
 Work to improve the radar continued . An improved array was designed which covered 60 degrees rather than 30 . The first Dnepr radar was built at Balkhash as a new radar , cell 5 . It entered service on 12 May 1974 . The second was a new early warning station at Sevastopol . New <unk> were also built at Mishelevka and another at Skrunda , and then one at <unk> . The remaining radars were all converted to Dnepr with the exception of cells 3 and 4 at Balkhash and Mishelevka which remained space surveillance radars . : 422 
 All current operational radars are described as Dnepr , and have been updated incrementally . 
 = = Technical details = = 
 Each Dnepr array is a double sectoral horn antenna 250m long by 12 m wide . It has two rows of slot radiators within two waveguides . At each end of the two arrays , there is a set of transmitting and receiving equipment . It emits a signal covering a sector 30 degrees in azimuth and 30 degrees in elevation , with the scanning controlled by frequency . Four sets mean the radar covers 120 degrees in azimuth and 30 degrees in elevation ( 5 to 35 degrees ) . 
 The Dnepr involved the horn antenna being reduced from 20 to 14 metres in height and the addition of a polarising filter 
 = = Current status = = 
 These radars have been installed at six different radar stations and as of 2012 are operational at three – Balkhash , Mishelevka and Olenegorsk . The 1972 Anti @-@ Ballistic Missile Treaty required that early warning radars were located on the periphery of national territory and faced outwards . This caused problems when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 as many of the radar stations were now in newly independent states . The first station to close was Skrunda , in newly independent Latvia . A 1994 agreement between Russia and Latvia agreed that the two Dnepr radars there would stop working in 1998 , and would be fully demolished by 2000 . : 129 : 65 : 426 
 Russia signed an agreement with Ukraine in 1992 allowing it to continue using the Dnepr radars at Sevastopol and <unk> . The stations were run by Ukrainian personnel and data was sent to the headquarters of the Russian early warning system in Solnechnogorsk . In 2008 Russia announced that it was pulling out of the agreement with Ukraine and that the last data given to Russia from the stations would be in 2009 . : 76 The Ukrainian government announced that the stations were to be used part @-@ time for space surveillance . 
 The station in Balkhash in Kazakhstan remains the only Dnepr operational outside Russia . It has been modernised and is run by the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces . 
 The remaining stations in Russia are due to be replaced by the Voronezh radar . The <unk> in Mishelevka , Irkutsk will close once the second array of the new Voronezh radar is operational . The Dnepr at Olenegorsk , Murmansk will be replaced by a Voronezh as well . It is planned to start construction there in 2017 . 
 = Hikari ( Utada Hikaru song ) = 
 " Hikari " ( Japanese : 光 , " light " ) is a song recorded by Japanese – American recording artist Utada Hikaru for her fourth studio and third Japanese language album , Deep River ( 2002 ) . It premiered on March 20 , 2002 as the third single from the album in Japan . It was written and composed by Utada , whilst production and arrangement was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and long @-@ time collaborator Miyake Akira . The single , and a remix by Russell McNamara ( under the alias PlanitB ) , was used as the official Japanese theme song 's for the 2002 action role @-@ playing video game Kingdom Hearts , and appeared on its original soundtrack respectively . Musically , " Hikari " is pop folk song . Lyrically , it is about mysteries in life and human activities . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics highlighted the track as one of Utada 's best singles , and commended her vocal abilities and songwriting . It was also successful in Japan , peaking at number one both on the Oricon Singles Chart and Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV singles chart . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . An accompanying music video was shot by her then @-@ husband , Kazuaki Kiriya ; it features Utada washing dishes and drinking water . It was performed on some of her concert tours , including the Utada United and Wild Life tour . 
 To promote the international formats of Kingdom Hearts , Utada re @-@ recorded an English language version entitled " Simple & Clean " . Both the original edit and remix version by PlanitB served as international theme songs . It did not appear on Utada 's English studio Exodus ( 2004 ) , but the original version was included on her 2009 English studio album This Is the One . It was later released as an A @-@ side 12 @-@ inch single with Utada 's single " Colors " in 2003 , and received positive reviews from most music critics . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In February 2000 , Japanese video game artist Tetsuya Nomura announced the development of an action role @-@ playing video game named Kingdom Hearts . According to Nomura , he only had Utada in mind to create the theme song for the video game , so he had contacted her to collaborate ; as a result , she accepted his offer . In a brief interview with IGN.com , Nomura further stated ; " Her music has moved millions of fans , and I was absolutely thrilled when she agreed to contribute to this project . I see her as an icon for young artists and she also proves that music transcends national and language barriers . " 
 " Hikari " was written and composed by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and long @-@ time collaborator Miyake Akira . The song 's instrumentation consists of keyboards and programming handled by Kawano Kei , synthesizers from Tsunemi Kazuhide , and an acoustic guitar from Akiyama Hironori . The song was recorded by Ugajin Masaaki and mixed by Goh Hotoda in 2001 at Bunkamura Studio , Shibuya , Tokyo . It was released as the third single from her fourth studio and third Japanese language album , Deep River ( 2002 ) . Since then , the song has been remastered and re @-@ released twice ; the first on April 1 , 2004 , and the second time on December 9 , 2014 for Utada 's first greatest hits album Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) . 
 It was available on a CD single , released in Japan and Taiwan . Both formats included the original track , a remix each by Russell McNamara ( under the alias PlanitB ) and Alex <unk> ( under the alias Godson ) , plus the instrumental version . The artwork for the CD single 's were photographed by Takimoto Mikiya . It has a long @-@ distance shot of Utada in a greyish living room . A promotional 12 " vinyl was released by <unk> Records in 2002 , and included both the remixed tracks . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Hikari " is a pop folk song , as described by staff members from Japanese music magazine CD Journal . Similarly , rock musician and music journalist David Bertrand Wilson had reviewed the parent album Deep River , and described the sound and its appeal as " so commercial " . Square Enix Music 's Neo Locke described the song 's composition and melody in an extended review : " The acoustic guitar combined with the synth in the background creates a pleasant and gentle harmony that helps bring out Utada 's voice . " A reviewer from OngakuDB.com noted the acoustic guitar as one of the composition 's key elements , and described its sound as " melancholy " and a big " impact " . Similarly , Yeah ! J @-@ Pop ! editor Hiromi <unk> noted that the acoustic instrumentation was an " unusual " change in Utada 's normal pop musical style . Shinko Music 's Hiroshi <unk> described " Hikari " as a mid @-@ tempo ballad . 
 According to Kano , the editor in chief of Rockin 'On Japan , he stated that the lyrical content discusses themes of mystery and daily life actions ; he furthered believed that the song 's lyrics is an open interpretation , due to its lack of major characteristics and identified philosophy and religion as examples . In an interview that promoted her fifth Japanese studio album Ultra Blue ( 2005 ) and her single " Passion " , which is the follow to " Hikari " , Utada felt the writing process was difficult . She believed that the plot to Kingdom Hearts was soulless , and was unable to become inspired by it to write the song . She further explained ; " when I was making the song ' Hikari ' , the whole outlook for the game and its entry onto the world was so crucial that I got a lot more info on the characters ( so that ' Hikari ' would mirror the image that they wanted ) . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Hikari " received positive reviews from most music critics . Neo Locke from Square Enix Music was positive in his review , saying " ' Hikari ' has always impressed me for having a very recognizable and easy to manipulate melody despite the fact that the vocals are the only melodic line in the piece — partially due once again to Utada Hikaru 's strong and versatile voice . " He awarded the single seven out of ten points . In another positive , staff members from CD Journal complimented Utada 's " simple " and " distinctive " vocals , and her songwriting . Similarly , a reviewer from OngakuDB.com praised Utada 's vocals and expressed happiness for the song 's nostalgic vibe . Yeah ! J @-@ Pop ! editor Hiromi <unk> believed that " Hikari " demonstrated some of Utada 's best vocals to date , and labeled them and the song 's melody as " synergistic " . In a similar review , Shinko Music 's Hiroshi <unk> praised the songwriting and the chorus . Although describing the song in a positive manner , Sharon G. from <unk> compared the song to many other of Utada 's music , and felt " Hikari " didn 't come close to her " true sound " . Despite Daniel Kalabakov from Soundtrack Central disliking pop songs , he complimented Utada 's singing and the track 's instrumentation . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Commercially , " Hikari " was a success in Japan . It became her seventh single to debut at number one on the Oricon Singles Chart , with sales of 270 @,@ 370 units . It stayed at number one for a sole week , and spent a total of 20 weeks on that chart . By the end of 2002 , the single was ranked at number 10 on Oricon 's Annual 2002 chart with sales of 598 @,@ 130 units . This made " Hikari " her third single to reach inside the top ten of the yearly Oricon chart ; the other two singles being " Sakura Drops " at number six , and " Traveling " at number two . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . The single debuted at number one on Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV chart during the chart week of March 30 , 2002 , her eighth non @-@ consecutive single to do so . It stayed at the top spot for three consecutive weeks . The single stayed in the chart for 13 weeks , and was ranked at number eight on their 2002 Annual Chart . Despite it not charting on any digital record charts in Japan , it was certified gold by the RIAJ for 100 @,@ 000 full @-@ length cell phone downloads . According to the Oricon Style database , it is Utada 's 11th highest selling single . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video was filmed by her then @-@ husband , Kazuaki Kiriya . Utada intended to have " Hikari " directed by Kiriya , but the original idea was more complex and intricate . However , he was unable to submit her ideas and portray them into the video due to scheduling and work conflicts . Then , in a blog post , Utada revealed that the music video would feature her washing dishes because she found it enjoyable . She further explained ; " Actually we were to shoot the music video of ' Hikari ' with him ( Kazuaki Kiriya ) but it didn 't come true due to his scheduling conflicts at the last moment and that 's why we requested Kiriya urgently to shoot that dish @-@ washing video . " The entire four minute and 22 second video has Utada washing dishes in her kitchen ; during some portions of the video , Utada drinks water , stops washing her dishes , and walks away from the camera . According to Utada , no further editing was needed , and was completed in one take . 
 The music video received positive reviews from critics . According to Naomi <unk> , writing for The Global Post , she commended the departure of Utada 's general " beautiful and intricate music videos " , stating " The camera did not move once . Occasionally she lip @-@ synced along ; occasionally she just washed dishes . " Daniel Montesinos @-@ Donaghy from Noisey Vice noted and complimented Utada 's abilities in adapting to different roles through her music videos , specifically highlighting the " mundane " activity of washing dishes . A reviewer from OngakuDB.com noted a contrast between the song and the video , stating that the video had shown her " lonely " and the song more " gracious " . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 The song has been performed on some of Utada 's concert tours . Despite Utada 's plans to promote the song between 2002 and 2003 , she halted all promotional activities due to her diagnosis of a benign ovarian tumor , which was surgically removed that same year . Its first performance was in 2004 , during her Bokuhan concert tour ; it was included as the first song performed . It appeared on the live DVD , which was released on July 28 , 2004 . It was included on Utada 's debut English concert tour named Utada United . Featured as the closing number , it was later included on the live DVD , released on December 20 , 2006 . " Hikari " was performed during Utada 's two date concert series Wild Life in December 2010 . Since the track 's release , it has appeared on three compilation releases : Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) , it 's 2014 remastered version , and a special bundle of the compilation and the vol . 2 collection on a USB . In 2014 , Love <unk> recorded the song for Utada Hikaru no Uta , a tribute album celebrating 15 years since Utada 's debut . 
 = = Simple & Clean = = 
 To promote the international formats of Kingdom Hearts , Utada recorded an English version of " Hikari " , named " Simple & Clean " . Both the original edit and remix version by PlanitB served as the international theme songs . It did not appear on Utada 's English studio Exodus ( 2004 ) , but the original version was included on her 2009 English studio album This Is the One . It was released as an A @-@ side 12 @-@ inch single with Utada 's single " Colors " in 2003 , and received positive reviews from most music critics . It has been performed on two of Utada 's concerts , these being Utada United in 2006 and In The Flesh 2010 . 
 = = = Background and composition = = = 
 Much of the song 's production is similar to the Japanese version ; it was written and composed by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and Miyake Akira . The song included live instrumentation by Kawano Kei ( keyboards and programming ) , Tsunemi Kazuhide ( synthesizers ) , and Akiyama Hironori ( acoustic guitar ) , whilst it was arranged by Utada and Kawano Kei . The song was recorded by Ugajin Masaaki and mixed by Goh Hotoda in 2001 at Bunkamura Studio , Shibuya , Tokyo . The song was also remixed by Russell McNamara ( under the alias PlanitB ) . Like the Japanese version , Utada felt the writing process was difficult . Musically , " Simple & Clean " is a pop folk song , as described by staff members from Japanese music magazine CD Journal . Utada explained the song process in a detailed interview with <unk> Magazine ; 
 " ... that was so hard , it 's just , and it felt strained , and as a result , I 'm happy that I worked hard to do those , because those English versions are really good and " Simple and Clean , " I think , is a really good song , and <unk> most of the people that know me here , they know me for <unk> but it 's not ideal for me as a writer , to- because , actually , I changed the melodies for " Simple and Clean " and " Hikari , " because when you change the language you 're singing in , the same melodies don 't <unk> and as a writer , it 's just very frustrating to have , <unk> I wrote these melodies for Japanese words , and to have to write in English for that , it 's just not right . And then , so , for this , uh , this contract with Island Def Jam , in the beginning I separated it to this English language album , and I don 't do Japanese translations . I just , my integrity as an artist just would not take that , could not take that . " 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in the key of B ♭ major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 84 beats per minute . Utada 's vocal range spans between the notes G3 to G5 , specifically between the chorus lyrics ; " When you walk away / You don 't hear me say / Please oh baby don 't go / Simple and clean is the way that you 're making me feel tonight / It 's hard to let it go " . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The original edit and PlanitB remix of " Simple & Clean " first appeared on Utada 's single " Colors " as a B @-@ side , which was released on January 29 , 2003 . It was also available on the Taiwanese versions of " Colors " , released in mid @-@ 2003 . Near the end of 2003 , " Simple & Clean " was released as an A @-@ side 12 @-@ inch single with " Colors " in Japan ; it included the original and PlanitB remix . The original version was included on her 2009 English studio album This Is the One . 
 Upon its release , " Simple & Clean " received positive reviews from most music critics . Benjamin Turner from GameSpy was impressed by the translation of " Hikari " into English , and felt Utada 's vocals were a good addition to the opening and ending segments of the game . Michael Pascua from <unk> was generally positive , stating in a detail review ; " Utada made a smart decision with the physical release of the CD : she included the songs “ Simple and Clean ” and “ Sanctuary ” from the Kingdom Hearts series . Both songs showcase a strong musical style that isn ’ t necessarily in the R & B flare that This is the One provides . They also help connect any video game player who hasn ’ t necessarily listened to any of her Japanese albums or even knew that she had another English album . " He also labelled the song and " Sanctuary " " happy additions " to This Is The One . 
 = = = Live performances and promotions = = = 
 The song has been performed on some of Utada 's concert tours . Its first performance was at a special event that celebrated Utada 's 20th birthday in Japan on January 19 , 2003 ; she sung " Simple & Clean " as the encore track . Throughout the song , she performed the acoustic guitar . When Kingdom Hearts was released in North America , Utada performed the song ; this was one of Utada 's first performances outside on Japan . Despite Utada 's plans to promote the song between 2002 and 2003 , she halted all promotional activities due to her diagnosis of a benign ovarian tumor , which was surgically removed that same year . Its most recent performance was in 2010 , which was included on her Utada : In the Flesh 2010 concert tour in North America and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When the single was released and promoted through Kingdom Hearts , " Hikari " and " Simple & Clean " were widely considered a " hot topic " around the world of music , as described by a staff member at <unk> Their inclusion in the video game 's respective international versions was successful , as Kingdom Hearts sold over 4 @.@ 78 million units worldwide , subsequently earning the rank of being the tenth best selling PlayStation 2 video game . Both songs were then included on the spin @-@ off titles : Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories ( 2004 ) , Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep ( 2010 ) , and the remix versions Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix ( 2013 ) and Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix ( 2014 ) . The first two games , alongside the original release , sold over 5 @.@ 9 million units worldwide together . Both the original and remix versions of the two songs ( alongside an orchestral instrumental by Kingdom Hearts composer Yoko Shimomura ) were included on the first soundtrack , and the HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix soundtrack . Due to the success of the songs , Utada was invited to record another track for the original video game 's sequel , Kingdom Hearts II ( 2007 ) . This track was the Japanese written " Passion " , which was re @-@ written to " Sanctuary " as part of the international releases . Jeff Chuang from <unk> believed that " Simple & Clean " is what Utada is " best known for " by her fans outside of Japan . Similarly , Emily Goodman from <unk> believed that " Simple & Clean " was her most successful work outside of Japan . 
 " Hikari " and " Simple & Clean " are often cited as " one of the best video game songs in recent history " , as described by Dannii C. from <unk> Alex <unk> from The Young Folks listed the orchestral version of " Hikari " , which also appeared during the credits section of Kingdom Hearts , at number two on their " Top Ten Video Game Theme Songs " . He stated his reason through his extended review ; " Kingdom Hearts has several ' theme songs ' but the orchestrated version of ' Hikari ' takes the cake with all the makings of a grand adventure . It resonates with the many themes of the games : friendship , teamwork , and adventure . ' Hikari ' undoubtedly brings back wealth of memories for any fan of the franchise . " <unk> 's editor Pierce Sparrow listed both " Simple & Clean " and " Sanctuary " at number two on their " Top Ten Lyrical Songs for a Video Game " . Sparrow stated : " It was a little too difficult for me to choose just one of the songs , seeing as they have very similar qualities ... I doubt that anyone will disagree that these are two of the greatest theme songs ever produced . " 
 " Hikari " brought Utada a number of accolades and award nominations . In 2008 , the Guinness World Records listed the track as the best @-@ selling video game single in Japan , and was included on the 2008 Gamer 's Edition book ; this is Utada 's first , and current , induction into this . At the 17th Japan Gold Disc Awards in 2003 , Utada won the Song of the Year award ; she had also won two awards with the same name that year for her single 's " Sakura Drops " and " Colors " . Similarly , she also received the Silver Award for Foreign Production recognition at the 2003 Japanese Society for Rights of Authors , Composers and Publishers Awards ( JASRAC ) . In December 2015 , in honor of Utada 's comeback into the music business , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favourite songs by Utada out of 25 positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Hikari " was ranked at number three with 97 votes in total . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted by the CD liner notes of " Hikari " and " Colors " . 
 = = Chart and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Thomas H. Tongue = 
 Thomas H. Tongue ( June 23 , 1844 – January 11 , 1903 ) was an American politician and attorney in the state of Oregon . Born in England , his family immigrated to Washington County , Oregon , in 1859 . In Oregon , he would serve in the State Senate from 1889 to 1893 and was the seventh mayor of Hillsboro . A Republican , he was chairman of the state party , and national convention delegate in 1892 . Tongue served as Congressman from 1897 to 1903 representing Oregon 's 1st congressional district . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas H. Tongue was born in Lincolnshire , England , on June 23 , 1844 . He attended the public schools of England before immigrating to the United States with his parents . The family settled in Washington County , Oregon , in the Tualatin Valley on November 23 , 1859 . His parents Rebecca and Anthony Tongue had a house west of North Plains . 
 In Oregon , Tongue attended the Tualatin Academy preparatory school in nearby Forest Grove . He then enrolled at Pacific University , a college affiliated with Tualatin Academy , and graduated from the school in June 1868 . After graduating he moved to Hillsboro , the county seat of Washington County , where he studied law . On December 25 , 1869 , he married Emily Margaret Eagleton , daughter of George Eagleton . 
 = = Career = = 
 Tongue was admitted to the Oregon State Bar in 1870 and began private legal practice in Hillsboro . While practicing law he was also a farmer and raised livestock while a member of the Knights of Pythias and Odd Fellows . Also a member of the Masonic Order , he served as a grand master in that organization . Tongue started his political career as mayor of Hillsboro , serving two terms . He was elected in 1882 as the seventh person to hold that office , serving from December 13 , 1882 , to December 10 , 1883 . He would serve a second term three years later from December 13 , 1886 to December 9 , 1887 . 
 In 1884 , he purchased the former fairgrounds where the Washington County Fair had been held for approximately 15 years . The 50 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) were south of First Avenue and Baseline in present @-@ day downtown Hillsboro , with Tongue using the land for his hobby farm . In 1888 , Tongue was elected to a four @-@ year term in the Oregon State Senate . Serving in both the 1889 and 1891 sessions , the Republican represented District 27 and Washington County . While in the State Senate he was selected as the chairperson of the judiciary committee . He replaced William D. Hare as both mayor and state senator . 
 A Republican Party official , Tongue served on the party 's state central committee from 1886 to 1896 . In 1890 , he was elected to the post of chairman for the Republican state convention and followed that position as president of the state party from 1892 to 1894 . In 1892 , Oregon received a second congressional district , and Tongue served as the Republican party 's chairman for the district until 1896 . Also in 1892 , Tongue served as a delegate to the Republican National Convention held in Minneapolis , Minnesota , and served as the vice president of the Oregon delegation to the convention in 1894 . 
 = = Congress = = 
 Thomas Tongue was elected in 1896 as a Republican to the 55th Congress from Oregon 's 1st congressional district . Replacing Binger Hermann , Tongue won by a total of 63 votes over his opponents . He was re @-@ elected three times and served in the 56th and 57th United States Congresses . Tongue also won re @-@ election in 1902 to the 58th Congress , but died before that session began . In the 1898 campaign he defeated three opponents led by Fusion Party candidate Robert M. Veatch , winning by 2 @,@ 037 votes over Veatch . Tongue won by 3 @,@ 100 votes in 1900 and by 7 @,@ 318 votes in the 1902 campaign . 
 On March 4 , 1897 , he began serving in the United States House of Representatives and remained until his death in Washington , D.C. , on January 11 , 1903 , before the start of what would have been a fourth term . In Congress , Tongue was chairman of the Committee on Irrigation of Arid Lands during both the 56th and 57th Congresses . He served alongside William R. Ellis and Malcolm Adelbert Moody as Oregon 's House delegates . While in Congress , Tongue advocated for the creation of a national park for Crater Lake in Southern Oregon . He introduced bills to create the park in 1898 , 1899 , and finally in 1901 when the bill was passed by Congress . In May 1902 , Crater Lake National Park became the United States ' fifth national park when President Theodore Roosevelt signed the bill into law . After Tongue 's death , Binger Hermann , who Tongue succeeded in Congress , was elected to complete Tongue 's term . Thomas Brackett Reed , Speaker of the House during Tongue 's first two terms , considered Tongue " one of the seven ablest men in the House . " 
 = = Family = = 
 Tongue and his wife , the former Margarite Eagleton , had eight children : Edmund Burke Tongue , Edwin Tongue , Mary G. Lombard , Thomas H. Tongue , Jr . , Elizabeth Fey , Florence Munger , Bertha Rebecca Tongue , and Edith . Edith married Alfred E. <unk> , who would serve in the United States Senate . Thomas Tongue , Jr. and Edmund both became lawyers , with the older Edmund forming a legal partnership with his father in 1897 . Congressman Tongue was buried in Hillsboro , Oregon , at the family 's private plot next to the Masonic Cemetery ( now Pioneer Cemetery ) . Tongue was the grandfather of Thomas H. Tongue III ( 1912 – 1994 ) , who served as an associate justice on the Oregon Supreme Court . 
 = Jürgen Ehlers = 
 Jürgen Ehlers ( German : [ <unk> ̩ <unk> ] ; 29 December 1929 – 20 May 2008 ) was a German physicist who contributed to the understanding of Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity . From graduate and postgraduate work in Pascual Jordan 's relativity research group at Hamburg University , he held various posts as a lecturer and , later , as a professor before joining the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Munich as a director . In 1995 , he became the founding director of the newly created Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics in Potsdam , Germany . 
 Ehlers ' research focused on the foundations of general relativity as well as on the theory 's applications to astrophysics . He formulated a suitable classification of exact solutions to Einstein 's field equations and proved the Ehlers – Geren – Sachs theorem that justifies the application of simple , general @-@ relativistic model universes to modern cosmology . He created a spacetime @-@ oriented description of gravitational lensing and clarified the relationship between models formulated within the framework of general relativity and those of Newtonian gravity . In addition , Ehlers had a keen interest in both the history and philosophy of physics and was an ardent populariser of science . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Jürgen Ehlers was born in Hamburg . He attended public schools from 1936 to 1949 , and then went on to study physics , mathematics and philosophy at Hamburg University from 1949 to 1955 . In the winter term of 1955 – 56 , he passed the high school teacher 's examination ( <unk> ) , but instead of becoming a teacher undertook graduate research with Pascual Jordan , who acted as his thesis advisor . Ehlers ' doctoral work was on the construction and characterization of solutions of the Einstein field equations . He earned his doctorate in physics from Hamburg University in 1958 . 
 Prior to Ehlers ' arrival , the main research of Jordan 's group had been dedicated to a scalar @-@ tensor modification of general relativity that later became known as Jordan – <unk> – Dicke theory . This theory differs from general relativity in that the gravitational constant is replaced by a variable field . Ehlers was instrumental in changing the group 's focus to the structure and interpretation of Einstein 's original theory . Other members of the group included Wolfgang <unk> , Rainer K. Sachs and Manfred <unk> . The group had a close working relationship with Otto Heckmann and his student Engelbert Schücking at Hamburger <unk> , the city 's observatory . Guests at the group 's colloquium included Wolfgang Pauli , Joshua Goldberg and Peter Bergmann . 
 In 1961 , as Jordan 's assistant , Ehlers earned his habilitation , qualifying him for a German professorship . He then held teaching and research positions in Germany and in the US , namely at the University of Kiel , Syracuse University and Hamburg University . From 1964 to 1965 , he was at the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest in Dallas . From 1965 to 1971 , he held various positions in Alfred Schild 's group at the University of Texas at Austin , starting as an associate professor and , in 1967 , obtaining a position as full professor . During that time , he held visiting professorships at the universities of Würzburg and Bonn . 
 = = = Munich = = = 
 In 1970 , Ehlers received an offer to join the Max Planck Institute for Physics and Astrophysics in Munich as the director of its gravitational theory department . Ehlers had been suggested by Ludwig Biermann , the institute 's director at the time . When Ehlers joined the institute in 1971 , he also became an adjunct professor at Munich 's Ludwig Maximilian University . In March 1991 , the institute split into the Max Planck Institute for Physics and the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics , where Ehlers ' department found a home . Over the 24 years of his tenure , his research group was home to , among others , Gary Gibbons , John Stewart and Bernd Schmidt , as well as visiting scientists including Abhay <unk> , Demetrios <unk> and Brandon Carter . 
 One of Ehlers ' postdoctoral students in Munich was Reinhard Breuer , who later became editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Spektrum der Wissenschaft , the German edition of the popular @-@ science journal Scientific American . 
 = = = Potsdam = = = 
 When German science institutions reorganized after German reunification in 1990 , Ehlers lobbied for the establishment of an institute of the Max Planck Society dedicated to research on gravitational theory . On 9 June 1994 , the Society decided to open the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics in Potsdam . The institute started operations on 1 April 1995 , with Ehlers as its founding director and as the leader of its department for the foundations and mathematics of general relativity . Ehlers then oversaw the founding of a second institute department devoted to gravitational wave research and headed by Bernard F. Schutz . On 31 December 1998 , Ehlers retired to become founding director emeritus . 
 Ehlers continued to work at the institute until his death on 20 May 2008 . He left behind his wife Anita Ehlers , his four children , Martin , Kathrin , David , and Max , as well as five grandchildren . 
 = = Research = = 
 Ehlers ' research was in the field of general relativity . In particular , he made contributions to cosmology , the theory of gravitational lenses and gravitational waves . His principal concern was to clarify general relativity 's mathematical structure and its consequences , separating rigorous proofs from heuristic conjectures . 
 = = = Exact solutions = = = 
 For his doctoral thesis , Ehlers turned to a question that was to shape his lifetime research . He sought exact solutions of Einstein 's equations : model universes consistent with the laws of general relativity that are simple enough to allow for an explicit description in terms of basic mathematical expressions . These exact solutions play a key role when it comes to building general @-@ relativistic models of physical situations . However , general relativity is a fully covariant theory – its laws are the same , independent of which coordinates are chosen to describe a given situation . One direct consequence is that two apparently different exact solutions could correspond to the same model universe , and differ only in their coordinates . Ehlers began to look for serviceable ways of characterizing exact solutions <unk> , that is , in ways that do not depend on coordinate choice . In order to do so , he examined ways of describing the intrinsic geometric properties of the known exact solutions . 
 During the 1960s , following up on his doctoral thesis , Ehlers published a series of papers , all but one in collaboration with colleagues from the Hamburg group , which later became known as the " Hamburg Bible " . The first paper , written with Jordan and <unk> , is a treatise on how to characterize exact solutions to Einstein 's field equations in a systematic way . The analysis presented there uses tools from differential geometry such as the Petrov classification of Weyl tensors ( that is , those parts of the Riemann tensor describing the curvature of space @-@ time that are not constrained by Einstein 's equations ) , isometry groups and conformal transformations . This work also includes the first definition and classification of pp @-@ waves , a class of simple gravitational waves . 
 The following papers in the series were treatises on gravitational radiation ( one with Sachs , one with <unk> ) . The work with Sachs studies , among other things , vacuum solutions with special algebraic properties , using the 2 @-@ component spinor formalism . It also gives a systematic exposition of the geometric properties of bundles ( in mathematical terms : congruences ) of light beams . Spacetime geometry can influence the propagation of light , making them converge on or diverge from each other , or deforming the bundle 's cross section without changing its area . The paper formalizes these possible changes in the bundle in terms of the bundle 's expansion ( convergence / divergence ) , and twist and shear ( cross @-@ section area @-@ conserving deformation ) , linking those properties to spacetime geometry . One result is the Ehlers @-@ Sachs theorem describing the properties of the shadow produced by a narrow beam of light encountering an opaque object . The tools developed in that work would prove essential for the discovery by Roy Kerr of his Kerr solution , describing a rotating black hole – one of the most important exact solutions . 
 The last of these seminal papers addressed the general @-@ relativistic treatment of the mechanics of continuous media . However useful the notion of a point mass may be in classical physics ; in general relativity , such an idealized mass concentration into a single point of space is not even well @-@ defined . That is why relativistic hydrodynamics , that is , the study of continuous media , is an essential part of model @-@ building in general relativity . The paper systematically describes the basic concepts and models in what the editor of the journal General Relativity and Gravitation , on the occasion of publishing an English translation 32 years after the original publication date , called " one of the best reviews in this area " . 
 Another part of Ehlers ' exploration of exact solutions in his thesis led to a result that proved important later . At the time Ehlers started his research on his doctoral thesis , the Golden age of general relativity had not yet begun and the basic properties and concepts of black holes were not yet understood . In the work that led to his doctoral thesis , Ehlers proved important properties of the surface around a black hole that would later be identified as its horizon , in particular that the gravitational field inside cannot be static , but must change over time . The simplest example of this is the " Einstein @-@ Rosen bridge " , or Schwarzschild wormhole that is part of the Schwarzschild solution describing an idealized , spherically symmetric black hole : the interior of the horizon houses a bridge @-@ like connection that changes over time , collapsing sufficiently quickly to keep any space @-@ traveler from traveling through the wormhole . 
 = = = Ehlers group = = = 
 In physics , duality means that two equivalent descriptions of a particular physical situation exist , using different physical concepts . This is a special case of a physical symmetry , that is , a change that preserves key features of a physical system . A simple example for a duality is that between the electric field E and the magnetic field B electrodynamics : In the complete absence of electrical charges , the replacement E <formula> – B , B <formula> E leaves Maxwell 's equations invariant . Whenever a particular pair of expressions for B and E conform to the laws of electrodynamics , switching the two expressions around and adding a minus sign to the new B is also valid . 
 In his doctoral thesis , Ehlers pointed out a duality symmetry between different components of the metric of a stationary vacuum spacetime , which maps solutions of Einstein 's field equations to other solutions . This symmetry between the tt @-@ component of the metric , which describes time as measured by clocks whose spatial coordinates do not change , and a term known as the twist potential is analogous to the aforementioned duality between E and B. 
 The duality discovered by Ehlers was later expanded to a larger symmetry corresponding to the special linear group <formula> . This larger symmetry group has since become known as the Ehlers group . Its discovery led to further generalizations , notably the infinite @-@ dimensional <unk> group ( the <unk> group is generated by two non @-@ commuting subgroups , one of which is the Ehlers group ) . These so @-@ called hidden symmetries play an important role in the Kaluza – Klein reduction of both general relativity and its generalizations , such as eleven @-@ dimensional supergravity . Other applications include their use as a tool in the discovery of previously unknown solutions and their role in a proof that solutions in the stationary <unk> @-@ symmetric case form an integrable system . 
 = = = Cosmology : Ehlers – Geren – Sachs theorem = = = 
 The Ehlers – Geren – Sachs theorem , published in 1968 , shows that in a given universe , if all freely falling observers measure the cosmic background radiation to have exactly the same properties in all directions ( that is , they measure the background radiation to be isotropic ) , then that universe is an isotropic and homogeneous Friedmann – Lemaître spacetime . Cosmic isotropy and homogeneity are important as they are the basis of the modern standard model of cosmology . 
 = = = Fundamental concepts in general relativity = = = 
 In the 1960s , Ehlers collaborated with Felix <unk> and Alfred Schild on a constructive @-@ axiomatic approach to general relativity : a way of deriving the theory from a minimal set of elementary objects and a set of axioms specifying these objects ' properties . The basic ingredients of their approach are primitive concepts such as event , light ray , particle and freely falling particle . At the outset , spacetime is a mere set of events , without any further structure . They postulated the basic properties of light and freely falling particles as axioms , and with their help constructed the differential topology , conformal structure and , finally , the metric structure of spacetime , that is : the notion of when two events are close to each other , the role of light rays in linking up events , and a notion of distance between events . Key steps of the construction correspond to idealized measurements , such the standard range finding used in radar . The final step derived Einstein 's equations from the weakest possible set of additional axioms . The result is a formulation that clearly identifies the assumptions underlying general relativity . 
 In the 1970s , in collaboration with <unk> Rudolph , Ehlers addressed the problem of rigid bodies in general relativity . Rigid bodies are a fundamental concept in classical physics . However , the fact that by definition their different parts move simultaneously is incompatible with the relativistic concept of the speed of light as a limiting speed for the propagation of signals and other influences . While , as early as 1909 , Max Born had given a definition of rigidity that was compatible with relativistic physics , his definition depends on assumptions that are not satisfied in a general space @-@ time , and are thus overly restrictive . Ehlers and Rudolph generalized Born 's definition to a more readily applicable definition they called " pseudo @-@ rigidity " , which represents a more satisfactory approximation to the rigidity of classical physics . 
 = = = Gravitational lensing = = = 
 With Peter Schneider , Ehlers embarked on an in @-@ depth study of the foundations of gravitational lensing . One result of this work was a 1992 monograph co @-@ authored with Schneider and Emilio Falco . It was the first systematic exposition of the topic that included both the theoretical foundations and the observational results . From the viewpoint of astronomy , gravitational lensing is often described using a quasi @-@ Newtonian approximation — assuming the gravitational field to be small and the deflection angles to be minute — which is perfectly sufficient for most situations of astrophysical relevance . In contrast , the monograph developed a thorough and complete description of gravitational lensing from a fully relativistic space @-@ time perspective . This feature of the book played a major part in its long @-@ term positive reception . In the following years , Ehlers continued his research on the propagation of bundles of light in arbitrary spacetimes . 
 = = = Frame theory and Newtonian gravity = = = 
 A basic derivation of the Newtonian limit of general relativity is as old as the theory itself . Einstein used it to derive predictions such as the anomalous perihelion precession of the planet Mercury . Later work by Élie Cartan , Kurt Friedrichs and others showed more concretely how a geometrical generalization of Newton 's theory of gravity known as Newton – Cartan theory could be understood as a ( degenerate ) limit of general relativity . This required letting a specific parameter <formula> go to zero . Ehlers extended this work by developing a frame theory that allowed for constructing the Newton – Cartan limit , and in a mathematically precise way , not only for the physical laws , but for any spacetime obeying those laws ( that is , solutions of Einstein 's equations ) . This allowed physicists to explore what the Newtonian limit meant in specific physical situations . For example , the frame theory can be used to show that the Newtonian limit of a Schwarzschild black hole is a simple point particle . Also , it allows Newtonian versions of exact solutions such as the Friedmann – Lemaître models or the Gödel universe to be constructed . Since its inception , ideas Ehlers introduced in the context of his frame theory have found important applications in the study of both the Newtonian limit of general relativity and of the Post @-@ Newtonian expansion , where Newtonian gravity is complemented by terms of ever higher order in <formula> in order to accommodate relativistic effects . 
 General relativity is non @-@ linear : the gravitational influence of two masses is not simply the sum of those masses ' individual gravitational influences , as had been the case in Newtonian gravity . Ehlers participated in the discussion of how the back @-@ reaction from gravitational radiation onto a radiating system could be systematically described in a non @-@ linear theory such as general relativity , pointing out that the standard quadrupole formula for the energy flux for systems like the binary pulsar had not ( yet ) been rigorously derived : a priori , a derivation demanded the inclusion of higher @-@ order terms than was commonly assumed , higher than were computed until then . 
 His work on the Newtonian limit , particularly in relation to cosmological solutions , led Ehlers , together with his former doctoral student Thomas Buchert , to a systematic study of perturbations and inhomogeneities in a Newtonian cosmos . This laid the groundwork for Buchert 's later generalization of this treatment of inhomogeneities . This generalization was the basis of his attempt to explain what is currently seen as the cosmic effects of a cosmological constant or , in modern parlance , dark energy , as a non @-@ linear consequence of inhomogeneities in general @-@ relativistic cosmology . 
 = = = History and philosophy of physics = = = 
 Complementing his interest in the foundations of general relativity and , more generally , of physics , Ehlers researched the history of physics . Up until his death , he collaborated in a project on the history of quantum theory at the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science in Berlin . In particular , he explored Pascual Jordan 's seminal contributions to the development of quantum field theory between 1925 and 1928 . Throughout his career , Ehlers had an interest in the philosophical foundations and implications of physics and contributed to research on this topic by addressing questions such as the basic status of scientific knowledge in physics . 
 = = = Science popularization = = = 
 Ehlers showed a keen interest in reaching a general audience . He was a frequent public lecturer , at universities as well as at venues such as the Urania in Berlin . He authored popular @-@ science articles , including contributions to general @-@ audience journals such as Bild der Wissenschaft . He edited a compilation of articles on gravity for the German edition of Scientific American . Ehlers directly addressed physics teachers , in talks and journal articles on the teaching of relativity and related basic ideas , such as mathematics as the language of physics . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Ehlers became a member of the Berlin @-@ Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities ( 1993 ) , the Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur , Mainz ( 1972 ) , the Leopoldina in Halle ( 1975 ) and the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities in Munich ( 1979 ) . From 1995 to 1998 , he served as president of the International Society on General Relativity and Gravitation . He also received the 2002 Max Planck Medal of the German Physical Society , the Volta Gold Medal of Pavia University ( 2005 ) and the medal of the Faculty of Natural Sciences of Charles University , Prague ( 2007 ) . 
 In 2008 , the International Society on General Relativity and Gravitation instituted the " Jürgen Ehlers Thesis Prize " in commemoration of Ehlers . It is sponsored by the scientific publishing house Springer and is awarded <unk> , at the society 's international conference , to the best doctoral thesis in the areas of mathematical and numerical general relativity . Issue 9 of volume 41 of the journal General Relativity and Gravitation was dedicated to Ehlers , in memoriam . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 <unk> , G. ; Ehlers , J. , eds . ( 1996 ) , Gravitation , Spektrum Akademischer Verlag , ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 362 @-@ X 
 Ehlers , Jürgen ( 1973 ) , " Survey of general relativity theory " , in Israel , Werner , Relativity , Astrophysics and Cosmology , D. Reidel , pp. 1 – 125 , ISBN 90 @-@ 277 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Schneider , P. ; Ehlers , J. ; Falco , E. E. ( 1992 ) , Gravitational lenses , Springer , ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 = Anniemal = 
 Anniemal is the debut album by Norwegian recording artist Annie . It was first released by 679 Recordings in September 2004 . Annie began recording music in 1999 with her boyfriend , Tore Kroknes , who died in 2001 . She returned to recording later that year , collaborating with Richard X , Röyksopp , and Timo Kaukolampi . 
 The album combines Annie 's thin , airy vocals with heavily layered beats . It is heavily influenced by 1980s dance @-@ pop . Upon release , the album was successful in Norway . Blogs leaked tracks from Anniemal before it was released internationally , and publications from other countries soon praised the album for its blissful but melancholic sound . 
 Before releasing the album internationally in 2005 , Annie 's record label 679 Recordings was not confident in the album 's ability to achieve commercial success overseas , so it did not heavily promote Anniemal . The album eventually sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . It yielded four singles : " Chewing Gum " , " Heartbeat " , " Happy Without You " , and " Always Too Late " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In the late 1990s , Annie held a monthly DJ night called Pop Till You Drop with friend <unk> <unk> in her hometown of Bergen , Norway . There she met producer Tore Kroknes , and the two began dating . Annie and Kroknes borrowed a small studio from downtempo duo Röyksopp to record her debut single " The Greatest Hit " . The song , which uses a sample of Madonna 's 1982 dance @-@ pop single " Everybody " , had a limited edition release in 1999 . It became an underground hit at clubs in Norway and Britain , resulting in offers for record deals . The two recorded Annie 's second single , titled " I Will Get On " . She focused on vocals and melodies in music , and Kroknes concentrated on production , influenced by techno , disco and house music . As she began to work on her debut album , Kroknes became ill due to a heart defect . He died eighteen months later , in April 2001 . Because of their plan to make the album together , Annie struggled with the idea of collaborating with anyone else and stopped work on it entirely . 
 Half a year passed before Annie returned to music . She asked Timo Kaukolampi from Finnish electronic group Op : l Bastards to DJ in Bergen . Starting with a song titled " Kiss Me " , he had Annie contribute vocals to some of his tracks . She asked Kaukolampi to work on the album , and he produced nine of its songs for her . She could not afford to rent a studio , so Annie recorded demos by asking to use local studios at night or borrowing one owned by her friend . In late 2003 , Annie signed with 679 Recordings , and the advance enabled her to complete the record . Producer Richard X , impressed with " The Greatest Hit " , asked her to record vocals for his debut album Richard X Presents His X @-@ Factor Vol . 1 . In exchange , he contributed " Chewing Gum " and " Me Plus One " , both written with Hannah Robinson . Annie also worked with Röyksopp , who co @-@ wrote and produced three songs on the album . 
 Rather than recording and selecting from a large number of songs , Annie stopped after around thirteen and compiled the tracklist . She selected the title Anniemal based on a suggestion by Kroknes . The two had planned on writing a song titled " Anniemal " , so she chose it as the album 's title because to her , " it just made sense . Anniemal is simple and easy and good . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 When working on songs , Annie was involved with the whole recording and production processes , with a focus on the melodies . Annie stated that while promoting the album , she wanted to make sure people knew of her involvement in the album 's writing and production . Of its twelve songs , ten were co @-@ written by Annie . She stated that although singing songs written by someone else might not feel less personal , " It 's special to be on the stage and actually sing something you had done . " With respect to her involvement in the songwriting process , Annie referred to herself as " a bit of a control freak " . 
 The lyrics of Anniemal generally describe falling in or out of love . Annie 's vocals are thin and breathy , working within a narrow vocal range . Reviewers noted a sense of melancholy in the vocals , suggesting that it could be attributed to the death of Kroknes . Annie acknowledged that none of the songs " are directly happy " and that some are " happy but still a bit melancholy . " She stated that she thought bittersweet melodies " [ sound ] timeless … Very Scandinavian of me ! " She insisted , however , that she tries to write songs that are cheerful : 
 " For me , it 's really easy to write depressive songs and that 's why I never do that . I try to do songs that are a bit happier and a bit more complicated . I think there are too many songwriters writing sad , depressive songs , and I find it really boring , listening to music where people are just complaining . People should stop whining ! I find it much more challenging to make songs that are pop songs , to make happy songs , and that 's why I like to do it . I really like to make quite hopeful , happy music with a little bit of melancholy in it , with a little spice of melancholy . " 
 Anniemal focuses on heavily layered beats , with a strong 1980s influence . Annie was influenced by 1980s dance @-@ pop , and on " No Easy Love " , she includes a sample of <unk> 's 1982 song " Easier Said Than Done " . Unlike many of her contemporaries , Annie avoids using an ironic or kitschy in her take on 1980s music . The songs ' styles span genres including bubblegum pop , electro , disco , R & B , dance @-@ pop , and rock . Annie 's DJing experiences taught her about sound and production and had an impact on her music . She stated that she wanted to make a pop album that would not quickly become dated , " an album that you could listen to in five years and it wouldn 't sound terrible . " Annie considered excluding " Greatest Hit " from Anniemal to achieve this but ultimately included it because she felt it did not sound as if it were five years old . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Anniemal received acclaim from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 81 , based on 23 reviews , which indicates " universal acclaim " . Scott Plagenhoef of Pitchfork Media referred to the songs as a " dozen slices of stylish , sophisticated electro @-@ pop , crisp tracks that move between the fizzy and the woozy , all anchored by Annie 's breathy ( sometimes almost muted ) vocals . " The site 's endorsement was uncommon during a period when sites covering independent music were often dismissive of pop acts . In his review for AllMusic , Andy Kellman described Anniemal as " cunning " but also " deeply affecting " . Dylan Hicks ' review for The Village Voice stated that the blogosphere and British music press overrated Anniemal but that " an overrated good record is still a good record " . Jody Rosen wrote for The New York Times that the album " is a true album , strong from top to bottom " and that " there is charm in [ Annie 's ] deadpan delivery , and her songwriting is full of the flair for melody for which Scandinavian pop is famous . " Rosen also contributed a review to Slate , where she noted that " other singers have made whole careers out of singles less winning than ' Chewing Gum , ' but [ Anniemal ] includes several other superb songs " . Kitty Empire 's review in The Observer stated that the album 's songs " boast a winning combination of innocence and experience , breezy blonde melodies and just @-@ so productions " . PopMatters ' Pierre Hamilton called Anniemal " riveting " for how " it lacks the waxy sheen " that listeners were used to hearing in manufactured pop music . However , a second PopMatters review , written by Rob Horning , criticised the album for using a similar formula to previous generations of electropop , adding that the result was " exquisitely empty … enough to suck the feelings out of its listeners and leave them happily vacant , blank and unburdened . " In his review for Billboard magazine , Michael Paoletta described the album as " slinky and sensual , cool and classy , fun and fiery " and labeled it " one of the best debut albums of 2005 . " 
 Several reviewers drew parallels between mainstream pop acts and Annie . Entertainment Weekly 's Raymond Fiore called the album an " addictive " debut where Annie " flaunts whispery Kylie cool and old @-@ school @-@ Madonna cheekiness " , but added that " this sugar rush of an album proves … candy is best consumed in moderation . " Hua Hsu of Blender magazine made a similar comparison , proclaiming Annie the " Kylie Minogue hipsters don 't have to feel guilty about liking " . Barry Walters of Rolling Stone touted how the album " comes packed with both instant surface fizz and quirky finesse that sustains repeated listenings " , and ending his review , " Goodbye , Britney . Hello , Annie . " 
 Pitchfork listed Anniemal at number fifteen on its list of the top fifty albums of 2004 , stating that its strength was how " its downtime feels so decidedly personal " , and the album appeared at number 167 on Pitchfork 's list of the top 200 albums of the 2000s . The album was placed on Slant Magazine 's list of best albums of the 2000s at number twenty @-@ three . Rolling Stone ranked Anniemal number thirty @-@ nine on its " Top 50 Records of 2005 " list , exclaiming , " Hail the Norse goddess . " 
 = = Release and commercial performance = = 
 679 Recordings first released Anniemal in Norway on 28 September 2004 . The album debuted at its peak of number six on the Norwegian Albums Chart . It won in the pop category at the 2005 Alarm Prizes , and Annie won for newcomer of the year . She again won for Newcomer of the Year at Spellemannprisen 2005 , where she was invited to present an award . 
 Following the album 's Norwegian release , the songs were leaked onto the Internet , and some appeared on year @-@ end best @-@ of lists in other countries . Annie stated that she had not expected North American publications to show interest in the album because she thought " the record sounds really European . " The songs reached an international audience through online blogs , message boards , and file @-@ sharing networks before they had been released outside Scandinavia . This was more common for independent bands , and Annie became the first European dance @-@ pop musician to cultivate an underground fanbase this way . 
 679 released the album in the rest of Europe during early 2005 but was unsure how to categorise and market Anniemal . It asked Annie about artists like Goldfrapp whose audiences 679 thought it should target . Uncertain that the album 's Internet hype would significantly bolster the album 's sales , the label did not heavily promote it . In support of the album , Annie opened for English alternative dance band Saint Etienne at several June 2005 gigs in the United Kingdom . Annie had never performed her songs live before the release of Anniemal , so replicating the sound of more electronic songs like " Chewing Gum " became a long process . By September of that year , the album had sold 20 @,@ 000 copies . 
 For its 7 June 2005 American release , Anniemal was distributed by Big Beat Records . To promote the album , Annie performed a set of DJing gigs in the United States for the <unk> Tour during late June and early July 2005 . She and Kaukolampi spun vinyl , and Annie performed her songs during the tour . Before the tour began , Anniemal was selling over one thousand copies per week in the US , and it went on to sell a total of 22 thousand copies there . Although it did not chart on the US Billboard 200 , Anniemal reached number thirteen on the Top Electronic Albums chart . When released in Australia the following year , the album failed to chart on the ARIA Albums Chart but peaked at number twenty @-@ five on the Dance Albums Chart . Anniemal sold a total of over 100 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Chewing Gum " was released as the album 's lead single in September 2004 . Built around a retro beat by Richard X , the song uses chewing gum as a metaphor for men , with Annie singing " You spit it out when all the flavor has gone / Wrap him round your finger like you 're playing with gum " . It was the album 's most commercially successful single , reaching number eight on the Norwegian Singles Chart and number twenty @-@ five on the UK Singles Chart . It was also a critical success , listed thirty @-@ first on the 2004 Pazz & Jop list , a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau . 
 " Heartbeat " was the second single released from Anniemal . It narrates a night of going to clubs with friends , using a beat symbolizing a heartbeat , which doubles its tempo when Annie 's persona catches the attention of her romantic interest on the dancefloor . Like " Chewing Gum " , it received acclaim from music critics . It was one place behind " Chewing Gum " on the Pazz & Jop list , and Pitchfork Media named it the best single of 2004 . However , it did not sell as well as " Chewing Gum " , reaching number eighteen in Norway and fifty in the United Kingdom . " Happy Without You " and " Always Too Late " were released as the third and fourth singles in 2005 , but neither charted . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Anniemal album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
