 = = Release history = = 
 = Keith Fahey = 
 Keith Declan Fahey ( born 15 January 1983 in Dublin ) is a retired ex @-@ Republic of Ireland international footballer who played most of his career with League of Ireland side St Patrick 's Athletic as well as English side Birmingham City . He played predominantly as a central midfielder , but also occasionally as a winger . 
 Fahey started his professional career as a trainee with Arsenal . He played for Aston Villa , Bluebell United , St Patrick 's Athletic and Drogheda United before his transfer to Birmingham City . With Birmingham City he won the 2011 League Cup in England , as well as helping the club gain promotion from the Football League Championship to the Premier League during the 2008 – 09 season . He left the club at the end of the 2012 – 13 season , and returned to St Patrick 's Athletic for a third spell with the club . 
 With Ireland , he was part of the team that secured qualification for UEFA Euro 2012 . Manager Giovanni Trapattoni called Fahey into the Irish squad for the tournament , but he was later sent home due to injury . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Fahey started his professional career as a trainee with Arsenal before signing for Aston Villa in April 2000 for a fee of £ 250 @,@ 000 . He played for Villa 's youth and reserve teams , but never made a first @-@ team appearance . 
 = = = Return to Ireland = = = 
 Having failed to settle in England , Fahey returned home in 2003 . He initially played a few games in non @-@ League football for Bluebell United , before a six @-@ week trial at St Patrick 's Athletic led to a contract . He made his League of Ireland debut and had a goal disallowed at Waterford United on 21 April . 
 He contributed to St Pats 's victory in the League of Ireland Cup and scored a " stunning " free kick in extra time of the semi @-@ final replay against Bohemians to reach the FAI Cup final . However the final turned out to be very disappointing for both team and player , who was sent off for a " two @-@ footed lunge " on Longford Town 's Sean <unk> after 77 minutes as the Saints lost 2 – 0 . 
 He joined Drogheda United in exchange for Alan Reilly and a cash adjustment in July 2005 . He was involved in Mark Leech 's golden goal that won the Setanta Cup for Drogheda in April 2006 , but a few months later was released , following a disagreement with manager Paul <unk> , and returned to St Pats . 
 RTÉ reported that " Danger man Fahey was quieter than usual " as Pats lost 2 – 0 to Hertha BSC in the first round of the 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup , held at the Olympiastadion ; however , in the second leg , despite Pats ' " excellent performance " failing to overturn the deficit , an RTÉ feature picked out " Keith Fahey 's control of the game , dictating almost every Pat 's attack with that delicate but incisive right foot of his . Fahey stood head and shoulders above the many highly decorated full internationals in the Hertha team , showing the full range of his passing from deep and from close range , and generally showing a poise and guile on the ball that you would not expect from a League of Ireland player amongst such illustrious company . " 
 His performances for St Pats in 2008 , in which he scored 11 goals in all competitions , earned Fahey the <unk> Player of the Year award . He also won Monday Night Soccer 's 2008 Goal of the Season . After Pats were beaten by Bohemians in the FAI Cup , Fahey declared that he wished to move to an English club to further his career . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 On 2 December 2008 , Fahey signed a pre @-@ contract agreement with Football League Championship side Birmingham City to join the club when the transfer window opened in January 2009 . The Irish season having finished , Fahey joined up with Birmingham in mid @-@ December for training , though manager Alex McLeish suggested supporters should not " expect him to walk straight into the team " when he became eligible in January . 
 Fahey made his Birmingham debut on 17 January 2009 , coming on as a late substitute in a 1 – 1 draw against Cardiff City . He scored his first goal for the club , a " delicate lob " which the player admitted was meant to be a cross , to clinch a 2 – 0 home victory against Nottingham Forest on 14 February . His second goal gave the Blues a 1 – 0 home win over Southampton some weeks later . Fahey retained his place in the side for the rest of the season ( keeping loan signings Scott Sinclair and <unk> <unk> out of the starting eleven ) , and was a key player for Birmingham in their successful bid for promotion to the Premier League , scoring a goal and making a goal in a vital 2 – 1 win at Reading on the last day of the campaign . 
 Fahey made his Premier League debut in the opening game of the 2009 – 10 season at Old Trafford , in the 1 – 0 defeat against Manchester United . He made 34 appearances in his first Premier League season ( 18 of which he started ) , but failed to score all season , as Birmingham finished in ninth place , their highest ever position in the Premier League . In July 2010 , Fahey 's contract was extended to 2013 , in recognition of his having " proved to [ McLeish ] that he 's a Premier League player " . He was part of the starting eleven as Birmingham won the 2011 League Cup , defeating favourites Arsenal 2 – 1 at Wembley Stadium . However , the season would prove to be less successful for both player and club , with Fahey making only 24 appearances in the league ( although he did score his first Premier League goal ) , and Birmingham finishing 18th , and being relegated on the last day of the season , following a 2 – 1 defeat to Tottenham Hotspur . 
 Following relegation from the Premier League at the end of the 2010 – 11 season , Barry Ferguson and Lee Bowyer left the club , giving Fahey the chance to establish himself in his preferred central position . After recovering from hernia surgery early in the 2011 – 12 season , he partnered Jonathan Spector in a solid midfield supporting two attacking wide players . Later in the season , he played a defensive support role alongside the more attacking Jordon Mutch , and manager Chris Hughton suggested he was " enjoying playing in that central role and he 's enjoying the development he 's had there all season " . When he suffered a groin problem that caused him to miss the last few weeks of the season , Hughton called it " a real blow for us ... because he 's a player that has been in really good form " . He scored four goals during the season , including " a venomous left @-@ foot drive from 20 yards " at Barnsley and a goal he " couldn 't have hit ... any sweeter first time , or with any more power " at home to Crystal Palace that earned him the club 's Goal of the Season award . 
 Fahey returned to the team in mid @-@ September , and made seven appearances , four of which were starts . In November , he returned home to Ireland on indefinite compassionate leave for personal and family reasons . After two months away , Fahey took part in pre @-@ season training with Shamrock Rovers , ahead of a full fitness assessment which preceded his return to training with Birmingham in mid @-@ February . However , Fahey was ruled out for the rest of the season in April with a recurrence of a hip problem , having played just twice since his return from compassionate leave . At the end of the season , Fahey announced he was leaving Birmingham as the club had decided not to take up their option to extend his contract . 
 = = = Return to St. Patrick 's Athletic = = = 
 After a few months out of the game , Fahey trained with Sheffield United in October 2013 . Following this , he returned to Ireland , where he rejoined his old club St Patrick 's Athletic on 23 December 2013 . Commenting on his move back to Richmond Park , he said " Both the fans and the club have always been great to me , and the stability of the club behind the scenes really made me want to come back and play my football in Inchicore again . " He made his third debut for the club in a 2 – 1 victory over Dundalk on 17 February 2014 in a Leinster Senior Cup match , scoring a free kick . On 2 March 2014 , Fahey scored the only goal as St. Patrick 's Athletic became the first team to win the FAI President 's Cup , defeating Sligo Rovers in the process . His goal drew praise from Republic of Ireland manager Martin O 'Neill and Sligo Rover 's Alan Keane , the latter of whom stated " A wonder goal won it , it was a great strike . No keeper in the world could have saved that . " 
 Fahey started the first day of the season in the 1 @-@ 1 away draw against Cork City . Fahey started the famous 1 @-@ 1 draw away to Legia Warsaw in the Second Qualifying Round of the UEFA Champions League , his sublime through ball found Ian Bermingham who assisted Christy Fagan who slotted home to make it 1 @-@ 0 to the Inchicore side . He started the return leg in Tallaght , Pats lost 5 @-@ 0 . Fahey scored his first goal of the season against UCD in a 3 @-@ 2 win . Overall Fahey made 26 league appearances scoring two goals throughout the season . 
 = = = Shamrock Rovers = = = 
 On 11 November 2014 , Fahey switched to Shamrock Rovers . He announced his retirement in August 2015 having failed to recover from knee surgery . His last ever game of professional football turned out to be the 2 – 1 FAI Cup loss to his old club St Patrick 's Athletic at Richmond Park as he was substituted off with his knee injury for the last time in his career . 
 = = International career = = 
 Fahey played for the Republic of Ireland at the 2000 UEFA European Under @-@ 16 Football Championship and scored against their English counterparts . 
 He also played at the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship , where he contributed to Ireland topping their group to reach the knockout stages . In the second round match against Colombia under @-@ 20 , he came on as a late substitute to assist Kevin Doyle 's goal and help turn the game around , coming back from a two @-@ goal deficit only to lose on the golden goal . 
 On 25 May 2010 , Fahey won his first senior cap for the Republic of Ireland in a 2 – 1 win against Paraguay at the RDS Arena , replacing Damien Duff in the 77th minute . He made his first start against Argentina on 12 August , in the first international match at the new Aviva Stadium . Fahey scored his first goal for the Republic of Ireland eight minutes into his competitive debut , coming off the bench to score the only goal in a Euro 2012 qualifying win over Armenia in Yerevan on 3 September 2010 . On his first competitive start , in a 1 – 1 draw against Slovakia in <unk> on 12 October , Fahey delivered the free kick that led to Ireland 's goal , scored by Sean St. Ledger . In February 2011 , he scored his second goal for Ireland in a 3 – 0 defeat of Wales in the 2011 Nations Cup , and his third came in March 2011 , a penalty against Uruguay . 
 Fahey was part of the squad that clinched victory in the inaugural Nations Cup with a 1 – 0 win over Scotland on 29 May 2011 at the Aviva Stadium . 
 He was called into the UEFA Euro 2012 squad but withdrew due to injury before the tournament . 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 = = Club statistics = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 St Patrick 's Athletic 
 League of Ireland Cup ( 1 ) : 2003 
 President 's Cup ( 1 ) : 2014 
 Leinster Senior Cup ( 1 ) : 2014 
 FAI Cup ( 1 ) : 2014 
 Drogheda United 
 Setanta Sports Cup : 2006 
 Birmingham City 
 Football League Cup : 2011 
 Football League Championship runner @-@ up : 2008 – 09 
 = = = International = = = 
 Republic of Ireland 
 Nations Cup ( 1 ) : 2011 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 <unk> Players ' Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2008 
 Monday Night Soccer Goal of the Season ( 1 ) : 2008 
 Birmingham City Goal of the Season ( 1 ) : 2011 – 12 ( vs Crystal Palace ) 
 = British Army during World War I = 
 The British Army during World War I fought the largest and most costly war in its long history . Unlike the French and German Armies , its units were made up exclusively of volunteers — as opposed to conscripts — at the beginning of the conflict . Furthermore , the British Army was considerably smaller than its French and German counterparts . 
 During World War I , there were three distinct British Armies . The " first " army was the small volunteer force of 400 @,@ 000 soldiers , over half of which were posted overseas to garrison the British Empire . This total included the Regular Army and reservists in the Territorial Force . Together , they formed the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , which was formed for service in France and became known as the Old Contemptibles . The ' second ' army was Kitchener 's Army , formed from the volunteers in 1914 – 1915 destined to go into action at the Battle of the Somme . The ' third ' was formed after the introduction of conscription in the United Kingdom in January 1916 , and by the end of 1918 , the British Army had reached its maximum strength of 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 men and could field over 70 divisions . The vast majority of the British Army fought in the main theatre of war on the Western Front in France and Belgium against the German Empire . Some units were engaged in Italy and Salonika against Austria @-@ Hungary and the Bulgarian Army , while other units fought in the Middle East , Africa and Mesopotamia — mainly against the Ottoman Empire — and one battalion fought alongside the Japanese Army in China during the Siege of Tsingtao . 
 The war also posed problems for the army commanders , given that , prior to 1914 , the largest formation any serving General in the BEF had commanded on operations was a division . The expansion of the British Army saw some officers promoted from brigade to corps commander in less than a year . Army commanders also had to cope with the new tactics and weapons that were developed . With the move from manoeuvre to trench warfare , both the infantry and the artillery had to learn how to work together . During an offensive , and when in defence , they learned how to combine forces to defend the front line . Later in the war , when the Machine Gun Corps and the Tank Corps were added to the order of battle , they were also included in the new tactical doctrine . 
 The men at the front had to struggle with supply problems - there was a shortage of food ; and disease was rife in the damp , rat @-@ infested conditions . Along with enemy action , many troops had to contend with new diseases : trench foot , trench fever and trench nephritis . When the war ended in 1918 , British Army casualties , as the result of enemy action and disease , were recorded as 673 @,@ 375 killed and missing , with another 1 @,@ 643 @,@ 469 wounded . The rush to demobilise at the end of the war substantially decreased the strength of the British Army , from its peak of 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 men in 1918 to 370 @,@ 000 men by 1920 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The British Army during World War I could trace its organisation to the increasing demands of imperial expansion . The framework was the voluntary system of recruitment and the regimental system , which had been defined by the Cardwell and Childers Reforms of the late 19th century . The British Army had been prepared and primarily called upon for Empire matters and the ensuing colonial wars . In the last years of the 19th century , the Army was involved in a major conflict , the Second Boer War ( 1899 – 1902 ) , which highlighted shortcomings in its tactics , leadership and administration . The 1904 Esher Report recommended radical reform , such as the creation of an Army Council , a General Staff , the abolition of the office of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Forces , and the creation of a Chief of the General Staff . The Haldane Reforms of 1907 formally created an Expeditionary Force of seven divisions ( one cavalry , six infantry ) , reorganised the volunteers into a new Territorial Force of fourteen cavalry brigades and fourteen infantry divisions , and changed the old militia into the Special Reserve to reinforce the expeditionary force . 
 At the outbreak of the war in August 1914 , the British regular army was a small professional force . It consisted of 247 @,@ 432 regular troops organised in four regiments of Guards ( Grenadier , with 3 Battalions ; Coldstream , with 3 Battalions ; Scots , with 2 Battalions ; Irish with 1 Battalion ) , 68 regiments of the line and the Rifle Brigade ( despite its name , this was an infantry regiment ) , 31 cavalry regiments , artillery and other support arms . Most of the line infantry regiments had two regular battalions , one of which served at home and provided drafts and replacements to the other which was stationed overseas , while also being prepared to be part of the Expeditionary Force - the Royal Fusiliers , Worcestershire Regiment , Middlesex Regiment , King 's Royal Rifle Corps and the Rifle Brigade ( Prince Consort 's Own ) had four regular battalions , two of which served overseas . Almost half of the regular army ( 74 of the 157 infantry battalions and 12 of the 31 cavalry regiments ) , was stationed overseas in garrisons throughout the British Empire . The Royal Flying Corps was part of the British Army until 1918 . At the outbreak of the war , it consisted of 84 aircraft . 
 The regular army was supported by the Territorial Force , and by reservists . In August 1914 , there were three forms of reserves . The Army Reserve of retired soldiers was 145 @,@ 350 strong . They were paid 3 Shillings and 6 pence a week ( 17 @.@ 5 pence ) worth about £ 70 per week in 2013 terms , and had to attend 12 training days per year . The Special Reserve had another 64 @,@ 000 men and was a form of part @-@ time soldiering , similar to the Territorial Force . A Special Reservist had an initial six months full @-@ time training and was paid the same as a regular soldier during this period ; they had three or four weeks training per year thereafter . The National Reserve had some 215 @,@ 000 men , who were on a register that was maintained by Territorial Force County Associations ; these men had military experience , but no other reserve obligation . 
 The regulars and reserves — at least on paper — totalled a mobilised force of almost 700 @,@ 000 men , although only 150 @,@ 000 men were immediately available to be formed into the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) that was sent to the continent . This consisted of six infantry divisions and one of cavalry . By contrast , the French Army in 1914 mobilised 1 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 troops and 62 infantry divisions , while the German Army mobilised 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 troops and 87 infantry divisions . 
 Britain , therefore , began the war with six regular and 14 reserve infantry divisions . During the war , a further six regular , 14 Territorial , 36 Kitchener 's Army and six other divisions , including the Naval Division from the Royal Navy were formed . 
 In 1914 , each British infantry division consisted of three infantry brigades , each of four battalions , with two machine guns per battalion , ( 24 in the division ) . They also had three field artillery brigades with fifty @-@ four 18 @-@ pounder guns , one field howitzer brigade with eighteen 4 @.@ 5 in ( 110 mm ) howitzers , one heavy artillery battery with four 60 @-@ pounder guns , two engineer field companies , one royal engineer signals company , one cavalry squadron , one cyclist company , three field ambulances , four Army Service Corps horse @-@ drawn transport companies and divisional headquarters support detachments . 
 The single cavalry division assigned to the BEF in 1914 consisted of 15 cavalry regiments in five brigades . They were armed with rifles , unlike their French and German counterparts , who were only armed with the shorter range carbine . The cavalry division also had a high allocation of artillery compared to foreign cavalry divisions , with 24 13 @-@ pounder guns organised into two brigades and two machine guns for each regiment . When dismounted , the cavalry division was the equivalent of two weakened infantry brigades with less artillery than the infantry division . By 1916 , there were five cavalry divisions , each of three brigades , serving in France , the 1st , 2nd , 3rd divisions in the Cavalry Corps and the 1st and 2nd Indian Cavalry Divisions in the Indian Cavalry Corps , each brigade in the Indian cavalry corps contained a British cavalry regiment . 
 Over the course of the war , the composition of the infantry division gradually changed , and there was an increased emphasis on providing the infantry divisions with organic fire support . By 1918 , a British division consisted of three infantry brigades , each of three battalions . Each of these battalions had 36 Lewis machine guns , making a total of 324 such weapons in the division . Additionally , there was a divisional machine gun battalion , equipped with 64 Vickers machine guns in four companies of 16 guns . Each brigade in the division also had a mortar battery with eight Stokes Mortars . The artillery also changed the composition of its batteries . At the start of the war , there were three batteries with six guns per brigade ; they then moved to four batteries with four guns per brigade , and finally in 1917 , to four batteries with six guns per brigade to economise on battery commanders . In this way , the army would change drastically over the course of the war , reacting to the various developments , from the mobile war fought in the opening weeks to the static trench warfare of 1916 and 1917 . The cavalry of the BEF represented 9 @.@ 28 % of the army ; by July 1918 , it would only represent 1 @.@ 65 % . The infantry would decrease from 64 @.@ 64 % in 1914 to 51 @.@ 25 % of the army in 1918 , while the Royal Engineers would increase from 5 @.@ 91 % to 11 @.@ 24 % in 1918 . 
 = = British Expeditionary Force = = 
 Under the terms of the Entente Cordiale , the British Army 's role in a European war was to embark soldiers of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , which consisted of six infantry divisions and five cavalry brigades that were arranged into two Army corps : I Corps , under the command of Douglas Haig , and II Corps , under the command of Horace Smith @-@ Dorrien . At the outset of the conflict , the British Indian Army was called upon for assistance ; in August 1914 , 20 percent of the 9 @,@ 610 British officers initially sent to France were from the Indian army , while 16 percent of the 76 @,@ 450 other ranks came from the British Indian Army . 
 German Emperor Kaiser Wilhelm — who was famously dismissive of the BEF — issued an order on 19 August 1914 to " exterminate ... the treacherous English and walk over General French 's contemptible little army " . Hence , in later years , the survivors of the regular army dubbed themselves " The Old Contemptibles " . By the end of 1914 ( after the battles of Mons , Le Cateau , the Aisne and Ypres ) , the old regular British Army had been virtually wiped out ; although it managed to stop the German advance . 
 In October 1914 , the 7th Division arrived in France , forming the basis of the British III Corps ; the cavalry had grown into its own corps of three divisions . By December 1914 , the BEF had expanded , fielding five army corps divided between the First and the Second Armies . As the Regular Army 's strength declined , the numbers were made up — first by the Territorial Force , then by the volunteers of Field Marshal Kitchener 's , New Army . By the end of August 1914 , he had raised six new divisions ; by March 1915 , the number of divisions had increased to 29 . The Territorial Force was also expanded , raising second and third battalions and forming eight new divisions , which supplemented its peacetime strength of 14 divisions . The Third Army was formed in July 1915 and with the influx of troops from Kitchener 's volunteers and further reorganisation , the Fourth Army and the Reserve Army , which became the Fifth Army were formed in 1916 . 
 = = Recruitment and conscription = = 
 In August 1914 , 300 @,@ 000 men had signed up to fight , and another 450 @,@ 000 had joined @-@ up by the end of September . Recruitment remained fairly steady through 1914 and early 1915 , but it fell dramatically during the later years , especially after the Somme campaign , which resulted in 360 @,@ 000 casualties . A prominent feature of the early months of volunteering was the formation of Pals battalions . Many of these pals who had lived and worked together , joined up and trained together and were allocated to the same units . The policy of drawing recruits from amongst the local population ensured that , when the Pals battalions suffered casualties , whole towns , villages , neighbourhoods and communities back in Britain were to suffer disproportionate losses . With the introduction of conscription in January 1916 , no further Pals battalions were raised . Conscription for single men was introduced in January 1916 . Four months later , in May 1916 , it was extended to all men aged 18 to 41 . The Military Service Act March 1916 specified that men from the ages of 18 to 41 were liable to be called up for service in the army , unless they were married ( or widowed with children ) , or served in one of a number of reserved occupations , which were usually industrial but which also included clergymen and teachers . This legislation did not apply to Ireland , despite its then status as part of the United Kingdom ( but see Conscription Crisis of 1918 ) . By January 1916 , when conscription was introduced , 2 @.@ 6 million men had volunteered for service , a further 2 @.@ 3 million were conscripted before the end of the war ; by the end of 1918 , the army had reached its peak strength of four million men . 
 Women also volunteered and served in a non @-@ combatant role ; by the end of the war , 80 @,@ 000 had enlisted . They mostly served as nurses in the Queen Alexandra 's Imperial Military Nursing Service ( <unk> ) , the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry ( <unk> ) , the Voluntary Aid Detachment ( VAD ) ; and from 1917 , in the Army when the Queen Mary 's Army Auxiliary Corps ( WAAC ) , was founded . The WAAC was divided into four sections : cookery ; mechanical ; clerical and miscellaneous . Most stayed on the Home Front , but around 9 @,@ 000 served in France . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 In 1914 , no serving British officer of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) had controlled a formation larger than a division on active operations . The first Commander in Chief of the BEF appointed in August 1914 was Field Marshal John French . His last active command had been the cavalry division in the Second Boer War . 
 The commander of the British I Corps in 1914 was Douglas Haig . French had remarked in 1912 that Haig would be better suited to a position on the staff than a field command . Like French , Haig was a cavalryman . His last active command had been during the Second Boer War , first as a senior staff officer in the cavalry division , then commanding a brigade @-@ sized group of columns . The first commander of the British II Corps was Lieutenant General James Grierson , a noted tactician who died of a heart attack soon after arriving in France . French wished to appoint Lieutenant General Herbert Plumer in his place , but against French 's wishes , Kitchener instead appointed Lieutenant General Horace Smith @-@ Dorrien , who had begun his military career in the Zulu War in 1879 and was one of only five officers to survive the battle of Isandlwana . He had built a formidable reputation as an infantry commander during the Sudan Campaign and the Second Boer War . After the Second Boer War , he was responsible for a number of reforms , notably forcing an increase in dismounted training for the cavalry . This was met with hostility by French ( as a cavalryman ) . By 1914 , French 's dislike for Smith @-@ Dorrien was well known within the army . 
 After the failed offensive at the Battle of Loos in 1915 , French was replaced as commander of the BEF by Haig , who remained in command for the rest of the war . He became most famous for his role as its commander during the battle of the Somme , the battle of Passchendaele , and the Hundred Days Offensive , the series of victories leading to the German surrender in 1918 . Haig was succeeded in command of the First Army by General Charles Carmichael Monro , who in turn was succeeded by General Henry Horne in September 1916 , the only officer with an artillery background to command a British army during the war . 
 General Plumer was eventually appointed to command II Corps in December 1914 , and succeeded Smith @-@ Dorrien in command of the Second Army in 1915 . He had commanded a mounted infantry detachment in the Second Boer war , where he started to build his reputation . He held command of the Ypres salient for three years and gained an overwhelming victory over the German Army at the battle of Messines in 1917 . Plumer is generally recognised as one of the most effective of the senior British commanders on the Western Front . 
 In 1914 , General Edmund Allenby was commander of the Cavalry Division and later the Cavalry Corps in the BEF . His leadership was noted during the retreat from Mons and the first battle of Ypres . After commanding an infantry corps , he was appointed to command the Third Army on the western front . He had previously served in the Zulu War , the Sudan campaign , and the Second Boer war . In 1917 , he was given command of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force , where he oversaw the conquest of Palestine and Syria in 1917 and 1918 . Allenby replaced Archibald Murray , who had been the Chief of Staff of the British Expeditionary Force in France in 1914 . 
 Allenby was replaced as Third Army commander by General Julian Byng , who began the war as commander of the 3rd Cavalry Division . After performing well during the First Battle of Ypres , he succeeded Allenby in command of the Cavalry Corps . He was sent to the Dardanelles in August 1915 , to command the British IX Corps . He planned the highly successful evacuation of 105 @,@ 000 Allied troops and the majority of the equipment of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force ( MEF ) . The withdrawal was successfully completed in January 1916 , without the loss of a single man . Byng had already returned to the western front , where he was given command of the Canadian Corps . His most notable battle was the Battle of Vimy Ridge in April 1917 , which was carried out by the Canadian Corps with British support . 
 General Henry Rawlinson served on Kitchener 's staff during the advance on Omdurman , in 1898 , and served with distinction in the Second Boer War , where he earned a reputation as one of the most able British commanders . Rawlinson took command of the British IV Corps in 1914 and then command of the Fourth Army in 1916 , as the plans for the Allied offensive on the Somme were being developed . During the war , Rawlinson was noted for his willingness to use innovative tactics , which he employed during the battle of Amiens , where he combined attacks by tanks with artillery . 
 General Hubert Gough commanded a mounted infantry regiment with distinction during the relief of Ladysmith , but his command was destroyed while attacking a larger Boer force in 1901 . When he joined the BEF , he was in command of the 3rd Cavalry Brigade , and was promoted from a brigade to a corps command in less than a year . He was given command of the 2nd Cavalry Division in September 1914 , the 7th Division in April 1915 , and the British I Corps in July 1915 . He commanded I Corps during the battle of Loos . In May 1916 , he was appointed commander of the Fifth Army , which suffered heavy losses at the battle of Passchendaele . The collapse of the Fifth Army was widely viewed as the reason for the German breakthrough in the Spring Offensive , and Gough was dismissed as its commander in March 1918 , being succeeded by General William Birdwood for the last months of the war . Birdwood had previously commanded the Australian Corps , an appointment requiring a combination of tact and tactical flair . 
 On the Macedonian front , General George Milne commanded the British Salonika Army , and General Ian Hamilton commanded the ill @-@ fated MEF during the Gallipoli Campaign . He had previously seen service in the First Boer War , the Sudan campaign , and the Second Boer War . 
 Back in Britain , Chief of the Imperial General Staff ( CIGS ) , effectively the professional commander of the British Army , was General James Murray , who retained that post during the early years of the war . He was replaced as CIGS in 1916 by General William Robertson . A strong supporter of Haig , Robertson was replaced in 1918 , by General Henry Hughes Wilson . 
 = = = Officer selection = = = 
 In August 1914 , there were 28 @,@ 060 officers in the British Army , of which 12 @,@ 738 were regular officers , the rest were in the reserves . The number of officers in the army had increased to 164 @,@ 255 by November 1918 . These were survivors among the 247 @,@ 061 officers who had been granted a commission during the war . 
 Most pre @-@ war officers came from families with military connections , the gentry or the peerage ; a public school education was almost essential . In 1913 , about 2 % of regular officers had been promoted from the ranks . The officer corps , during the war , consisted of regular officers from the peacetime army , officers who had been granted permanent commissions during the war , officers who had been granted temporary commissions for the duration of the war , territorial army officers commissioned during peacetime , officers commissioned from the ranks of the pre @-@ war regular and territorial army and temporary officers commissioned from the ranks for the duration of the war alone . 
 In September 1914 , Lord Kitchener announced that he was looking for volunteers and regular NCOs to provide officers for the expanding army . Most of the volunteers came from the middle class , with the largest group from commercial and clerical occupations ( 27 % ) , followed by teachers and students ( 18 % ) and professional men ( 15 % ) . In March 1915 , it was discovered that 12 @,@ 290 men serving in the ranks had been members of a university or public school Officers ' Training Corps ( OTC ) . Most applied for and were granted commissions , while others who did not apply were also commissioned . Direct commissioning largely ceased early in 1916 , from then most new officers had served in the ranks first , even if in a unit of potential officers . 
 Once a candidate was selected as an officer , promotion could be rapid . A. S. <unk> was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in 1915 , after serving in the Regular Army for 15 years . He rose in rank , and by the Spring of 1917 had been promoted to Lieutenant Colonel and was commanding officer of the 6th Battalion , The Buffs ( Royal East Kent Regiment ) . 
 Along with rapid promotion , the war also noticeably lowered the age of battalion commanding officers . In 1914 , they were aged over 50 , while the average age for a battalion commanding officer in the BEF between 1917 and 1918 was 28 . By this stage , it was official policy that men over 35 were no longer eligible to command battalions . This trend was reflected amongst the junior officers . Anthony Eden was the Adjutant of a battalion when aged 18 , and served as the Brigade Major in the 198th Brigade while still only aged 20 . 
 The war also provided opportunities for advancement onto the General Staff , especially in the early days , when many former senior officers were recalled from retirement . Some of these were found wanting , due to their advanced age , their unwillingness to serve , or a lack of competence and fitness ; most were sent back into retirement before the first year of the war was over , leaving a gap that had to be filled by lower @-@ ranking officers . Criticism of the quality of staff work in the Crimean War and the Second Boer War had led to sweeping changes under Haldane . The Staff College , Camberley was greatly expanded and Lord Kitchener established another staff college at Quetta for Indian Army officers in 1904 . Nonetheless , when war broke out in August 1914 , there were barely enough graduates to staff the BEF . Four @-@ month @-@ long staff courses were introduced , and filled with regimental officers who , upon completing their training , were posted to various headquarters . As a result , staff work was again poor , until training and experience slowly remedied the situation . In 1918 , staff officers who had been trained exclusively for static trench warfare were forced to adapt to the demands of semi @-@ open warfare . 
 During the course of the war , 78 British and Dominion officers of the rank of Brigadier @-@ General and above were killed or died during active service , while another 146 were wounded , gassed , or captured . 
 = = Doctrine = = 
 British official historian Brigadier James Edward Edmonds , in 1925 , recorded that " The British Army of 1914 was the best trained , best equipped and best organized British Army ever sent to war " . This was in part due to the Haldane reforms , and the Army itself recognising the need for change and training . Training began with individual training in winter , followed by squadron , company or battery training in spring ; regimental , battalion and brigade training in summer ; and division or inter @-@ divisional exercises and army manoeuvres in late summer and autumn . The common doctrine of headquarters at all levels was outlined in the Field Service Pocket Book , which Haig had introduced while serving as Director of Staff Studies at the War Office in 1906 . 
 The Second Boer War had alerted the army to the dangers posed by fire zones that were covered by long @-@ range , magazine @-@ fed rifles . In the place of volley firing and frontal attacks , there was a greater emphasis on advancing in extended order , the use of available cover , the use of artillery to support the attack , flank and converging attacks and fire and movement . The Army expected units to advance as far as possible in a firing line without opening fire , both to conceal their positions and conserve ammunition , then to attack in successive waves , closing with the enemy decisively . 
 The cavalry practised reconnaissance and fighting dismounted more regularly , and in January 1910 , the decision was made at the General Staff Conference that dismounted cavalry should be taught infantry tactics in attack and defence . They were the only cavalry from a major European power trained for both the mounted cavalry charge and dismounted action , and equipped with the same rifles as the infantry , rather than short @-@ range carbines . The cavalry were also issued with entrenching tools prior to the outbreak of war , as a result of experience gained during the Second Boer War . 
 The infantry 's marksmanship , and fire and movement techniques , had been inspired by Boer tactics and was established as formal doctrine by Colonel Charles Monro when he was in charge of the School of Musketry at Shorncliffe . In 1914 , British rifle fire was so effective that there were some reports to the effect that the Germans believed they were facing huge numbers of machine guns . The Army concentrated on rifle practice , with days spent on the ranges dedicated to improving marksmanship and obtaining a rate of fire of 15 effective rounds a minute at 300 yd ( 270 m ) ; one sergeant set a record of 38 rounds into a 12 in ( 300 mm ) target set at 300 yd ( 270 m ) in 30 seconds . In their 1914 skill @-@ at @-@ arms meeting , the 1st Battalion Black Watch recorded 184 marksmen , 263 first @-@ class shots , 89 @-@ second @-@ class shots and four third @-@ class shots , at ranges from 300 – 600 yd ( 270 – 550 m ) . The infantry also practised squad and section attacks and fire from cover , often without orders from officers or NCOs , so that soldiers would be able to act on their own initiative . In the last exercise before the war , it was noted that the infantry made wonderful use of ground , advances in short rushes and always at the double and almost invariably fires from a prone position . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 The British Army was armed with the Short Magazine Lee – Enfield Mk III ( SMLE Mk III ) , which featured a bolt @-@ action and large magazine capacity that enabled a trained rifleman to fire 20 – 30 aimed rounds a minute . World War I accounts tell of British troops repelling German attackers , who subsequently reported that they had encountered machine guns , when in fact , it was simply a group of trained riflemen armed with <unk> . The heavy Vickers machine gun proved itself to be the most reliable weapon on the battlefield , with some of its feats of endurance entering military mythology . One account tells of the action by the 100th Company of the Machine Gun Corps at High Wood on 24 August 1916 . This company had 10 Vickers guns ; it was ordered to give sustained covering fire for 12 hours onto a selected area 2 @,@ 000 yd ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) away , to prevent German troops forming up there for a counterattack while a British attack was in progress . Two companies of infantry were allocated as ammunition , rations and water carriers for the gunners . Two men worked a belt – filling machine non – stop for 12 hours , keeping up a supply of 250 @-@ round belts . They used 100 new barrels and all of the water — including the men 's drinking water and the contents of the latrine buckets — to keep the guns cool . In that 12 @-@ hour period , the 10 guns fired just short of one million rounds between them . One team is reported to have fired 120 @,@ 000 . At the close of the operation , it is alleged that every gun was working perfectly and that not one had broken down during the whole period . 
 The lighter Lewis gun was adopted for land and aircraft use in October 1915 . The Lewis gun had the advantage of being about 80 % faster to build than the Vickers , and far more portable . By the end of World War I , over 50 @,@ 000 Lewis Guns had been produced ; they were nearly ubiquitous on the Western Front , outnumbering the Vickers gun by a ratio of about 3 : 1 . 
 The Stokes Mortar was rapidly developed when it became clear that some type of weapon was needed to provide artillery @-@ like fire support to the infantry . The weapon was fully man @-@ transportable yet also capable of firing reasonably powerful shells at targets beyond the range of rifle grenades . 
 Finally , the Mark I tank — a British invention — was seen as the solution to the stalemate of trench warfare . The Mark I had a range of 23 mi ( 37 km ) without refuelling , and a speed of 3 mph ( 4 @.@ 8 km / h ) ; it first saw service on the Somme in September 1916 . 
 = = = Infantry tactics = = = 
 After the " race to the sea " , manoeuvre warfare gave way to trench warfare , a development for which the British Army had not prepared . Expecting an offensive mobile war , the Army had not instructed the troops in defensive tactics and had failed to obtain stocks of barbed wire , hand grenades , or trench mortars . In the early years of trench warfare , the normal infantry attack formation was based on the battalion , which comprised four companies that were each made up of four platoons . The battalion would form 10 waves with 100 yd ( 91 m ) between each , while each company formed two waves of two platoons . The first six waves were the fighting elements from three of the battalions ' companies , the seventh contained the battalion headquarters ; the remaining company formed the eighth and ninth waves , which were expected to carry equipment forward , the tenth wave contained the stretcher bearers and medics . The formation was expected to move forward at a rate of 100 yd ( 91 m ) every two minutes , even though each man carried his rifle , bayonet , gas mask , ammunition , two hand grenades , wire cutters , a spade , two empty sandbags and flares . The carrying platoons , in addition to the above , also carried extra ammunition , barbed wire and construction materials to effect repairs to captured lines and fortifications . 
 By 1918 , experience had led to a change in tactics ; the infantry no longer advanced in rigid lines , but formed a series of flexible waves . They would move covertly , under the cover of darkness , and occupy shell holes or other cover near the German line . Skirmishers formed the first wave and followed the creeping barrage into the German front line to hunt out points of resistance . The second or main wave followed in platoons or sections in single file . The third was formed from small groups of reinforcements , the fourth wave was expected to defend the captured territory . All waves were expected to take advantage of the ground during the advance . ( see below for when operating with tanks ) 
 Each platoon now had a Lewis gun section and a section that specialised in throwing hand @-@ grenades ( then known as bombs ) , each section was compelled to provide two scouts to carry out reconnaissance duties . Each platoon was expected to provide mutual fire support in the attack they were to advance , without halting ; but leap frogging was accepted , with the lead platoon taking an objective and the following platoons passing through them and onto the next objective , while the Lewis gunners provided fire support . Grenades were used for clearing trenches and dugouts , each battalion carried forward two trench mortars to provide fire support . 
 = = = Tank tactics = = = 
 The tank was designed to break the deadlock of trench warfare . In their first use on the Somme , they were placed under command of the infantry and ordered to attack their given targets in groups or pairs . They were also assigned small groups of troops , who served as an escort while providing close defence against enemy attacks . Only nine tanks reached the German lines to engage machine gun emplacements and troop concentrations . On the way , 14 broke down or were ditched , another 10 were damaged by enemy fire . 
 In 1917 , during the battle of Cambrai , the Tank Corps adopted new tactics . Three tanks working together would advance in a triangle formation , with the two rear tanks providing cover for an infantry platoon . The tanks were to create gaps in the barbed wire for the accompanying infantry to pass through , then use their armament to suppress the German strong points . The effectiveness of tank – infantry co @-@ operation was demonstrated during the battle , when Major General George Montague Harper of the 51st ( Highland ) Division refused to co @-@ operate with the tanks , a decision that compelled them to move forward without any infantry support ; the result was the destruction of more than 12 tanks by German artillery sighted behind bunkers . 
 The situation had changed again by 1918 , when tank attacks would have one tank every 100 or 200 yd ( 180 m ) , with a tank company of 12 – 16 tanks per objective . One section of each company would be out in front , with the remainder of the company following behind and each tank providing protection for an infantry platoon , who were instructed to advance , making use of available cover and supported by machine gun fire . When the tanks came across an enemy strong point , they would engage the defenders , forcing them into shelter and leaving them to the devices of the following infantry . 
 = = = Artillery tactics = = = 
 Prior to the war , the artillery worked independently and was taught to support the infantry to ensure a successful attack . In 1914 , the heaviest artillery gun was the 60 @-@ pounder , four in each heavy battery . The Royal Horse Artillery employed the 13 @-@ pounder , while the Royal Field Artillery used the 18 @-@ pounder gun . By 1918 , the situation had changed ; the artillery were the dominant force on the battlefield . Between 1914 and 1918 , the Royal Field Artillery had increased from 45 field brigades to 173 field brigades , while the heavy and siege artillery of the Royal Garrison Artillery had increased from 32 heavy and six siege batteries to 117 heavy and 401 siege batteries . 
 With this increase in the number of batteries of heavier guns , the armies needed to find a more efficient method of moving the heavier guns around . ( It was proving difficult to find the number of draught horses required . ) The War office ordered over 1 @,@ 000 Holts caterpillar tractors , which transformed the mobility of the siege artillery . The army also mounted a variety of surplus naval guns on various railway platforms to provide mobile long @-@ range heavy artillery on the Western Front . 
 Until 1914 , artillery generally fired over open sights at visible targets , the largest unit accustomed to firing at a single target was the artillery regiment or brigade . One innovation brought about by the adoption of trench warfare was the barrage — a term first used in the battle of Neuve Chapelle in 1915 . Trench warfare had created the need for indirect fire , with the use of observers , more sophisticated artillery fire plans , and an increasingly scientific approach to gunnery , where artillerymen had to use increasingly complicated calculations to lay the guns . Individual guns were aimed so that their fall of shot was coordinated with others to form a pattern ; in the case of a barrage , the pattern was a line . 
 The creeping barrage was a barrage that lifted in small increments , perhaps 50 yards ( 46 m ) , so that it moved forward slowly , keeping pace with the infantry , who were trained to follow close behind the moving wall of their own fire , often as close as 55 yd ( 50 m ) ; infantry commanders were encouraged to keep their troops as close to the barrage as possible , even at the risk of casualties from friendly fire . A creeping barrage could maintain the element of surprise , with guns opening fire only shortly before the assault troops moved off . It was useful when enemy positions had not been thoroughly reconnoitred , as it did not depend on identifying individual targets in advance . The idea behind the creeping barrage was that the infantry should reach the enemy positions before the defenders had time to recover , emerge from shelters , and man their positions . On the first day of the battle of the Somme , the barrage outpaced the infantry , allowing the defenders to recover and emerge from their dugouts , with disastrous results for the attackers . The creeping barrage demonstrated its effectiveness a year later , in 1917 , during the battle of Arras . A weakness of the creeping barrage was that the infantry was subordinated to the artillery schedule , while the infantry commanders had less control over the tactical situation and were therefore in danger of forgetting how to manoeuvre their troops around the battlefield . The importance of the barrage was such that traditional infantry tactics , including a reliance on the infantry 's own firepower to support its movement forward , was sometimes forgotten . 
 Once the infantry had reached the German trenches , the artillery shifted from the creeping barrage to the standing barrage , a static barrage that would protect the infantry from counter @-@ attack while they consolidated the position . A variant was the box barrage , in which three or four barrages formed a box — or more often three sides of a box — around a position to isolate and prevent reinforcements being brought up into the front line . This was normally used to protect trench raids , although it could also be used offensively against a German unit . Another type of barrage was the SOS barrage , fired in response to a German counterattack . An SOS barrage could be brought down by firing a flare signal of a pre arranged colour , as a German barrage tended to cut the telephone lines . A pre @-@ registered barrage would then descend on No Man 's Land . 
 With the introduction of the tank the artillery was no longer required to aid the infantry by destroying obstacles and machine gun positions . Instead , the artillery assisted by neutralising the German artillery with Counter battery fire . British Army researchers under Lieutenant William Lawrence Bragg developed sound ranging , a method of determining the location of hostile artillery from the sound of its guns firing . A Counter Battery Staff Officer ( CBSO ) was appointed at each corps to co @-@ ordinate the counter battery effort , collating reports from sound ranging and Royal Flying Corps observers . By the end of the war , it was realised that the important effect of the barrage was to demoralise and suppress the enemy , rather than physical destruction ; a short , intense bombardment immediately followed by an infantry assault was more effective than the weeks of grinding bombardment used in 1916 . 
 = = = Communications = = = 
 The Royal Engineers Signal Service , formed in 1912 , was given responsibility for communications that included signal dispatch , telegraph , telephone and later wireless communications , from army headquarters to brigade and down to battery level for the artillery . For most of the war , the Army 's primary methods of communication were signal dispatch ( employing runners , messengers on horseback , dogs , and carrier pigeons ) , visual signalling , telegraph , and telephone . At the start of the war , the Army had a small number of wireless sets , which in addition to being heavy and unreliable , operated on longwave . In 1915 , trench wireless sets were introduced , but the transmissions were easily intercepted by the listening Germans . 
 Civilian telephones were used at the outset of the war , but they were found to be unreliable in the damp , muddy conditions that prevailed . Consequently , the field telephone was designed ; a device that operated with its own switchboard . Apart from voice communication , it featured a buzzer unit with a Morse code key , so that it could be used to send and receive coded messages . This facility proved useful when , in the midst of bombardment , exploding shells drowned out voice communication . The telephones were connected by lines that sustained continual damage as a result of shell fire and the movement of troops . The lines were generally buried , with redundant lines set in place to compensate for breakages . 
 The primary types of visual signalling were Semaphore flags , lamps and flags , lamps and lights , and the heliograph . In open warfare , visual signalling ( employing signal flags and the heliograph ) was the norm . A competent signaller could transmit 12 words a minute with signal flags ( during daylight ) and signal lights ( at night ) . Signal lights , which were secured in a wooden case , employed a battery @-@ operated Morse code key . These signalling techniques had certain disadvantages , however . In trench warfare , operators using these methods were forced to expose themselves to enemy fire ; while messages sent to the rear by signal lights could not be seen by enemy forces , replies to such messages were readily spotted , and operators were , once again , exposed to enemy fire . 
 During the war , the Army also trained animals for use in the trenches . Dogs carried messages ; horses , mules and dogs were used to lay telephone and telegraph cables . Carrier pigeons , who transported messages back from the front line , were also carried in tanks so that they could deliver messages during an attack . Over 20 @,@ 000 pigeons and 370 handlers were used during the war , and at times , they were the sole means of communication . 
 = = = Royal Flying Corps = = = 
 At the start of the war , the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) in the Field , commanded by Sir David Henderson consisted of five squadrons — one observation balloon squadron ( RFC No 1 Squadron ) and four aeroplane squadrons ( Nos 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 ) . These units were first used for aerial spotting on 13 September 1914 , but only became efficient when they perfected the use of wireless communication at Aubers Ridge on 9 May 1915 . Aerial photography was attempted during 1914 , but again , it only became effective the following year . In August 1915 , General Hugh Trenchard replaced Henderson . The British use of air power evolved during the war , from a reconnaissance force to a fighting force that attempted to gain command of the air above the trenches and carry out bombing raids on targets behind the line . The early aircraft of the RFC were inferior to their German rivals ; in April 1917 , ( known as Bloody April ) , the RFC lost over 300 aircrew and 245 aircraft . Not until late 1917 , with the introduction of the Sopwith Camel and the S.E.5 , were they able to compete successfully for control of the air . 
 On 17 August 1917 , General Jan Smuts presented a report to the War Council concerning the future of air power . Given its potential for the ' devastation of enemy lands and the destruction of industrial targets and centres of population on a vast scale ' . He recommended a new air service be formed that would be on a level with the Army and Royal Navy . The formation of the new service , however , would make use of the under @-@ utilised men and machines of the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) , as well as ending the inter @-@ service rivalries that at times had adversely affected aircraft procurement . On 1 April 1918 , the RFC and the RNAS were amalgamated to form a new service , the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . The RAF was under the control of the equally new Air Ministry . By 1918 , photographic images could be taken from 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) and interpreted by over 3 @,@ 000 personnel . Planes did not carry parachutes until 1918 , though they had been available since before the war . After starting with some 2 @,@ 073 personnel in 1914 , the RAF had 4 @,@ 000 combat aircraft and 114 @,@ 000 personnel by the beginning of 1919 . 
 = = = Corps of Royal Engineers = = = 
 On 1 August 1914 , the Royal Engineers consisted of 25 @,@ 000 officers and men in the regular army and reserves ; by the same date in 1917 , it had grown to a total of 250 @,@ 000 . In 1914 , when the BEF arrived in France , there were two Engineer field companies attached to each infantry division , which was increased to three companies by September 1914 . Each division also had a Signals company , which was responsible for communications between Corps , Division and Brigade headquarters . 
 Royal Engineer tunnelling companies were formed in response to the German blowing of 10 small mines in December 1914 , at Givenchy . The first British mine was detonated at Hill 60 on 17 February 1915 . Mining was used increasingly during the Battle of Aubers Ridge in May 1915 , and the battle of Loos in September 1915 . In July 1916 , on the first day of the battle of the Somme , what became known as the <unk> Crater was created by a mine at La Boisselle . 
 Twenty @-@ one companies were eventually formed and were employed digging subways , cable trenches , <unk> , dugouts as well as offensive or defensive mining . At the end of the war , Engineers were directly responsible for maintaining buildings and designing the infantry front @-@ line fortifications and artillery positions , the telephones , wireless and other signalling equipment , railways , roads , water supply , bridges and transport . They also operated the railways and inland waterways . 
 = = = Machine Gun Corps = = = 
 In September 1915 , the Machine Gun Corps ( MGC ) was formed to provide heavy machine @-@ gun teams after a proposal was made to the War Office for the formation of a single specialist machine @-@ gun company for each infantry brigade — a goal to be achieved by withdrawing guns and gun teams from the battalions . Created in October 1915 , the MGC consisted of infantry machine @-@ gun companies , cavalry machine @-@ gun squadrons and motor machine @-@ gun batteries . In the trenches , the Corps ' guns were deployed with an interlocking field of fire and proved to be a devastating defensive weapon against attacking infantry . They were also used in an indirect fire support role , in which they fired over the heads and from the flanks of the advancing infantry and behind the German trenches to stop reinforcements and supplies from getting to the front . 
 = = = Tank Corps = = = 
 The Tank Corps was formed as the Heavy Section Machine Gun Corps in 1916 . Tanks were used for the first time in action in the battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916 . The intention being that they would crush the barbed wire for the infantry , then cross the trenches and exploit any breakthrough behind the German lines . In November 1916 , they were renamed the Heavy Branch MGC and in June 1917 , the Tank Corps . 
 Originally formed in Companies of the Heavy Branch MGC , designated A , B , C and D ; each company of four sections had six tanks , three male and three female versions ( artillery or machine guns ) , with one tank held as a company reserve . In November 1916 , each company was reformed as a battalion of three companies , with plans to increase the Corps to 20 battalions , each Tank Battalion had a complement of 32 officers and 374 men . 
 Tanks were primarily used on the Western Front . The first offensive of the war in which tanks were used en masse was the battle of Cambrai in 1917 ; 476 tanks started the attack , and the German front collapsed . At midday the British had advanced five miles behind the German line . The battle of Amiens in 1918 saw the value of the tank being appreciated ; 10 heavy and two light battalions of 414 tanks were included in the assault . 342 Mark Vs and 72 Whippets were backed up by a further 120 tanks designed to carry forward supplies for the armour and infantry . By the end of the first day of the attack , they had penetrated the German line by 6 – 8 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 – 12 @.@ 9 km ) , 16 @,@ 000 prisoners were taken . In September 1918 , the British Army was the most mechanised army in the world . Some 22 @,@ 000 men had served in the Tank Corps by the end of the war . 
 A detachment of eight obsolescent Mark I tanks was sent to Southern Palestine in early 1917 and saw action against Turkish forces there . 
 = = = Army Service Corps = = = 
 The Army Service Corps ( ASC ) operated the transport system to deliver men , ammunition and matériel to the front . From 12 @,@ 000 men at the start of the war , the Corps increased in size to over 300 @,@ 000 by November 1918 . In addition they had under command Indian , Egyptian , Chinese ( Chinese Labour Corps ) and other native labourers , carriers and stores men . They provided horsed and mechanical transport companies , the Army Remount Service and ASC Labour companies . In August 1914 , they delivered 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) of bread to the front which increased to 90 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ( 41 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) by November 1918 . 
 = = = Royal Army Medical Corps = = = 
 The Royal Army Medical Corps ( RAMC ) supplied the doctors , casualty evacuation , field ambulances and hospitals for the army . The Corps was assisted in its work by voluntary help from the British Red Cross , St John 's Ambulance and the Friends Ambulance Unit . 
 The only person to be awarded the Victoria Cross twice during the war was a doctor in the RAMC , Captain Noel Godfrey Chavasse , VC and Bar , MC . 
 While not strictly a member of the RAMC , stretcher bearer Lance Corporal William Harold Coltman VC , DCM & Bar , MM & Bar , was the most decorated other rank of the war . 
 = = Life in the trenches = = 
 By the end of 1914 , the war on the Western Front had reached stalemate and the trench lines extended from the Belgian coast to the Swiss frontier . By September 1915 , the length of the British front line stretched some 70 mi ( 110 km ) . Soldiers were in the front or reserve line trenches for about eight days at a time , before being relieved . 
 There were three trenches in a typical front line sector ; the fire trench , the support trench and the reserve trench , all joined by communication trenches . The trenches varied in depth , but they were usually about four or five feet deep , or in areas with a high water table a wall of sandbags would be built to allow the defenders to stand upright , fire trenches were provided with a fire step , so the occupants could return fire during an attack ( see diagram ) . Ideally , the bottom of the trench was lined with duckboards to prevent men from sinking into the mud and dugouts were cut into the walls , these gave shelter from the elements and shrapnel , although in the British Army dugouts were usually reserved for the officers and senior NCOs . The men were then expected to sleep wherever they could and in wet weather they lived under <unk> or in tents at the bottom of the trench on the duckboards . 
 At the front , soldiers were in constant danger from artillery shells , mortar bombs and bullets and as the war progressed they also faced aerial attack . Some sectors of the front saw little activity throughout the war , making life comparatively easy . Other sectors were in a perpetual state of violent activity . However , quiet sectors still amassed daily casualties through snipers , artillery fire and disease . The harsh conditions , where trenches were often wet and muddy and the constant company of lice and rats which fed on unburied bodies , often carried disease . Many troops suffered from trench foot , trench fever and trench nephritis . They could also contract frostbite in the winter months and heat exhaustion in the summer . The men were frequently wet and extremely muddy , or dry and exceedingly dusty . Food could not usually be cooked in the front line trenches as any smoke would draw enemy fire , hot food had to be carried along communication trenches in clumsy " <unk> " , sometimes arriving late or not at all . 
 = = = Daily routine = = = 
 Daily routine of life in the trenches began with the morning ' stand @-@ to ' . An hour before dawn everyone was roused and ordered to man their positions to guard against a dawn raid by the Germans . With stand @-@ to over , it was time for the men to have breakfast and perform ablutions . Once complete , the NCOs would assign daily chores , before the men attended to the cleaning of rifles and equipment , filling sandbags , repairing trenches or digging latrines . Once the daily tasks had been completed the men who were off @-@ duty would find a place to sleep . Due to the constant bombardments and the sheer effort of trying to stay alive , sleep deprivation was common . Soldiers also had to take it in turns to be on sentry duty , watching for enemy movements . 
 Each side 's front line was constantly under observation by snipers and lookouts during daylight ; movement was therefore restricted until after the dusk stand @-@ to and night had fallen . Under the cover of darkness , troops attended to vital maintenance and resupply , with rations and water being brought to the front line , fresh units swapped places with troops moving to the rear for rest and recuperation . Trench raiding was also carried out and construction parties formed to repair trenches and fortifications , while wiring parties were sent out to repair or renew the barbed wire in no man 's land . An hour before dawn , everyone would stand @-@ to once more . 
 = = = Moving into the front line = = = 
 A set procedure was used by a division that was moving into the front line . Once they had been informed that they were moving forward , the brigadiers and battalion commanders would be taken to the forward areas to reconnoitre the sections of the front that were to be occupied by their troops . Meanwhile , the battalion transport officers would be taken to the headquarters of the division that they were relieving to observe the methods used for drawing rations and ammunition , and the manner in which they were supplied to the troops at the front . Detachments from the divisional artillery group would move forward and were attached to the artillery batteries of the division they were relieving . Five days later , the infantry battalions that were destined for the front line sent forward their specialists from the Lewis gun teams , and the grenade officer , the machine gun officer , the four company commanders , and some of the signallers to take over the trench stores and settle into the trench routine before the battalions moved in . Overnight , the battalions would move into the line , and the artillery would take over the guns that were already in position , leaving theirs behind to be taken over by the batteries that had been relieved . 
 = = Discipline = = 
 = = = Legal authority = = = 
 The Army was ultimately under political authority . Since the Glorious Revolution of 1688 the Crown has not technically been permitted a standing army in the United Kingdom – it derives its existence from the Army Act , passed by Parliament each year ( every five years since the late 1950s ) . The House of Commons took these responsibilities seriously : a letter from Haig clarifying the position on shell @-@ shock had to be read out in the House of Commons on 14 March 1918 . Most disciplinary regulations in World War One derived from the 1881 Army Act , although some offences were more severely dealt with on active service , e.g. in principle looting or wilful disobedience carried the death penalty . 
 = = = Lesser offences = = = 
 Lesser offences were dealt with by commanding officers . For petty offences , a company commander could have men fined or confined to barracks for fatigue duty A battalion Commanding Officer could give detention , order up to 28 days Field Punishment , or demote corporals to the ranks ( officers and senior NCOs were dealt with by court martial other than for very trivial offences ) . Enlisted men could also lose leave or seniority . 
 Field punishment ( FP ) had replaced flogging ( abolished at home in 1868 and on active service in 1881 , although still used in military prisons until 1907 ) . FP No.1 ( in which the man was shackled to fixed object , e.g. a large wheel ) was awarded to 60 @,@ 210 cases , equivalent to one man in 50 ( although in practice there were many repeat offenders ) . FP No.1 could be very unpleasant depending on the weather , was abhorred by some as barbaric , and in some units was ritualised ( e.g. by locking a man in a shed and throwing the handcuffs in with him ) ; there were also cases of Australian troops releasing British troops whom they found tied up , although in other units it was regarded as a necessary sanction for serious offences . FP No.2 meant that a man was shackled but not fixed in place . 
 Striking an inferior was an offence but it was not uncommon in some units for officers to turn a blind eye to NCOs keeping discipline by violence , or even to do so themselves . 
 = = = Courts martial = = = 
 Men who committed serious offences were tried by Field General Court Martial , sometimes resulting in execution . Despite " assertions " that these were " kangaroo courts " ( e.g. in the book " Shot at Dawn " which says that men " did not receive even the rudiments of a just hearing " ) the release of records in 1990 @-@ 4 showed this to be untrue . They in fact had strict rules of procedure and a duty to uncover the facts . Unlike a General Court Martial in peacetime , there was no legally qualified Judge @-@ Advocate to advise the court , but from the start of 1916 a " Court Martial Officer " – usually an officer with legal experience in civilian life – was often present to do so . 
 The accused was entitled to object to the composition of the panel ( e.g. if one of the officers was connected with the case or enjoyed a poor relationship with the accused ) and to present his case , defended by an officer ( a " Prisoner 's Friend " ) if he chose , although " Prisoners Friends " became more common as the war went on . The officer who convened a court martial could not sit on it , and the most junior officer voted first ( to lessen the chance of his deferring to a superior 's opinion ) . However , the courts were explicitly intended to be " speedy " and were sometimes encouraged by higher authority to make an example of certain offences , and in practice the leniency of the court and the ability of the accused to defend himself varied widely . Some pleaded guilty or chose not to present a defence or call witnesses , and in most cases the offence was " so blatant that little defence could be put forward " . 
 Eighty @-@ nine per cent of courts martial returned a guilty verdict , the vast majority of cases being for offences such as Absence Without Leave ( the most common offence ) , drunkenness and insubordination . Terms of imprisonment were often suspended , to discourage soldiers from committing an offence to escape the front lines , but also to give a convicted man a chance to earn a reprieve for good conduct . 
 Of the 252 officers tried , 76 per cent were found guilty , the most common offence ( 52 per cent of cases ) being drunkenness . Although three officers were executed , an officer was most likely to receive a severe reprimand ( 60 per cent of cases – a severe blow to his career ) or be cashiered ( 30 per cent of cases – stripped of his commission , which brought total social disgrace and barred him from any employment under the Crown , even working for the local council – but a cashiered officer could still be conscripted as a private to a different unit ) . 
 = = = Executions = = = 
 A death sentence had to be passed unanimously , and confirmed in writing by various officers as the verdict passed up the chain of command . A man 's battalion and brigade commander tended to comment on his own record , but senior generals tended to be more concerned with the type of offence and the state of discipline in that unit . The Judge Advocate General at GHQ also checked the records for irregularities , before final confirmation ( or otherwise ) by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the relevant theatre . 
 Of the 3 @,@ 080 men sentenced to death , 346 men were actually executed , the vast majority of these ( 266 ) for desertion , the next largest reasons for execution being murder ( 37 — these men would probably have been hanged under civilian law at the time ) and cowardice ( 18 ) . Convictions for mutiny were rare — only one man was shot for the Etaples disturbances in 1917 . Of the men shot , 91 were already under a previous suspended sentence , and nine under two sentences . Of the 91 , 40 were already under a suspended death sentence , 38 of them for desertion , and one man had already been " sentenced to death " twice for desertion . 
 It was felt at the time that , precisely because most soldiers in combat were afraid , an example needed to be made of men who deserted . Front line soldiers also sometimes felt that those who left their mates " in the lurch " by deserting " deserved to be shot " . One historian writes that there is " virtually no evidence " that soldiers thought the death penalty unjust , although another writes that some soldiers deplored the death penalty , while most thought it justified . Desertion normally meant an absence of 21 days or other evidence to indicate intent of not returning , e.g. wearing civilian clothes or failing to report for a key deployment . Those executed were normally not boys – the average age was in the mid @-@ twenties and 40 percent had been in serious trouble before . Thirty percent were regulars or reservists , 40 percent were Kitchener volunteers , 19 percent were Irish , Canadian or New Zealand volunteers , but only nine percent were conscripts , suggesting indulgence to the conscripts , many of them under 21 , who made up the bulk of the army by late in the war . Only executed men 's records survive , so it is hard to comment on the reasons why men were reprieved , but it has been suggested that the policy of commuting 90 percent of death sentences may well have been deliberate mercy in the application of military law designed for a small regular army recruited from the rougher elements of society . Only 7 @,@ 361 of the 38 @,@ 630 desertions were in the field . Most were away from the front line — 14 of the executed deserters were arrested in the United Kingdom — and many deserters had never served in the front line at all . 
 In the latter part of the war , executed men 's families were usually told white lies by the authorities ; their families received pensions and were buried in the same graves as other dead soldiers . 
 Death for desertion was abolished in 1930 over objections in the House of Lords from Lords Allenby and Plumer , two of the most distinguished British commanders of World War One ; calls for its restoration in World War Two were vetoed on political grounds . 
 By contrast , of 393 men sentenced to death for falling asleep on sentry duty in all theatres in World War I , only two were executed ( sentries were usually posted in pairs to keep one another awake ; these two , who served in Mesopotamia , were made an example of because they were found sitting asleep together , suggesting that they had colluded ) . 
 Australians made up seven percent of the British Expeditionary Force but 25 percent of deserters , while an Australian was nine times more likely to be imprisoned than a British soldier . Haig asked for permission to shoot Australians , but their government refused . 
 British discipline of the First World War was not especially severe compared to most other armies of the time ( e.g. the Russians and Italians ) . The French admitted to only 133 executions and the Germans 48 , but these figures may not be reliable as both armies had problems with discipline . 
 = = = Shell shock and pardons = = = 
 At the time Posttraumatic stress disorder ( known as " shell shock " because it was initially wrongly thought to be caused by concussion damage to the membranes of brain ) was beginning to be recognised and was admissible in defence – it was classified as a war injury , although there were concerns that soldiers accused of offences tried falsely to claim shell shock as a defence . One historian writes that " in no case was a soldier whom the medical staff certified as suffering from shell shock actually executed " , that " there appear to have been very few cases where men who alleged shell shock , but whose claim was denied , were actually executed " , and that the suggestions of modern campaigners that most of the executed men suffered from shell shock are " palpably untrue " . However , another historian has pointed out that there was a great deal of chance in whether a soldier 's claim of shell @-@ shock would be taken seriously , and gives examples of soldiers being given cursory medical examinations or none ; specific references to shell @-@ shock are uncommon , and records usually refer to dizziness , " queer turns " , bad nerves etc . Such trauma was still poorly understood at that time . 
 There were enquiries in 1919 , 1922 , 1925 and 1938 , which examined documents now lost and witnesses now dead . The books " For the Sake of Example " ( 1983 ) by Babington and " Shot at Dawn " ( 1989 ) by Sykes & <unk> were openly intended to start a campaign for pardons . This campaign was rejected in February 1993 because there was no evidence of procedural error ( i.e. they had been correctly convicted according to the law at the time ) and it was felt not right to impose modern values on to the past . The case was rejected again in 1998 after a detailed two @-@ year review , which found " no white cases , very many black cases and a handful of grey cases " in which medical evidence was ignored or not called . The decisions were reversed by the Government in 2006 and all men given pardons and recognised as victims of World War I. However , their sentences were not overturned as it was impossible after this length of time to re @-@ examine the evidence in every case . 
 = = = Other discipline = = = 
 It has been pointed out that we have only anecdotal accounts , but no figures , for men who were shot on the spot by officers and NCOs for " cowardice in the face of the enemy " . 
 There were over 13 @,@ 000 Royal Military Police ( “ <unk> ” ) . They were unpopular , at a time when the police were often unpopular with young men from big cities . Besides policing , a large part of their job was maintaining discipline on the march and keeping roads running smoothly , and collecting stragglers from a battle . During the March 1918 retreat 25 @,@ 000 stragglers were rounded up and sent back to fighting units . Royal Military Police also fought on occasion if headquarters areas were threatened by an enemy advance . Although soldiers sometimes told lurid tales of men who refused to fight being shot by Military Police , no reliable first @-@ hand accounts exist of this happening . 
 There were occasional examples of men making unwanted homosexual advances , homosexuality being then criminal under both military and civil law , to escape the front lines , but prosecutions for this crime were rare , and there is also evidence of men turning a blind eye to homosexual relationships . 
 = = = Positive motivation = = = 
 Men were also motivated by positive means . New medals were instituted : the Military Cross was created in December 1914 for warrant officers and officers up to captain , the Military Medal for enlisted men in March 1916 ( although to the regret of some men , it did not carry a cash bounty like the Distinguished Conduct Medal ) . The Order of the British Empire ( of which the MBE is one grade ) was instituted in 1917 . By 1918 , medals for bravery were often awarded within a week to ensure that the man lived long enough to receive it . 
 Race meetings , concert parties ( including drag acts – good drag queens were in great demand ) , trips to the seaside and football matches were organised to keep men entertained . There were various unofficial publications , including the “ Wipers Times ” – these give an insight into the views of ordinary soldiers and junior officers . Overt patriotism was rare , and politicians such as ( Prime Minister ) Asquith and Ramsay MacDonald ( an opponent of the war , later Labour Prime Minister ) were satirised . 
 = = Western front = = 
 Under the command of Field Marshal Sir John French , the BEF began to deploy to France within days of the declaration of war . The first encounter with the Germans came at Mons on 23 August 1914 , after which the Allies began the Great Retreat , the BEF was involved in the battle of Le Cateau . The BEF had a small role in halting the German advance at the Marne , before participating in the Aisne counter @-@ offensive , in September which was followed by a period known as the " Race to the Sea " during which the BEF redeployed to Flanders . 
 For the BEF , 1914 ended with " First Ypres " which marked the beginning of a long struggle for the Ypres salient . British casualties in the fighting between 14 October and 30 November were 58 @,@ 155 ( 7 @,@ 960 dead , 29 @,@ 562 wounded and 17 @,@ 873 missing ) . It is often said that the pre @-@ war professional army died at the first battle of Ypres . The army had arrived in France with 84 @,@ 000 infantry . By the end of the battle , the BEF had suffered 86 @,@ 237 casualties , mostly to the infantry . 
 Trench warfare prevailed in 1915 , and the BEF — as the junior partner on the Western Front — fought a series of small battles , at times coordinated with the larger French offensives , like the battle of Neuve Chapelle which is always associated with the shell crisis , the battle of Aubers Ridge , the battle of Festubert in May and the battle of Givenchy in June . On 22 April 1915 , the Germans launched the second battle of Ypres , employing poison gas for the first time on the Western Front and capturing much of the high ground that ringed the salient . By September 1915 , the British Army had grown with the first of Kitchener 's New Army divisions entering the line , and as part of the third battle of Artois , the army launched a major attack , the battle of Loos , utilising its own newly developed chemical weapons for the first time . The resulting failure marked the end for Field Marshal French . On 19 December 1915 , General Sir Douglas Haig replaced him as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the BEF . 
 For the British Army , 1916 was dominated by the battle of the Somme which started disastrously on 1 July . The first day on the Somme remains the bloodiest day in the history of the British Army when over 19 @,@ 000 soldiers were killed and nearly 40 @,@ 000 were wounded , all for little or no gain . The only real success was in the south where , using imaginative tactics and helped by the French , the 18th ( Eastern ) Division and 30th Division took all their objectives , including Montauban , and the 7th Division captured Mametz . At Thiepval , the 36th ( Ulster ) Division seized the Schwaben Redoubt but was forced to withdraw because of lack of progress elsewhere . There followed nearly five months of attrition during which the Fourth Army of General Henry Rawlinson and the Fifth Army of General Hubert Gough advanced an average of 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) at a cost of 420 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 In February 1917 , the German Army began to withdraw to the Hindenburg Line and it was these formidable defences that elements of the British Army assaulted in the battle of Arras in April . For this battle , the British Prime Minister — David Lloyd George — had placed Haig and the BEF under the orders of new French Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief ( Robert Nivelle ) , who planned a major French Army offensive in Champagne . When the battle officially ended on 16 May , British troops had made significant advances , but had been unable to achieve a major breakthrough at any point . Having failed to deliver a breakthrough , Haig now embarked on his favoured plan to launch an offensive in Flanders . In a successful preliminary operation , General Herbert Plumer 's Second Army seized the Messines ridge south of Ypres . The battle of Passchendaele , which began on 31 July 1917 , was one of the harshest ordeals endured by British and Dominion troops during the war , with the battlefield reduced to a quagmire . It was not until 6 November that Passchendaele ridge was captured , by which time the British Army had sustained 310 @,@ 000 casualties . For the British Army , 1917 ended with the battle of Cambrai which demonstrated the potential of tanks operating en masse . The Third Army commander — General Julian Byng — planned an ambitious breakthrough and achieved an unprecedented advanced of 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) on the first day but lacked the reserves to either continue or consolidate . A German counter @-@ offensive succeeded in recapturing most of the lost ground . 
 The final year of the war — 1918 — started with disaster and ended in triumph . On 21 March 1918 , German General Erich Ludendorff launched the Spring Offensive and the main weight of the first blow — Operation Michael — fell on the British Fifth Army of General Gough which was forced to retreat . In response to the crisis facing the Allies , French general Ferdinand Foch was made Supreme Commander for Allied forces on the Western Front , placing the BEF under his strategic direction . The next German attack came south of Ypres in the battle of the Lys river and here too the British Army fell back . Haig issued his famous Order of the Day , " With our backs to the wall and believing in the justice of our cause , each one of us must fight on to the end . " A third major German offensive , falling mainly on the French , was finally halted on the Marne in June 1918 . On 8 August 1918 , General Rawlinson 's Fourth Army launched the battle of Amiens which marked the start of the Hundred Days Offensive , the final Allied offensive on the Western Front . Over the following weeks , all five armies of the BEF went on the offensive from the Somme to Flanders . Fighting continued right up until the Armistice with Germany came into effect at 11 : 00 am on 11 November 1918 . 
 In the final offensive , the BEF captured 188 @,@ 700 prisoners and 2 @,@ 840 guns which was only 7 @,@ 800 prisoners and 935 guns less than those taken by the French , Belgian and American armies combined . 
 = = Other campaigns = = 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 The Easter Rising was a rebellion staged in Ireland during Easter Week , 1916 . It was mounted by Irish republicans with the aims of ending British rule in Ireland and establishing an Irish Republic . Organised by the Military Council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood , the rising lasted from 24 – 30 April 1916 . Members of the Irish Volunteers , joined by the smaller Irish Citizen Army , along with 200 members of Cumann na <unk> , seized key locations in Dublin and proclaimed an Irish Republic independent of Britain . 
 Army reinforcements were moved into Dublin and , by 28 April , the 1 @,@ 600 rebels were facing 18 to 20 @,@ 000 soldiers , the rising was suppressed after seven days of fighting , its leaders were court martialled and executed . Easter Rising casualties were 450 killed , 2 @,@ 614 wounded , and nine missing , almost all in Dublin . The only significant action elsewhere was at Ashbourne , 10 mi ( 16 km ) north of Dublin . Military casualties were 116 dead , 368 wounded and 9 missing . The Irish and Dublin police forces had 16 killed and 29 wounded , 254 non @-@ combatant civilians died . 
 = = = Salonika = = = 
 A new front was opened in Salonika at the request of the Greek government , intending to support Serbian forces and oppose Bulgaria . The first troops of the British Salonika Army , arrived in Salonika in October 1916 , too late to prevent the Serbian Army from retreating into Albania and Greece . French , British and Russian troops arrived in Salonika between 1916 and 1917 and became known as the Allied Army of the Orient or Allied Army of the East , under the overall command of French General Maurice Sarrail . 
 With the objective of destroying the Bulgarian Army , the French and British launched a new offensive in April 1917 , without any significant success . A stalemate ensued without any movement by either side ; the front became known as Europe 's biggest internment camp for the Allies by the Germans . This situation lasted until 18 September 1918 , when the British and Greek Armies , under the command of General George Milne attacked in the Lake Doiran Sector . The Bulgarian Army — now in retreat — signed an armistice on 30 September 1918 . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 Italy joined the war on the Allies ' side on 5 May 1915 , declaring war on Austria @-@ Hungary on 23 May 1915 and on Germany on 28 August 1916 . The British Army 's involvement in the Italian campaign did not start until late 1917 , when troops were sent to help prevent a defeat on the Italian front . On 24 October 1917 in the battle of Caporetto the Second Italian Army collapsed and the Italians were forced to retreat to the Piave River , where they could be reinforced with five British and six French Divisions from the Western Front , complete with supporting arms and commanded by General Herbert Plumer . The reinforced Italians successfully managed to halt the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance at the battle of the Piave river . During the Allied counter @-@ attack in October 1918 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army collapsed after taking heavy losses at the battle of Vittorio Veneto . An armistice was signed shortly afterwards on 3 November 1918 . 
 = = = China = = = 
 In 1914 , the British Army was involved in what became known as the Siege of Tsingtao when the 2nd Battalion South Wales Borderers landed in China in support of Japanese forces in the capture of the German port of Tsingtao . The British were part of a 23 @,@ 000 @-@ strong task force which included a mixed British – Indian Brigade of 1 @,@ 500 troops and the battleship HMS Triumph . A bombardment of the port started on 31 October 1914 , and by 7 November , the Japanese 18th Division , 29th Infantry Brigade and the British – Indian Brigade , had stormed and captured the garrison and its 4 @,@ 000 troops . 
 = = = East Africa = = = 
 1914 also witnessed the commencement of the East African Campaign against von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's elusive German and African askari forces . Most British operations in Africa were carried out by African askari units such as the King 's African Rifles ( KAR ) , South African or Indian Army units . The British force was led , in turn , by General Horace Smith @-@ Dorrien , South African General Jan Smuts , and British General Arthur Reginald Hoskins . The force was composed of units of the KAR and the 27th Bangalore Brigade from the British Indian Army , with the 2nd Battalion , Loyal Regiment ( North Lancashire ) under command . The German forces of von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's Schutztruppe remained undefeated and surrendered on 25 November 1918 , 14 days after the Armistice in Europe . 
 The casualty rate amongst British and Empire troops , excluding the Africans , was 6 @,@ 000 dead and 3 @,@ 000 wounded . More troops died from diseases than from enemy action , and illness accounted for 70 % of the total casualties . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 Turkey had entered the war on the German side on 31 October 1914 . One of its first acts was to close the Dardanelles Straits to the Allies . In April 1915 , following the failure of the Royal Navy 's attempt to capture the Dardanelles , British and ANZAC forces landed on the Gallipoli peninsula , under the command of General Ian Hamilton . The main British attacks were the first , second and third battles of Krithia . These were a series of attacks against the Turkish defences aimed at capturing the original objectives of 25 April 1915 . They all failed to achieve their objectives . In August , another landing was made at Suvla Bay . The Suvla landing was reinforced by the arrival of the 10th Division from Kitchener 's New Army , 53rd , 54th first @-@ line Territorial divisions and the dismounted yeomanry of the 2nd Mounted Division . The 29th Division was also moved from Helles to Suvla for one more push . The final British attempt to resuscitate the offensive came on 21 August , with attacks at Scimitar Hill and Hill 60 . Control of these hills would have united the Anzac and Suvla fronts , but neither battle achieved success . When fighting at Hill 60 ceased on 29 August , the battle for the Sari Bair heights , and indeed , the battle for the peninsula , was effectively over ; by January 1916 , the Allies had withdrawn . 
 Estimates of casualties vary enormously , but of the around 480 @,@ 000 Allied troops involved in the campaign , 180 @,@ 000 were wounded and 44 @,@ 000 died , 20 @,@ 000 of the dead being British . 
 = = = Mesopotamia = = = 
 The British force fighting in Mesopotamia was principally drawn from the British Indian Army , with only one solely British formation , the 13th ( Western ) Division . Its objective was to secure the Royal Navy 's oil supply from Persia . On 7 November 1914 , the British Indian force — led by General Sir John Nixon — invaded Mesopotamia , and on 23 November , entered <unk> . After this initial invasion , there followed a disastrous and humiliating defeat for the British by the Turks at the Siege of Kut @-@ al @-@ Amara from 7 December 1915 – 29 April 1916 , when the entire garrison of 13 @,@ 000 British and Indian troops surrendered . The British reorganised and raised the number of available troops to 250 @,@ 000 . The British eventually regained momentum upon General Frederick Stanley Maude becoming commander , and a new offensive began in December 1916 . On 24 February 1917 , Kut @-@ al @-@ Amara fell to the joint British and Indian force , and Baghdad was captured in March 1917 . A week after the capture of Baghdad , General Maude issued the Proclamation of Baghdad , which contained the famous line , " our armies do not come into your cities and lands as conquerors or enemies , but as liberators " . Lieutenant General Sir William Marshall succeeded Maude following the latter 's death from cholera on 18 November 1917 . He continued with the River War until October 1918 , when the British captured the Mosul oil fields , a development that led to the collapse of the Turkish forces . The Armistice of Mudros with Turkey was signed on 30 October 1918 . During the campaign , 100 @,@ 000 British and Indian casualties were caused . Of these , 53 @,@ 000 died , with 13 @,@ 000 of the dead succumbing to disease . 
 = = = Sinai and Palestine = = = 
 The Sinai and Palestine Campaign was fuelled by criticism of the policy of a static defence of the Suez canal , which employed six infantry divisions and five mounted brigades . After the repulse of the Turkish First Suez Offensive , nine divisions were sent to the Western Front and one to Mesopotamia . 
 The British Army in the Sinai and Palestine subsequently included the 10th , 42nd , 52nd , 53rd , 54th , 60th , 74th and 75th divisions . British yeomanry formed part of the ANZAC Mounted Division , Australian Mounted Division and Yeomanry Mounted Divisions . With the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade , mounted troops formed the Desert Column . The whole force — known as the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) — was under the command of General Sir Archibald Murray in Cairo . 
 Murray made steady progress against the Turkish forces , which were defeated in the battles of Romani , Magdhaba and Rafa . However , he was repulsed at the first and second battle of Gaza in 1917 . The defeat in the Second Battle of Gaza prompted the War Office to change the command of the EEF , and on 28 June 1917 , Murray was replaced by General Sir Edmund Allenby , who reinvigorated the campaign . 
 Allenby reorganised his forces along more conventional lines . The EEF now included the Desert Mounted Corps , under Lieutenant General Sir Harry Chauvel ; XX Corps under Lieutenant General Sir Phillip Chetwode and XXI Corps under Lieutenant General Edward Bulfin . In October 1917 , they defeated the Turkish forces in the third battle of Gaza and the Battle of Mughar Ridge , which succeeded in causing the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies to withdraw towards Jerusalem and Haifa respectively . This led to the capture of Jerusalem in December 1917 . 
 In February and April 1918 , Australian mounted troops took part in two raids east across the Jordan River near Es Salt , a village in Palestine 14 mi ( 23 km ) west of Amman . Although these raids were unsuccessful , they encouraged Turkish commanders to believe that the main British effort would be launched across the Jordan , when in fact it would be launched along the coastal plain . The EEF was greatly weakened at this time by the crisis in France , which led to the despatch of the 52nd and 74th Divisions to the Western Front , the breaking up of the Yeomanry Mounted Division , and the replacement of most of the British infantry in four of the remaining divisions with Indian troops . In September 1918 , Allenby 's forces won the decisive Megiddo Offensive , which precipitated the Armistice of Mudros with the Ottoman Empire , which was signed on 31 October 1918 . 
 Total Allied casualties in the Sinai and Palestine campaign were 60 @,@ 000 of which 20 @,@ 000 were killed . Some 15 @,@ 000 of the dead were British . 
 = = = Persia = = = 
 Following the abdication of the Russian Tsar in 1917 , the Caucasus Front collapsed , leaving Central Asia — and beyond it India — open to the Turkish Army . The War Office responded with a plan to send a force of hand @-@ picked British officers and NCOs to organise any remaining Russian forces or civilians who were ready to fight the Turkish forces . This force became known as Dunsterforce after its commander , Major General Lionel Charles Dunsterville , the inspiration for the titular character of Rudyard Kipling 's novel Stalky & Co .. It arrived in Baku in August 1918 . It was hoped that Dunsterforce could raise an army from the Christian Georgian , Armenian and Assyrian people who had supported the Russians and had historically feared the Turks . While Dunsterforce had some success the task proved beyond its ability . 
 = = = Fighting the Senussi Arabs = = = 
 In late November 1915 , in response to the growing threat from a pro @-@ Turkish Islamic Arab sect known as the Senussi , a composite British body known as the ' Western Frontier Force ' was sent into the Libyan Desert to Mersa Matruh , under the command of British Indian Army officer Major General Alexander Wallace . A series of sharp battles against the Arabs ensued at Um <unk> , Gebel <unk> , and <unk> during December and January . The Western Desert Force , now under Major General William Peyton , re @-@ occupied Sidi Barrani and Sallum in February and March 1916 . Shipwrecked British seamen from HMT <unk> and HMS Tara , who had been held at Bir Hakeim , were rescued by a contingent of armoured cars led by the Duke of Westminster . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British Army during World War I was the largest military force that Britain had put into the field up to that point . On the Western Front , the British Expeditionary Force ended the war as the strongest fighting force , more experienced than the United States Army and its morale was in better shape than the French Army . 
 The cost of victory , however , was high . The official " final and corrected " casualty figures for the British Army — including the Territorial Force — were issued on 10 March 1921 . The losses for the period between 4 August 1914 and 30 September 1919 included 573 @,@ 507 " killed in action , died from wounds and died of other causes " and 254 @,@ 176 missing ( minus 154 @,@ 308 released prisoners of war ) , for a net total of 673 @,@ 375 dead and missing . Casualty figures also indicated that there were 1 @,@ 643 @,@ 469 wounded . 
 For some , the fighting did not end in 1918 . The British Army dispatched troops to Russia during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War , which was followed by the Anglo @-@ Irish War in January 1919 and the Third Anglo @-@ Afghan War in May 1919 . The Third Afghan War was followed by the 1920 conflict between British forces and Somaliland dervishes . Those not involved in fighting or occupation duties were demobilised . The demobilisation of 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 men that followed the end of the war had , within a year , reduced the British Army to 800 @,@ 000 men ; by November 1920 , two years after the signing of the Armistice , this figure had fallen to 370 @,@ 000 men . 
 The Ten Year Rule was introduced in August 1919 , which stipulated that the British Armed Forces should draft their estimates " on the assumption that the British Empire would not be engaged in any great war during the next ten years " . In 1928 , Winston Churchill , as Chancellor of the Exchequer , successfully urged the Cabinet to make the rule self @-@ perpetuating and hence it was in force unless specifically countermanded . There were cuts in defence spending as a result of this rule , falling from £ 766 million in 1919 – 1920 , to £ 189 million in 1921 – 1922 , and to £ 102 million in 1932 . 
 The British Army tried to learn the lessons of the First World War , and adopt them into its pre @-@ war doctrine . In the 1920s , and much of the 1930s , the General Staff tried to establish a small , mechanised , professional army and formed the Experimental Mechanized Force but , with the lack of any identified threat , its main function reverted to garrison duties around the British Empire . 
 = Croatia – Hungary relations = 
 Croatia – Hungary relations refer to the bilateral relationship between Croatia and Hungary . Diplomatic relations among two states were established on January 18 , 1992 following Croatia 's independence from SFR Yugoslavia . 
 Croatia has an embassy in Budapest and consulates in Pécs and Nagykanizsa , while Hungary has an embassy in Zagreb and consulates in Rijeka and Split . 
 In 1102 the previously @-@ independent Kingdom of Croatia and Kingdom of Hungary entered personal union and were ruled by the same King , Ladislaus I. Following the Ottoman conquests and a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Mohács in 1527 , Croatian nobility elected the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I as the new king of Croatia . The Hungarian nobility was divided but the Habsburgs annexed the Kingdom of Hungary , keeping Croatia and Hungary under a single crown . During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 Croatia sided with the Austrians so Croatian Ban Josip Jelačić helped Austria to defeat the Hungarian forces in 1849 and ushering in a period of Germanization . By the 1860s the failure of this policy became apparent , leading to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and the creation of a personal union between the crowns of the Austrian Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary . The issue of Croatia 's status in Hungary was resolved by the Croatian – Hungarian Settlement of 1868 , when the kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united into Kingdom of Croatia @-@ Slavonia . Following the breakup of Austria @-@ Hungary after its defeat in World War I , Croatian Parliament declared independence on 29 October 1918 and decided to join the newly formed State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs , ending Habsburg rule and the personal union with Hungary after 816 years . Through the Treaty of Trianon , Hungary lost Međimurje and the southern part of Baranya to Croatia . Since World War II , relations between two states have been defined by cooperation with Nazis , Soviets and Yugoslavia until the revolutions of 1989 and the breakup of Yugoslavia . Hungary recognised Croatian independence with the rest of the European Economic Community in 1992 , and supported Croatia during the Croatian War of Independence . 
 Croatian and Hungarian high @-@ ranking officials usually meet several times a year . Trade between Croatia and Hungary amounted $ 1 @.@ 020 <unk> in 2012 , largely consisting of Hungarian exports to Croatia . Hungarian tourists contribute significantly to Croatian tourism ; in 2009 , a total of 323 @,@ 000 visited Croatia , including the Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor <unk> who spends his summer holidays in Dalmatia for last few decades . Both countries coordinate the development of cross @-@ border infrastructure . Pan @-@ European corridors Vb and Vc connect Budapest to the Adriatic Sea via Zagreb and Osijek . Both countries have sizable minorities living across their common border , and both have passed laws to protect their minority rights . 
 Croatia and Hungary are parties to 96 bilateral treaties and members of a number of multinational organizations , including NATO and the European Union . 
 = = Present = = 
 = = = Diplomatic relations = = = 
 Croatia and Hungary established diplomatic relations on 16 and 18 January 1992 , after Hungary recognised the independence of Croatia on 15 January 1992 . As of December 2011 Croatia maintains an embassy in Budapest ( headed by ambassador Ivan Band | <unk> ) , a consulate general in Pécs and a consulate in Nagykanizsa . The Nagykanizsa consulate is led by an honorary consul . Hungary maintains an embassy in Zagreb and consulates in Rijeka and Split . The embassy is headed by ambassador Gábor Iván ; the offices also include an army and air attaché office in the Republic of Croatia ( headed by László <unk> ) and the Office for Economic Affairs of the Embassy of the Republic of Hungary in the Republic of Croatia ( headed by András Péter <unk> , Counsellor for Economy and Trade ) . 
 Croatian and Hungarian high @-@ ranking officials ( including heads of state , prime ministers and foreign ministers ) meet several times a year . In addition , Croatian and Hungarian governments have occasionally held joint sessions since January 2006 . 
 = = = Economy and infrastructure = = = 
 Trade between Croatia and Hungary amounted to € 625 @,@ 083 in 2009 , a decrease from € 894 @,@ 270 in 2008 . In 2009 Croatian exports to Hungary reached € 132 @,@ 474 , while Hungarian exports to Croatia were worth € 492 @,@ 609 . Overall , the 2009 trade volume represented 2 @.@ 75 percent of total Croatian foreign trade . Croatian – Hungarian trade comprises only a small fraction of total Hungarian foreign trade , reaching 0 @.@ 54 percent of the total in 2009 . Hungarian investments in Croatia rose sharply in 2003 , reaching the fourth ranking in that year following investments exceeding <unk> million , largely in tourism and manufacturing . The largest single investment that year was the purchase of more than 25 percent of the stock of INA for <unk> million by the MOL Group . By 2011 , the MOL Group increased its stake in INA to 47 @.@ 16 percent . 
 Hungarian tourists contribute significantly to the Croatian tourist industry ; in 2009 , a total of 323 @,@ 000 Hungarians visited Croatia as tourists . A total of 1 @.@ 644 million overnight stays were made by Hungarian tourists in that year alone , ranking Hungarian tourists seventh in the number of nights spent in Croatia ( behind the Germans , Slovenes , Italians , Austrians , Czechs and Dutch ) . At the same time , the Hungarian tourists spent more than 143 million kuna ( c . € 19 million ) in Croatia , representing a sharp increase from 69 @.@ 5 million kuna ( c . € 9 @.@ 3 million ) spent in 2008 . In 2009 , 103 @,@ 000 Croatians visited Hungary ( excluding family and friend visits ) in 356 @,@ 000 overnight stays , spending 204 @,@ 000 kuna ( c . € 27 @,@ 000 ) . This spending represented a 250 @-@ percent increase from 2008 . 
 Croatia and Hungary coordinate the development of infrastructure , especially transportation routes . Pan @-@ European corridors Vb and Vc connect Budapest to the Adriatic Sea via Zagreb and Rijeka ( Vb ) and to Osijek and Ploče ( Vc ) . The Pan @-@ European corridor Vb comprises road and rail links between the Hungarian and Croatian capitals and the Port of Rijeka . The corridor 's road component primarily consists of the M7 , the A4 and the A6 motorways ( as well as several other connecting motorway sections ) completed on 22 October 2008 . The rail component of the corridor largely uses the route completed in 1873 , but it is planned to be rebuilt to increase its capacity . The Pan @-@ European corridor Vc primarily consists of the M6 and the A5 motorways ; however , as of December 2011 the motorway is not completed . Other infrastructure jointly developed by Croatia and Hungary includes a € 395 million gas pipeline and two electric @-@ power lines . On the 355 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 220 @.@ 9 mi ) border between Croatia and Hungary there are six international @-@ road border crossings , three rail border crossings and five local @-@ traffic border crossings . Citizens of Croatia and Hungary may cross the border with a valid passport or an identity card for stays of up to 90 days . 
 = = = Minorities and migrations = = = 
 According to the 2001 census there are 16 @,@ 595 Hungarians living in Croatia , representing 0 @.@ 37 percent of the population . In 2000 , there were 15 @,@ 597 Croats living in Hungary , accounting for 0 @.@ 15 percent of the total population . The Hungarian minority in Croatia is recognised by the Constitution of Croatia ; minority rights ( including official use of Hungarian by local governments and education in Hungarian ) are safeguarded by legislation enacted by the Sabor . Seven municipalities in Croatia introduced Hungarian for official use ( either in part of their territory or the entire municipality ) , depending on the distribution of the Hungarian population there . There are five Hungarian minority organizations in Croatia , and the Hungarian minority is guaranteed one seat in the Croatian Parliament . 
 The Hungarian government recognised Croats as a minority native to Hungary ; it has decided to implement the optional regulations of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages with respect to the Croatian language and establish a minority self @-@ government for the Croatian minority in Hungary , guaranteeing cultural autonomy . The Croatian minority set up 127 local and 7 county self @-@ governments in Hungary . There are concerns that Croatian minority rights in Hungary are being diminished , but the president of Croatia has assessed that both Croatian and Hungarian minority policies were appropriate . The Croatian minority in Hungary is particularly active in Pécs , where the Scientific Institute of Croats in Hungary and the Croatian Theatre have been established . The number of migrants between Croatia and Hungary is very low ; in 2009 , only 22 people emigrated from Hungary to Croatia while a single person emigrated from Croatia to Hungary . 
 = = = Cultural and scientific cooperation = = = 
 Croatia and Hungary have agreed to the Cultural Cooperation Programme , which defines cooperation and cultural exchange in the fields of music , theatre and dance , and with respect to the arts , museums , galleries , literature , publishing , libraries , archives , film and cultural @-@ heritage protection . The programme was agreed to on 7 November 2011 in Budapest by secretaries of the Croatian Ministry of Culture and the Hungarian Ministry of National Resources . The programme pertains to the 2012 – 2014 period and represents a continuation of cultural cooperation through cultural exchange , outside the framework of formal agreements . Cultural , educational and scientific cooperation between the two countries is covered by a treaty of 16 March 1994 , with additional treaties regulating diploma recognitions since 16 June 1997 and additional treaties and protocols on scientific and technological cooperation signed in 2002 and 2009 . The scientific and educational cooperation entails the awarding of scholarships and bilateral research projects . 
 = = = Bilateral treaties and multinational organizations = = = 
 Croatia and Hungary have either signed or succeeded 133 different treaties and other agreements . Some were originally signed by Hungary and SFR Yugoslavia , while Croatia succeeded relevant documents pursuant to decisions of the Badinter Arbitration Committee . As of December 2011 96 remain in force , regulating various aspects of relations between the countries ( including minority rights , diplomatic relations , cultural and scientific cooperation , trade and economic relations , Drava river navigation , border control and air transport ) . Free @-@ trade agreements were signed , but have since been repealed through adoption of similar agreements with the European Union . There were also agreements made with a limited period of application , pertaining to sporting @-@ event security . 
 Croatia and Hungary are members of several multinational organizations , including the United Nations , the Organization for Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe , the Council of Europe , NATO , the World Trade Organization and the Central European Initiative . In addition , Hungary is a member of the European Union ( EU ) . On 9 December 2011 , Croatia signed an EU accession treaty and is expected to become a member on 1 July 2013 . Both countries are also taking part in the formulation and implementation of the Danube Strategy , focusing on transport , environmental and economic development of the Danube area and involving all countries along its banks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Personal union = = = 
 When Stjepan II died in 1091 , ending the Trpimirović dynasty rule in the medieval kingdom of Croatia , Ladislaus I of Hungary claimed the Croatian crown . Opposition to the claim led to a war and the personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102 , ruled by Coloman . For the next four centuries , Croatia was ruled by the Sabor ( parliament ) and a Ban of Croatia ( viceroy ) appointed by the king . This period saw an increasing threat of Ottoman conquest and a struggle against the Republic of Venice for control of coastal areas . The Venetians gained control over most of Dalmatia by 1428 except for the city @-@ state of Dubrovnik , which became independent . Ottoman conquests led to the 1493 Battle of Krbava Field and the 1526 Battle of Mohács , both ending in decisive Ottoman victories against Hungarian and Croatian armies . King Louis II died at Mohács ; in 1527 , the assembly of Croatian nobility meeting at Cetin chose Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg as the new ruler of Croatia under the conditions that he provide protection to Croatia against the Ottoman Empire and respect its political rights . In political disarray , the divided Hungarian nobility elected two kings simultaneously : János Szapolyai and Ferdinand I. With the conquest of Buda by the Ottomans in 1541 , the remaining part of Hungary not ruled by the Ottomans ( known as the Royal Hungary ) was annexed by the Habsburgs ; they ruled as Kings of Hungary , thus keeping the kingdoms of Hungary and Croatia under a single crown . 
 = = = Habsburg rule = = = 
 During the 1830s and 1840s romantic nationalism appeared in Croatia , inspiring the Croatian National Revival ( a political and cultural campaign advocating the unity of all South Slavs in the empire ) . Its primary focus was the establishment of a standard language as a counterweight to Hungarian and the promotion of Croatian literature and culture . During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 , Croatia sided with the Austrians ; Ban Josip Jelačić helped defeat the Hungarian forces in 1849 , ushering in a period of Germanization . By the 1860s the policy 's failure became apparent , leading to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and the creation of a personal union between the crowns of the Austrian Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary . The treaty left the issue of Croatia 's status to Hungary ; this was resolved by the Croatian – Hungarian Settlement of 1868 , when the kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united . The Kingdom of Dalmatia remained under de facto Austrian control , while Rijeka retained its status of Corpus separatum introduced in 1779 . After Austria @-@ Hungary occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina following the 1878 Treaty of Berlin , the Croatian Military Frontier was abolished and the territory returned to Croatia in 1881 . Renewed efforts to reform Austria @-@ Hungary , entailing federalisation with Croatia as a federal unit , were halted by World War I. On 29 October 1918 the Croatian Sabor declared independence and decided to join the newly formed State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs , ending Habsburg rule and the personal union with Hungary after 816 years . 
 = = = Treaty of Trianon and World War II = = = 
 The Treaty of Trianon was signed in 1920 , at the end of World War I , between the Allies of World War I and Hungary ( as one of the successor states of Austria @-@ Hungary ) . The treaty regulated the status of the independent Hungarian state and defined its borders . Compared to the prewar Kingdom of Hungary ( as a part of Austria @-@ Hungary ) , post @-@ Trianon Hungary lost 72 percent of its territory . The principal beneficiaries of the territorial division of the prewar Kingdom of Hungary were Romania , Czechoslovakia and the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . The treaty established the southern border of Hungary along the Drava and Mura rivers ( except in Baranya , where only the northern part of the county was retained by Hungary ) . On 4 December 1918 the State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs ( comprising present @-@ day Croatia ) joined the Kingdom of Serbia to form the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats , and Slovenes . 
 The invasion of Yugoslavia by the Axis Powers began on 6 April 1941 , during World War II , and ended with the unconditional surrender of the Royal Yugoslav Army on 17 April 1941 . During that time , on 12 April the Hungarian Third Army crossed the border ( advancing into Međimurje and southern Baranya ) . Those territorial gains were reversed by Yugoslav partisans and the Red Army in 1944 and 1945 , and confirmed by the Paris Peace Treaties of 1947 . As World War II was replaced by the Cold War , Hungarian – Croatian relations were substantially dictated by the Soviet Union ; it dominated the Eastern Bloc , which included Hungary and Communist @-@ ruled Yugoslavia ( which in turn comprised Croatia as its constituent part ) , as defined by the Tito – Stalin split . This situation ended with the revolutions of 1989 , the end of Communism in Hungary and the breakup of Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Fall of Communism and Croatian independence = = = 
 Hungary recognised Croatian independence on 15 January 1992 ( with the rest of the European Economic Community member states ) , and established diplomatic relations with Croatia three days later . During the Croatian War of Independence , Croatia obtained arms from several countries ( including Hungary ) , despite a United Nations @-@ imposed arms embargo . As of December 2011 , Hungary and Croatia have 96 treaties and agreements in force regulating a wide range of activities and relations ( including diplomatic , cultural , economic , energy , transport , education , minority and other issues ) . Furthermore , Hungary supported the Croatian NATO membership request and Croatian accession to the European Union . 
 = Francis Poulenc = 
 Francis Jean Marcel Poulenc ( French : [ fʁɑ ̃ sis ʒɑ ̃ <unk> <unk> ̃ k ] ; 7 January 1899 – 30 January 1963 ) was a French composer and pianist . His compositions include mélodies , solo piano works , chamber music , choral pieces , operas , ballets , and orchestral concert music . Among the best @-@ known are the piano suite Trois mouvements perpétuels ( 1919 ) , the ballet Les biches ( 1923 ) , the Concert champêtre ( 1928 ) for harpsichord and orchestra , the opera Dialogues des Carmélites ( 1957 ) , and the Gloria ( 1959 ) for soprano , choir and orchestra . 
 His wealthy family intended Poulenc for a business career and did not allow him to enrol at a music college . Largely self @-@ educated musically , he studied with the pianist Ricardo Viñes , who became his mentor after the composer 's parents died . Poulenc soon came under the influence of Erik Satie , under whose tutelage he became one of a group of young composers known collectively as Les Six . In his early works Poulenc became known for his high spirits and irreverence . During the 1930s a much more serious side to his nature emerged , particularly in the religious music he composed from 1936 onwards , which he alternated with his more light @-@ hearted works . 
 In addition to composing , Poulenc was an accomplished pianist . He was particularly celebrated for his performing partnerships with the baritone Pierre Bernac ( who also advised him in vocal writing ) and the soprano Denise Duval , touring in Europe and America with each , and making many recordings . He was among the first composers to see the importance of the gramophone , and he recorded extensively from 1928 onwards . 
 In his later years , and for decades after his death , Poulenc had a reputation , particularly in his native country , as a humorous , lightweight composer , and his religious music was often overlooked . During the 21st century more attention has been given to his serious works , with many new productions of Dialogues des Carmélites and La Voix humaine worldwide , and numerous live and recorded performances of his songs and choral music . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Poulenc was born in the 8th arrondissement of Paris , the younger child and only son of Émile Poulenc and his wife , Jenny , née Royer . Poulenc senior was joint owner of the <unk> Poulenc Frères , a successful manufacturer of pharmaceuticals ( later Rhône @-@ Poulenc ) . He was a member of a pious Roman Catholic family from <unk> in the département of Aveyron . Jenny Poulenc was from a Parisian family with wide artistic interests . In Poulenc 's view , the two sides of his nature grew out of this background : a deep religious faith from his father 's family and a worldly and artistic side from his mother 's . The critic Claude Rostand later described Poulenc as " half monk and half naughty boy " . 
 Poulenc grew up in a musical household ; his mother was a capable pianist , with a wide repertoire ranging from classical to less elevated works that gave him a lifelong taste for what he called " adorable bad music " . He took piano lessons from the age of five ; when he was eight he first heard the music of Debussy and was fascinated by the originality of the sound . Other composers whose works influenced his development were Schubert and Stravinsky : the former 's Winterreise and the latter 's The Rite of Spring made a deep impression on him . At his father 's insistence , Poulenc followed a conventional school career , studying at the Lycée Condorcet in Paris rather than at a music conservatory . 
 In 1916 a childhood friend , Raymonde Linossier ( 1897 – 1930 ) , introduced Poulenc to Adrienne Monnier 's bookshop , the Maison des Amis des Livres . There he met the avant @-@ garde poets Guillaume Apollinaire , Max Jacob , Paul Éluard and Louis Aragon . He later set many of their poems to music . In the same year he became the pupil of the pianist Ricardo Viñes . The biographer Henri Hell comments that Viñes 's influence on his pupil was profound , both as to pianistic technique and the style of Poulenc 's keyboard works . Poulenc later said of Viñes : 
 He was a most delightful man , a bizarre <unk> with enormous <unk> , a flat @-@ brimmed sombrero in the purest Spanish style , and button boots which he used to rap my shins when I didn 't change the pedalling enough . ... I admired him madly , because , at this time , in 1914 , he was the only virtuoso who played Debussy and Ravel . That meeting with Viñes was paramount in my life : I owe him everything ... In reality it is to Viñes that I owe my fledgling efforts in music and everything I know about the piano . 
 When Poulenc was sixteen his mother died ; his father died two years later . Viñes became more than a teacher : he was , in the words of Myriam <unk> in the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , the young man 's " spiritual mentor " . He encouraged his pupil to compose , and he later gave the premieres of three early Poulenc works . Through him Poulenc became friendly with two composers who helped shape his early development : Georges Auric and Erik Satie . 
 Auric , who was the same age as Poulenc , was an early developer musically ; by the time the two met , Auric 's music had already been performed at important Parisian concert venues . The two young composers shared a similar musical outlook and enthusiasms , and for the rest of Poulenc 's life Auric was his most trusted friend and guide . Poulenc called him " my true brother in spirit " . Satie , an eccentric figure , isolated from the mainstream French musical establishment , was a mentor to several rising young composers , including Auric , Louis Durey and Arthur Honegger . After initially dismissing Poulenc as a bourgeois amateur , he relented and admitted him to the circle of protégés , whom he called " Les Nouveaux Jeunes " . Poulenc described Satie 's influence on him as " immediate and wide , on both the spiritual and musical planes " . The pianist Alfred Cortot commented that Poulenc 's Trois mouvements perpétuels were " reflections of the ironical outlook of Satie adapted to the sensitive standards of the current intellectual circles " . 
 = = = First compositions and Les Six = = = 
 Poulenc made his début as a composer in 1917 with his Rapsodie nègre , a ten @-@ minute , five @-@ movement piece for baritone and chamber group ; it was dedicated to Satie and premiered at one of a series of concerts of new music run by the singer Jane <unk> . There was a fashion for African arts in Paris at the time , and Poulenc was delighted to run across some published verses purportedly Liberian , but full of Parisian boulevard slang . He used one of the poems in two sections of the rhapsody . The baritone engaged for the first performance lost his nerve on the platform , and the composer , though no singer , jumped in . This jeu d 'esprit was the first of many examples of what Anglophone critics came to call " leg @-@ Poulenc " . Ravel was amused by the piece and commented on Poulenc 's ability to invent his own folklore . Stravinsky was impressed enough to use his influence to secure Poulenc a contract with a publisher , a kindness that Poulenc never forgot . 
 In 1917 Poulenc got to know Ravel well enough to have serious discussions with him about music . He was dismayed by Ravel 's judgments , which exalted composers whom Poulenc thought little of above those he greatly admired . He told Satie of this unhappy encounter ; Satie replied with a dismissive epithet for Ravel who , he said , talked " a load of rubbish " . For many years Poulenc was equivocal about Ravel 's music , though always respecting him as a man . Ravel 's modesty about his own music particularly appealed to Poulenc , who sought throughout his life to follow Ravel 's example . 
 From January 1918 to January 1921 Poulenc was a conscript in the French army in the last months of the First World War and the immediate post @-@ war period . Between July and October 1918 he served at the Franco @-@ German front , after which he was given a series of auxiliary posts , ending as a typist at the Ministry of Aviation . His duties allowed him time for composition ; the Trois mouvements perpétuels for piano and the Sonata for Piano Duet were written at the piano of the local elementary school at Saint @-@ Martin @-@ sur @-@ le @-@ Pré , and he completed his first song cycle , Le <unk> , setting poems by Apollinaire . The sonata did not create a deep public impression , but the song cycle made the composer 's name known in France , and the Trois mouvements perpétuels rapidly became an international success . The exigencies of music @-@ making in wartime taught Poulenc much about writing for whatever instruments were available ; then , and later , some of his works were for unusual combinations of players . 
 At this stage in his career Poulenc was conscious of his lack of academic musical training ; the critic and biographer Jeremy Sams writes that it was the composer 's good luck that the public mood was turning against late @-@ romantic lushness in favour of the " freshness and insouciant charm " of his works , technically unsophisticated though they were . Four of Poulenc 's early works were premiered at the Salle <unk> in Montparnasse , where between 1917 and 1920 the cellist Félix <unk> presented concerts of music by young composers . Among them were Auric , Durey , Honegger , Darius Milhaud and Germaine Tailleferre , who , with Poulenc , became known collectively as " Les Six " . After one of their concerts , the critic Henri Collet published an article titled , " The Five Russians , the Six Frenchmen and Satie " . According to Milhaud : 
 In completely arbitrary fashion Collet chose the names of six composers , Auric , Durey , Honegger , Poulenc , Tailleferre and myself , for no other reason than that we knew each other , that we were friends and were represented in the same programmes , but without the slightest concern for our different attitudes and our different natures . Auric and Poulenc followed the ideas of Cocteau , Honegger was a product of German Romanticism and my leanings were towards a Mediterranean lyrical art ... Collet 's article made such a wide impression that the Groupe des Six had come into being . 
 Cocteau , though similar in age to Les Six , was something of a father @-@ figure to the group . His literary style , " paradoxical and lapidary " in Henri Hell 's phrase , was anti @-@ romantic , concise and irreverent . It greatly appealed to Poulenc , who made his first setting of Cocteau 's words in 1919 and his last in 1961 . When members of Les Six collaborated with each other , they contributed their own individual sections to the joint work . Their 1920 piano suite L <unk> des Six consists of six separate and unrelated pieces . Their 1921 ballet Les <unk> de la tour Eiffel contains three sections by Milhaud , two apiece by Auric , Poulenc and Tailleferre , one by Honegger and none by Durey , who was already distancing himself from the group . 
 In the early 1920s Poulenc remained concerned at his lack of formal musical training . Satie was suspicious of music colleges , but Ravel advised Poulenc to take composition lessons ; Milhaud suggested the composer and teacher Charles Koechlin . Poulenc worked with him intermittently from 1921 to 1925 . 
 = = = 1920s : increasing fame = = = 
 From the early 1920s Poulenc was well received abroad , particularly in Britain , both as a performer and a composer . In 1921 Ernest Newman wrote in The Manchester Guardian , " I keep my eye on Francis Poulenc , a young man who has only just arrived at his twenties . He ought to develop into a <unk> of the first order . " Newman said that he had rarely heard anything so deliciously absurd as parts of Poulenc 's song cycle <unk> , with its accompaniment played by the unorthodox combination of cornet , trombone , violin and percussion . In 1922 Poulenc and Milhaud travelled to Vienna to meet Alban Berg , Anton Webern and Arnold Schönberg . Neither of the French composers was influenced by their Austrian colleagues ' revolutionary twelve tone system , but they admired the three as its leading proponents . The following year Poulenc received a commission from Serge Diaghilev for a full @-@ length ballet score . He decided that the theme would be a modern version of the classical French fête galante . This work , Les biches , was an immediate success , first in Monte Carlo in January 1924 and then in Paris in May , under the direction of André Messager ; it has remained one of Poulenc 's best @-@ known scores . Poulenc 's new celebrity after the success of the ballet was the unexpected cause of his estrangement from Satie : among the new friends Poulenc made was Louis <unk> , a writer whom Satie regarded with implacable enmity . Auric , who had just enjoyed a similar triumph with a Diaghilev ballet , Les <unk> , was also repudiated by Satie for becoming a friend of <unk> . 
 As the decade progressed , Poulenc produced a range of compositions , from songs to chamber music and another ballet , Aubade . Henri Hell suggests that Koechlin 's influence occasionally inhibited Poulenc 's natural simple style , and that Auric offered useful guidance to help him appear in his true colours . At a concert of music by the two friends in 1926 , Poulenc 's songs were sung for the first time by the baritone Pierre Bernac , from whom , in Henri Hell 's phrase , " the name of Poulenc was soon to be inseparable . " Another performer with whom the composer came to be closely associated was the harpsichordist Wanda Landowska . He heard her as the soloist in Falla 's El retablo de <unk> Pedro ( 1923 ) , an early example of the use of a harpsichord in a modern work , and was immediately taken with the sound . At Landowska 's request he wrote a concerto , the Concert champêtre , which she premiered in 1929 with the Orchestre Symphonique de Paris conducted by Pierre Monteux . 
 The biographer Richard D E Burton comments that , in the late 1920s , Poulenc might have seemed to be in an enviable position : professionally successful and independently well @-@ off , having inherited a substantial fortune from his father . He bought a large country house , Le Grande Coteau , at <unk> , Indre @-@ et @-@ Loire , 140 miles ( 230 km ) south @-@ west of Paris , where he retreated to compose in peaceful surroundings . Yet he was troubled , struggling to come to terms with his sexuality , which was predominantly gay . His first serious affair was with the painter Richard Chanlaire , to whom he sent a copy of the Concert champêtre score inscribed , " You have changed my life , you are the sunshine of my thirty years , a reason for living and working " . Nevertheless , while this affair was in progress Poulenc proposed marriage to his friend Raymonde Linossier . As she was not only well aware of his homosexuality but was also romantically attached elsewhere , she refused him , and their relationship became strained . He suffered the first of many periods of depression , which affected his ability to compose , and he was devastated in January 1930 , when Linossier died suddenly at the age of 32 . On her death he wrote , " All my youth departs with her , all that part of my life that belonged only to her . I sob ... I am now twenty years older " . His affair with Chanlaire petered out in 1931 , though they remained lifelong friends . 
 = = = 1930s : new seriousness = = = 
 At the start of the decade , Poulenc returned to writing songs , after a two @-@ year break from doing so . His " <unk> " , to a poem by Malherbe , was written in memory of Linossier , and is described by the pianist Graham Johnson as " a profound song in every sense " . The following year Poulenc wrote three sets of songs , to words by Apollinaire and Max Jacob , some of which were serious in tone , and others reminiscent of his earlier light @-@ hearted style , as were others of his works of the early 1930s . In 1932 his music was among the first to be broadcast on television , in a transmission by the BBC in which Reginald Kell and Gilbert Vinter played his Sonata for Clarinet and Bassoon . At about this time Poulenc began a relationship with Raymond Destouches , a chauffeur ; as with Chanlaire earlier , what began as a passionate affair changed into a deep and lasting friendship . Destouches , who married in the 1950s , remained close to Poulenc until the end of the composer 's life . 
 Two unrelated events in 1936 combined to inspire a reawakening of religious faith and a new depth of seriousness in Poulenc 's music . His fellow composer Pierre @-@ Octave <unk> was killed in a car crash so violent that he was decapitated , and almost immediately afterwards , while on holiday , Poulenc visited the sanctuary of Rocamadour . He later explained : 
 A few days earlier I 'd just heard of the tragic death of my colleague ... As I meditated on the fragility of our human frame , I was drawn once more to the life of the spirit . Rocamadour had the effect of restoring me to the faith of my childhood . This sanctuary , undoubtedly the oldest in France ... had everything to captivate me ... The same evening of this visit to Rocamadour , I began my Litanies à la Vierge noire for female voices and organ . In that work I tried to get across the atmosphere of " peasant devotion " that had struck me so forcibly in that lofty chapel . 
 Other works that followed continued the composer 's new @-@ found seriousness , including many settings of Éluard 's surrealist and humanist poems . In 1937 he composed his first major liturgical work , the Mass in G Major for soprano and mixed choir a cappella , which has become the most frequently performed of all his sacred works . Poulenc 's new compositions were not all in this serious vein ; his incidental music to the play La Reine Margot , starring Yvonne Printemps , was pastiche 16th @-@ century dance music , and became popular under the title Suite française . Music critics generally continued to define Poulenc by his light @-@ hearted works , and it was not until the 1950s that his serious side was widely recognised . 
 In 1936 Poulenc began giving frequent recitals with Bernac . At the École Normale in Paris they gave the premiere of Poulenc 's Cinq poèmes de Paul Éluard . They continued to perform together for more than twenty years , in Paris and internationally , until Bernac 's retirement in 1959 . Poulenc , who composed 90 songs for his collaborator , considered him one of the " three great meetings " of his professional career , the other two being Éluard and Landowska . In Johnson 's words , " for twenty @-@ five years Bernac was Poulenc 's counsellor and conscience " , and the composer relied on him for advice not only on song @-@ writing , but on his operas and choral music . 
 Throughout the decade , Poulenc was popular with British audiences ; he established a fruitful relationship with the BBC in London , which broadcast many of his works . With Bernac , he made his first tour of Britain in 1938 . His music was also popular in America , seen by many as " the quintessence of French wit , elegance and high spirits " . In the last years of the 1930s , Poulenc 's compositions continued to vary between serious and light @-@ hearted works . Quatre Motets pour un temps de <unk> ( Four <unk> Motets ) ( 1938 – 39 ) and the song " <unk> " ( 1939 ) , an elegiac meditation on death , contrast with the song cycle <unk> pour rire ( Light @-@ Hearted Betrothal ) , which Henri Hell considers to capture the spirit of Les Biches . 
 = = = 1940s : war and post @-@ war = = = 
 Poulenc was briefly a soldier again during the Second World War ; he was called up on 2 June 1940 and served in an anti @-@ aircraft unit at Bordeaux . After France surrendered to Germany , Poulenc was demobilised from the army on 18 July 1940 . He spent the summer of that year with family and friends at Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde in south @-@ central France . In the early months of the war , he had composed little new music , instead re @-@ orchestrating Les biches and reworking his 1932 Sextet for Piano and Winds . At Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde he began three new works , and once back at his home in <unk> in October he started on a fourth . These were music for Babar the Elephant , the Cello Sonata , the ballet Les Animaux modèles and the song cycle <unk> . 
 For most of the war , Poulenc was in Paris , giving recitals with Bernac , concentrating on French songs . Under Nazi rule he was in a vulnerable position , as a known homosexual ( Destouches narrowly avoided arrest and deportation ) , but in his music he made many gestures of defiance of the Germans . He set to music verses by poets prominent in the French resistance , including Aragon and Éluard . In Les Animaux modèles , premiered at the Opéra in 1942 , he included the tune , repeated several times , of the anti @-@ German song " Vous n <unk> pas l 'Alsace et la Lorraine " . He was a founder @-@ member of the Front National ( pour musique ) which the Nazi authorities viewed with suspicion for its association with banned musicians such as Milhaud and Paul Hindemith . In 1943 he wrote a cantata for unaccompanied double choir intended for Belgium , Figure humaine , setting eight of Éluard 's poems . The work , ending with " Liberté " , could not be given in France while the Nazis were in control ; its first performance was broadcast from a BBC studio in London in March 1945 , and it was not sung in Paris until 1947 . The music critic of The Times later wrote that the work " is among the very finest choral works of our time and in itself removes Poulenc from the category of petit maître to which ignorance has generally been content to relegate him . " 
 In January 1945 , commissioned by the French government , Poulenc and Bernac flew from Paris to London , where they received an enthusiastic welcome . The London Philharmonic Orchestra gave a reception in the composer 's honour ; he and Benjamin Britten were the soloists in a performance of Poulenc 's Double Piano Concerto at the Royal Albert Hall ; with Bernac he gave recitals of French mélodies and piano works at the Wigmore Hall and the National Gallery , and recorded for the BBC . Bernac was overwhelmed by the public 's response ; when he and Poulenc stepped out on the Wigmore Hall stage , " the audience rose and my emotion was such that instead of beginning to sing , I began to weep . " After their fortnight 's stay , the two returned home on the first boat @-@ train to leave London for Paris since May 1940 . 
 In Paris , Poulenc completed his scores for Babar the Elephant and his first opera , Les mamelles de Tirésias , a short opéra bouffe of about an hour 's duration . The work is a setting of Apollinaire 's play of the same name , staged in 1917 . Sams describes the opera as " high @-@ spirited topsy @-@ <unk> " concealing " a deeper and sadder theme – the need to repopulate and rediscover a France ravaged by war " . It was premiered in June 1947 at the Opéra @-@ Comique , and was a critical success , but did not prove popular with the public . The leading female role was taken by Denise Duval , who became the composer 's favourite soprano , frequent recital partner and dedicatee of some of his music . He called her the nightingale who made him cry ( " Mon <unk> à <unk> " ) . 
 Shortly after the war , Poulenc had a brief affair with a woman , <unk> ( " Freddy " ) <unk> , with whom he had a daughter , Marie @-@ Ange , in 1946 . The child was brought up without knowing who her father was ( Poulenc was supposedly her " godfather " ) but he made generous provision for her , and she was the principal beneficiary of his will . 
 In the post @-@ war period Poulenc crossed swords with composers of the younger generation who rejected Stravinsky 's recent work and insisted that only the precepts of the Second Viennese School were valid . Poulenc defended Stravinsky and expressed incredulity that " in 1945 we are speaking as if the aesthetic of twelve tones is the only possible salvation for contemporary music " . His view that Berg had taken serialism as far as it could go and that Schoenberg 's music was now " desert , stone soup , ersatz music , or poetic vitamins " earned him the enmity of composers such as Pierre Boulez . Those disagreeing with Poulenc attempted to paint him as a relic of the pre @-@ war era , frivolous and unprogressive . This led him to focus on his more serious works , and to try to persuade the French public to listen to them . In the US and Britain , with their strong choral traditions , his religious music was frequently performed , but performances in France were much rarer , so that the public and the critics were often unaware of his serious compositions . 
 In 1948 Poulenc made his first visit to the US , in a two @-@ month concert tour with Bernac . He returned there frequently until 1961 , giving recitals with Bernac or Duval and as soloist in the world premiere of his Piano Concerto ( 1949 ) , commissioned by the Boston Symphony Orchestra . 
 = = = 1950 – 63 : The Carmelites and last years = = = 
 Poulenc began the 1950s with a new partner in his private life , Lucien Roubert , a travelling salesman . Professionally Poulenc was productive , writing a seven @-@ song cycle setting poems by Éluard , La <unk> et le feu ( 1950 ) , and the Stabat Mater , in memory of the painter Christian Bérard , composed in 1950 and premiered the following year . 
 In 1953 Poulenc was offered a commission by La Scala and the Milanese publisher Casa Ricordi for a ballet . He considered the story of St Margaret of Cortona but found a dance version of her life impracticable . He preferred to write an opera on a religious theme ; Ricordi suggested Dialogues des Carmélites , an unfilmed screenplay by Georges Bernanos . The text , based on a short story by Gertrud von Le Fort , depicts the Martyrs of Compiègne , nuns guillotined during the French Revolution for their religious beliefs . Poulenc found it " such a moving and noble work " , ideal for his libretto , and he began composition in August 1953 . 
 During the composition of the opera , Poulenc suffered two blows : the Bernanos estate made unforeseen difficulties about allowing him the rights to set the text , and simultaneously Roubert became gravely ill . Intense worry pushed Poulenc into a nervous breakdown , and in November 1954 he was in a clinic at L <unk> @-@ les @-@ Roses , outside Paris , heavily sedated . When he recovered , he resumed work on Dialogues des Carmélites in between extensive touring with Bernac in England . As his personal wealth had declined since the 1920s he required the substantial income earned from his recitals . 
 While working on the opera Poulenc composed little else ; exceptions were two mélodies , and a short orchestral movement , " <unk> " in a collective work , Variations sur le nom de Marguerite Long ( 1954 ) , to which his old friends from Les Six Auric and Milhaud also contributed . As Poulenc was writing the last pages of his opera in October 1955 , Roubert died , at the age of forty @-@ seven . The composer wrote to a friend , " Lucien was delivered from his martyrdom ten days ago and the final copy of Les Carmélites was completed ( take note ) at the very moment my dear breathed his last . " 
 The opera was first given in January 1957 at La Scala in Italian translation . Between then and the French premiere Poulenc introduced one of his most popular late works , the Flute Sonata , which he and Jean @-@ Pierre Rampal performed in June at the Strasbourg Festival . Three days later , on 21 June , came the Paris premiere of Dialogues des Carmélites at the Opéra . It was a tremendous success , to the composer 's considerable relief . At around this time Poulenc began his last romantic relationship , with Louis Gautier , a former soldier ; they remained partners to the end of Poulenc 's life . 
 In 1958 Poulenc embarked on a collaboration with his old friend Cocteau , in an operatic version of the latter 's 1930 monodrama La Voix humaine . The work was produced in February 1959 at the Opéra @-@ Comique , under Cocteau 's direction , with Duval as the tragic deserted woman speaking to her former lover by telephone . In May Poulenc 's 60th birthday was marked , a few months late , by his last concert with Bernac before the latter 's retirement from public performance . 
 Poulenc visited the US in 1960 and 1961 . Among his works given during these trips were the American premiere of La Voix humaine at Carnegie Hall , New York , with Duval , and the world premiere of his Gloria , a large @-@ scale work for soprano , four @-@ part mixed chorus and orchestra , conducted in Boston by Charles Munch . In 1961 Poulenc published a book about Chabrier , a 187 @-@ page study of which a reviewer wrote in the 1980s , " he writes with love and insight of a composer whose views he shared on matters like the primacy of melody and the essential seriousness of humour . " The works of Poulenc 's last twelve months included Sept répons pour les ténèbres for voices and orchestra , the Clarinet Sonata and the Oboe Sonata . 
 On 30 January 1963 , at his flat opposite the Jardin du Luxembourg , Poulenc suffered a fatal heart attack . His funeral was at the nearby church of Saint @-@ Sulpice . In compliance with his wishes , none of his music was performed ; Marcel Dupré played works by Bach on the grand organ of the church . Poulenc was buried at Père Lachaise Cemetery , alongside his family . 
 = = Music = = 
 Poulenc 's music is essentially diatonic . In Henri Hell 's view , this is because the main feature of Poulenc 's musical art is his melodic gift . In the words of Roger Nichols in the Grove dictionary , " For [ Poulenc ] the most important element of all was melody and he found his way to a vast treasury of undiscovered tunes within an area that had , according to the most up @-@ to @-@ date musical maps , been surveyed , worked and exhausted . " The commentator George Keck writes , " His melodies are simple , pleasing , easily remembered , and most often emotionally expressive . " 
 Poulenc said that he was not inventive in his harmonic language . The composer Lennox Berkeley wrote of him , " All through his life , he was content to use conventional harmony , but his use of it was so individual , so immediately recognizable as his own , that it gave his music freshness and validity . " Keck considers Poulenc 's harmonic language " as beautiful , interesting and personal as his melodic writing ... clear , simple harmonies moving in obviously defined tonal areas with chromaticism that is rarely more than passing " . Poulenc had no time for musical theories ; in one of his many radio interviews he called for " a truce to composing by theory , doctrine , rule ! " He was dismissive of what he saw as the dogmatism of latter @-@ day adherents to dodecaphony , led by René Leibowitz , and greatly regretted that the adoption of a theoretical approach had affected the music of Olivier Messiaen , of whom he had earlier had high hopes . To Hell , almost all Poulenc 's music is " directly or indirectly inspired by the purely melodic associations of the human voice " . Poulenc was a painstaking craftsman , though a myth grew up – " la légende de <unk> " – that his music came easily to him ; he commented , " The myth is excusable , since I do everything to conceal my efforts . " 
 The pianist Pascal Rogé commented in 1999 that both sides of Poulenc 's musical nature were equally important : " You must accept him as a whole . If you take away either part , the serious or the non @-@ serious , you destroy him . If one part is erased you get only a pale photocopy of what he really is . " Poulenc recognised the dichotomy , but in all his works he wanted music that was " healthy , clear and robust – music as frankly French as Stravinsky 's is Slav " . 
 = = = Orchestral and concertante = = = 
 Poulenc 's principal works for large orchestra comprise two ballets , a Sinfonietta and four keyboard concertos . The first of the ballets , Les biches , was first performed in 1924 and remains one of his best @-@ known works . Nichols writes in Grove that the clear and tuneful score has no deep , or even shallow , symbolism , a fact " accentuated by a tiny passage of mock @-@ Wagnerian brass , complete with emotive minor <unk> " . The first two of the four concertos are in Poulenc 's light @-@ hearted vein . The Concert champêtre for harpsichord and orchestra ( 1927 – 28 ) , evokes the countryside seen from a Parisian point of view : Nichols comments that the fanfares in the last movement bring to mind the bugles in the barracks of Vincennes in the Paris suburbs . The Concerto for two pianos and orchestra ( 1932 ) is similarly a work intended purely to entertain . It draws on a variety of stylistic sources : the first movement ends in a manner reminiscent of Balinese gamelan , and the slow movement begins in a Mozartian style , which Poulenc gradually fills out with his own characteristic personal touches . The Organ Concerto ( 1938 ) is in a much more serious vein . Poulenc said that it was " on the outskirts " of his religious music , and there are passages that draw on the church music of Bach , though there are also interludes in breezy popular style . The second ballet score , Les Animaux modèles ( 1941 ) , has never equalled the popularity of Les biches , though both Auric and Honegger praised the composer 's harmonic flair and resourceful orchestration . Honegger wrote , " The influences that have worked on him , Chabrier , Satie , Stravinsky , are now completely assimilated . Listening to his music you think – it 's Poulenc . " The Sinfonietta ( 1947 ) is a reversion to Poulenc 's pre @-@ war frivolity . He came to feel , " I dressed too young for my age ... [ it ] is a new version of Les biches but young girls [ biches ] that are forty @-@ eight years old – that 's horrible ! " The Concerto for piano and orchestra ( 1949 ) initially caused some disappointment : many felt that it was not an advance on Poulenc 's pre @-@ war music , a view he came to share . The piece has been re @-@ evaluated in more recent years , and in 1996 the writer Claire <unk> rated it as the composer 's finest concertante work . 
 = = = Piano = = = 
 Poulenc , a highly accomplished pianist , usually composed at the piano and wrote many pieces for the instrument throughout his career . In Henri Hell 's view , Poulenc 's piano writing can be divided into the percussive and the gentler style reminiscent of the harpsichord . Hell considers that the finest of Poulenc 's music for piano is in the accompaniments to the songs , a view shared by Poulenc himself . The vast majority of the piano works are , in the view of the writer Keith W Daniel , " what might be called ' miniatures ' " . Looking back at his piano music in the 1950s , the composer viewed it critically : " I tolerate the <unk> perpétuels , my old Suite en ut [ in C ] , and the Trois pieces . I like very much my two collections of Improvisations , an Intermezzo in A flat , and certain Nocturnes . I condemn Napoli and the <unk> de <unk> without reprieve . " 
 Of the pieces cited with approval by Poulenc , the fifteen Improvisations were composed at intervals between 1932 and 1959 . All are brief : the longest lasts a little more than three minutes . They vary from swift and balletic to tender lyricism , old @-@ fashioned march , perpetuum mobile , waltz and a poignant musical portrait of the singer Édith Piaf . Poulenc 's favoured Intermezzo was the last of three . Numbers one and two were composed in August 1934 ; the A flat followed in March 1943 . The commentators Marina and Victor <unk> describe the work as " the embodiment of the word ' charming ' . The music seems simply to roll off the pages , each sound following another in such an honest and natural way , with eloquence and unmistakable <unk> . " The eight nocturnes were composed across nearly a decade ( 1929 – 38 ) . Whether or not Poulenc originally conceived them as an integral set , he give the eighth the title " To serve as Coda for the Cycle " ( Pour servir de Coda au Cycle ) . Although they share their generic title with the nocturnes of Field , Chopin and Fauré , Poulenc 's do not resemble those of the earlier composers , being " night @-@ scenes and sound @-@ images of public and private events " rather than romantic tone poems . 
 The pieces Poulenc found merely tolerable were all early works : Trois mouvements perpétuels dates from 1919 , the Suite in C from 1920 and the Trois pièces from 1928 . All consist of short sections , the longest being the " Hymne " , the second of the three 1928 pieces , which lasts about four minutes . Of the two works their composer singled out for censure , Napoli ( 1925 ) is a three @-@ movement portrait of Italy , and Les <unk> de <unk> is described by the composer Geoffrey Bush as " the French equivalent of Elgar 's Enigma Variations " – miniature character sketches of his friends . Despite Poulenc 's scorn for the work , Bush judges it ingenious and witty . Among the piano music not mentioned , favourably or harshly , by Poulenc , the best known pieces include the two Novelettes ( 1927 – 28 ) , the set of six miniatures for children , <unk> ( 1933 ) , a piano version of the seven @-@ movement Suite française ( 1935 ) , and L <unk> pour <unk> for two pianos ( 1953 ) . 
 = = = Chamber = = = 
 In Grove , Nichols divides the chamber works into three clearly differentiated periods . The first four sonatas come from the early group , all written before Poulenc was twenty @-@ two . They are for two clarinets ( 1918 ) , piano duo ( 1918 ) , clarinet and bassoon ( 1922 ) and horn , trumpet and trombone ( 1922 ) . They are early examples of Poulenc 's many and varied influences , with echoes of rococo <unk> alongside unconventional harmonies , some influenced by jazz . All four are characterised by their brevity – less than ten minutes each – their mischievousness and their wit , which Nichols describes as acid . Other chamber works from this period are the Rapsodie nègre from 1917 ( mainly instrumental , with brief vocal episodes ) and the Trio for Oboe , Bassoon and Piano ( 1926 ) . 
 The chamber works of Poulenc 's middle period were written in the 1930s and 1940s . The best known is the Sextet for Piano and Wind ( 1932 ) , in Poulenc 's light @-@ hearted vein , consisting of two lively outer movements and a central divertimento ; this was one of several chamber works that the composer became dissatisfied with and revised extensively some years after their first performance ( in this case in 1939 – 40 ) . The sonatas in this group are for violin and piano ( 1942 – 43 ) and for cello and piano ( 1948 ) . Writing for strings did not come easily to Poulenc ; these sonatas were completed after two unsuccessful earlier attempts , and in 1947 he destroyed the draft of a string quartet . Both sonatas are predominantly grave in character ; that for violin is dedicated to the memory of Federico García Lorca . Commentators including Hell , Schmidt and Poulenc himself have regarded it , and to some extent the cello sonata , as less effective than those for wind . The Aubade , " Concerto <unk> " for piano and 18 instruments ( 1930 ) achieves an almost orchestral effect , despite its modest number of players . The other chamber works from this period are arrangements for small ensembles of two works in Poulenc 's lightest vein , the Suite française ( 1935 ) and the Trois mouvements perpétuels ( 1946 ) . 
 The final three sonatas are for woodwind and piano : for flute ( 1956 – 57 ) , clarinet ( 1962 ) , and oboe ( 1962 ) . They have , according to Grove , become fixtures in their repertoires because of " their technical expertise and of their profound beauty " . The <unk> for horn and piano ( 1957 ) was composed in memory of the horn player Dennis Brain . It contains one of Poulenc 's rare excursions into dodecaphony , with the brief employment of a twelve @-@ note tone row . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Poulenc composed songs throughout his career , and his output in the genre is extensive . In Johnson 's view , most of the finest were written in the 1930s and 1940s . Though widely varied in character , the songs are dominated by Poulenc 's preference for certain poets . From the outset of his career he favoured verses by Guillaume Apollinaire , and from the mid @-@ 1930s the writer whose work he set most often was Paul Éluard . Other poets whose works he frequently set included Jean Cocteau , Max Jacob , and Louise de <unk> . In the view of the music critic Andrew Clements , the Éluard songs include many of Poulenc 's greatest settings ; Johnson calls the cycle Tel Jour , Telle Nuit ( 1937 ) the composer 's " watershed work " , and Nichols regards it as " a masterpiece worthy to stand beside Fauré 's La bonne chanson " . Clements finds in the Éluard settings a profundity " worlds away from the brittle , facetious surfaces of Poulenc 's early orchestral and instrumental music " . The first of the Deux poèmes de Louis Aragon ( 1943 ) , titled simply " C " , is described by Johnson as " a masterpiece known the world over ; it is the most unusual , and perhaps the most moving , song about the ravages of war ever composed . " 
 In an overview of the songs in 1973 , the musical scholar Yvonne <unk> said , " With Poulenc , the melodic line matches the text so well that it seems in some way to complete it , thanks to the gift which the music has for penetrating the very essence of a given poem ; nobody has better crafted a phrase than Poulenc , highlighting the colour of the words . " Among the lighter pieces , one of the composer 's most popular songs is a setting of Jean Anouilh 's " Les Chemins de l 'Amour " ( 1940 ) as a Parisian waltz ; by contrast his " monologue " " La Dame de Monte Carlo " , ( 1961 ) a depiction of an elderly woman addicted to gambling , shows the composer 's painful understanding of the horrors of depression . 
 = = = Choral = = = 
 Apart from a single early work for unaccompanied choir ( " Chanson à <unk> " , 1922 ) , Poulenc began writing choral music in 1936 . In that year he produced three works for choir : Sept chansons ( settings of verses by Éluard and others ) , Petites voix ( for children 's voices ) , and his religious work Litanies à la <unk> noire , for female or children 's voices and organ . The Mass in G major ( 1937 ) for unaccompanied choir is described by <unk> as having something of a baroque style , with " vitality and joyful clamour on which his faith is writ large " . Poulenc 's new @-@ found religious theme continued with Quatre motets pour un temps de <unk> ( 1938 – 39 ) , but among his most important choral works is the secular cantata Figure humaine ( 1943 ) . Like the Mass , it is unaccompanied , and to succeed in performance it requires singers of the highest quality . Other a capella works include the Quatre motets pour le temps de Noël ( 1952 ) , which make severe demands on choirs ' rhythmic precision and intonation . 
 Poulenc 's major works for choir and orchestra are the Stabat Mater ( 1950 ) , the Gloria ( 1959 – 60 ) , and Sept répons des <unk> ( 1961 – 62 ) . All these works are based on liturgical texts , originally set to Gregorian chant . In the Gloria , Poulenc 's faith expresses itself in an exuberant , joyful way , with intervals of prayerful calm and mystic feeling , and an ending of serene tranquillity . Poulenc wrote to Bernac in 1962 , " I have finished Les <unk> . I think it is beautiful . With the Gloria and the Stabat Mater , I think I have three good religious works . May they spare me a few days in Purgatory , if I narrowly avoid going to hell . " Sept répons des ténèbres , which Poulenc did not live to hear performed , uses a large orchestra , but , in Nichols 's view , it displays a new concentration of thought . To the critic Ralph <unk> , the work may be considered as Poulenc 's own requiem and is " the most avant @-@ garde of his sacred compositions , the most emotionally demanding , and the most interesting musically , comparable only with his magnum opus sacrum , the opera , Dialogues des Carmélites . " 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 Poulenc turned to opera only in the latter half of his career . Having achieved fame by his early twenties , he was in his forties before attempting his first opera . He attributed this to the need for maturity before tackling the subjects he chose to set . In 1958 he told an interviewer , " When I was 24 I was able to write Les biches [ but ] it is obvious that unless a composer of 30 has the genius of a Mozart or the precociousness of Schubert he couldn 't write The Carmelites – the problems are too profound . " In Sams 's view , all three of Poulenc 's operas display a depth of feeling far distant from " the cynical stylist of the 1920s " : Les mamelles de Tirésias ( 1947 ) , despite the riotous plot , is full of nostalgia and a sense of loss . In the two avowedly serious operas , Dialogues des Carmélites ( 1957 ) and La Voix humaine ( 1959 ) , in which Poulenc depicts deep human suffering , Sams sees a reflection of the composer 's own struggles with depression . 
 In terms of musical technique the operas show how far Poulenc had come from his naïve and insecure beginnings . Nichols comments in Grove that Les mamelles de Tirésias , deploys " lyrical solos , patter duets , chorales , falsetto lines for tenor and bass babies and ... succeeds in being both funny and beautiful " . In all three operas Poulenc drew on earlier composers , while blending their influence into music unmistakably his own . In the printed score of Dialogues des Carmélites he acknowledged his debt to Mussorgsky , Monteverdi , Debussy and Verdi . The critic Renaud <unk> writes that Dialogues des Carmélites is , with Britten ’ s Peter Grimes , one of the extremely rare operas written since the Second World War to appear on opera programmes all over the world . 
 Even when he wrote for a large orchestra , Poulenc used the full forces sparingly in his operas , often scoring for woodwinds or brass or strings alone . With the invaluable input of Bernac he showed great skill in writing for the human voice , fitting the music to the tessitura of each character . By the time of the last of the operas , La Voix humaine , Poulenc felt able to give the soprano stretches of music with no orchestral accompaniment at all , though when the orchestra plays , Poulenc calls for the music to be " bathed in sensuality " . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Poulenc was among the composers who recognised in the 1920s the important role that the gramophone would play in the promotion of music . The first recording of his music was made in 1928 , with the mezzo @-@ soprano Claire <unk> accompanied by the composer at the piano , in the complete song cycle La <unk> for French Columbia . He made numerous recordings , mainly for the French division of EMI . With Bernac and Duval he recorded many of his own songs , and those of other composers including Chabrier , Debussy , Gounod and Ravel . He played the piano part in recordings of his Babar the Elephant with Pierre Fresnay and Noël Coward as narrators . In 2005 , EMI issued a DVD , " Francis Poulenc & Friends " , featuring filmed performances of Poulenc 's music , played by the composer , with Duval , Jean @-@ Pierre Rampal , Jacques Février and Georges Prêtre . 
 A 1984 discography of Poulenc 's music lists recordings by more than 1 @,@ 300 conductors , soloists and ensembles , including the conductors Leonard Bernstein , Charles Dutoit , Milhaud , Eugene Ormandy , Prêtre , André Previn and Leopold Stokowski . Among the singers , in addition to Bernac and Duval , the list includes Régine Crespin , Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau , Nicolai Gedda , Peter Pears , Yvonne Printemps and Gérard <unk> . Instrumental soloists include Britten , Jacques Février , Pierre Fournier , Emil Gilels , Yehudi Menuhin and Arthur Rubinstein . 
 Complete sets of Poulenc 's solo piano music have been recorded by Gabriel <unk> , who had been Poulenc 's only piano student ( released on the EMI label ) , Pascal Rogé ( Decca ) , Paul Crossley ( CBS ) , Eric Parkin ( Chandos ) and Olivier <unk> ( Naxos ) . Integral sets of the chamber music have been recorded by the Nash Ensemble ( Hyperion ) , and a variety of young French musicians ( Naxos ) . 
 The world premiere of Dialogues des Carmélites ( in Italian , as <unk> delle <unk> ) was recorded and has been released on CD . The first studio recording was soon after the French premiere , and since then there have been at least ten live or studio recordings on CD or DVD , most of them in French but one in German and one in English . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 The two sides to Poulenc 's musical nature caused misunderstanding during his life and have continued to do so . The composer Ned Rorem observed , " He was deeply devout and uncontrollably sensual " ; this still leads some critics to underrate his seriousness . His uncompromising adherence to melody , both in his lighter and serious works , has similarly caused some to regard him as unprogressive . Although he was not much influenced by new developments in music , Poulenc was always keenly interested in the works of younger generations of composers . Lennox Berkeley recalled , " Unlike some artists , he was genuinely interested in other people 's work , and surprisingly appreciative of music very far removed from his . I remember him playing me the records of Boulez 's Le <unk> sans maître with which he was already familiar when that work was much less well @-@ known than it is today . " Boulez has not taken a reciprocal view , remarking in 2010 , " There are always people who will take an easy intellectual path . Poulenc coming after Sacre [ du Printemps ] . It was not progress . " Other composers have found more merit in Poulenc 's work ; Stravinsky wrote to him in 1931 : " You are truly good , and that is what I find again and again in your music " . 
 In his last years Poulenc observed , " if people are still interested in my music in 50 years ' time it will be for my Stabat Mater rather than the <unk> perpétuels . " In a centenary tribute in The Times Gerald Larner commented that Poulenc 's prediction was wrong , and that in 1999 the composer was widely celebrated for both sides of his musical character : " both the fervent Catholic and the naughty boy , for both the Gloria and Les Biches , both Les Dialogues des Carmélites and Les <unk> de Tirésias . " At around the same time the writer Jessica Duchen described Poulenc as " a fizzing , bubbling mass of Gallic energy who can move you to both laughter and tears within seconds . His language speaks clearly , directly and humanely to every generation . " 
 = Luís Alves de Lima e Silva , Duke of Caxias = 
 Luís Alves de Lima e Silva , Duke of Caxias ( 25 August 1803 – 7 May 1880 ) , nicknamed " the Peacemaker " and " Iron Duke " , was an army officer , politician and monarchist of the Empire of Brazil . Like his father and uncles , Caxias pursued a military career . In 1823 he fought as a young officer in the Brazilian War for Independence against Portugal , then spent three years in Brazil 's southernmost province , Cisplatina , as the government unsuccessfully resisted that province 's secession in the Cisplatine War . Though his own father and uncles renounced Emperor Dom Pedro I during the protests of 1831 , Caxias remained loyal . Pedro I abdicated in favor of his young son Dom Pedro II , whom Caxias instructed in swordsmanship and horsemanship and eventually befriended . 
 During Pedro II 's minority the governing regency faced countless rebellions throughout the country . Again breaking with his father and other relatives sympathetic to the rebels , from 1839 to 1845 Caxias commanded loyalist forces suppressing such uprisings as the Balaiada , the Liberal rebellions of 1842 and the Ragamuffin War . In 1851 , under his command , the Brazilian army prevailed against the Argentine Confederation in the Platine War ; a decade later Caxias , as army marshal ( the army 's highest rank ) , led Brazilian forces to victory in the Paraguayan War . As a reward he was raised to the titled nobility , becoming successively a baron , count , and marquis , finally becoming the only person created duke during Pedro II 's 58 @-@ year reign . 
 In the early 1840s Caxias became a member of the Reactionary Party , which evolved into the Party of Order and finally the Conservative Party . He was elected senator in 1846 . The Emperor appointed him president of the Council of Ministers ( prime minister ) in 1856 ; he briefly held that office again in 1861 , but fell when his party lost its parliamentary majority . Over the decades Caxias witnessed the growth and zenith of his party , then its slow decline as internal conflict divided it . In 1875 he headed a cabinet for the last time , and after years of failing health he died in May 1880 . 
 In the years after his death and mainly following the downfall of the Brazilian monarchy , Caxias ' reputation was initially overshadowed by that of Manuel Luís Osório , Marquis of Erval , but with time surpassed even Erval 's renown . In 1925 his birthday was established as the Day of the Soldier , a day of honor for the Brazilian army . On 13 March 1962 he was officially designated the army 's protector — ​ its soldierly ideal and the most important figure in its tradition . Historians have regarded Caxias positively , several ranking him as the greatest of Brazil 's military officers . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Luís Alves de Lima e Silva was born on 25 August 1803 on a farm called São Paulo ( today within the city of Duque de Caxias ) located in Rio de Janeiro , then a captaincy ( later province ) of the Portuguese colony of Brazil . He was the first son and second of ten children of Francisco de Lima e Silva and Mariana Cândido de Oliveira Belo . His godparents were his paternal grandfather , José Joaquim de Lima da Silva , and his maternal grandmother , Ana <unk> Joaquina . Luís Alves ' early years were spent on the São Paulo farm owned by his maternal grandfather and namesake , Luís Alves de Freitas . The young boy may have initially been schooled at home , as was common then . He may have been taught to read and write by his grandmother , Ana <unk> . 
 Luís Alves ' grandfather , José Joaquim , was a Portuguese military officer who had emigrated in 1767 to Brazil . He settled in the city of Rio de Janeiro , capital of both the Rio de Janeiro captaincy and of Brazil . He had neither noble rank nor noble ancestry and lacked patrons in an environment in which advancement depended upon exchanges of favors and family connections . Having fought against the Spaniards on Brazil 's southern frontiers , he secured a place for himself in Rio de Janeiro 's upper class when he married a member of a local and influential family . 
 The arrival of the Portuguese Royal Family in Rio de Janeiro in 1808 changed the lives of the Lima family . King Dom João VI embarked upon a series of wars of conquest which resulted in the expansion of Brazil 's territory with the annexation of Cisplatina to the south and of French Guiana to the north . By 1818 , Luís Alves ' relatives , who were military officers and had served in the wars , had been ennobled . His grandfather , José Joaquim , became a member of the Order of Christ and Fidalgo Cavaleiro da Casa Real ( Knight Nobleman of the Royal House ) . His father , Francisco de Lima , and uncles were also granted honors . Within two generations , the Lima family had risen from mere commoners to the ranks of Portugal 's untitled nobility . 
 = = = Military education = = = 
 On 22 May 1808 , Luís Alves was enlisted at the age of five as a cadet in the 1st Regiment of Infantry of Rio de Janeiro . Historian Adriana Barreto de Souza explained that this did " not mean that he began to serve as a child , the connection to the regiment was simply honorific " , his <unk> as the son of a military officer . This infantry regiment was informally known as the " Lima [ family ] Regiment " because so many members of the family served in it , including his father and grandfather . 
 In 1811 , Luís Alves moved with his parents from his grandparents ' farm to Rio de Janeiro and was enrolled at the Seminário São Joaquim ( Saint Joachim School ) , which became Pedro II School in 1837 . On 4 May 1818 , he was admitted into the Royal Military Academy . The entire course ( which ran from the first to seventh year ) was mandatory for artillerymen and engineers but infantrymen were only required to take first- and fifth @-@ year classes . Luís Alves took the first- and fifth @-@ year classes in 1818 and 1819 , respectively . Though he could have skipped the other years , he chose to take second @-@ year classes in 1820 and third @-@ year classes in 1821 . The subjects he studied in the Royal Military Academy ranged from arithmetic , algebra and geometry to tactics , strategy , camping , fortification in campaign and terrain reconnaissance . He was promoted to alferes ( equivalent to a modern @-@ day second lieutenant ) on 12 October 1818 , and to lieutenant ( modern @-@ day first lieutenant ) on 4 November 1820 . 
 Though an accomplished student , Luís Alves was often reprimanded for bullying new students . With time , he matured , eventually being regarded by his peers as a very reasonable and honest person . He had an ordinary appearance , with a round face , brown hair , brown eyes and average height . Luís Alves ' unremarkable features were compensated by his bearing . Historian Thomas Whigham described him as someone who " learned the art of giving orders early in life . Immaculate in his dress , he was soft spoken , polite , and smoothly in control of himself . He seemed to radiate calm composure and authority . " 
 = = Wars and military crises = = 
 = = = Independence of Brazil = = = 
 Luís Alves would normally have begun the fourth @-@ year classes at the Royal Military Academy in March 1822 . Instead , he dropped out in December 1821 and enlisted in the 1st Fusilier Battalion . Prince Dom Pedro , son and heir of King João VI , had just embarked upon the struggle against Portugal that would lead to the independence of Brazil on 7 September 1822 . The prince was later acclaimed Dom Pedro I , the first Brazilian emperor , on 12 October . Those Brazilian and Portuguese forces who remained loyal to Portugal refused to accept this outcome , which led to a war fought on several fronts across Brazil . 
 On 18 January 1823 , Pedro I created the Emperor 's Battalion , a handpicked elite infantry unit that included Luís Alves , who was named as adjutant to the company 's commander , his uncle , Colonel José Joaquim de Lima e Silva . The Emperor 's Battalion was sent to the province of Bahia in the northeast on 28 January and placed , along with other troops , under the command of French Brigadier Pierre Labatut . The Brazilian imperial forces besieged Bahia 's capital , Salvador , which was held by the Portuguese . During the siege , Luís Alves fought in at least three attacks ( on 28 March , 3 May and 3 June ) against Portuguese positions around Salvador , all successful . In the engagement on 28 March , he led a charge on an enemy bunker . 
 During the Bahia campaign , high @-@ ranking officers mutinied against Labatut , who was taken prisoner and sent back to Rio de Janeiro . It is unlikely that Luís Alves was involved , but his uncle , Joaquim de Lima , was almost certainly part of the conspiracy and was chosen by the officers to replace Labatut . The campaign resumed , and the Portuguese withdrew from Salvador and set sail back to Portugal . On 2 July , the victorious Brazilians entered the city . The Emperor 's Battalion returned to Rio de Janeiro , and Luís Alves was later promoted to captain on 22 January 1824 . 
 = = = Cisplatine War and the abdication crisis = = = 
 The Portuguese garrison in Montevideo , the capital of Cisplatina ( then Brazil 's southernmost province ) , was the last to surrender . In 1825 , secessionists in the province rebelled . The United Provinces of the Río de la Plata ( later Argentina ) attempted to annex Cisplatina . Brazil declared war , triggering the Cisplatine War . The Emperor 's Battalion , to which Luís Alves was attached , was sent to guard Montevideo , then besieged by rebel forces . Luís Alves fought in engagements against the insurgents during 1827 ( 7 February , 5 July , 7 July , 14 July , 5 August and 7 August ) . 
 The war came to a disastrous end in 1828 , as Brazil relinquished Cisplatina , which became the independent nation of Uruguay . Nonetheless , Luís Alves was promoted to the rank of major on 2 December 1828 and made second @-@ in @-@ command of the Emperor 's Battalion in early 1829 . During his stay in Montevideo , he met María <unk> <unk> González Luna . How far their relationship progressed is unknown , but there may have been a failed engagement . He returned to Rio de Janeiro and witnessed the increasing deterioration in Emperor Pedro I 's political position . A growing opposition to Pedro I 's policies eventually erupted into mass protests at the Field of Santana in downtown Rio de Janeiro on 6 April 1831 . The situation became more ominous when several military units , led by Luís Alves ' father and uncles , joined the protests . 
 The Emperor considered appointing Luís Alves to command the Emperor 's Battalion and asked him which side he would choose . According to historian Francisco Doratioto , Luís Alves answered that " between the love of his father and his duty to the crown , he would stay with the latter . " Pedro I expressed gratitude for his loyalty , but instead ordered him to take the Emperor 's Battalion to the Field of Santana and join the rebels , preferring abdication to <unk> . Decades later , Luís Alves said in the Brazilian Senate : " I marched along with the Emperor 's Battalion to the Field of Santana , out of devotion to competent orders [ from Pedro I ] . I was not a revolutionary . I esteemed the Abdication . I judged that it would be of advantage to Brazil , but I did not concur directly or indirectly with it . " 
 = = = Era of troubles = = = 
 A regency of three was elected to rule until the five @-@ year @-@ old Dom Pedro II reached the age of majority and the ability to rule in his own right . One of the regents chosen was Luís Alves ' father . The regency had little effective authority , resulting in nine years of chaos , during which the country was plagued by rebellions and coup attempts initiated by unruly political factions . The army , " demoralized by the far from exemplary part it had played in the April Revolution [ i.e. Pedro I 's abdication ] , " said historian C. H. Haring , " became the ready tool of any popular agitator or demagogue , and often the source of riot and sedition . " The government severely reduced the size of the standing army and effectively replaced it with the newly created National Guard , a militia force . In July 1831 , without troops to command , Luís Alves and other officers joined the Volunteer Soldier @-@ Officers Battalion as soldiers . As second in command of that unit , he put down a mutiny of navy artillerymen in the Ilha das Cobras ( Island of the Snakes ) on 7 October . A year later , on 18 October 1832 , he was appointed commander of the Permanent Municipal Guard Corps , a police force in the city of Rio de Janeiro . 
 On 6 January 1833 , at age 29 , he married Ana Luísa de Loreto Carneiro Viana , the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old younger sister of an army officer friend , and a member of an aristocratic family of Rio de Janeiro . The union was contrary to the wishes of the bride 's mother , who saw Luís Alves and his family as upstarts . Newspapers connected to political enemies of his family took advantage of this disagreement to level serious , but unfounded , accusations against him , including that he had kidnapped Ana Luísa . Despite the invective , their marriage was a happy one and three children resulted : Luísa de Loreto Viana de Lima , Ana de Loreto Viana de Lima and Luís Alves de Lima e Silva , born in 1833 , 1836 and 1847 , respectively . 
 In the late 1830s , Luís Alves was appointed instructor in swordsmanship and horsemanship to the young Pedro II . Ties of duty had drawn the two men together , but a long @-@ lasting friendship and personal devotion also developed . Pedro II said many years later that he regarded Luís Alves as " loyal and my friend " . According to historian Heitor Lira , Luís Alves was " one of the rare , sincere and profoundly convicted monarchists and friends of the King [ i.e. , the Emperor ] and of the Dynasty [ the House of Braganza ] . He placed his sword not only in service to a united and strong Brazil , but also to a worthy and respected Monarch " . 
 = = <unk> rebellions = = 
 = = = Balaiada = = = 
 As the commander of the Permanent Municipal Guard Corps , Luís Alves brought order to the streets of Rio de Janeiro , through his own skill and through partnership with the city 's chief of police , Eusébio de Queirós . Luís Alves was promoted from major to lieutenant colonel on 12 September 1837 . Eusébio de Queirós was a member of the Partido <unk> ( Reactionary Party ) , which had come to power that year . Bernardo Pereira de Vasconcelos , one of the leading Reactionaries and a government minister , attempted to attract Luís Alves to his party . 
 After being promoted to colonel on 2 December 1839 , Luís Alves was sent by the Reactionary cabinet to the province of Maranhão to quell a rebellion which became known as the Balaiada . He was appointed to the highest civilian and military positions in the province : presidente ( president or governor ) and comandante das armas ( military commander ) , thus giving him authority over the National Guard and army ( brought back to full strength by the Reactionary administration ) units in the province , respectively . 
 Luís Alves arrived in São Luís , Maranhão 's capital , on 4 February 1840 . After several battles and skirmishes , he defeated the rebels . For his achievement , Luís Alves was promoted to brigadier ( present @-@ day brigadier general ) on 18 July 1841 and raised by Pedro II to the titled nobility as Barão de Caxias ( Baron of Caxias ) . He was given the rare honor of choosing his title ; he decided to commemorate his recapture of Caxias , Maranhão 's second richest town , which had fallen into rebel hands . Francisco de Lima wrote to his son with news of the Liberals ' demand that Pedro II 's majority be immediately declared . Meanwhile , Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão ( later Marquis of Paraná , a distant cousin of Caxias ' wife and a leader of the Reactionary Party ) sent letters to Luís Alves attempting to undermine the influence Francisco de Lima had on him and to dissuade him from supporting the unconstitutional proposal to declare the Emperor of age . 
 = = = Liberal rebellions of 1842 = = = 
 Upon his return from Maranhão , Caxias saw that the political climate had changed . Francisco de Lima 's Liberal Party had pushed through the premature declaration of the Emperor 's majority on 23 July 1840 . In May 1842 , the Liberals rebelled in the provinces of Rio de Janeiro , São Paulo and Minas Gerais in retaliation for the Emperor 's decision — on the advice of a Council of State dominated by Reactionaries — to call for new elections , annulling the previous election tainted by widespread fraud by the Liberal Party . 
 Named as the province 's vice @-@ president and military commander , Caxias arrived in São Paulo on 21 May 1842 . After he defeated the rebels there , he was appointed military commander of Minas Gerais and marched to that province . With the aid of National Guard units from Rio de Janeiro under its president , Honório Hermeto , Caxias was once again successful , and by late August , the rebellion was crushed . Caxias was honored by Pedro II , who made him his aide @-@ de @-@ camp on 23 July 1842 . Two days later , Caxias was promoted to brevet ( acting ) field marshal ( present @-@ day divisional general ) . 
 To distinguish itself from what the Reactionaries perceived as the " unruly " Liberals , sometime around 1843 ( and certainly by 1844 ) , the Reactionary Party became known as the Partido da Ordem ( Party of Order ) and its members as saquaremas . Caxias increasingly identified himself with the saquarema ideology : liberalism , preservation of the authority of the state , and support for representative parliamentary monarchy . Although his move toward the saquarema camp was not clear at the time he accepted the appointment to put down the rebellion in Maranhão in 1839 , his victory over the Liberal rebels in 1842 further solidified his allegiance to the Party of Order . 
 = = = Ragamuffin War = = = 
 When the republican secessionist rebellion known as the Ragamuffin War began in Rio Grande do Sul in 1835 , one of Caxias ' uncles joined the rebels . His father , Francisco de Lima , and possibly another uncle ( the Minister of War at the time ) , also secretly supported the rebellion . On 28 September 1842 , Caxias was appointed president and military commander of the province of Rio Grande do Sul . The 16 @-@ year @-@ old Pedro II allowed Caxias to prove once more that he was unlike his father and uncles and gave him a short and direct order : " End this revolution , as you have ended the others . " Caxias brought with him a fellow saquarema and a famous poet , Domingos Gonçalves de Magalhães ( later Viscount of Araguaia ) , to serve as his secretary , as he had previously in Maranhão . 
 Caxias had made a short trip to Rio Grande do Sul in 1839 to inspect the troops fighting the Ragamuffins . Upon his return to the province in November 1842 , he found that the rebels , severely weakened after years of struggle , had been forced to resort to guerrilla warfare . When threatened , the rebels escaped to safety in nearby Uruguay ( formerly Cisplatina ) . As in Maranhão , São Paulo and Minas Gerais , Caxias planted spies within the enemy 's ranks to gather information and to foment dissension . Historian Roderick J. Barman said that he " displayed military , organizational , and political talents essential to what is now termed ' counterinsurgency ' . " 
 In early 1843 , Honório Hermeto became the head of the cabinet , and so long as the saquaremas remained in power , Caxias was secure in his position . After Honório Hermeto quarreled with Pedro II a year later , he and the saquaremas resigned . The Liberals replaced the saquaremas in government , but Caxias was retained in his command . The War of the Ragamuffins took far longer to put down than had previous rebellions , but through careful negotiation and military victories , Caxias finally managed to pacify the province . The end of the armed conflict was declared on 1 March 1845 . He was made a permanent field marshal on 25 March , and raised to the rank of count on 2 April . Caxias ran for a Senate seat , and being among the three candidates with the most votes , he was selected by the Emperor in late 1845 as the senator representing Rio Grande do Sul . He took his Senate seat on 11 May 1846 . 
 = = Conservatism = = 
 = = = Platine War = = = 
 After years in opposition in the parliament , in September 1848 , the Party of Order was called upon by Pedro II to form a new cabinet . The saquarema cabinet was composed of men with whom Caxias had close relationships , among them Eusébio de Queirós , who had helped him bring order to the streets of Rio de Janeiro in the late 1830s . Caxias was now a wealthy planter who owned slaves and was very much a part of the landed aristocracy that formed the backbone of the Party of Order . With the help of his wealthy mother @-@ in @-@ law , he purchased his first property — a coffee farm — in 1838 . He acquired more lands in 1849 , further expanding his plantation . Due to growing international demand , coffee had become the most valuable export commodity for Brazil . 
 In 1851 , Juan Manuel de Rosas , dictator of the Argentine Confederation , declared war on Brazil . Caxias was appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Brazilian land forces . The Minister of Foreign Affairs , Paulino Soares de Sousa ( later Viscount of Uruguai ) , forged an anti @-@ Rosas alliance between Brazil , Uruguay and rebel Argentine provinces . When Paulino Soares asked who should be appointed as Brazil 's representative among the allied forces , Caxias suggested Honório Hermeto . Honório Hermeto , who had been ostracized by his peers after his fall in 1844 , was the saquarema closest to Caxias . 
 An army commanded by Caxias crossed into Uruguay in September 1851 . The allies decided to divide their forces into two armies : a multinational force that included a single Brazilian division , and a second army composed entirely of Brazilians under Caxias . Against the wishes of Honório Hermeto , Caxias chose Manuel Marques de Sousa ( later Count of Porto Alegre ) to lead the former force . Caxias met and befriended Marques de Sousa , who had served under his command in the War of the Ragamuffins , during his trip to Rio Grande do Sul in 1839 . The Brazilian division , led by Marques de Sousa , along with Uruguayan and Argentine rebel troops , invaded Argentina . On 3 February 1852 , in the Battle of Caseros , the allies defeated an army led by Rosas , who fled to the United Kingdom , thus ending the war . Caxias spent 17 January aboard the frigate Dom Afonso alongside John Pascoe Grenfell , taking stock of the port area of Buenos Aires , the Argentine capital , selecting the best place to launch an amphibious attack . His plan was aborted once the news of the victory at Caseros arrived . As a reward for his role in the victory , Caxias was promoted to lieutenant general on 3 March , and raised to marquis on 26 June . 
 = = = Conciliation Cabinet = = = 
 Caxias 's father died in December 1853 . For years , father and son had clashed , taking opposite sides . The marquis ultimately prevailed , adhering closely to his grandfather José Joaquim de Lima 's steadfast loyalty to the Crown and respect for the law . By the time of his death , Francisco de Lima , a senator in his own right , had long since lost his former influence and had not held any office of importance for years . Nevertheless , Caxias and Francisco de Lima maintained a loving and respectful relationship to the very end , as may be seen in the few surviving letters between them . His relationship with other family members , however , was marred by resentment , as he told his wife years later : " We are placed in the foreground of our society , causing even envy to your relatives and to mine as well . " 
 Around 1853 ( and certainly by 1855 ) , the old Party of Order had become more widely known as the Conservative Party . On 14 June 1855 , the marquis accepted the portfolio of Minister of War and joined the " Conciliation Cabinet " headed by Honório Hermeto ( now Marquis of Paraná ) . Caxias and Paraná had known each other since 1831 and had formed a deep friendship and strong bond based on trust and views in common . Paraná had been facing overwhelming opposition in parliament from members of his , and Caxias 's , own party . Under the guise of correcting flaws in elections so that all parties would have legitimate access to representation in parliament , Paraná attempted to pass electoral reforms that would , in practice , allot cabinets even more influence to meddle in elections through coercion and patronage . The saquaremas understood the threat : it would undermine their own party ( or in fact any party ) by strengthening the executive branch to the detriment of the legislative . 
 In search of broader support , Paraná appointed as ministers politicians who had few , or no , links to the saquaremas . Caxias himself was a saquarema , but according to Needell , he " was first and foremost a military man . Personal fealty to the Empire came before any other . As so many did , he identified this loyalty with fealty to the Crown in abstraction and to Dom Pedro personally . " He was a choice that could please all sides . Caxias , said Needell , " was not so much a political man as a man profoundly loyal to the Monarchy with which he ... had come to identify with the Conservative Party . Thus , Paraná may have appointed Caxias to reassure traditional Conservatives without endangering the more independent political position Paraná was taking . " 
 = = = Presidencies of the Council of Ministers = = = 
 Paraná succeeded in passing electoral reform , which was called the Lei dos <unk> ( Law of the Circles ) . As predicted , and feared , it gave greater powers to the president ( prime minister ) of the Council of Ministers to meddle in elections . Unexpectedly , Paraná fell ill and died on 3 September 1856 . Caxias replaced him , but was reluctant to face the legislature , elected under the electoral reform , that was slated to convene the next year . He resigned , along with the other cabinet ministers , on 4 May 1857 . The Law of the Circles and the controversy surrounding it split the Conservative Party : one faction was the saquarema ultraconservative ( or <unk> ) wing , then called the <unk> ( reds ) or <unk> ( puritans ) , led by Eusébio de Queirós , Uruguai and Joaquim Rodrigues Torres , Viscount of Itaboraí . The second bloc comprised the <unk> <unk> ( moderate Conservative ) wing , composed mostly of younger politicians who owed their positions to electoral reform . 
 The moderate Conservatives were Conservatives in name only , and did not support the saquarema ideology and leadership . During the years following 1857 , successive cabinets quickly collapsed , unable to muster a majority in the Chamber of Deputies , as the two Conservative wings undercut each other in a fight for dominance . The Emperor asked Caxias to head a new cabinet on 2 March 1861 . Among his ministers were José Maria da Silva Paranhos ( later Viscount of Rio Branco ) , whom Caxias had met and befriended during the Platine War while serving as secretary to Paraná . 
 Caxias tried to secure support from the traditional saquarema leadership . They attempted , however , to use him as a figurehead and to further their own agendas . He commented to Paranhos : " I see what you meant , with respect to the bizarre behavior of these gentlemen , who do not wish to govern the country , when they are invited to do so , because they prefer to govern the Government . They are completely mistaken about me , since I am not disposed to serve them as a <unk> . " Lacking support in parliament , Caxias ' cabinet resigned on 24 May 1862 after losing its majority in the Chamber of Deputies ( the national legislature 's lower house ) . Pedro II asked members of the Liga <unk> ( Progressive League ) — a new party consisting of moderate Conservatives and Liberals — to form a new cabinet . Barely a month later , Caxias ' only son died at age 14 of unknown causes . There was a small consolation at the end of 1862 when , on 2 December , he was made brevet <unk> de <unk> ( army marshal ) , the highest rank in the Brazilian army . 
 = = Paraguayan War = = 
 = = = Siege of Uruguaiana = = = 
 In December 1864 , the dictator of Paraguay , Francisco Solano López , took advantage of Brazil 's military intervention in Uruguay to establish his country as a regional power . The Paraguayan army invaded the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso ( currently the state of Mato Grosso do Sul ) , triggering the Paraguayan War . Four months later , Paraguayan troops invaded Argentine territory in preparation for an attack on Rio Grande do Sul . 
 The situation in Rio Grande do Sul was chaotic , and the local military commanders were incapable of mounting an effective resistance to the Paraguayan army . Pedro II , aware of the danger , decided to go to the front to shore up operations . As the Emperor 's military aide @-@ de @-@ camp , Caxias followed him into the combat zone . The marquis had warned the Progressive cabinet that Brazil was unprepared to intervene in Uruguay and even less prepared to resist a foreign invasion . His warnings were ignored , and he complained , with a bit of irony , to his friend João Maurício <unk> , Baron of Cotejipe , a former colleague in the Conciliation cabinet : " I am almost mad with the mistakes that I am seeing being made , but since I am a red [ ultraconservative or traditional saquarema ] I am not listened to , since everything is progress in our country . " 
 The imperial party arrived in Rio Grande do Sul 's capital , Porto Alegre , in July 1865 . From there , they traveled inland until they reached Uruguaiana in September . This Brazilian town was occupied by a Paraguayan army . By the time Caxias and his party arrived , the town was under siege by a combined force of Brazilian , Argentine and Uruguayan units . The Paraguayans surrendered without further bloodshed , freeing the Emperor and Caxias to return to the imperial capital . 
 = = = Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief = = = 
 The allies invaded Paraguay in April 1866 , but after initial success , their advance was blocked by fortifications at Humaitá by land and along the Paraguay River . The Progressive cabinet decided to create a unified command over Brazilian forces operating in Paraguay , and it turned to the 63 @-@ year @-@ old Caxias ( made permanent army marshal on 13 January ) as the new leader on 10 October 1866 . He told his wife that the reason he had accepted the post was because the war " was an evil that has reached more or less all , from the Emperor to the most unfortunate slave . " 
 Caxias arrived in Paraguay on 18 November , and assumed the supreme command of land and naval forces in the war . His first measure was to arrange the dismissal of Vice @-@ Admiral Joaquim Marques Lisboa ( later the Marquis of Tamandaré and also a member of the Progressive League ) by the government , and appoint fellow Conservative Vice @-@ Admiral Joaquim José Inácio ( later the Viscount of Inhaúma ) to lead the navy . From October 1866 until July 1867 , all offensive operations were suspended . During this period , Caxias trained his soldiers , re @-@ equipped the army with newer guns , improved the quality of the officer corps , and upgraded the health corps and overall hygiene of the troops , putting an end to epidemics . Alfredo d 'Escragnolle Taunay ( later the Viscount of Taunay ) , who fought in the war , remembered that Caxias was a " generous military chief , who forgave small errors , but was implacable with those who committed grave misdeeds , or , then , who betrayed his confidence . " 
 As the Brazilian army was ready for combat , Caxias sought to encircle Humaitá and force its capitulation by siege . To aid the operation , he used observation balloons to gather information of the enemy lines . The combined Brazilian – Argentine – Uruguayan army advanced through hostile territory to surround Humaitá . By 2 November , Humaitá was completely cut off from land reinforcement by Paraguayan forces . On 19 February 1868 , Brazilian ironclads successfully made a passage up the Paraguay River under heavy fire , gaining full control of the river and isolating Humaitá from resupply by water . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The relationship between the Marquis of Caxias , now the allied Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , and the governing Progressives worsened until it became a political crisis that led to the cabinet 's resignation . The Emperor called Conservatives , under Itaboraí 's leadership , back into power on 16 July 1868 , while the Progressive League was rechristened as the Liberal Party . Meanwhile , the allies occupied Humaitá on 25 July after López managed to engineer a successful withdrawal of all Paraguayan troops from its fortress . 
 Pressing his advantage , the marquis began organizing an assault on the new Paraguayan defenses which López had thrown up along the <unk> , south of Asunción ( Paraguay 's capital ) . This stream afforded a strong defensive position which was anchored by the Paraguay River and by the swampy jungle of the Chaco region , both considered to be nearly impassable by a large force . Rather than making a frontal attack on López 's line , Caxias had a road cut through the Chaco . The road was finished by early December , allowing the allied forces to outflank the Paraguayan lines and attack from the rear . In three successive battles ( Ytororó , <unk> and Lomas <unk> ) which became known as <unk> ( Deed of December ) , the combined allied forces annihilated the Paraguayan army . López barely managed to escape with a few followers , and on 1 January 1869 , the Brazilians occupied Asunción . According to historian Ronaldo Vainfas , Caxias ' " performance ahead of the allied forces contributed in an unquestionable way to the final triumph over the enemy . " 
 The marquis had to take great risks to win these victories . In the Ytororó engagement , which occurred on 5 December , the allied objective was to take a bridge over the Ytororó River . Several attempts were made to cross the bridge , but each was repelled by intense fire from the Paraguayan positions . In the final attempt , the Brazilian soldiers panicked and began to flee in disorder . Caxias , witnessing the unfolding disaster , unsheathed his sword and charged on horseback toward the bridge , followed by his staff . He passed through the fleeing troops , shouting " Hail to His Majesty " , " Hail to Brazil " and finally , " <unk> @-@ me os que <unk> <unk> ! " ( " Those who are true Brazilians , follow me ! " ) His display of courage stopped the retreat immediately ; the units regrouped , and a vigorous attack led personally by Caxias overwhelmed the Paraguayan positions . Several men who were next to him during the attack were killed , as was his horse . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Caxias was growing old , and was ill and exhausted by the time he reached Asunción . As he did not feel up to the task of pursuing López into the Paraguayan hinterland , he asked to be either relieved of his post or given a short leave . Although his request was denied , he appointed a senior member of his staff as acting commander , and left for Brazil on 19 January 1869 . The Emperor was angered that the marquis had left his post without permission , and especially that Caxias had declared the war to have been already won — even though López was still at large and regrouping his few remaining military assets . Caxias ' ill @-@ conceived decision seriously endangered the hard @-@ won achievements of the past months , even as the objective of eliminating López as a threat remained tantalizingly within reach . 
 In early February the marquis arrived back unannounced at his house in Rio de Janeiro , much to the surprise of his wife . The Viscount of Inhaúma also returned home shortly afterwards , but with his health so compromised that he died a few weeks later . Upon learning of Inhaúma 's death , Caxias said : " and the same would have had happened to me , had I not resolved to get out of that hell . " Pedro II was greatly disappointed in Caxias , but he was also very aware that the marquis was the person most responsible for the great successes during the war , accomplishments that had come at the cost of years of sacrifice and personal bravery . The Emperor called the marquis to the Imperial Palace , the <unk> de São Cristóvão , on 21 February 1869 for a reconciliation . 
 A few days later the Emperor awarded Caxias the Order of Pedro I and raised him from marquis to duke , the highest rank of Brazilian nobility , and a unique distinction during Pedro II 's 58 @-@ year reign . The Emperor also appointed him to the Council of State on October 1870 . But none of this prevented Caxias from attacks and accusations — some petty — in the parliament , including having left his post without permission . The embittered duke wrote to his friend Manuel Luís Osório , Marquis of Erval : " When I was young , my friend , I did not know how to explain why the elderly were selfish , but now that I am old , I see that they are like that because of the disappointments and <unk> they suffer during their lives . At least this is what happens to me " . 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = <unk> presidency = = = 
 Paranhos , now Viscount of Rio Branco , led a cabinet from 1871 to 1875 . Two serious crises arose that challenged its viability and undermined the foundations of the monarchy . The first resulted from the controversy over the Law of Free Birth , which Caxias voted for . The law was to emancipate children born to slave women after its enactment . With half of Conservative Party members supporting the bill and the other half staunchly opposed , a serious rift opened in the ranks . Opponents represented the interests of powerful coffee farmers such as Caxias , planters who had long been the main political , social , and economic supporters of the Conservative Party . 
 The second crisis was the Religious Question , which developed after the government came into conflict with two bishops who had ordered that Freemasons be expelled from lay brotherhoods . The dispute grew out of proportion when both bishops were convicted and given prison sentences for disobeying the government 's order to rescind their expulsions . As Catholicism was the state religion , the Emperor exercised , with the papacy 's acquiescence , a great deal of control over church affairs — paying clerical salaries , appointing parish priests , nominating bishops , ratifying papal bulls , and overseeing seminaries . As a result of the furor over the handling of the affair , Rio Branco and his cabinet resigned , " disunited and weary after four years in office " , according to historian Roderick J. Barman . Pedro II asked Caxias to form a new cabinet . The duke later gave a remarkable account of their meeting : 
 Believe that when I entered my carriage to go São Cristóvão , summoned by the Emperor , I was determined not to accept . But he , as soon as he saw me , embraced me and said to me that he would not let me go unless I told him that I would accept the post of minister and that , if I refused to do this service , he would summon the Liberals and would have to tell everybody that I was responsible for the consequence , all the while encircling me with his arms . I pointed out to him my circumstances , my age , and my infirmity ; but he concurred in nothing . To free myself from him , I should have had to shove him off , and this I could not do . I bowed my head and said that I would do what he wanted but that I was sure that he would have cause for regret , since I would not be minister for long , because I would die from work and troubles . However , he listened to nothing and told me that I should only do what I could do but that I must not abandon him , since he would in that case abandon us and go away . 
 The elderly Caxias , almost 72 and widowed since 1874 , was in poor health and could serve only as a figurehead president of the government formed on 25 June 1875 . Cotejipe was the de facto president . The Caxias @-@ Cotejipe cabinet attempted to dissipate the discord created by the previous cabinet . Their measures included financial aid to coffee farmers , an amnesty for the convicted bishops , and , to please the pro @-@ slavery Conservatives , the selection of new ministers and a call for elections . Caxias , who was a Freemason but also a staunch Catholic , threatened to resign if the Emperor did not grant the amnesty , which Pedro II grudgingly issued in September 1875 . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 At the end of 1877 , Pedro II paid a visit to Caxias and ascertained that he could no longer remain in office . The entire cabinet resigned on 1 January 1878 . His health problems had become so troubling that he had been asking repeatedly to resign since early 1876 . Caxias was not only afflicted by concerns over his declining health , but increasingly felt a sense of alienation . He did not feel he could play a relevant role in politics . He belonged to an older generation who perceived the Emperor ( and consequently , the monarchy ) as essential for holding the nation together . 
 The new politicians who had begun to dominate the government had little memory of the times before Pedro II assumed control in 1840 . Unlike their predecessors , they had no experience of the regency and the early years of Pedro II 's reign , when external and internal dangers threatened the nation 's existence ; they had only known a stable administration and prosperity . The young politicians saw no reason to uphold and defend the imperial office as a unifying force beneficial to the nation . Times were changing fast , and Caxias was aware of the situation . He became increasingly nostalgic for the former times he had spent with his now @-@ dead Conservative Party colleagues and held a pessimistic view of future political prospects . When Itaboraí — one of the last survivors of those Conservative leaders who had begun their careers during the 1830s — died in 1872 , the duke wrote to a friend : " Who will replace him ? I don 't know , I cannot see ... The vacuum he left will not be filled , as it was not with Eusébio , Paraná , Uruguai , Manuel <unk> and many others who helped us sustain this little church [ i.e. , the monarchy , his ' second faith ' ] , which collapsed or almost collapsed on 7 April 1831 . " 
 Confined to a wheelchair as his health slowly declined , the Duke of Caxias lived his remaining days at Santa Mônica farm , located near the town of Valença , in the countryside of Rio de Janeiro province . On 7 May 1880 at 11 pm he quietly died , attended by members of his family . A saddened Pedro II ( who visited Caxias several times during his long illness ) remarked about his " friend of almost a half century " , that he had " known him , and esteemed him since 1832 . He was 76 , almost 77 years old . And so we remain in this world . " Caxias asked for a simple funeral , with no pomp , no honors , no invitations , and only six soldiers of good conduct to carry his coffin . His last wish was not entirely respected : Pedro II sent a carriage used for funerals of members of the imperial family only , to be followed by sixteen servants of the imperial household , and one corporal and thirteen , not six , soldiers of good conduct to carry his remains . A huge procession was followed by a funeral ( attended by Pedro II ) and his body was laid to rest in the São Francisco de Paula cemetery in the city of Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 From his death in 1880 until the 1920s , the Duke of Caxias was not regarded as the most important military figure in Brazilian history . This honor belonged to Manuel Luís Osório , Marquis of Erval . Caxias was held to be a minor figure in comparison to Erval . His reputation slowly grew , and in 1923 , the Ministry of the Army created an annual celebration in his honor . In 1925 , his birthday officially became the " Day of the Soldier " , which commemorates the Brazilian army . On 25 August 1949 , his remains , along with those of his wife , were exhumed and reinterred in Rio de Janeiro 's Duke of Caxias Pantheon . On 13 March 1962 , Caxias became <unk> ( protector ) of the army , making him the most important figure in its tradition . According to Adriana Barreto de Souza , Francisco Doratioto and Celso Castro , Caxias supplanted Osório because he was seen as a loyal and dutiful officer who could serve as a role model in a Brazilian republic plagued since its birth in 1889 by military insubordination , rebellions and coups . " His name " , said the historian Thomas Whigham , " has become synonymous with the upright officer and citizen who never breaks the law — hence the popular term <unk> , which refers to individuals who follow regulations without mistrust , doubt and evasion . " 
 The historiography is often positive toward Caxias and several historians have ranked him as the greatest Brazilian military officer . To historian Nelson Werneck Sodré , he was " not only the greatest military commander of his continent [ South America ] , in his time , but [ also ] a great politician " . Moreover , Caxias was " — more than D. Pedro II — the Empire . " Francisco Doratioto said that the duke " in Paraguay had doubts , pride , resentment , and made mistakes ; in short , he was a real character ... Caxias , however , was able to rise above his limitations , imposed on himself great personal sacrifices and incorporated the responsibility of accomplishing the objective ... In this context , Caxias was , indeed , a hero ; he carried with him , it is true , social and political prejudices of his time , but one can not demand from the past the observance of present @-@ day values . " 
 Roderick J. Barman affirmed that Caxias was not only " extremely powerful in the Conservative party " , but also " the country 's most distinguished " and " most successful soldier " , who had " proved his capacity and his loyalty by defeating revolts against the regime " . C. H. Haring said that he was " a brilliant army officer " , also " Brazil 's most famous military figure " and a man " who was genuinely loyal to the throne " . To Whigham , the duke was " destined to occupy a lofty spot in Brazil 's national mythology . He often had to act as a statesman as much as military man " and was " [ s ] <unk> competent in both roles " . Hélio Viana regarded Caxias as " the greatest soldier of Brazil " , a view shared by Eugênio Vilhena de Morais , Pedro Calmon , Otávio Tarquínio de Sousa , Antônio da Rocha Almeida and Gustavo Barroso . 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles of nobility = = = 
 Baron of Caxias ( without Greatness ) on 18 July 1841 . 
 Count of Caxias on 25 March 1845 . 
 Marquis of Caxias on 26 June 1852 . 
 Duke of Caxias on 23 March 1869 . 
 = = = Other titles = = = 
 Member of the Brazilian Council of State . 
 Member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute . 
 Member of the Supreme Military and Justice Council . 
 Emperor 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp . 
 Emperor 's <unk> ( gentleman usher ) . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross . 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of the Rose . 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of Pedro I. 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of Saint Benedict of Aviz . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa . 
 = = = Military honors = = = 
 Medal ( oval ) of the Independence War ( Bahia ) . 
 Medal of the army in the Oriental State of Uruguay in 1852 . 
 Commemorative medal of the surrender of the division of the army of Paraguay that occupied the village of Uruguaiana . 
 Medal ( oval ) of bravery " to the bravest ones " ( 1867 ) . 
 Medal awarded to the army , armada and to civil servants in operations in the Paraguayan War ( 1870 ) . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = 2010 <unk> Good ! Sour Cream Dips 400 = 
 The 2010 <unk> Good ! Sour Cream Dips 400 was a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series stock car race that was held on June 13 , 2010 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn , Michigan . Contested over 200 laps , it was the fifteenth race of the 2010 Sprint Cup Series season . The race was won by Denny Hamlin for the Joe Gibbs Racing team . Kasey Kahne finished second , and Kurt Busch , who started first , clinched third . 
 Pole position driver Busch maintained his lead into the first turn to begin the race , but Jamie McMurray , who started in the second position on the grid , passed him to lead the first lap . Hamlin soon became the leader and would lead a race high of 123 laps . On the final restart , Hamlin started beside Kahne . Hamlin held onto first to claim his first Sprint Cup Series win at Michigan and his fifth of the season . 
 There were four cautions and nineteen lead changes among nine different drivers throughout the course of the race . The result left Kevin Harvick in the first position in the Drivers ' Championship , twenty @-@ two points ahead of second place driver Kyle Busch and forty @-@ seven ahead of Denny Hamlin . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , six points ahead of Toyota and thirty @-@ eight ahead of Dodge , with twenty @-@ one races remaining in the season . A total of 95 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 4 @.@ 3 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Michigan International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races , the others being Daytona International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Talladega Superspeedway . The standard track at Michigan International Speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at eighteen degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at twelve degrees . The back stretch , has a five degree banking . Michigan International Speedway can seat up to 119 @,@ 500 people . 
 Before the race , Kevin Harvick led the Drivers ' Championship with 2 @,@ 063 points , and Kyle Busch stood in second with 2 @,@ 044 points . Denny Hamlin was third in the Drivers ' Championship with 1 @,@ 927 points , Matt Kenseth was fourth with 1 @,@ 893 points , and Kurt Busch was in fifth with 1 @,@ 881 points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was leading with 100 points , twelve points ahead of their rival Toyota . Dodge , with 61 points , was three points ahead of Ford in the battle for third . Mark Martin was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were scheduled before the race — one on Friday , June 11 , 2010 , and two on Saturday , June 12 , 2010 . The first practice session lasted only 70 minutes , but was scheduled to be 90 minutes . The Saturday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted sixty minutes . In the first practice session , which was held under mostly cloudy conditions , Juan Pablo Montoya was fastest , ahead of Jimmie Johnson and Kurt Busch in second and third . Greg Biffle and Jeff Gordon followed in fourth and fifth . In the morning practice session , Paul Menard was the quickest , with a time of 38 @.@ 824 seconds while Carl Edwards , Jeff Burton , Jimmie Johnson , and Jeff Gordon followed in second , third , fourth and fifth . During the third practice session , Jimmie Johnson , was the fastest , ahead of Paul Menard in second , Denny Hamlin in third , Jeff Gordon in fourth , and Kevin Harvick in fifth . 
 During Friday afternoon 's qualifying session , forty @-@ six cars were entered , but only the fastest forty @-@ three were able to enter the race . Kurt Busch clinched his second pole position of 2010 , with a time of 37 @.@ 898 seconds . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Jamie McMurray . Jimmie Johnson and Kasey Kahne shared the second row in the third and fourth position , while Jeff Burton , with a time of 38 @.@ 00 seconds , qualified fifth . The three drivers that failed to qualify were Dave Blaney , Michael Waltrip and Johnny Sauter . 
 = = = Race summary = = = 
 The race , the fifteenth out of a total of thirty @-@ six in the season , began at 1 p.m. EDT and was televised live in the United States on TNT . To begin pre @-@ race ceremonies , at 1 : 00 p.m. EDT , Fr . Geoff Rose , <unk> , from Lumen Christi High School in Jackson , Michigan , gave the invocation . Then , the Army Chorus A Capella Team performed the national anthem , and Adam Sandler and Kevin James delivered the command , " Gentlemen , start your engines ! " Three drivers had to move to the rear from making major adjustments to their race car after first practice , they were Kyle Busch , with an engine change , Clint Bowyer , who changed to a back @-@ up car , and Kevin Conway because of a transmission change . 
 Kurt Busch made a good start , retaining the first position ; Jamie McMurray behind him maintained the second position . At the end of the first lap , McMurray passed Busch . One lap later , Busch reclaimed the first position . By lap 3 , Kasey Kahne and Jimmie Johnson had passed McMurray to put him in the fourth position . McMurray dropped to sixth place on the sixth lap . On lap 7 , Kahne started catching the leader , and McMurray announced on the team 's radio that his car was loose . On lap 11 , Max Papis went to the garage ( the place where teams repair or park their car ) because of overheating problems . On lap 18 , Marcos Ambrose spun through the grass , to cause the first caution . Afterward , most drivers made pit stops for fuel and tires while Joe Nemechek decided to stay out to lead one lap . On the same lap , Todd Bodine drove his car to the garage . 
 On lap 22 , the green flag waved , as Tony Stewart led Kurt Busch , Jimmie Johnson , Juan Pablo Montoya , and Kasey Kahne on the restart . Stewart dropped to third after being passed by Kurt Busch and Montoya . Two laps later , Joe Nemechek went to garage with electrical problems . On lap 26 , Jimmie Johnson moved into the third position after passing Montoya . By lap 27 , Kurt Busch had a two @-@ second lead over Tony Stewart . Johnson , Stewart and Kahne were battling three @-@ wide for the second position on lap 30 . One lap later , Nemechek returned to the track after having electrical problems . On lap 33 , the top @-@ five positions were single file with Kurt Busch in first , Kahne in second , Johnson in third , Denny Hamlin in fourth and Stewart in fifth . A lap later , Bobby Labonte went to garage because of overheating problems . On lap 37 , Landon Cassill went to the garage with rear gear problems . Afterward , on lap 41 , J.J. Yeley drove to the garage because of overheating problems , but he returned to the track four laps later . 
 On the forty @-@ eighth lap , debris in turn two brought out the second caution . Robby Gordon and David Gilliland stayed out while the other teams made pit stops . Gordon and <unk> made pit stops the next lap and gave the lead to Kurt Busch . Kurt Busch brought the field to the green flag with Hamlin in second , Montoya in third , Johnson in fourth , and Kahne in fifth on lap 51 . After Hamlin made a good restart he passed Kurt Busch on lap 52 . Afterward , on lap 54 , Landon Cassill returned to the track while J.J. Yeley returned to the garage . Kahne passed Montoya for the third position . After 67 laps , Hamlin had a 2 @.@ 4 second lead over Kurt Busch in the second position . On lap 87 , green flag pit stops began . One lap later , most drivers in the first ten positions made pit stops . Denny Hamlin , who was in the first position , came to pit road on lap 92 , but had problems leaving which gave Kurt Busch the lead . 
 On laps 94 – 95 , Kurt Busch in first , and Kahne in second were battling for the lead , but Kahne did not pass Kurt Busch until one lap later . After the green flag pit stops , Kahne was first , Kurt Busch in second , Hamlin in third , Montoya in fourth and Jeff Gordon in fifth . On lap 99 , Scott Speed spun after contact with his team @-@ mate Casey Mears , and brought out the third caution . One lap later , Sam Hornish , Jr. stayed out as other teams made pit stops . On lap 101 , Casey Mears collided with David Ragan while on pit road . Mears drove to the garage the following lap . On lap 103 , Hornish , Jr. led Kurt Busch , Jeff Gordon , Hamlin and Kahne on the restart . Three laps later , Kurt Busch passed team @-@ mate Hornish , Jr . Afterward , Hornish , Jr. dropped to fourth . On lap 113 , Hamlin passed Kurt Busch for the lead in turn three . On lap 119 , Kahne passed Kurt Busch for the second position . 
 On lap 126 , Hamlin had a 2 @.@ 8 second lead over Kahne . Seven laps later , Stewart passed Jeff Burton for the fifth position . By lap 134 , the green flag pit stops began . Hamlin , Kahne , and Stewart made pit stops , as Matt Kenseth became the new leader . Two laps later , Hamlin regained the lead from Kenseth . On lap 146 , Hamlin was in first , Kahne in second , Kurt Busch in third , Jeff Gordon in fourth , and Greg Biffle in fifth . Four laps later , Ryan Newman told his crew that his car was not running correctly from hitting a piece of aluminum . On lap 154 , Hamlin was leading by seven seconds over Kahne . Most teams started making pit stops for fuel only on lap 161 . On lap 177 , Kahne became the leader as Hamlin made a pit stop . Kahne made a pit stop on lap 178 to give the lead back to Hamlin ; . On lap 179 , Hamlin was leading by nine seconds . With twenty laps to go , Hamlin was first , Kahne was second , Kurt Busch was third , Jeff Gordon was fourth , and Biffle was fifth . 
 The fourth caution came out on lap 181 because of debris on the back straightaway . The first nine positions stayed off of pit road while the rest made pit stops . On lap 186 , Hamlin made a good start and maintained the first position . On lap 188 , Jimmie Johnson , who restarted twelfth , had moved up to the sixth position . On lap 193 , Hamlin had a growing lead over Kahne . Denny Hamlin crossed the line to win the race , a second ahead of second place Kasey Kahne . Kurt Busch maintained third while Jeff Gordon and Tony Stewart finished fourth and fifth . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Denny Hamlin appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his fifth win of the season , and his first Sprint Cup win at Michigan International Speedway , in front of a crowd of 95 @,@ 000 people . " It ’ s so easy to drive cars like this , " Hamlin said . He also stated , " We never stop working , regardless of whether we ’ ve got a nine @-@ 10ths @-@ of @-@ a @-@ second lead or a nine @-@ second lead . " 
 Kasey Kahne , who finished second , said , " I hung with him for about three laps running in his kind of dirty air . I was right there . Then he just slowly crept away . It felt good . We were close . That ’ s a huge improvement . I was pretty happy . " " We had a similar [ fuel ] issue at the start of the Pocono race last year where we broke a fuel cable , " Hamlin said after the race . " I thought maybe that ’ s what we did . When I went to take off [ after his stop ] , it immediately shut off . While it was " a downer , I was pretty confident we weren ’ t going to have it again . Because Mike [ Ford , crew chief ] never really gave me an alarm we were going to be stretching it on fuel . " In the subsequent press conference , Hamlin 's crew chief said , " Towards the end of last season , where I said the best is yet to come , I strongly felt that way because towards the end of last season we closed out the season strong . I knew that was a catalyst to really turn up the team , to get a little bit more out of everyone . Denny goes down with his knee injury . He comes back , obviously not 100 percent . The team steps up . We narrow the gap to try to pick him up knowing he 's not going to be there , and we start winning races , even with a driver that is not 100 percent . Now that he 's coming back healthier each week , we 're winning more and more . I simply think that 's the catalyst for us to move forward . It 's easier when the morale is high to get a little bit more out of your guys . Our benchmark is ourselves and we 're just trying to work on that . " 
 The race left Kevin Harvick leading the Driver 's Championship with 2 @,@ 169 points . Kyle Busch , who finished twentieth , was second on 2 @,@ 147 , twenty @-@ five points ahead of Hamlin in second and ninety @-@ six ahead of Kurt Busch in third . Matt Kenseth was fifth with 2 @,@ 019 points . Chevrolet maintained their lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship with 103 points . Toyota placed second with 97 points , and Dodge followed with 65 points , now even with Ford . 4 @.@ 3 million people watched the race on television . The race took two hours , thirty @-@ three minutes and twenty @-@ eight seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 1 @.@ 246 seconds . 
 = = Race results = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = American Airlines Flight 77 = 
 American Airlines Flight 77 was a scheduled American Airlines domestic transcontinental passenger flight from Washington Dulles International Airport in Dulles , Virginia , to Los Angeles International Airport in Los Angeles , California . The Boeing 757 @-@ 223 aircraft serving the flight was hijacked by five men affiliated with al @-@ Qaeda on September 11 , 2001 , as part of the September 11 attacks . They deliberately crashed the plane into the Pentagon in Arlington County , Virginia , near Washington , D.C. , killing all 64 people on board , including the five hijackers and six crew , as well as 125 people in the building . 
 Less than 35 minutes into the flight , the hijackers stormed the cockpit . They forced the passengers , crew , and pilots to the rear of the aircraft . Hani Hanjour , one of the hijackers who was trained as a pilot , assumed control of the flight . Unknown to the hijackers , passengers aboard made telephone calls to friends and family and relayed information on the hijacking . 
 The hijackers crashed the aircraft into the western side of the Pentagon at 09 : 37 EDT . Dozens of people witnessed the crash , and news sources began reporting on the incident within minutes . The impact severely damaged an area of the Pentagon and caused a large fire . A portion of the building collapsed ; firefighters spent days working to fully extinguish the blaze . The damaged sections of the Pentagon were rebuilt in 2002 , with occupants moving back into the completed areas that August . The 184 victims of the attack are memorialized in the Pentagon Memorial adjacent to the crash site . The 1 @.@ 93 @-@ acre ( 7 @,@ 800 m2 ) park contains a bench for each of the victims , arranged according to their year of birth and ranging from 1930 to 1998 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The hijackers on American Airlines Flight 77 were led by Hani Hanjour , who piloted the aircraft into the Pentagon . Hanjour first came to the United States in 1990 . 
 Hanjour trained at the CRM Airline Training Center in Scottsdale , Arizona , earning his FAA commercial pilot 's certificate in April 1999 . He had wanted to be a commercial pilot for the Saudi national airline but was rejected when he applied to the civil aviation school in Jeddah in 1999 . Hanjour 's brother later explained that , frustrated at not finding a job , Hanjour " increasingly turned his attention toward religious texts and cassette tapes of militant Islamic preachers " . Hanjour returned to Saudi Arabia after being certified as a pilot , but left again in late 1999 , telling his family that he was going to the United Arab Emirates to work for an airline . Hanjour likely went to Afghanistan , where Al @-@ Qaeda recruits were screened for special skills they might have . Already having selected the Hamburg cell members , Al Qaeda leaders selected Hanjour to lead the fourth team of hijackers . 
 Alec Station , the CIA 's unit dedicated to tracking Osama bin Laden , had discovered that two of the other hijackers , al @-@ Hazmi and al @-@ Mihdhar , had multiple @-@ entry visas to the United States well before 9 / 11 . Two FBI agents inside the unit tried to alert FBI headquarters , but CIA officers rebuffed them . 
 In December 2000 , Hanjour arrived in San Diego , joining " muscle " hijackers Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi and Khalid al @-@ Mihdhar , who had been there since January 2000 . Soon after arriving , Hanjour and Hazmi left for Mesa , Arizona , where Hanjour began refresher training at Arizona Aviation . 
 In April 2001 , they relocated to Falls Church , Virginia , where they awaited the arrival of the remaining " muscle " hijackers . One of these men , Majed Moqed , arrived on May 2 , 2001 , with Flight 175 hijacker Ahmed al @-@ Ghamdi from Dubai at Dulles International Airport . They moved into an apartment with Hazmi and Hanjour . 
 On May 21 , 2001 , Hanjour rented a room in Paterson , New Jersey , where he stayed with other hijackers through the end of August . The last Flight 77 " muscle " hijacker , Salem al @-@ Hazmi , arrived on June 29 , 2001 , with Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari ( a hijacker of Flight 11 ) at John F. Kennedy International Airport from the United Arab Emirates . They stayed with Hanjour . 
 Hanjour received ground instruction and did practice flights at Air Fleet Training Systems in Teterboro , New Jersey , and at Caldwell Flight Academy in Fairfield , New Jersey . Hanjour moved out of the room in Paterson and arrived at the Valencia Motel in Laurel , Maryland , on September 2 , 2001 . While in Maryland , Hanjour and fellow hijackers trained at Gold 's Gym in Greenbelt . On September 10 , he completed a certification flight , using a terrain recognition system for navigation , at Congressional Air Charters in Gaithersburg , Maryland . 
 On September 10 , Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi — accompanied by other hijackers — checked into the Marriott in Herndon , Virginia , near Dulles Airport . 
 = = = Suspected accomplices = = = 
 According to a U.S. State Department cable leaked in the WikiLeaks dump in February 2010 , the FBI has investigated another suspect , Mohammed al @-@ <unk> . He had associated with three Qatari citizens who flew from Los Angeles to London ( via Washington ) and Qatar on the eve of the attacks , after allegedly surveying the World Trade Center and the White House . U.S. law enforcement officials said that the data about the four men was " just one of many leads that were thoroughly investigated at the time and never led to terrorism charges " . An official added that the three Qatari citizens have never been questioned by the FBI . Eleanor Hill , the former staff director for the congressional joint inquiry on the September 11 attacks , said the cable reinforces questions about the thoroughness of the FBI 's investigation . She also said that the inquiry concluded that the hijackers had a support network that helped them in different ways . 
 The three Qatari men were booked to fly from Los Angeles to Washington on September 10 , 2001 , on the same plane that was hijacked and piloted into the Pentagon on the following day . Instead , they flew from Los Angeles to Qatar , via Washington and London . While the cable said that <unk> was currently under investigation , U.S. law enforcement officials said that there was no active investigation of him or of the Qatari citizens mentioned in the cable . 
 = = Flight = = 
 The American Airlines Flight 77 aircraft was a Boeing 757 @-@ 223 ( registration <unk> ) . The aircraft was built and had its first flight in 1991 . The flight crew included pilot Charles Burlingame ( a Naval Academy graduate and former fighter pilot ) , First Officer David <unk> , and flight attendants Michele <unk> , Jennifer Lewis , Kenneth Lewis , and Renee May . The capacity of the aircraft was 188 passengers , but with 58 passengers on September 11 , the load factor was 33 percent . American Airlines said that Tuesdays were the least @-@ traveled day of the week , with the same load factor seen on Tuesdays in the previous three months for Flight 77 . 
 = = = Boarding and departure = = = 
 On the morning of September 11 , 2001 , the five hijackers arrived at Washington Dulles International Airport . At 07 : 15 , Khalid al @-@ Mihdhar and Majed Moqed checked in at the American Airlines ticket counter for Flight 77 , arriving at the passenger security checkpoint a few minutes later at 07 : 18 . Both men set off the metal detector and were put through secondary screening . Moqed continued to set off the alarm , so he was searched with a hand wand . The Hazmi brothers checked in together at the ticket counter at 07 : 29 . Hani Hanjour checked in separately and arrived at the passenger security checkpoint at 07 : 35 . Hanjour was followed minutes later at the checkpoint by Salem and Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi , who also set off the metal detector 's alarm . The screener at the checkpoint never resolved what set off the alarm . As seen in security footage later released , Nawaf Hazmi appeared to have an unidentified item in his back pocket . Utility knives up to four inches were permitted at the time by the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) as carry @-@ on items . The passenger security checkpoint at Dulles International Airport was operated by <unk> Security , under contract with United Airlines . 
 The hijackers were all selected for extra screening of their checked bags . Hanjour , al @-@ Mihdhar , and Moqed were chosen by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System criteria , while the brothers Nawaf and Salem al @-@ Hazmi were selected because they did not provide adequate identification and were deemed suspicious by the airline check @-@ in agent . Hanjour , Mihdhar , and Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi did not check any bags for the flight . Checked bags belonging to Moqed and Salem al @-@ Hazmi were held until they boarded the aircraft . 
 Flight 77 was scheduled to depart for Los Angeles at 08 : 10 ; 58 passengers boarded through Gate <unk> , including the five hijackers . Excluding the hijackers , of the 59 other passengers and crew on board , there were 26 men , 22 women , and five children ranging in age from three to eleven . On the flight , Hani Hanjour was seated up front in 1B , while Salem and Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi were seated in first class in seats 5E and 5F . Majed Moqed and Khalid al @-@ Mihdhar were seated further back in 12A and 12B , in economy class . Flight 77 left the gate on time and took off from Runway 30 at Dulles at 08 : 20 . 
 = = = Hijacking = = = 
 The 9 / 11 Commission estimated that the flight was hijacked between 08 : 51 and 08 : 54 , shortly after American Airlines Flight 11 struck the World Trade Center and not too long after United Airlines Flight 175 had been hijacked . The last normal radio communications from the aircraft to air traffic control occurred at 08 : 50 : 51 . Unlike the other three flights , there were no reports of anyone being stabbed or a bomb threat and the pilots were not immediately killed but shoved to the back of the plane with the rest of the passengers . At 08 : 54 , the plane began to deviate from its normal , assigned flight path and turned south . Two minutes later at 08 : 56 , the plane 's transponder was switched off . The hijackers set the flight 's autopilot on a course heading east towards Washington , D.C. 
 The FAA was aware at this point that there was an emergency on board the airplane . By this time , Flight 11 had already crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center and Flight 175 was known to have been hijacked and was within minutes of striking the South Tower . After learning of this second hijacking involving an American Airlines aircraft and the hijacking involving United Airlines , American Airlines ' executive vice president Gerard <unk> ordered a nationwide ground stop for the airline . The Indianapolis Air Traffic Control Center , as well as American Airlines dispatchers , made several failed attempts to contact the aircraft . At the time the airplane was hijacked , it was flying over an area of limited radar coverage . With air controllers unable to contact the flight by radio , an Indianapolis official declared that the Boeing 757 had possibly crashed at 09 : 09 . 
 Two people on the aircraft made phone calls to contacts on the ground . At 09 : 12 , flight attendant Renee May called her mother , Nancy May , in Las Vegas . During the call , which lasted nearly two minutes , May said her flight was being hijacked by six persons , and staff and passengers had been moved to the rear of the airplane . May asked her mother to contact American Airlines , which she and her husband promptly did ; American Airlines was already aware of the hijacking . Between 09 : 16 and 09 : 26 , passenger Barbara Olson called her husband , United States Solicitor General Theodore Olson , and reported that the airplane had been hijacked and that the assailants had box cutters and knives . She reported that the passengers , including the pilots , had been moved to the back of the cabin and that the hijackers were unaware of her call . A minute into the conversation , the call was cut off . Theodore Olson contacted the command center at the Department of Justice , and tried unsuccessfully to contact Attorney General John Ashcroft . About five minutes later , Barbara Olson called again , told her husband that the " pilot " ( possibly Hanjour on the cabin intercom ) had announced the flight was hijacked , and asked , " what do I tell the pilot to do ? " Ted Olson asked her location and she reported the plane was flying low over a residential area . He told her of the attacks on the World Trade Center . Soon afterward , the call cut off again . 
 An airplane was detected again by Dulles controllers on radar screens as it approached Washington , turning and descending rapidly . Controllers initially thought this was a military fighter , due to its high speed and maneuvering . Reagan Airport controllers asked a passing Air National Guard Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules to identify and follow the aircraft . The pilot , Lt. Col. Steven O 'Brien , told them it was a Boeing 757 or 767 , and its silver fuselage meant that it was probably an American Airlines jet . He had difficulty picking out the airplane in the " East Coast haze " , but then saw a " huge " fireball , and initially assumed it had hit the ground . Approaching the Pentagon , he saw the impact site on the building 's west side and reported to Reagan control , " Looks like that aircraft crashed into the Pentagon , sir . " 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 According to the 9 / 11 Commission Report , as Flight 77 was 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Pentagon , it made a 330 @-@ degree turn . At the end of the turn , it was descending through 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 670 m ) , pointed toward the Pentagon and downtown Washington . Hani Hanjour advanced the throttles to maximum power and dived toward the Pentagon . While level above the ground and seconds from the crash , the wings knocked over five street lampposts and the right wing struck a portable generator , creating a smoke trail seconds before smashing into the Pentagon . Flight 77 , flying at 530 mph ( 853 km / h , 237 m / s , or 460 knots ) over the Navy Annex Building adjacent to Arlington National Cemetery , crashed into the western side of the Pentagon in Arlington County , Virginia , just south of Washington , D.C. , at 09 : 37 : 46 . The plane hit the Pentagon at the first @-@ floor level , and at the moment of impact , the airplane was rolled slightly to the left , with the right wing elevated . The front part of the fuselage disintegrated on impact , while the mid and tail sections moved for another fraction of a second , with tail section debris penetrating furthest into the building . In all , the airplane took eight @-@ tenths of a second to fully penetrate 310 feet ( 94 m ) into the three outermost of the building 's five rings and unleashed a fireball that rose 200 feet ( 61 m ) above the building . 
 At the time of the attacks , approximately 18 @,@ 000 people worked in the Pentagon , which was 4 @,@ 000 fewer than before renovations began in 1998 . The section of the Pentagon that was struck , which had recently been renovated at a cost of $ 250 million , housed the Naval Command Center . 
 In all , there were 189 deaths at the Pentagon site , including the 125 in the Pentagon building in addition to the 64 on board the aircraft . Passenger Barbara Olson was en route to a taping of Politically Incorrect . A group of children , their chaperones , and National Geographic Society staff members were also on board , embarking on an educational trip west to the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary near Santa Barbara , California . The fatalities at the Pentagon included 55 military personnel and 70 civilians . Of those 125 killed , 92 were on the first floor , 31 were on the second floor , and two were on the third . Seven Defense Intelligence Agency civilian employees were killed while the Office of the Secretary of Defense lost one contractor . The Army suffered 75 fatalities — 53 civilians ( 47 employees and six contractors ) and 22 soldiers — while the Navy suffered 42 fatalities — nine civilians ( six employees and three contractors ) and 33 sailors . Lieutenant General Timothy Maude , an Army Deputy Chief of Staff , was the highest @-@ ranking military officer killed at the Pentagon ; also killed was retired Rear Admiral Wilson Flagg , a passenger on the plane . LT Mari @-@ Rae <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , was also on board the flight , and was the first Navy Judge Advocate ever to be killed . Another 106 were injured on the ground and were treated at area hospitals . 
 On the side where the plane hit , the Pentagon is bordered by Interstate 395 and Washington Boulevard . Motorist Mary Lyman , who was on I @-@ 395 , saw the airplane pass over at a " steep angle toward the ground and going fast " and then saw the cloud of smoke from the Pentagon . Omar Campo , another witness , was cutting the grass on the other side of the road when the airplane flew over his head , and later recalled : 
 I was cutting the grass and it came in screaming over my head . I felt the impact . The whole ground shook and the whole area was full of fire . I could never imagine I would see anything like that here . 
 <unk> <unk> , a computer programmer , was on his way to work and stuck in a traffic jam near the Pentagon when the airplane flew over . " There was a huge screaming noise and I got out of the car as the plane came over . Everybody was running away in different directions . It was tilting its wings up and down like it was trying to balance . It hit some lampposts on the way in . " Daryl Donley witnessed the crash and took some of the first photographs of the site . 
 USA Today reporter Mike Walter was driving on Washington Boulevard when he witnessed the crash , which he recounted , 
 I looked out my window and I saw this plane , this jet , an American Airlines jet , coming . And I thought , ' This doesn 't add up , it 's really low . ' And I saw it . I mean it was like a cruise missile with wings . It went right there and slammed right into the Pentagon . 
 Terrance Kean , who lived in a nearby apartment building , heard the noise of loud jet engines , glanced out his window , and saw a " very , very large passenger jet " . He watched " it just plow right into the side of the Pentagon . The nose penetrated into the portico . And then it sort of disappeared , and there was fire and smoke everywhere . " Tim Timmerman , who is a pilot himself , noticed American Airlines markings on the aircraft as he saw it hit the Pentagon . Other drivers on Washington Boulevard , Interstate 395 , and Columbia Pike witnessed the crash , as did people in Pentagon City , Crystal City , and other nearby locations . 
 Former Georgetown University basketball coach John Thompson had originally booked a ticket on Flight 77 . As he would tell the story many times in the following years , including a September 12 , 2011 interview on Jim Rome 's radio show , he had been scheduled to appear on that show on September 12 , 2001 . Thompson was planning to be in Las Vegas for a friend 's birthday on September 13 , and initially insisted on traveling to Rome 's Los Angeles studio on the 11th . However , this did not work for the show , which wanted him to travel on the day of the show . After a Rome staffer personally assured Thompson that he would be able to travel from Los Angeles to Las Vegas immediately after the show , Thompson changed his travel plans . He felt the impact from the crash at his home near the Pentagon . 
 = = Rescue and recovery = = 
 Rescue efforts began immediately after the crash . Almost all the successful rescues of survivors occurred within half an hour of the impact . Initially , rescue efforts were led by the military and civilian employees within the building . Within minutes , the first fire companies arrived and found these volunteers searching near the impact site . The firemen ordered them to leave as they were not properly equipped or trained to deal with the hazards . The Arlington County Fire Department ( ACFD ) assumed command of the immediate rescue operation within 10 minutes of the crash . ACFD Assistant Chief James Schwartz implemented an incident command system ( ICS ) to coordinate response efforts among multiple agencies . It took about an hour for the ICS structure to become fully operational . Firefighters from Fort Myer and Reagan National Airport arrived within minutes . Rescue and firefighting efforts were impeded by rumors of additional incoming planes . Chief Schwartz ordered two evacuations during the day in response to these rumors . 
 As firefighters attempted to extinguish the fires , they watched the building in fear of a structural collapse . One firefighter remarked that they " pretty much knew the building was going to collapse because it started making weird sounds and creaking " . Officials saw a cornice of the building move and ordered an evacuation . Minutes later , at 10 : 10 , the upper floors of the damaged area of the Pentagon collapsed . The collapsed area was about 95 feet ( 29 m ) at its widest point and 50 feet ( 15 m ) at its deepest . The amount of time between impact and collapse allowed everyone on the fourth and fifth levels to evacuate safely before the structure collapsed . After the collapse , the interior fires intensified , spreading through all five floors . After 11 : 00 , firefighters mounted a two @-@ pronged attack against the fires . Officials estimated temperatures of up to 2 @,@ 000 ° F ( 1 @,@ 090 ° C ) . While progress was made against the interior fires by late afternoon , firefighters realized a flammable layer of wood under the Pentagon 's slate roof had caught fire and begun to spread . Typical firefighting tactics were rendered useless by the reinforced structure as firefighters were unable to reach the fire to extinguish it . Firefighters instead made firebreaks in the roof on September 12 to prevent further spreading . At 18 : 00 on the 12th , Arlington County issued a press release stating the fire was " controlled " but not fully " extinguished " . Firefighters continued to put out smaller fires that ignited in the succeeding days . 
 Various pieces of aircraft debris were found within the wreckage at the Pentagon . While on fire and escaping from the Navy Command Center , Lt. Kevin Shaeffer observed a chunk of the aircraft 's nose cone and the nose landing gear in the service road between rings B and C. Early in the morning on Friday , September 14 , Fairfax County Urban Search and Rescue Team members Carlton <unk> and Brian <unk> came across an " intact seat from the plane 's cockpit " , while paramedics and firefighters located the two black boxes near the punch out hole in the A @-@ E drive , nearly 300 feet ( 91 m ) into the building . The cockpit voice recorder was too badly damaged and charred to retrieve any information , though the flight data recorder yielded useful information . Investigators also found a part of Nawaf al @-@ Hazmi 's driver 's license in the North Parking Lot rubble pile . Personal effects belonging to victims were found and taken to Fort Myer . 
 = = = Remains = = = 
 Army engineers determined by 5 : 30 p.m. on the first day that no one remained alive in the damaged section of the building . In the days after the crash , news reports emerged that up to 800 people had died . Army troops from Fort Belvoir were the first teams to survey the interior of the crash site and noted the presence of human remains . Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) Urban Search and Rescue teams , including Fairfax County Urban Search and Rescue assisted the search for remains , working through the National Interagency Incident Management System ( <unk> ) . Kevin <unk> , a Navy photographer surveying the Navy Command Center after the attacks , remarked that " there were so many bodies , I 'd almost step on them . So I 'd have to really take care to look backwards as I 'm backing up in the dark , looking with a flashlight , making sure I 'm not stepping on somebody " . Debris from the Pentagon was taken to the Pentagon 's north parking lot for more detailed search for remains and evidence . 
 Remains that were recovered from the Pentagon were photographed , and turned over to the Armed Forces Medical Examiner office , located at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware . The medical examiner 's office was able to identify remains belonging to 179 of the victims . Investigators eventually identified 184 of the 189 people who died in the attack . The remains of the five hijackers were identified through a process of elimination , and were turned over as evidence to the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) . On September 21 , the ACFD relinquished control of the crime scene to the FBI . The Washington Field Office , National Capital Response Squad ( <unk> ) , and the Joint Terrorism Task Force ( JTTF ) led the crime scene investigation at the Pentagon . 
 By October 2 , 2001 , the search for evidence and remains was complete and the site was turned over to Pentagon officials . In 2002 , the remains of 25 victims were buried collectively at Arlington National Cemetery , with a five @-@ sided granite marker inscribed with the names of all the victims in the Pentagon . The ceremony also honored the five victims whose remains were never found . 
 = = = Flight recorders = = = 
 At around 3 : 40 a.m. on September 14 , a paramedic and a firefighter who were searching through the debris of the impact site found two dark boxes , about 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 46 cm ) by 2 feet ( 61 cm ) long . They called for an FBI agent , who in turn called for someone from the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) . The NTSB employee confirmed that these were the flight recorders ( " black boxes " ) from American Airlines Flight 77 . Dick Bridges , deputy manager for Arlington County , Virginia , said the cockpit voice recorder was damaged on the outside and the flight data recorder was charred . Bridges said the recorders were found " right where the plane came into the building . " 
 The cockpit voice recorder was transported to the NTSB lab in Washington , D.C. , to see what data was salvageable . In its report , the NTSB identified the unit as an L @-@ 3 Communications , Fairchild Aviation Recorders model A @-@ 100A cockpit voice recorder — a device which records on magnetic tape . No usable segments of tape were found inside the recorder ; according to the NTSB 's report , " [ t ] he majority of the recording tape was fused into a solid block of charred plastic " . On the other hand , all the data from the flight data recorder , which used a solid @-@ state drive , was recovered . 
 = = = Continuity of operations = = = 
 At the moment of impact , Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was in his office on the other side of the Pentagon , away from the crash site . He ran to the site and assisted the injured . Rumsfeld returned to his office , and went to a conference room in the Executive Support Center where he joined a secure <unk> with Vice President Dick Cheney and other officials . On the day of the attacks , DoD officials considered moving their command operations to Site R , a backup facility in Pennsylvania . Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld insisted he remain at the Pentagon , and sent Deputy Secretary Paul Wolfowitz to Site R. The National Military Command Center ( NMCC ) continued to operate at the Pentagon , even as smoke entered the facility . Engineers and building managers manipulated the ventilation and other building systems that still functioned to draw smoke out of the NMCC and bring in fresh air . 
 During a press conference held inside the Pentagon at 18 : 42 , Rumsfeld announced , " The Pentagon 's functioning . It will be in business tomorrow . " Pentagon employees returned the next day to offices in mostly unaffected areas of the building . By the end of September , more workers returned to the lightly damaged areas of the Pentagon . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Early estimates on rebuilding the damaged section of the Pentagon were that it would take three years to complete . However , the project moved forward at an accelerated pace and was completed by the one @-@ year anniversary of the attack . The rebuilt section of the Pentagon includes a small indoor memorial and chapel at the point of impact . An outdoor memorial , commissioned by the Pentagon and designed by Julie Beckman and Keith Kaseman , was completed on schedule for its dedication on September 11 , 2008 . Since September 11 , American Airlines continues to fly from Dulles International Airport to Los Angeles International Airport . The flight number 77 has been renumbered to 1736 , now using an Airbus 319 , departing at 8 : 30 in the morning . 
 = = = Security camera video = = = 
 On May 16 , 2006 , the Department of Defense released filmed footage that was recorded by a security camera of American Airlines Flight 77 crashing into the Pentagon , with a plane visible in one frame , as a " thin white blur " and an explosion following . The images were made public in response to a December 2004 Freedom of Information Act request by Judicial Watch . Some still images from the video had previously been released and publicly circulated , but this was the first official release of the edited video of the crash . 
 A nearby Citgo service station also had security cameras , but a video released on September 15 , 2006 did not show the crash because the camera was pointed away from the crash site . 
 The <unk> Hotel , located nearby in Crystal City , Virginia , also had a security camera video . On December 4 , 2006 , the FBI released the video in response to a FOIA lawsuit filed by Scott Bingham . The footage is " grainy and the focus is soft , but a rapidly growing tower of smoke is visible in the distance on the upper edge of the frame as the plane crashes into the building " . 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 On September 12 , 2002 , Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and General Richard Myers , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , dedicated the Victims of Terrorist Attack on the Pentagon Memorial at Arlington National Cemetery . The memorial specifically honors the five individuals for whom no identifiable remains were found . This included Dana Falkenberg , age three , who was aboard American Airlines Flight 77 with her parents and older sister . A portion of the remains of 25 other victims are also buried at the site . The memorial is a pentagonal granite marker 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) high . On five sides of the memorial along the top are inscribed the words " Victims of Terrorist Attack on the Pentagon September 11 , 2001 " . Aluminum plaques , painted black , are inscribed with the names of the 184 victims of the terrorist attack . The site is located in Section 64 , on a slight rise , which gives it a view of the Pentagon . 
 At the National September 11 Memorial , the names of the Pentagon victims are inscribed on the South Pool , on Panels S @-@ 1 and S @-@ 72 – S @-@ 76 . 
 The Pentagon Memorial , located just southwest of The Pentagon in Arlington County , Virginia , is a permanent outdoor memorial to the 184 people who died as victims in the building and on American Airlines Flight 77 during the September 11 attacks . Designed by Julie Beckman and Keith Kaseman of the architectural firm of Kaseman Beckman Advanced Strategies with engineers Buro Happold , the memorial opened on September 11 , 2008 , seven years after the attack . 
 = = Nationalities of people on the plane = = 
 Note : This list does not include the nationalities of the five hijackers . 
 = The Shortest Way with the Dissenters = 
 The Shortest @-@ Way with the Dissenters ; Or , Proposals for the Establishment of the Church is a pamphlet by Daniel Defoe , first published in 1702 . Defoe was prompted to write the pamphlet by the increased hostility towards Dissenters in the wake of the accession of Queen Anne to the throne . 
 It is written in the same style as the Tory publications that attacked Dissenters , and was assumed by some people to be a genuine vindication of their view . The pamphlet raised embarrassing questions about the handling of the issue by the Tory ministry , and led to Defoe 's arrest for seditious libel . His imprisonment , during which he fell into bankruptcy , was to have a lasting influence on his subsequent writings . In the years after his release , Defoe published several pamphlets that attempted to explain its purpose and his own views . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1702 , King William III died , and Queen Anne succeeded to the thrones of England , Scotland and Ireland . She was markedly less tolerant than William of the device known as " occasional conformity " , whereby Dissenters could qualify as members of the Church of England — and thereby hold public office — by attending a church service once a year . Defoe was supportive of religious freedom , though he was critical of the device and considered it hypocrisy . He had written against it in a pamphlet entitled An enquiry into occasional conformity : Shewing that the dissenters are no way concern 'd in it ( 1698 ) 
 In the same year , hostility towards Dissenters increased . A Bill against occasional conformity was passed through the House of Commons and debated in the Lords . Figures such as Henry Sacheverell , a High church clergyman , warned against Dissenters assuming positions of political power . His lead was followed by the Tory press , who published a number of sermons and pamphlets making similar arguments . In December , Defoe published his own pamphlet , The Shortest Way , assuming the same stylistic conventions as the Sacheverell and the Tory publications . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The Shortest Way with the Dissenters ; or , Proposals for the Establishment of the Church is a pamphlet consisting of twenty @-@ nine pages . It opens with the fable of the Cock and the Horses . The Cock , lacking any perch in the stable , is forced to rest on the ground and in fear of the Horses moving around and stepping on him , advises : “ Pray , <unk> ! let us stand still ! for fear we should tread upon one another ! ” The speaker then applies this to the contemporary situation , with the Cock representing the Dissenters . 
 The next section accuses the Dissenters of involvement with various notorious and hideous events of the past century , including the English Civil War and Monmouth 's Rebellion . The accusations become increasingly sinister , and at points the speaker directly addresses the Dissenters ( " You have butchered one King ! deposed another King ! and made a Mock King of a third ! " ) . A brief history is given of how past monarchs — from James I to William III — have treated the Dissenters ; in the opinion of the speaker , it is too leniently . 
 The major section comprises a series of arguments for why the Dissenters should be treated favourably ( " They are very numerous " , " That this is a time of war " ) . The speaker denounces each in turn and offers several counter @-@ arguments , each gradually escalating in their severity . A vision is given of what will happen to the Church of England if it is not defended against the Dissenters . The pamphlet ends with a rallying call to action against the Dissenters in defence of the church ( " Now let us <unk> the Thieves . " ) 
 = = Genre and style = = 
 The Shortest Way has traditionally been classified as a satire , although this has been disputed by scholars . Miriam <unk> has suggested that it is instead a form of hoax or " banter " , and that Defoe does not use many of the features necessary for it to be considered a true satire . Paul <unk> describes the critical tradition surrounding the work as " asking mainly whether it is inadequate irony , deficient satire , or misused impersonation . " Ashley Marshall suggests that " The Shortest @-@ Way is best understood not as insufficiently ironic but as a counterfeit , an intentional fake not meant to be decoded . " 
 The difficulty for Defoe 's contemporaries in assessing whether the work was ironic was the proximity of the speaker 's voice to that of the High Anglicans whose views are being ridiculed . The pamphlet mixes both real observation and fabrication , and assumes the rhetorical style of his target . Defoe uses and imitates the language and metaphor of fanatical churchman , particularly Sacheverell 's sermons ; the speaker 's comparison of the Dissenters to vipers is one that Sacheverell often made . Although The Shortest Way does not parody the genre of the Anglican sermon , it does deploy some of the same structures ; the initial Aesopic fable of the Cock and the Horses is expanded upon in a way that parallels the use of a biblical quotation to initiate a sermon . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Upon its publication , The Shortest Way provoked immediate and passionate reactions from both sides of the debate . Some made use of it as a genuine vindication of the anti @-@ Dissenter opinion , although speculation later occurred over whether it was ironic . The pamphlet generated a great deal of publicity over the handling of the issue by the Tory ministry . This resulted in the issuing of a warrant by the High Tory Secretary of State for the Southern Department , the Earl of Nottingham , for the arrest of Defoe on the charge of seditious libel , the order being given to " … make Strict and diligent Search for Daniel <unk> and him having found you are to apprehend and seize together with his Papers for high Crime and misdemeanours and to bring him before me … " 
 Defoe was finally imprisoned on 21 May 1703 , after avoiding his summons and evading capture . He was fined , made to stand in the pillory on three occasions and remained in prison till November ; in the meantime , his business affairs sank into ruin . The whole affair left a lasting impression on him , which can be felt in his writings . In the years following his arrest and release , Defoe made several attempts to explain The Shortest Way and his own viewpoint . Amongst the series of explanatory pamphlets doing this are An Explanation of a Late Pamphlet , <unk> , The Shortest Way … ( 1703 ) and A Dialogue Between a Dissenter and the <unk> ( 1703 ) . The suspected involvement of the Tory Speaker of the House , Robert Harley , in obtaining the release of Defoe is credited as the beginning of their professional relationship , in which Defoe worked as a propagandist for Harley , after he succeeded Nottingham as Secretary of State in 1704 . 
 Modern scholarly reception has considered The Shortest Way in negative terms , as a failed satire , or as using irony so slight as to be undetectable . Such a conclusion cites the contemporary reaction to the work , how it failed to deliver its objectives and also caused its author such problems . If critics have offered praise , it is the extent to which Defoe managed to impersonate the style of his subjects , so as to be indistinguishable from them . The Shortest Way is frequently contrasted with another work of irony in the eighteenth century , which is considered to have succeeded in its use of the device , Jonathan Swift 's A Modest Proposal ( 1729 ) . 
 = England national football team manager = 
 The role of an England national football team manager was first established in May 1947 with the appointment of Walter Winterbottom . Before this , the England team was selected by the " International Selection Committee " , a process in which the Football Association ( FA ) would select coaches and trainers from the league to prepare the side for single games , but where all decisions ultimately remained under the control of the committee . A 1 – 0 defeat by Switzerland prompted FA secretary Stanley Rous to raise Winterbottom from " National Director of coaching " to " Manager " . 
 Eighteen men have occupied the post since its inception ; four of those were in short @-@ term caretaker manager roles : Joe Mercer ( seven games in charge ) , Howard Wilkinson ( two games , a year apart from one another ) , Peter Taylor ( one game ) and Stuart Pearce ( one game ) . In comparison , Winterbottom held the position for the longest to date ; a tenure of 16 years , comprising four World Cups and a total of 139 matches . Alf Ramsey is the only manager to have won a major tournament , winning the 1966 World Cup with his " <unk> Wonders " . No other manager has progressed beyond the semi @-@ finals of a major competition before or since , with only two managers achieving a semi @-@ final appearance , Bobby Robson at the 1990 World Cup , and Terry Venables in the 1996 European Championship . 
 Swedish coach Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson became the first foreign manager of the team in January 2001 amid much acrimony ; he helped the team to three successive quarter @-@ finals in major championships . Italian manager Fabio Capello replaced Steve McClaren in December 2007 , after England failed to qualify for the 2008 European Championship . Capello 's side endured a lacklustre performance during the 2010 World Cup , but the FA confirmed that he would remain in the role . However , Capello resigned in February 2012 , following a disagreement with the FA over their removal of John Terry 's captaincy . He was replaced , on a caretaker basis , by Stuart Pearce , before Roy Hodgson was named as Capello 's permanent replacement in May 2012 . Hodgson resigned on the 27 June 2016 after England were knocked out of UEFA Euro 2016 by Iceland in the round of 16 . Sam Allardyce was announced as his successor a month later . 
 The England manager 's job is subject to intense press scrutiny , often including revelations about the incumbent 's private life . Due to the high level of expectation of both the public and media the role has been described as " the impossible job " or compared in importance in national culture to that of the British Prime Minister . 
 = = Position = = 
 = = = Role = = = 
 The England manager 's role means he has sole responsibility for all on @-@ the @-@ field elements of the England team . Among other activities , this includes selecting the national team squad , the starting team , captain , tactics , substitutes and penalty @-@ takers . Before 1946 , the " Select Committee " ( as appointed by the FA ) would manage all issues barring the actual match day team selection , formation and tactics which was left to the head coach for the event . However interference was common , and not only from the FA . After the Second World War , with the relaunch of competitive international calendar , the manager 's role expanded to take in all elements : from the selection of hotel and training camp venues , through to food and travel arrangements . 
 The manager is given a free hand in selecting his coaching ( " back room " ) staff . For example , in 2008 Fabio Capello appointed four Italians ( Franco Baldini as general manager , Italo <unk> as assistant coach , Franco Tancredi as goalkeeping coach and Massimo Neri as fitness coach ) ; he then appointed Englishman Stuart Pearce , the England Under 21s coach , as an England coach , with Capello stating " From the start I made it clear that I wanted an English coach as part of my coaching team . " 
 The England manager may also involve himself in wider issues beyond the on @-@ the @-@ field team issues . The England manager is expected to advise the FA on how to approach the complex bidding system that surrounds the arrangement of fixtures for a qualifying campaign . On a more tactical level , a host of other details can be influenced ; Capello is even believed to have instructed the Wembley ball boys to return balls at speed when they go out of play . 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 The process of appointing a new England manager is undertaken by an FA committee , comprising board members and other high @-@ ranking FA officials . For example , the members of the selection panel which appointed Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson in 2001 were : chief executive Adam Crozier , chairman Geoff Thompson , vice @-@ chairman Dave Richards , club chairmen and FA board members David Dein and Peter Ridsdale , and technical director Howard Wilkinson . 
 All eighteen England managers had played the game professionally . Of the sixteen Englishmen to hold the post of manager , six were never capped for the senior England team as a player ( Winterbottom , Greenwood , Wilkinson , Graham Taylor , McClaren , Allardyce ) . Of the eight that did , four earned caps numbering in double @-@ figures : Robson ( 20 ) , Ramsey ( 32 ) , Hoddle ( 53 ) , and Keegan ( 63 ) . Two also served as England captains , Ramsey ( 3 ) and Keegan ( 31 ) . Of the two foreign managers , only Capello played for a national team , earning 32 caps for Italy . 
 = = = National significance = = = 
 The England manager 's job has been compared in importance to that of the Prime Minister . Passion for football as England 's national sport is coupled with patriotism and Wembley Stadium as the " home " of football . The dismissal or appointment of an England manager is front page news and the subject of intense interest . Large sums are wagered on England winning , and during tournaments the country is festooned in St George 's flags ; during the 2006 World Cup , 27 % of English adults bought a flag in one month alone . Shops and offices will be deserted as vast numbers of people watch the game . 
 The England manager 's job is made more complex by his dependence on the co @-@ operation of clubs and their managers in releasing players for friendlies , and " club versus country " conflict is said to have happened when permission is refused , given reluctantly , or negotiated . There are also repeated comments that the length of the English season ( the top flight plays 38 league matches ) is unhelpful for preparing tired players for major tournaments , but the self @-@ interest of the Premier League makes a reduction in the number of games unlikely , particularly in light of the 2008 proposal for Game 39 , a match played between Premier League clubs outside the country . This combination of factors , coupled with England 's mediocre record in major championships has led to the England manager 's job being described as the " impossible job " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Full @-@ time era begins = = = 
 Before 1946 , the England national football team had been under the leadership of a Football Association official and a trainer , usually from a London club . Appointed in 1946 , initially as chief coach , Walter Winterbottom had been a member of the FA " International Selection Committee " . The England squad was selected by an FA committee during his tenure , with Winterbottom 's role restricted to selecting the starting team together with the coaching and tactics . In his first game as manager , he led England to a 7 – 2 victory over Ireland at Windsor Park , Belfast in the 1946 – 47 British Home Championship . Success in the Home Championship in 1950 resulted in England 's qualification to the 1950 World Cup in Brazil . During the tournament , England suffered a shock defeat against the United States , and went out of the tournament with another 1 – 0 defeat , this time to Spain . 
 England experienced another surprise upset under Winterbottom 's guidance in 1953 when Hungary defeated England 6 – 3 at Wembley Stadium . Winterbottom said afterwards , " ... The press tended to think we would win easily , but I tried to point out that the Hungarians were actually a great side . " He guided England to first place in the 1954 British Home Championship , which qualified the team for the 1954 World Cup in Switzerland , but saw his side knocked out in the quarter @-@ finals , going down 4 – 2 against Uruguay . Four wins from four matches enabled England 's qualification for the 1958 World Cup only for Winterbottom 's side to fail in the group play @-@ off stage , losing 1 – 0 to USSR . England lost to Brazil in the quarter @-@ final of the 1962 World Cup in Chile and , under attack from the British press , Winterbottom resigned five months later . He remains the longest serving manager of England . 
 = = = World Cup success = = = 
 Alf Ramsey took control of the team in 1962 , but unlike Winterbottom , Ramsey had been a club manager , winning the League championship with Ipswich Town . Upon his appointment , he declared England would win the 1966 World Cup . His first match in charge resulted in a 5 – 2 loss at Parc des Princes against France . England automatically qualified for the 1966 World Cup as hosts and , after a goalless draw in the first match against Uruguay , four consecutive victories saw England through to the final against West Germany . A 4 – 2 victory , after extra time , won England the World Cup for the only time . As a result of his and England 's achievements , Ramsey was awarded a knighthood in 1967 . The following year England finished third in the 1968 European Championship in Rome , but Ramsey reflected " We are world champions . Third place is not our real position . " 
 Automatic qualification for the 1970 World Cup was secured as world champions so Ramsey led England on a pre @-@ tournament tour of South America . The effects of altitude on the team led Ramsey to appoint the first full @-@ time team doctor , Neil Phillips , who helped prepare the squad for the forthcoming tournament in Mexico . England were defeated in the quarter @-@ final by West Germany ; with a 2 – 0 lead with 25 minutes of the match remaining , Ramsey substituted Bobby Charlton and goalscorer Martin Peters , but West Germany went on to win 3 – 2 after extra time . Ramsey was heavily criticised in the British press for the substitutions . Losing out to West Germany again , this time in a two @-@ legged qualifying quarter final in the 1972 European Championship , Ramsey prepared England for qualification for the 1974 World Cup . Needing a win against Poland , Ramsey 's tactical use of substitutions was again called into question as the match ended in a 1 – 1 draw . England had failed to qualify for the World Cup , and Ramsey was sacked the following May . 
 = = = Turbulent times = = = 
 Joe Mercer took control of the team on a caretaker basis for seven matches , before the FA appointed Don Revie on a five @-@ year contract . It was a year before Revie 's England suffered a defeat but despite this , he changed his starting line @-@ up for every game . His relationship with the FA had broken down and his team @-@ building exercises , including carpet bowls and indoor golf , led to <unk> in the squad . A 2 – 0 defeat to the Netherlands at Wembley turned the press against him ; some commentators compared the loss to the 6 – 3 defeat by Hungary in 1953 . Convinced he was to be replaced by Bobby Robson , he announced he was to become manager of the United Arab Emirates team . Selling his story to the Daily Mail , he subsequently resigned on 11 July 1977 . Revie was charged with bringing the game into disrepute and was banned by the FA in a " kangaroo court " for ten years . On appeal to the High Court , the ban was overturned but the judge ordered Revie to pay two @-@ thirds of the costs . Brian Clough applied for the position in 1977 , but the FA rejected him and Ron Greenwood was appointed , initially as a temporary replacement for Revie , but later in 1977 on a permanent basis . Bobby Moore described him as " the encyclopaedia of football " , and he guided England to Euro 1980 without a defeat during qualification . 
 The team exited the tournament at the group qualifying stage and Greenwood turned his attention to qualification for the 1982 World Cup in Spain . Defeats in Switzerland and Romania led Greenwood to consider resignation , but a victory over Hungary convinced him to stay . A 2 – 1 defeat in Oslo , which led to commentator <unk> <unk> 's famous outburst concluding with " Your boys took a hell of a beating ! " , meant England required at least a point in their final qualifying game against Hungary . A Paul Mariner goal secured victory and qualification for the team . Wins over France , Czechoslovakia and Kuwait allowed England into the second round group but two 0 – 0 draws ended in England going out of the tournament , without having lost a game . Greenwood retired immediately after the World Cup and on 7 July 1982 , two days after England were knocked out of the 1982 World Cup , Bobby Robson was appointed England manager , selecting former West Bromwich Albion team @-@ mate Don Howe as his chief coach . 
 = = = Robson and " The Hand of God " = = = 
 Robson 's tenure included 28 qualifying matches , of which only one , against Denmark in 1983 , resulted in a defeat . This contributed to England 's failure to qualify for the 1984 European Championships , and Robson offered his resignation . It was rejected by the FA chairman , Bert Millichip , and Robson went on to lead the England team to qualify for the 1986 World Cup in Mexico . England were defeated in the quarter @-@ final by Argentina with a brace of goals from Diego Maradona ; the infamous " Hand of God " goal , and the " Goal of the Century " he scored five minutes later . 
 Robson 's England dropped only one point in qualifying for Euro 1988 , which included an 8 – 0 win over Turkey . However , this was followed by failure at the tournament itself , held in West Germany , where England were knocked out in the group stage . They finished bottom of their qualifying group , succumbing to defeats against Ireland , the Netherlands and the USSR . Robson was vilified by the British press , and after a draw in a friendly with Saudi Arabia , one newspaper demanded : " In the name of Allah , go " . Robson led England without conceding a goal through the six @-@ match qualification for the 1990 FIFA World Cup . 
 As in the 1986 World Cup , Robson was denied the service of his captain , Bryan Robson , who suffered an achilles tendon injury which prevented him playing in the latter stages of the tournament . England topped their qualifying group , accumulating four points from their three games . However their progress was not without controversy . England changed formation from their traditional 4 – 4 – 2 to incorporate a sweeper , with some sources suggesting this was due to player revolt after the 1 – 1 draw in the first match with the Republic of Ireland . Robson denies this claim in his autobiography . This was followed by victories over Belgium and Cameroon in the knock @-@ out stages , to set up a semi @-@ final with West Germany . 
 England lost the match on a penalty shoot @-@ out , after the score had been level at 1 – 1 following extra time . Robson 's last public appearance before his death from cancer was at the Sir Bobby Robson Trophy match in July 2009 , played between veterans from that 1990 semi @-@ final as a tribute to his life and in aid of his cancer charity . 
 = = = Controversial times = = = 
 Robson had announced before the tournament that he would step down from the post after the finals and Graham Taylor was appointed , having been approached in April 1990 by the FA . Failure to proceed past the group stage of Euro 1992 with a 2 – 1 defeat against Sweden led to newspaper headlines such as " Swedes 2 Turnips 1 " and Taylor 's nickname of " Turnip Head " . Following defeat to the Netherlands in the penultimate qualifying match for the 1994 World Cup , for only the third time in its history , England had failed to qualify for the World Cup . The qualifying campaign was recorded in an television documentary , and Taylor 's remark " Do I not like that " soon after entered popular culture . 
 Failure in the qualification resulted in Taylor resigning , and Terry Venables took over the helm in 1994 . As England were hosts for Euro 96 , he did not manage the team in a competitive match for over two years . In January 1996 , he announced that he would resign after the tournament as a result of several court cases , but led England to the semi @-@ finals , where they were defeated by Germany on penalties . He was replaced by Glenn Hoddle , whose unorthodox off @-@ the @-@ field approach in bringing in faith healer Eileen Drewery to help the team drew significant criticism . Hoddle suggested she was " more of an agony aunt " but during the 1998 World Cup , the press suggested Drewery had influenced Hoddle in squad selection . England were knocked out of the tournament in the second round , once again on penalties , this time against Argentina . Hoddle 's diary portraying his version of events at the World Cup was subsequently published , drawing further criticism . 
 An interview with Matt Dickinson , a reporter from The Times , suggested that Hoddle had a " controversial belief that the disabled , and others , are being punished for sins in a former life . " Hoddle 's comments were criticised by several notable politicians , including Sports Minister Tony Banks and Prime Minister Tony Blair . Hoddle stated that he was not prepared to resign and claimed his words were misinterpreted and pointed out his contributions and commitment to organisations helping the disabled . The Football Association terminated Hoddle 's contract soon afterwards , which was welcomed by representatives of disabled groups . 
 Howard Wilkinson was caretaker manager for two games , before the appointment of Kevin Keegan in February 1999 . Initially combining the job with a role at Fulham , Keegan was made full @-@ time coach in May . He led England to qualification for the 2000 European Championship following success in a two @-@ legged play @-@ off against Scotland . Two 3 – 2 losses resulted in England leaving the tournament at the group stage . A loss to Germany in the last international match at the old Wembley Stadium in the first 2002 World Cup qualifying match led to Keegan 's resignation . Keegan resigned in the Wembley toilets , an hour after the team was booed off by the England fans ; he told the FA officials that tactically he felt " a little short at this level " . Wilkinson again returned as caretaker for one more match , followed by Peter Taylor who presided over a friendly loss to Italy . 
 = = = Foreign management = = = 
 The FA then took the unprecedented , and widely criticised step of appointing the first non @-@ Englishman as coach , in the form of Swede Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson . Eriksson had a good record in European domestic football , with success in Portugal and Italy , and had led clubs to win the UEFA Cup on two occasions . He led England to qualify for the 2002 World Cup with David Beckham scoring the vital equaliser against Greece , deep into injury time . England were knocked out by Brazil in the quarter @-@ finals and Eriksson came under fire for his " ice @-@ cool " appearance on the touchline failing to inspire his team , senior player Gareth Southgate contemptuously remarking after the tournament that " we needed Winston Churchill but we got Iain Duncan Smith " . 
 Eriksson led England to qualification for the 2004 European Championship but once more the team fell at the quarter @-@ final stage , again losing on penalties , this time to Portugal . Losing 1 – 0 to Northern Ireland in Belfast during the qualification for the 2006 World Cup led to fans chanting " Sack the Swede " , frustrated again at the lack of obvious emotion in Eriksson while his coach , Steve McClaren was much more animated . 
 In January 2006 , the FA announced that Eriksson would stand down after the World Cup . With the team losing in the quarter @-@ final again to Portugal and again on penalties , Eriksson duly left the post in July . The search for Eriksson 's replacement was controversial . It became clear that the FA wanted to appoint Luiz Felipe Scolari , but the approach was botched , and Scolari turned down the offer . Ultimately , Eriksson was replaced by the man who had coached the side under him , Steve McClaren . 
 Qualification for the 2008 European Championship proved too much , England losing the final qualifier against Croatia 3 – 2 in November 2007 , when a draw would have been enough to take England to the finals . The British press turned on McClaren , former Scottish international Alan Hansen stating that " ... what McClaren should be held accountable for is that with a squad of this quality he failed to qualify from what seemed a reasonably straightforward group ... " . McClaren was sacked the day following the defeat to Croatia , and was replaced in December 2007 by Italian Fabio Capello . 
 Capello led England to qualification for the 2010 World Cup finals , winning nine of the team 's ten qualifying matches . However , the team 's performance in the tournament proper was less impressive . Two lacklustre draws in the group stage against the United States and Algeria were followed by an ignominious 4 – 1 defeat by traditional rivals Germany in the Round of 16 . The team 's performance was at least partly attributed to selection and tactical errors by Capello and led to calls for his dismissal . However , on 2 July , the FA confirmed that he would remain in the role until 2012 , with Capello himself confirming his intention to step down and retire after Euro 2012 . 
 Conflicting reports came out of the FA as to whether the next manager would be English . On 15 August 2010 , the FA 's Adrian Bevington stated to the BBC that " we should have an English manager after ( Euro 2012 ) " , but on 22 September , the FA 's Director of Football Development , Trevor Brooking , stated that " We would like to go English ( but ) we 've got to see what English people are available " . Two weeks later , Capello 's England qualified for Euro 2012 with a 2 – 2 draw away against Montenegro . In February 2012 , Capello resigned following the FA 's decision to remove the captaincy of the national side from John Terry , with Englishman Stuart Pearce taking over the role on a caretaker basis . 
 = = = FA appoints an Englishman = = = 
 Following a 3 – 2 defeat at Wembley by the Netherlands in March , Pearce was replaced on 1 May 2012 by then @-@ West Bromwich Albion manager Roy Hodgson on a four @-@ year contract . The build @-@ up to UEFA Euro 2012 saw Hodgson lead England to two 1 – 0 victories over Norway in Oslo and Belgium at Wembley . Despite being based in Kraków in Poland , England 's first fixture in Euro 2012 was in Donetsk against France , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw . Subsequent victories over Sweden and tournament co @-@ hosts Ukraine resulted in a quarter @-@ final match against Italy . The game ended goalless after extra time , sending the game to a penalty shootout which Italy won 4 – 2 . Hodgson claimed that England 's exit from major tournaments had become a " national obsession " . With a 2 – 0 victory over Poland in October 2013 , Hodgson led England to automatic qualification for the 2014 World Cup . 
 However , in the 2014 FIFA World Cup , England lost two consecutive group matches , against Italy and Uruguay , by 2 – 1 on each occasion . This was the first time England had lost two group matches since the 1950 World Cup ( when they lost against the United States and Spain ) and the first time England had been eliminated at the group stage since the 1958 World Cup . This was also the first time that England had not won a match at the tournament since 1958 , and England 's points total of one from three matches was its worst ever in the World Cup . 
 England qualified for the UEFA Euro 2016 in September 2015 , following a 6 – 0 win over San Marino . On 5 September 2015 , England beat San Marino 6 – 0 at San Marino Stadium , Serravalle , to qualify for the France Euro 2016 . On 27 June 2016 , after England were knocked out by Iceland in the round of 16 , Hodgson resigned as manager . 
 On 22 July , Sam Allardyce was appointed England manager on a two @-@ year contract . 
 = = Media reaction = = 
 The reaction of the British media to the England national team manager reflects the changing nature of the British media generally . In recent times , managers have been attacked personally , for their personal beliefs , or private lives . 
 = = = Personal attacks = = = 
 The press had long campaigned for changes in management style and / or replacement of the manager himself , but a watershed was reached under the tenure of Graham Taylor , whose unsuccessful reign led to the manager being pilloried in the tabloids . Most notably , The Sun newspaper reacted to a damaging defeat by Sweden in the Euro 92 tournament , by the accompaniment of the headline " Swedes 2 Turnips 1 " with a photographic montage of a turnip superimposed on Taylor 's head . Taylor was thereafter often referred to in the media as " Graham Turnip " or " Turnip Taylor " . 
 Subsequent footballing <unk> were then followed by other depictions of Taylor as a vegetable ; England 's first game after Euro 92 ended in a 1 – 0 defeat to Spain , and The Sun pictured Taylor as a " Spanish onion " . When he resigned , following the loss of the 1994 FIFA World Cup spot to Norway , they reverted to the turnip image , accompanying the front page headline , " That 's yer allotment " . 
 Following Roy Hodgson 's appointment , The Sun mocked his <unk> speech impediment with a " <unk> on the <unk> ! " front page headline . The FA called the headline " unacceptable " and more than 100 people complained to the Press Complaints Commission . 
 = = = Issues @-@ based = = = 
 Glenn Hoddle attracted the media spotlight for two key issues unrelated to on @-@ the @-@ pitch affairs . In the first , his reliance upon purported faith healer Eileen Drewery was questioned . Drewery became part of the official England staff , and players were pressured to see her , even though many of them were sceptical . However , far more opprobrium was caused by Hoddle 's comments about disabled people : 
 Public opinion , based upon the immediate media furore resulted in ( according to one BBC poll ) 90 % of respondents believing Hoddle should not continue as English coach . However , the BBC survey showed that while many considered his comments insensitive to the disabled , others defended his right to express his religious beliefs by claiming that to sack him would constitute religious discrimination . 
 = = = Private life = = = 
 Eriksson 's private life came under scrutiny , with an number of well @-@ publicised accusations of trysts with women including Ulrika Jonsson , and FA secretary Faria Alam , despite his on @-@ going relationship with Nancy Dell <unk> . Though Eriksson maintained in press conferences that his personal life was a private matter , his relationships with Jonsson in 2002 and Alam in 2004 were subject to tabloid headlines for several weeks . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 The media , both broadsheet and tabloid , have sometimes campaigned for a manager to be dismissed , appointed or retained . Campaigns for managers to be dismissed have been front page news , with eye @-@ catching headlines including " The final ron @-@ <unk> " , " In the Name of Allah Go " , " Norse <unk> " , " Blair Gives Hoddle The Red Card " for ( respectively ) Ron Greenwood , Bobby Robson , Graham Taylor and Glenn Hoddle . 
 Eriksson survived several scandals whilst in office , but his tenure was eventually ended when he was one of a series of celebrities targeted by a tabloid ' sting ' , orchestrated by The Fake Sheikh . Eriksson 's indiscretions revealed by the newspaper " ... proved the final straw for the FA " , although Eriksson was permitted to stay on in the role until the end of the 2006 World Cup . 
 These campaigns have also sometimes backfired . Former FA chief executive , Graham Kelly recalled a campaign , orchestrated by The Sun against Bobby Robson , that began in 1984 ( six years before his resignation ) : 
 Sections of the media have often campaigned for a particular person to be appointed England manager . At various times , but particularly during the tenure of Bobby Robson , the media campaigned for the appointment of Brian Clough . Robson once told FA chairman Bert Millichip " I 'm having a rough time and everybody wants Brian – give the job to him . If he 's successful , everybody 's happy . If he fails , that 's the end of the clamour for Brian Clough to be England manager . " Robson added , " He would have ruffled a few feathers and disturbed the corridors of power but I think he would have been a good England manager . He had good judgement , knew how to design a team and was a great motivator . " Terry Venables was also the subject of a media campaign for dismissal during his time as manager but was then supported by the press to return to the role in 2000 . 
 Steve McClaren received media criticism , and , as failure to qualify for Euro 2008 looked increasingly likely , the headlines became more visceral . In January 2008 , football magazine When Saturday Comes described the newspaper coverage of his final month as " relentless and remorseless " . Both tabloids and broadsheets published critical pieces , with The Times headlining an editorial " Fail and McClaren has to go " . 
 The media have also parodied this genre of campaigns for recruitment , dismissal or retention of managers . In October 2000 , The Sun launched a campaign promoting a donkey as the new England manager . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 The following table provides a summary of the complete record of each England manager including their progress in both the World Cup and the European Championship . 
 Statistics correct as of 22 July 2016 
 Key : P – games played , W – games won , D – games drawn ; L – games lost , % – win percentage 
 = = Statistical summary for British Home championships = = 
 The following table provides a summary of results for each England manager in the British Home Championship , held annually until the 1983 – 84 season . 
 Key : P – Number of complete tournaments played , W – Number of tournaments won , S – Number of tournaments shared , % – outright win percentage 
 = Let Go ( Avril Lavigne album ) = 
 Let Go is the debut studio album by Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Avril Lavigne , released on 4 June 2002 . For a year after signing a record deal with Arista , Lavigne struggled due to conflicts in musical direction . She relocated to Los Angeles , California , and recorded there , her earlier materials for the album ; the kind of sound to which the label was not amenable . She was paired to the production team The Matrix , who understood her vision for the album . 
 The album was credited as the biggest pop debut of 2002 , and was certified 6 × Platinum in the United States . It was released to generally positive reviews , although Lavigne 's songwriting received some criticism . It also did extremely well in Canada , receiving a diamond certification from the Canadian Recording Industry Association , as well as reaching multi @-@ platinum in many countries around the world , including the UK in which she became the youngest female solo artist to have a number @-@ one album in the region . 
 As of December 2013 , Let Go had sold over 20 million copies worldwide , becoming Lavigne 's highest @-@ selling album to date . According to Billboard magazine , the album was the number 21 top @-@ selling album of the decade . A Rolling Stone readers poll named Let Go as the fourth best album of the 2000s . 
 On 18 March 2013 , Let Go was re @-@ released as a double disc @-@ set paired with her second studio album , Under My Skin , which is released under RCA Records . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lavigne relocated to Los Angeles , where she collaborated with songwriter @-@ producer Clif Magness , who gave her ample creative control in the writing process . Lavigne and Magness wrote " Losing Grip " and " Unwanted " , songs that she deemed reflective of her vision for the entire album . However , Arista was not thrilled with the heavy @-@ guitar laden songs that Lavigne was writing , prompting the label to look for other producers to match their demands . 
 Now two years since she signed the deal , Lavigne , who was then unknown , came to the attention of the three @-@ piece production team The Matrix . Arista could not find the right direction for Lavigne , so the team 's manager , Sandy Roberton , suggested that they work together : " Why don 't you put her together with The Matrix for a couple of days ? " According to member Lauren Christy , they had been listening to Lavigne 's early songs and felt they contained " a Faith Hill kind of vibe " . As soon as they saw Lavigne coming into their studio , The Matrix felt that her musical direction was incongruous to her image and attitude . After talking to Lavigne for an hour , " we cottoned on that she wasn 't happy but couldn 't quite figure out where to go " . The Matrix played her songs with Faith Hill influences , because it was those kind of songs the label wanted Lavigne to sing . But Lavigne dismissed it , saying she wanted songs with punk rock inclinations . Lavigne played The Matrix a song that she had recorded and really loved , a track with sounds in the likes of the rock band System of a Down . Fortunately , prior to forming The Matrix , its members ' early projects were in the pop @-@ rock type , so they readily figured out what Lavigne wanted to record and knew exactly what to do with her . They told her to come back the following day , and in the afternoon during that day , they wrote a song that evolved into " Complicated " and another song called " Falling Down " ( Falling Down appears on the Sweet Home Alabama Soundtrack ) . They played it to Lavigne when she came back the following day , inspiring her what path she should take . 
 When Josh Sarubin , the A & R executive who signed Lavigne to the imprint , heard the song , he knew it was right for her . Lavigne presented the song to Reid , who agreed the musical direction Lavigne and The Matrix were taking , and set " Complicated " as the album 's lead single . Reid sent Lavigne back to The Matrix to work with them , initially for a month . Arista gave the team carte blanche to write and produce 10 songs , which took them two months . The album was originally entitled Anything But Ordinary , after the track of the same name that The Matrix produced , but Lavigne asked Reid for the album to be called Let Go instead . 
 Critics described Let Go as an alternative rock album with pop rock influences and post @-@ grunge @-@ oriented sound . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 With The Matrix , Lavigne recorded tracks in Decoy Studios , situated in a Los Angeles suburb known as Valley Village . She also worked with producer @-@ songwriter Curt Frasca and Peter Zizzo , whose Manhattan studio Lavigne was checked in prior to securing a record deal with Arista , and where Lavigne also recorded some of the tracks . The Matrix member Scott Spock was their principal engineer for the project , while Tom Lord @-@ Alge was assigned to mix the tracks . Lavigne recorded complete takes " against the largely finished instrumental tracks " . Spocks revealed Lavigne normally recorded each song in five or six takes , " and probably 90 percent of what was finally used came from the first or second takes " . The Matrix also contributed backing vocals . 
 Introduced as a singer @-@ songwriter , Lavigne 's involvement produced significant issues . Lavigne has implied that she is the primary author of the album . In an article published in Rolling Stone magazine , Lavigne stated that while working with The Matrix , one member would be in the recording studio while they were writing , but did not write the guitar parts , lyrics , or the melody . According to Lavigne , she and Christy wrote all the lyrics together . Graham would come up with some guitar parts , " and I 'd be like , ' Yeah , I like that , ' or ' No , I don 't like that . ' None of those songs aren 't from me . " 
 The Matrix , who produced six songs for Lavigne , five of which appear in the album , had another explanation of how the collaboration went . According to them , they wrote much of the portions in the three singles : " Complicated " , " Sk8er Boi " , and " I 'm with You " , which were conceived using a guitar and piano . Christy said , " Avril would come in and sing a few melodies , change a word here or there . " Reid complemented the issue over the credits : " If I 'm looking for a single for an artist , I don 't care who writes it . Avril had the freedom to do as she really pleased , and the songs show her point of view . ... Avril has always been confident about her ideas . " 
 Although she needed pop songs " to break " into the industry , Lavigne felt " Complicated " does not reflect her and her songwriting skills . Nonetheless , she was grateful for the song as it successfully launched her career . She favors more " Losing Grip " , because " it means so much more when it comes straight from the artist " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was released on 4 June 2002 , in Canada and the United States . Later , on 22 July , Let Go hit record stores worldwide , and on 26 August in some parts of Europe , including the United Kingdom and Ireland . A <unk> version of the album was released in September 2002 . Arista had established a deal with <unk> earlier in 2002 , and included Let Go alongside albums by rock singer Santana and singer Whitney Houston in the release . 
 Although Lavigne was targeted to the teen audience , a marketing strategy credited with the successful launch of her career ; Lavigne performed on a host of radio @-@ sponsored multi @-@ artist holiday shows throughout the United States , a marketing strategy that induced higher sales of the album during the season . She embarked on her first headlining tour , Try To Shut Me Up Tour , which took place on 23 January 2003 , and ended on 4 June 2003 . Lavigne toured with her band — drummer Matthew Brann , bassist Mark <unk> , and guitarists Jesse Colburn and Evan Taubenfeld — which she had grouped after signing the deal . In the tour , she included all songs off Let Go , B @-@ sides , and cover versions of " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " by Bob Dylan and " Basket Case " by Green Day . 
 Lavigne filmed her performance in Buffalo , New York , on 18 May 2003 , the final date of her five @-@ week headlining North American tour . The tour DVD My World was released on 4 November 2003 , on joint venture by Arista Records and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment . The DVD features the concert , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurette , five music videos and a six @-@ song bonus audio CD that includes an unreleased track " Why " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Complicated " was released by Arista as the album 's lead single , which was seen as an across @-@ all @-@ age @-@ groups introduction to Lavigne . Thought to produce wide cross @-@ demographic appeal , however , the music video to the single features Lavigne and her band wreaking havoc in a mall , " the sort of imagery that might have grown @-@ ups thinking ' Clean that mess up ! ' more than clamoring for the record " . The song was a worldwide No. 1 hit and was nominated for two Grammy Awards for Song of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . 
 " Sk8er Boi " The follow @-@ up single was aimed at pop @-@ punk oriented kids . The release of " Sk8er Boi " created disagreement among many radio programming directors . However , their impressions were diverted as listeners helped change their minds ; early rotation of the single proved successful , showing it was as popular with post @-@ collegiate listeners as with teens . The song even went to No. 1 in U.S. mainstream radio . 
