 " I 'm with You " The adult ballad hit record stores in late November 2002 , close to Christmas holidays to remind parents about the album to , if not to buy it themselves , to purchase it for any children in their family . The song ended up being another hit for Lavigne reaching No. 4 in the Billboard Hot 100 , No. 1 in mainstream radio and top 10 in the UK and Canada . It was not officially released in Australia but received radio and television airplay , this song was also nominated for two Grammy Awards the same categories as " Complicated " . The release arrangement of the album 's singles , with " I 'm With You " being served as the third , was regarded as " controversial " , given that " I 'm With You " was " thought by some to be the biggest potential smash on the album " , and could have established Lavigne as a more mature artist if it was released first . According to Reid , " Some people just really didn 't get that . And with the first video , there was some concern that maybe because it 's so young and so playful , it might alienate more serious music lovers . " 
 " Losing Grip " was released as the fourth single off the album , " to act as a bridge into her next album " , which Lavigne stated would be " harder @-@ rocking " than her debut . In 2004 , it was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance However , it was the least successful single on the album . 
 " Mobile " was released in Australia and New Zealand as the final single from the album in those regions . It was later used in 2003 's The Medallion , the 2004 film Wimbledon , and a brief appearance in the film Just Married . In 2011 , a music video for the song leaked onto the internet made from official footage that was never finished . 
 = = = Other songs = = = 
 Other songs were released as regional radio @-@ only singles . " Things I 'll Never Say " was released as a radio @-@ only single in Italy . " Unwanted " was released as a promotional single in the United Kingdom . The song " Tomorrow " was played in one episode of the second season of the Warner Bros. series Smallville , while the song " Anything But Ordinary " was played in one episode of the TV series Birds of Prey . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Let Go has earned mostly positive responses from critics , earning 68 points on Metacritic based on the collated reviews from 7 publications . Rolling Stone magazine 's music critic Pat Blashill wrote that the album " comes fully loaded with another dozen infectious hymns of Total Request angst " . Blashill complimented Lavigne on having a " great voice " , adding she crafted the album with " a qualified staff of hitmakers " . Christina Saraceno of AllMusic noted that Lavigne " handles a variety of styles deftly " , while also complimenting her as " a capable songwriter with vocal chops " . Nonetheless , Saraceno opined that " at her age , one imagines , she is still finding her feet , borrowing from the music she 's grown up listening to " . John Perry of Blender magazine summarized Let Go into an " outstanding guitar @-@ pop debut " . A review in Q magazine praised Lavigne for displaying " a musical guile way beyond her years " . Kaj Roth of Melodic felt that Lavigne " sings lovely and some of the songs goes in the Alanis Morissette [ sic ] vein . " For Jon Caramanica of Entertainment Weekly magazine ( who gave the album a B − ) , " Lavigne 's monochromatic debut set of unimaginative guitar rock is saved only by the earnestness of her songs . " 
 Some reviewers had similar sentiments toward the quality of the lyrics to some songs in the album . Saraceno said that Lavigne " still has some growing up to do lyrically " , asserting " Sk8er Boi " shows her " lyrical shortcomings " and calling the phrasing in " Too Much to Ask " " awkward and sometimes silly " . Perry noted the lyrics to " Sk8er Boi " as " endearingly naive " . 
 The album earned Lavigne numerous awards from organizations around the world . The success of the album 's commercial performance led Lavigne to be named Best New Artist at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards as well as winning a World Music Award for Best @-@ Selling Canadian Singer . She won three awards — Favorite Female Artist , Favorite Breakthrough Artist , and the Style Award — the most of any performer at the 2003 MTV Asia Awards . She received five nominations for the album at the 2003 Grammy Awards , including Best New Artist and Best Pop Vocal Album . The album 's singles " Complicated " and " I 'm With You " were nominated Song of the Year at the 2003 and 2004 ceremony , respectively , accumulating eight nominations for the album . Lavigne was nominated for six categories at the 2003 Juno Awards — which were presented in Ottawa — winning four including Best Album and Best New Artist . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Let Go was commercially successful in the United States , gaining praise from Entertainment Weekly magazine as one of the biggest pop debut albums of 2002 . The album debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 8 on the strength of 62 @,@ 000 unit sales . Its high debut was fueled by the success of " Complicated " , which was in heavy rotation on MTV . Increasing weekly sales allowed the album to stay inside the chart 's top 10 for 37 weeks . The album sold at least 100 @,@ 000 copies every week straight until late 2002 , easily accumulating over two million unit sales . In a December 2002 report by Entertainment Weekly magazine , it was stated that the album had sold 3 @.@ 9 million copies , becoming the third top @-@ selling album of 2002 in the United States . Year @-@ end figures released by Nielsen SoundScan revealed that Let Go had sold over 4 @.@ 1 million copies in the United States , accumulated in 30 weeks of the album 's release . Let Go was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . This earned Let Go the distinction of being the highest @-@ shipped debut of 2002 and best @-@ selling album by a female artist . On 30 April 2003 , the RIAA certified the album six @-@ times platinum , denoting shipments of over six million units . It remains Lavigne 's best @-@ selling album to date , with 6 @.@ 9 million copies sold in the United States as of September 2015 . 
 <unk> , the album reached higher peak positions notably during and after the holidays . Following her show @-@ opening performance at the 2002 Billboard Music Awards , Let Go continued to be one of the holiday 's top sellers with sales that week of 272 @,@ 000 . It reached its highest sales week on the issue dated 4 January 2003 with 363 @,@ 000 copies sold . Although it had peaked at number two in September 2002 , Let Go rose from 3 to 2 on the Billboard 200 on the issue dated 1 February 2003 . The increase of sales was the offshoot to Lavigne 's appearance on 11 January in Saturday Night Live as the show 's musical guest . There were accusations of lip @-@ synching but in an interview at the time she tells she has never lip @-@ sung or ever plans to . During this time also , Lavigne received much media coverage due to her nominations at the 2003 Grammy Awards and for embarking on her first North American tour . In the United Kingdom , the album took longer to reach the summit of the UK Albums Chart . In its 18th week of release , reached on the chart year 2003 , the album hit number one , rising to the top spot over the holiday . The album 's international sales upsurge was attributed to the continuing success of " Sk8er Boi " . Let Go is the 12th best @-@ selling album of 2003 in the United Kingdom . The album has been certified five @-@ times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry . 
 Let Go was also selling well in Canada , surpassing sales of over one million unit sales in less than a year . The Canadian Recording Industry Association certified the album diamond in May 2003 . In Australia , Let Go had been certified seven @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association in 2003 , based on the sales of over 490 @,@ 000 units from wholesalers to retailers . The album is the tenth best @-@ selling album of 2002 there , and the third in the following year .. ' Let Go ' reached its peak worldwide during Christmas holiday with almost 860 @,@ 000 copies sold worldwide during Christmas week and then another 600 @,@ 000 copies worldwide in the first week of 2003 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 ( * ) Additional production 
 = = Personnel = = 
 This list of credits is based on <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 At the 2003 Grammy Awards , Lavigne received five nominations , including Best Pop Vocal Album for Let Go , Song of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " Complicated " , Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for " Sk8er Boi " and the coveted Best New Artist . At the 2004 Grammy Awards Lavigne received the nominations Song of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " I 'm with You " and Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for " Losing Grip " . 
 = R.E.M. = 
 R.E.M. was an American rock band from Athens , Georgia , formed in 1980 by lead singer Michael Stipe , lead guitarist Peter Buck , bassist / backing vocalist Mike Mills , and drummer Bill Berry . One of the first popular alternative rock bands , R.E.M. were noted for Buck 's ringing , arpeggiated guitar style , Stipe 's particular vocal quality , and Mills ' melodic basslines and backing vocals . R.E.M. released their first single , " Radio Free Europe " , in 1981 on the independent record label Hib @-@ Tone . The single was followed by the Chronic Town EP in 1982 , the band 's first release on I.R.S. Records . In 1983 , the group released its critically acclaimed debut album , Murmur , and built its reputation over the next few years through subsequent releases , constant touring , and the support of college radio . Following years of underground success , R.E.M. achieved a mainstream hit in 1987 with the single " The One I Love " . The group signed to Warner Bros. Records in 1988 , and began to espouse political and environmental concerns while playing large arenas worldwide . 
 By the early 1990s , when alternative rock began to experience broad mainstream success , R.E.M. was viewed by subsequent acts such as Nirvana and Pavement as a pioneer of the genre . The band then released its two most commercially successful albums , Out of Time ( 1991 ) and Automatic for the People ( 1992 ) , which veered from the band 's established sound and catapulted it to international fame . R.E.M. ' s 1994 release , Monster , was a return to a more rock @-@ oriented sound , but still continued its run of success . The band began its first tour in six years to support the album ; the tour was marred by medical emergencies suffered by the three band members . 
 In 1996 , R.E.M. re @-@ signed with Warner Bros. for a reported US $ 80 million , at the time the most expensive recording contract in history . Its 1996 release , New Adventures in Hi @-@ Fi , though critically acclaimed , fared worse commercially than expected . The following year , Bill Berry left the band , while Stipe , Buck , and Mills continued the group as a trio . Through some changes in musical style , the band continued its career into the next decade with mixed critical and commercial success , despite having sold more than 85 million records worldwide and becoming one of the world 's best @-@ selling music artists of all time . In 2007 , the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , in their first year of eligibility . R.E.M. disbanded amicably in September 2011 , announcing the split on its website . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1980 – 81 : Formation = = = 
 In January 1980 , Michael Stipe met Peter Buck in <unk> Records , the Athens record store where Buck worked . The pair discovered that they shared similar tastes in music , particularly in punk rock and protopunk artists like Patti Smith , Television , and The Velvet Underground . Stipe said , " It turns out that I was buying all the records that [ Buck ] was saving for himself . " Stipe and Buck soon met fellow University of Georgia students Mike Mills and Bill Berry , who had played music together since high school . The quartet agreed to collaborate on several songs ; Stipe later commented that " there was never any grand plan behind any of it " . Their still @-@ unnamed band spent a few months rehearsing and played its first show on April 5 , 1980 , at a friend 's birthday party held in a converted Episcopal church in Athens . After considering names like " Twisted Kites " , " Cans of Piss " , and " Negro Wives " , the band settled on " R.E.M. " ( which stands for the stage of sleep called rapid eye movement ) , which Stipe selected at random from a dictionary . 
 The band members eventually dropped out of school to focus on their developing group . They found a manager in Jefferson Holt , a record store clerk who was so impressed by an R.E.M. performance in his hometown of Chapel Hill , North Carolina , that he moved to Athens . R.E.M. ' s success was almost immediate in Athens and surrounding areas ; the band drew progressively larger crowds for shows , which caused some resentment in the Athens music scene . Over the next year and a half , R.E.M. toured throughout the Southern United States . Touring was arduous because a touring circuit for alternative rock bands did not then exist . The group toured in an old blue van driven by Holt , and lived on a food allowance of $ 2 each per day . 
 During the summer of 1981 , R.E.M. recorded its first single , " Radio Free Europe " , at producer Mitch Easter 's Drive @-@ In Studios in Winston @-@ Salem , North Carolina . The single was released on the local independent record label Hib @-@ Tone with an initial pressing of one thousand copies , which quickly sold out . Despite its limited pressing , the single garnered critical acclaim , and was listed as one of the ten best singles of the year by The New York Times . 
 = = = 1981 – 87 : I.R.S. Records and cult success = = = 
 R.E.M. recorded the Chronic Town EP with Mitch Easter in October 1981 , and planned to release it on a new indie label named <unk> Hopes . However , I.R.S. Records acquired a demo of the band 's first recording session with Easter that had been circulating for months . The band turned down the advances of major label RCA Records in favor of I.R.S. , with whom it signed a contract in May 1982 . I.R.S. released Chronic Town that August as its first American release . A positive review of the EP by NME praised the songs ' auras of mystery , and concluded , " R.E.M. ring true , and it 's great to hear something as unforced and cunning as this . " 
 I.R.S. first paired R.E.M. with producer Stephen Hague to record its debut album . Hague 's emphasis on technical perfection left the band unsatisfied , and the band members asked the label to let them record with Easter . I.R.S. agreed to a " tryout " session , allowing the band to return to North Carolina and record the song " Pilgrimage " with Easter and producing partner Don Dixon . After hearing the track , I.R.S. permitted the group to record the album with Dixon and Easter . Because of its bad experience with Hague , the band recorded the album via a process of negation , refusing to incorporate rock music clichés such as guitar solos or then @-@ popular synthesizers , in order to give its music a timeless feel . The completed album , Murmur , was greeted with critical acclaim upon its release in 1983 , with Rolling Stone listing the album as its record of the year . The album reached number 36 on the Billboard album chart . A re @-@ recorded version of " Radio Free Europe " was the album 's lead single and reached number 78 on the Billboard singles chart in 1983 . Despite the acclaim awarded the album , Murmur sold only about 200 @,@ 000 copies , which I.R.S. ' s Jay Boberg felt was below expectations . 
 R.E.M. made its first national television appearance on Late Night with David Letterman in October 1983 , during which the group performed a new , unnamed song . The piece , eventually titled " So . Central Rain ( I 'm Sorry ) " , became the first single from the band 's second album , Reckoning ( 1984 ) , which was also recorded with Easter and Dixon . The album met with critical acclaim ; NME 's Mat Snow wrote that Reckoning " confirms R.E.M. as one of the most beautifully exciting groups on the planet " . While Reckoning peaked at number 27 on the US album charts — an unusually high chart placing for a college rock band at the time — scant airplay and poor distribution overseas resulted in it charting no higher than number 91 in Britain . 
 The band 's third album , Fables of the Reconstruction ( 1985 ) , demonstrated a change in direction . Instead of Dixon and Easter , R.E.M. chose producer Joe Boyd , who had worked with Fairport Convention and Nick Drake , to record the album in England . The band members found the sessions unexpectedly difficult , and were miserable due to the cold winter weather and what they considered to be poor food ; the situation brought the band to the verge of break @-@ up . The gloominess surrounding the sessions ended up providing the context for the album itself . Lyrically , Stipe began to create storylines in the mode of Southern mythology , noting in a 1985 interview that he was inspired by " the whole idea of the old men sitting around the fire , passing on ... legends and fables to the grandchildren " . 
 They toured in Canada in July and August 1985 , and throughout Europe in October of that year , including in The Netherlands , England ( one concert was held at the famous Hammersmith Palais in London ) , Ireland , Scotland , France , Switzerland , Belgium and West Germany . On October 2 , 1985 , the group played a concert in Bochum , West Germany , for the German TV show Rockpalast . Stipe had bleached his hair blond during this time . Fables of the Reconstruction performed poorly in Europe and its critical reception was mixed , with some critics regarding it as dreary and poorly recorded . As with the previous records , the singles from Fables of the Reconstruction were mostly ignored by mainstream radio . Meanwhile , I.R.S. was becoming frustrated with the band 's reluctance to achieve mainstream success . 
 For its fourth album , R.E.M. enlisted John Mellencamp producer Don Gehman . The result , Lifes Rich Pageant ( 1986 ) featured Stipe 's vocals closer to the forefront of the music . In a 1986 interview with the Chicago Tribune , Peter Buck related , " Michael is getting better at what he 's doing , and he 's getting more confident at it . And I think that shows up in the projection of his voice . " The album improved markedly upon the sales of Fables of the Reconstruction and eventually peaked at number 21 on the Billboard album chart . The single " Fall on Me " also picked up support on commercial radio . The album was the band 's first to be certified gold for selling 500 @,@ 000 copies . While American college radio remained R.E.M. ' s core support , the band was beginning to chart hits on mainstream rock formats ; however , the music still encountered resistance from Top 40 radio . 
 Following the success of Lifes Rich Pageant , I.R.S. issued Dead Letter Office , a compilation of tracks recorded by the band during their album sessions , many of which had either been issued as B @-@ sides or left unreleased altogether . Shortly thereafter , I.R.S. compiled R.E.M. ' s music video catalog ( except " Wolves , Lower " ) as the band 's first video release , <unk> . 
 = = = 1987 – 90 : Breakthrough = = = 
 Don Gehman was unable to produce R.E.M. ' s fifth album , so he suggested the group work with Scott Litt . Litt would be the producer for the band 's next five albums . Document ( 1987 ) featured some of Stipe 's most openly political lyrics , particularly on " Welcome to the Occupation " and " <unk> McCarthy " , which were reactions to the conservative political environment of the 1980s under American President Ronald Reagan . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote in his review of the album , " ' Document ' is both confident and defiant ; if R.E.M. is about to move from cult @-@ band status to mass popularity , the album decrees that the band will get there on its own terms . " Document was R.E.M. ' s breakthrough album , and the first single " The One I Love " charted in the Top 20 in the US , UK , and Canada . By January 1988 , Document had become the group 's first album to sell a million copies . In light of the band 's breakthrough , the December 1987 cover of Rolling Stone declared R.E.M. " America 's Best Rock & Roll Band " . 
 Frustrated that its records did not see satisfactory overseas distribution , R.E.M. left I.R.S. when its contract expired and signed with the major label Warner Bros. Records . Though other labels offered more money , R.E.M. ultimately signed with Warner Bros. — reportedly for an amount between $ 6 million and $ 12 million — due to the company 's assurance of total creative freedom . In the aftermath of the group 's departure , I.R.S. released the 1988 " best of " compilation Eponymous ( assembled with input from the band members ) to capitalize on assets the company still possessed . The band 's 1988 Warner Bros. debut , Green , was recorded in Nashville , Tennessee , and showcased the group experimenting with its sound . The record 's tracks ranged from the upbeat first single " Stand " ( a hit in the United States ) , to more political material , like the rock @-@ oriented " Orange Crush " and " World Leader Pretend " , which address the Vietnam War and the Cold War , respectively . Green has gone on to sell four million copies worldwide . The band supported the album with its biggest and most visually developed tour to date , featuring back @-@ projections and art films playing on the stage . After the Green tour , the band members unofficially decided to take the following year off , the first extended break in the band 's career . In 1990 Warner Bros. issued the music video compilation Pop Screen to collect clips from the Document and Green albums , followed a few months later by the video album <unk> featuring live performances filmed during the Green World Tour . 
 = = = 1990 – 94 : Non @-@ touring years and international success = = = 
 R.E.M. reconvened in mid @-@ 1990 to record its seventh album , Out of Time . In a departure from Green , the band members often wrote the music with non @-@ traditional rock instrumentation including mandolin , organ , and acoustic guitar instead of adding them as overdubs later in the creative process . Released in March 1991 , Out of Time was the band 's first album to top both the US and UK charts . The record eventually sold 4 @.@ 2 million copies in the US alone , and about 12 million copies worldwide by 1996 . The album 's lead single " Losing My Religion " was a worldwide hit that received heavy rotation on radio , as did the music video on MTV . " Losing My Religion " was R.E.M. ' s highest @-@ charting single in the US , reaching number four on the Billboard charts . " There 've been very few life @-@ changing events in our career because our career has been so gradual , " Mills said years later . " If you want to talk about life changing , I think ' Losing My Religion ' is the closest it gets " . The album 's second single , " Shiny Happy People " ( one of three songs on the record to feature vocals from Kate Pierson of fellow Athens band The B @-@ 52 's ) , was also a major hit , reaching number 10 in the US and number six in the UK . Out of Time garnered R.E.M. seven nominations at the 1992 Grammy Awards , the most nominations of any artist that year . The band won three awards : one for Best Alternative Music Album and two for " Losing My Religion " , Best Short Form Music Video and Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . R.E.M. did not tour to promote Out of Time ; instead the group played a series of one @-@ off shows , including an appearance taped for an episode of MTV Unplugged and released music videos for each song on the video album This Film Is On . The MTV Unplugged session of " Losing My Religion " was recorded with members of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra in Madison , Georgia , at Madison @-@ Morgan Cultural Center . 
 After spending some months off , R.E.M. returned to the studio in 1991 to record its next album . Late in 1992 , the band released Automatic for the People . Though the group had intended to make a harder @-@ rocking album after the softer textures of Out of Time , the somber Automatic for the People " [ seemed ] to move at an even more agonized crawl " , according to Melody Maker . The album dealt with themes of loss and mourning inspired by " that sense of ... turning thirty " , according to Buck . Several songs featured string arrangements by former Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones . Considered by a number of critics ( as well as by Buck and Mills ) to be the band 's best album , Automatic for the People reached numbers one and two on UK and US charts , respectively , and generated the American Top 40 hit singles " Drive " , " Man on the Moon " , and " Everybody Hurts " . The album would sell over fifteen million copies worldwide . As with Out of Time , there was no tour in support of the album . The decision to forgo a tour , in conjunction with Stipe 's physical appearance , generated rumors that the singer was dying or HIV @-@ positive , which were vehemently denied by the band . 
 = = = 1994 – 97 : Return to touring and continued success = = = 
 After the band released two slow @-@ paced albums in a row , R.E.M. ' s 1994 album Monster was , as Buck said , " a ' rock ' record , with the rock in quotation marks . " In contrast to the sound of its predecessors , the music of Monster consisted of distorted guitar tones , minimal overdubs , and touches of 1970s glam rock . Like Out of Time , Monster topped the charts in both the US and UK . The record sold about nine million copies worldwide . The singles " What 's the Frequency , Kenneth ? " and " Bang and Blame " were the band 's last American Top 40 hits , although all the singles from Monster reached the Top 30 on the British charts . Warner Bros. assembled the music videos from the album as well as those from Automatic for the People for release as Parallel in 1995 . 
 In January 1995 , R.E.M. set out on its first tour in six years . The tour was a huge commercial success , but the period was difficult for the group . On March 1 , Berry collapsed on stage during a performance in Lausanne , Switzerland , having suffered a brain aneurysm . He had surgery immediately and recovered fully within a month . Berry 's aneurysm was only the beginning of a series of health problems that plagued the Monster Tour . Mills had to undergo abdominal surgery to remove an intestinal adhesion in July ; a month later , Stipe had to have an emergency surgery to repair a hernia . Despite all the problems , the group had recorded the bulk of a new album while on the road . The band brought along eight @-@ track recorders to capture its shows , and used the recordings as the base elements for the album . The final three performances of the tour were filmed and released in home video form as Road Movie . 
 R.E.M. re @-@ signed with Warner Bros. Records in 1996 for a reported $ 80 million ( a figure the band constantly asserted originated with the media ) , rumored to be the largest recording contract in history at that point . The group 's 1996 album New Adventures in Hi @-@ Fi debuted at number two in the US and number one in the UK . The five million copies of the album sold were a reversal of the group 's commercial fortunes of the previous five years . Time writer Christopher John Farley argued that the lesser sales of the album were due to the declining commercial power of alternative rock as a whole . That same year , R.E.M. parted ways with manager Jefferson Holt , allegedly due to sexual harassment charges levied against him by a member of the band 's home office in Athens . The group 's lawyer Bertis Downs assumed managerial duties . 
 = = = 1997 – 2000 : Berry 's departure and Up = = = 
 In April 1997 , the band convened at Buck 's Kauai vacation home to record demos of material intended for the next album . The band sought to reinvent its sound and intended to incorporate drum loops and percussion experiments . Just as the sessions were due to begin in October , Berry decided , after months of contemplation and discussions with Downs and Mills , to tell the rest of the band that he was quitting . Berry told his band mates that he would not quit if they would break up as a result , so Stipe , Buck , and Mills agreed to carry on as a three @-@ piece with his blessing . Berry publicly announced his departure three weeks later in October 1997 . Berry told the press , " I 'm just not as enthusiastic as I have been in the past about doing this anymore . . . I have the best job in the world . But I 'm kind of ready to sit back and reflect and maybe not be a pop star anymore . " Stipe admitted that the band would be different without a major contributor : " For me , Mike , and Peter , as R.E.M. , are we still R.E.M. ? I guess a three @-@ legged dog is still a dog . It just has to learn to run differently . " 
 The band cancelled its scheduled recording sessions as a result of Berry 's departure . " Without Bill it was different , confusing " , Mills later said . " We didn 't know exactly what to do . We couldn 't rehearse without a drummer . " The remaining members of R.E.M. resumed work on the album in February 1998 at Toast Studios in San Francisco . The band ended its decade @-@ long collaboration with Scott Litt and hired Pat McCarthy to produce the record . Nigel Godrich was taken on as assistant producer , and drafted in Screaming Trees member Barrett Martin and Beck 's touring drummer Joey Waronker . The recording process was plagued with tension , and the group came close to disbanding . Bertis Downs called an emergency meeting where the band members sorted out their problems and agreed to continue as a group . Led off by the single " <unk> " , Up ( 1998 ) debuted in the top ten in the US and UK . However , the album was a relative failure , selling 900 @,@ 000 copies in the US by mid @-@ 1999 and eventually selling just over two million copies worldwide . While R.E.M. ' s American sales were declining , the group 's commercial base was shifting to the UK , where more R.E.M. records were sold per capita than any other country and the band 's singles regularly entered the Top 20 . 
 A year after Up 's release , R.E.M. wrote the instrumental score to the Andy Kaufman biographical film Man on the Moon , a first for the group . The film took its title from the Automatic for the People song of the same name . The song " The Great Beyond " was released as a single from the Man on the Moon soundtrack album . " The Great Beyond " only reached number 57 on the American pop charts , but was the band 's highest @-@ charting single ever in the UK , reaching number three in 2000 . 
 = = = 2000 – 07 : Reveal and Around the Sun = = = 
 R.E.M. recorded the majority of its twelfth album Reveal ( 2001 ) in Canada and Ireland from May to October 2000 . Reveal shared the " lugubrious pace " of Up , and featured drumming by Joey Waronker , as well as contributions by Scott McCaughey ( a co @-@ founder of the band The Minus 5 with Buck ) and Posies founder Ken Stringfellow . Global sales of the album were over four million , but in the United States Reveal sold about the same number of copies as Up . The album was led by the single " Imitation of Life " , which reached number six in the UK . Writing for Rock 's Backpages , The Rev. Al <unk> described the album as " loaded with golden loveliness at every twist and turn " , in comparison to the group 's " essentially unconvincing work on New Adventures in Hi @-@ Fi and Up . " Similarly , Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone called Reveal " a spiritual renewal rooted in a musical one " and praised its " ceaselessly astonishing beauty . " 
 In 2003 , Warner Bros. released the compilation album and DVD In Time : The Best of R.E.M. 1988 – 2003 and In View : The Best of R.E.M. 1988 – 2003 , which featured two new songs , " Bad Day " and " Animal " . At a 2003 concert in Raleigh , North Carolina , Berry made a surprise appearance , performing backing vocals on " Radio Free Europe " . He then sat behind the drum kit for a performance of the early R.E.M. song " Permanent Vacation " , marking his first performance with the band since his retirement . 
 R.E.M. released Around the Sun in 2004 . During production of the album in 2002 , Stipe said , " [ The album ] sounds like it 's taking off from the last couple of records into <unk> R.E.M. territory . Kind of primitive and howling " . After the album 's release , Mills said , " I think , honestly , it turned out a little slower than we intended for it to , just in terms of the overall speed of songs . " Around the Sun received a mixed critical reception , and peaked at number 13 on the Billboard charts . The first single from the album , " Leaving New York " , was a Top 5 hit in the UK . For the record and subsequent tour , the band hired a new full @-@ time touring drummer , Bill Rieflin , who had previously been a member of several industrial music acts such as Ministry and Pigface . The video album Perfect Square was released that same year . 
 EMI released a compilation album covering R.E.M. ' s work during its tenure on I.R.S. in 2006 called And I Feel Fine ... The Best of the I.R.S. Years 1982 – 1987 along with the video album When the Light Is Mine : The Best of the I.R.S. Years 1982 – 1987 — the label had previously released the compilations The Best of R.E.M. ( 1991 ) , R.E.M. : Singles Collected ( 1994 ) , and R.E.M. : In the Attic – Alternative Recordings 1985 – 1989 ( 1997 ) . That same month , all four original band members performed during the ceremony for their induction into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame . While rehearsing for the ceremony , the band recorded a cover of John Lennon 's " # 9 Dream " for Instant Karma : The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur , a tribute album benefiting Amnesty International . The song — released as a single for the album and the campaign — featured Bill Berry 's first studio recording with the band since his departure almost a decade earlier . 
 In October 2006 , R.E.M. was nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in its first year of eligibility . The band was one of five nominees accepted into the Hall that year , and the induction ceremony took place in March 2007 at New York 's Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel . The group — which was inducted by Pearl Jam lead singer Eddie Vedder — performed three songs with Bill Berry ; " Gardening at Night , " " Man on the Moon " and " Begin the Begin " as well as a cover of " I Wanna Be Your Dog . " 
 = = = 2007 – 11 : Accelerate , Collapse into Now , and breakup = = = 
 Work on the group 's fourteenth album commenced in early 2007 . The band recorded with producer Jacknife Lee in Vancouver and Dublin , where it played five nights in the Olympia Theatre between June 30 and July 5 as part of a " working rehearsal " . R.E.M. Live , the band 's first live album ( featuring songs from a 2005 Dublin show ) , was released in October 2007 . The group followed this with the 2009 live album Live at The Olympia , which features performances from its 2007 residency . R.E.M. released Accelerate in early 2008 . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard charts , and became the band 's eighth album to top the British album charts . Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke considered Accelerate an improvement over the band 's previous post @-@ Berry albums , calling it " one of the best records R.E.M. have ever made . " 
 In 2010 , R.E.M. released the video album R.E.M. Live from Austin , TX — a concert recorded for Austin City Limits in 2008 . The group recorded its fifteenth album , Collapse into Now ( 2011 ) , with Jacknife Lee in locales including Berlin , Nashville , and New Orleans . For the album , the band aimed for a more expansive sound than the intentionally short and speedy approach implemented on Accelerate . The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 , becoming the group 's tenth album to reach the top ten of the chart . This release fulfilled R.E.M. ' s contractual obligations to Warner Bros. , and the band began recording material without a contract a few months later with the possible intention of self @-@ releasing the work . 
 On September 21 , 2011 , R.E.M. announced via its website that it was " calling it a day as a band " . Stipe said that he hoped fans realized it " wasn 't an easy decision " : " All things must end , and we wanted to do it right , to do it our way . " Long @-@ time associate and former Warner Bros. Senior Vice President of Emerging Technology Ethan Kaplan has speculated that shake @-@ ups at the record label influenced the group 's decision to disband . The group discussed breaking up for several years , but was encouraged to continue after the lackluster critical and commercial performance of Around the Sun ; according to Mills , " We needed to prove , not only to our fans and critics but to ourselves , that we could still make great records . " The band members finished their collaboration by assembling the compilation album Part Lies , Part Heart , Part Truth , Part Garbage 1982 – 2011 , which was released in November 2011 . The album is the first to collect songs from R.E.M. ' s I.R.S. and Warner Bros. tenures , as well as three songs from the group 's final studio recordings from post @-@ Collapse into Now sessions . In November , Mills and Stipe did a brief span of promotional appearances in British media , ruling out the option of the group ever reuniting . 
 In 2014 , Unplugged : The Complete 1991 and 2001 Sessions was released for Record Store Day . Digital download collections of I.R.S. and Warner Bros. rarities followed . Later in the year , the band compiled the video album box set <unk> , which collected their two Unplugged performances along with several other documentaries and live shows , while their record label released the box set <unk> — 83 – 88 , made up of 7 " vinyl singles . In December 2015 , the band members agreed to a distribution deal with Concord Bicycle Music to re @-@ release their Warner Bros. albums . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 In a 1988 interview , Peter Buck described typical R.E.M. songs as , " Minor key , mid @-@ tempo , enigmatic , semi @-@ folk @-@ rock @-@ <unk> things . That 's what everyone thinks and to a certain degree , that 's true . " All songwriting is credited to the entire band , even though individual members are sometimes responsible for writing the majority of a particular song . Each member is given an equal vote in the songwriting process ; however , Buck has conceded that Stipe , as the band 's lyricist , can rarely be persuaded to follow an idea he does not favor . Among the original line @-@ up , there were divisions of labor in the songwriting process : Stipe would write lyrics and devise melodies , Buck would edge the band in new musical directions , and Mills and Berry would fine @-@ tune the compositions due to their greater musical experience . 
 Michael Stipe sings in what R.E.M. biographer David Buckley described as " wailing , keening , arching vocal figures " . Stipe often harmonizes with Mills in songs ; in the chorus for " Stand " , Mills and Stipe alternate singing lyrics , creating a dialogue . Early articles about the band focused on Stipe 's singing style ( described as " mumbling " by The Washington Post ) , which often rendered his lyrics indecipherable . Creem writer John <unk> wrote in his review of Murmur , " I still have no idea what these songs are about , because neither me nor anyone else I know has ever been able to discern R.E.M. ' s lyrics . " Stipe commented in 1984 , " It 's just the way I sing . If I tried to control it , it would be pretty false . " Producer Joe Boyd convinced Stipe to begin singing more clearly during the recording of Fables of the Reconstruction . 
 Stipe later called chorus lyrics of " Sitting Still " from R.E.M. debut album , Murmur , " nonsense " , saying in a 1994 online chat , " You all know there aren 't words , per se , to a lot of the early stuff . I can 't even remember them . " In truth , Stipe carefully crafted the lyrics to many early R.E.M. songs . Stipe explained in 1984 that when he started writing lyrics they were like " simple pictures " , but after a year he grew tired of the approach and " started experimenting with lyrics that didn 't make exact linear sense , and it 's just gone from there . " In the mid @-@ 1980s , as Stipe 's pronunciation while singing became clearer , the band decided that its lyrics should convey ideas on a more literal level . Mills explained , " After you 've made three records and you 've written several songs and they 've gotten better and better lyrically the next step would be to have somebody question you and say , are you saying anything ? And Michael had the confidence at that point to say yes . . . " Songs like " Cuyahoga " and " Fall on Me " on Lifes Rich Pageant dealt with such concerns as pollution . Stipe incorporated more politically oriented concerns into his lyrics on Document and Green . " Our political activism and the content of the songs was just a reaction to where we were , and what we were surrounded by , which was just abject horror , " Stipe said later . " In 1987 and ' 88 there was nothing to do but be active . " Stipe has since explored other lyrical topics . Automatic for the People dealt with " mortality and dying . Pretty turgid stuff " , according to Stipe , while Monster critiqued love and mass culture . 
 Peter Buck 's style of playing guitar has been singled out by many as the most distinctive aspect of R.E.M. ' s music . During the 1980s , Buck 's " economical , arpeggiated , poetic " style reminded British music journalists of 1960s American folk rock band The Byrds . Buck has stated " [ Byrds guitarist ] Roger McGuinn was a big influence on me as a guitar player " , but said it was Byrds @-@ influenced bands , including Big Star and The Soft Boys , that inspired him more . Comparisons were also made with the guitar playing of Johnny Marr of alternative rock contemporaries The Smiths . While Buck professed being a fan of the group , he admitted he initially criticized the band simply because he was tired of fans asking him if he was influenced by Marr , whose band had in fact made their debut after R.E.M. Buck generally eschews guitar solos ; he explained in 2002 , " I know that when guitarists rip into this hot solo , people go nuts , but I don 't write songs that suit that , and I am not interested in that . I can do it if I have to , but I don 't like it . " Mike Mills ' melodic approach to bass playing is inspired by Paul McCartney of The Beatles and Chris Squire of Yes ; Mills has said , " I always played a melodic bass , like a piano bass in some ways . . . I never wanted to play the traditional locked into the kick drum , root note bass work . " Mills has more musical training than his band mates , which he has said " made it easier to turn abstract musical ideas into reality . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 R.E.M. was pivotal in the creation and development of the alternative rock genre . AllMusic stated , " R.E.M. mark the point when post @-@ punk turned into alternative rock . " In the early 1980s , the musical style of R.E.M. stood in contrast to the post @-@ punk and new wave genres that had preceded it . Music journalist Simon Reynolds noted that the post @-@ punk movement of the late 1970s and early 1980s " had taken whole swaths of music off the menu " , particularly that of the 1960s , and that " After <unk> 's <unk> and New Pop 's schematics , it felt liberating to listen to music rooted in mystical awe and blissed @-@ out surrender . " Reynolds declared R.E.M. , a band that recalled the music of the 1960s with its " <unk> guitar chimes and folk @-@ styled vocals " and who " wistfully and abstractly conjured visions and new frontiers for America " , one of " the two most important alt @-@ rock bands of the day . " With the release of Murmur , R.E.M. had the most impact musically and commercially of the developing alternative genre 's early groups , leaving in its wake a number of jangle pop followers . 
 R.E.M. ' s early breakthrough success served as an inspiration for other alternative bands . Spin referred to the " R.E.M. model " — career decisions that R.E.M. made which set guidelines for other underground artists to follow in their own careers . Spin 's Charles Aaron wrote that by 1985 , " They 'd shown how far an underground , punk @-@ inspired rock band could go within the industry without whoring out its artistic integrity in any obvious way . They 'd figured out how to buy in , not sellout @-@ in other words , they 'd achieved the American Bohemian Dream . " Steve Wynn of Dream Syndicate said , " They invented a whole new ballgame for all of the other bands to follow whether it was Sonic Youth or the Replacements or Nirvana or Butthole Surfers . R.E.M. staked the claim . Musically , the bands did different things , but R.E.M. was first to show us you can be big and still be cool . " Biographer David Buckley stated that between 1991 and 1994 , a period that saw the band sell an estimated 30 million albums , R.E.M. " asserted themselves as rivals to U2 for the title of biggest rock band in the world . " Over the course of its career , the band has sold over 85 million records worldwide . 
 Later alternative bands such as Nirvana , Pavement , Radiohead , Coldplay , Pearl Jam and Live , have drawn inspiration from R.E.M. ' s music . " When I was 15 years old in Richmond , Virginia , they were a very important part of my life , " Pavement 's Bob <unk> said , " as they were for all the members of our band . " Pavement devoted the song " Unseen Power of the Picket Fence " from the No Alternative compilation ( 1993 ) to discussing Chronic Town and Reckoning . Kurt Cobain of Nirvana was a vocal fan of R.E.M. , and had plans to collaborate on a musical project with Stipe before his death in April 1994 . Cobain told Rolling Stone in an interview earlier that year , " I don ’ t know how that band does what they do . God , they ’ re the greatest . They ’ ve dealt with their success like saints , and they keep delivering great music . " 
 = = Campaigning and activism = = 
 Throughout R.E.M. ' s career , its members sought to highlight social and political issues . According to the Los Angeles Times , R.E.M. was considered to be one of the United States ' " most liberal and politically correct rock groups . " The band 's members were " on the same page " politically , sharing a liberal and progressive outlook . Mills admitted that there was occasionally dissension between band members on what causes they might support , but acknowledged " Out of respect for the people who disagree , those discussions tend to stay in @-@ house , just because we 'd rather not let people know where the divisions lie , so people can 't exploit them for their own purposes . " An example is that in 1990 Buck noted that Stipe was involved with People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals , but the rest of the band were not . 
 R.E.M. helped raise funds for environmental , feminist and human rights causes , and were involved in campaigns to encourage voter registration . During the Green tour , Stipe took time during sets to inform the audience about a variety of pressing socio @-@ political issues . Through the late 1980s and 1990s , the band ( particularly Stipe ) increasingly used its media coverage on national television to mention a variety of causes it felt were important . One example is when the band attended the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards , during which Stipe wore a half @-@ dozen white shirts emblazoned with slogans including " rainforest " , " love knows no colors " , and " handgun control now " . 
 R.E.M. helped raise awareness of Aung San Suu Kyi and human rights violations in Burma , when they worked with the Freedom Campaign and the US Campaign for Burma . Stipe himself ran ads for the 1988 supporting Democratic presidential candidate and Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis over then @-@ Vice President George H. W. Bush . In 2004 , the band participated in the Vote for Change tour that sought to mobilize American voters to support Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry . R.E.M. ' s political stance , particularly coming from a wealthy rock band under contract to a label owned by a multinational corporation , received criticism from former Q editor Paul Du Noyer , who criticized the band 's " celebrity liberalism " , saying , " It 's an entirely pain @-@ free form of rebellion that they 're adopting . There 's no risk involved in it whatsoever , but quite a bit of shoring up of customer loyalty . " 
 From the late 1980s , R.E.M. was involved in the local politics of its hometown of Athens , Georgia . Buck explained to Sounds in 1987 , " Michael always says think local and act local — we have been doing a lot of stuff in our town to try and make it a better place . " The band often donated funds to local charities and to help renovate and preserve historic buildings in the town . R.E.M. ' s political clout was credited with the narrow election of Athens mayor Gwen O <unk> twice in the 1990s . 
 = = Members = = 
 Bill Berry – drums , percussion , backing vocals ( 1980 – 1997 ; guest performances in 2003 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 ) 
 Peter Buck – guitar , mandolin , banjo ( 1980 – 2011 ) 
 Mike Mills – bass guitar , backing vocals , piano , keyboards ( 1980 – 2011 ) 
 Michael Stipe – lead vocals ( 1980 – 2011 ) 
 Additional musicians 
 Buren Fowler – guitar ( 1984 – 1985 ) 
 Peter Holsapple – guitar , keyboard , piano ( 1989 – 1991 ) 
 Scott McCaughey – guitar , bass , keyboards , synthesizers , piano , vocals ( 1994 – 2011 ) 
 Nathan December – guitar ( 1995 ) 
 Ken Stringfellow – bass , guitar , keyboards , synthesizers , piano , vocals ( 1998 – 2007 ) 
 Joey Waronker – drums ( 1998 – 2002 ) 
 Barrett Martin – drums ( 2001 ) 
 Bill Rieflin – drums ( 2003 – 2011 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Murmur ( 1983 ) 
 Reckoning ( 1984 ) 
 Fables of the Reconstruction ( 1985 ) 
 Lifes Rich Pageant ( 1986 ) 
 Document ( 1987 ) 
 Green ( 1988 ) 
 Out of Time ( 1991 ) 
 Automatic for the People ( 1992 ) 
 Monster ( 1994 ) 
 New Adventures in Hi @-@ Fi ( 1996 ) 
 Up ( 1998 ) 
 Reveal ( 2001 ) 
 Around the Sun ( 2004 ) 
 Accelerate ( 2008 ) 
 Collapse into Now ( 2011 ) 
 = Terrible Towel = 
 The Terrible Towel is a rally towel associated with the Pittsburgh Steelers , an American football team in the National Football League ( NFL ) . The Terrible Towel has spread in popularity ; for example , fans take their Towel to famous sites while on vacation . The Towel has been taken to the peak of Mount Everest , and even into space on the International Space Station . It is widely recognized as a symbol of the Steelers and the city of Pittsburgh . 
 Proceeds from sales of the Towel have raised over US $ 3 million for Allegheny Valley School , which cares for people with mental disabilities and physical disabilities . The Terrible Towel is credited with being the first " rally towel " and its success has given rise to similar products promoting other teams . 
 Numerous versions have been produced ; almost all are black and gold in color with the words " Myron Cope 's Official The Terrible Towel " printed on the front . In October 2009 a pink Terrible Towel was introduced to promote Breast Cancer Awareness . 
 = = Origin = = 
 In 1975 the Steelers won the AFC Central title and qualified for the playoffs . WTAE was the team 's flagship radio station . Two weeks prior to the Steelers ' first playoff game , WTAE 's Vice President and General Manager , Ted J. Atkins , and President of Sales , Larry Garrett , said that they needed the assistance of Myron Cope , the Steelers radio broadcaster , in inventing a " gimmick " which would attract sponsors to his daily commentaries and talk show . Initially , Cope did not want to participate , saying " I am not a gimmick guy , never have been a gimmick guy . " However , after Garrett 's suggestion that a successful gimmick would be good leverage for a raise in Cope 's upcoming contract renewal , Cope replied , " I 'm a gimmick guy . " 
 The three men , along with other radio station advertising personnel , began brainstorming ideas . One idea , a black mask including coach Chuck Noll 's motto " Whatever it takes " , was deemed too expensive . Cope said the gimmick should be something " lightweight and portable and already owned by just about every fan . " Garrett suggested using towels . Cope agreed , suggesting the words " The Terrible Towel " be printed on the front . It was agreed that the towels would be gold or yellow , with the writing in black — the colors of the Steelers . Franklin C. Snyder , who was head of WTAE 's radio and television stations , held the final approval of the idea . He approved the idea on the stipulation that black towels would also be allowed , in order to avoid accusations of racism from the FCC ; Cope and Garrett agreed . 
 In the weeks leading up to the game , Cope advertised the idea of the towel to fans on the radio and evening television news , using the phrase " The Terrible Towel is poised to strike ! " However , Atkins grew nervous that fans would think the towel was a jinx if the Steelers lost the game . Cope agreed to poll players on their view of the towel . Linebacker Jack Ham told Cope , " I think your idea stinks " ; Ernie " Fats " Holmes was also against the idea . Also against the idea of the Towel was Andy Russell , who mirrored Cope 's original thoughts , " We 're not a gimmick team . We 've never been a gimmick team . " Cope simply replied , " Russell , you 're sick . " Growing nervous about the negative feedback , Cope , who had already advertised the towel on the news multiple times , polled the rest of the players with a " banana @-@ republic vote " . 
 The Towel made its debut on December 27 , 1975 , in a playoff game against the Baltimore Colts . Prior to the game , Cope , whose idea had been mocked by the local Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , watched the gathering fans through his binoculars from the broadcast booth . He saw less than a dozen towels while players were going through pre @-@ game warm @-@ ups . Cope recalls , " Nearing kickoff , the Steelers gathered in their tunnel for introductions , whereupon the crowd exploded — and suddenly , by my estimation , 30 @,@ 000 Terrible Towels twirled from the fists of fans around the stadium ! " The Steelers went on to defeat the Colts 28 – 10 . In the following weeks , the team defeated the Oakland Raiders and Dallas Cowboys , to capture the franchise 's second consecutive Super Bowl victory . Even while the Steelers struggled through the 1980s , the Towel remained a large part of the franchise . During the Towel 's debut game Andy Russell , who had opposed the idea of the Towel , returned a fumble 93 ‒ yards for a touchdown . The play inspired local fan Lisa Benz to write about the Towel , which she later sent to Cope . In part , her poem read : 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The Towel has been redesigned multiple times , as well as spawning its own line of paraphernalia . The line , known as " Terrible Stuff " , includes T @-@ shirts , license plates , pillows , earrings , and beach towels ; all include The Terrible Towel logo . When originally released , the towel was available in gold and black , was a simple design and had the words " the terrible towel " printed on the front . The current version of the Towel , introduced in 1998 , adds the words " Myron Cope 's Official " on the top and " A Pittsburgh Original " at the bottom and are of a Gold color . Towels with a plethora of variations are also in production ; such variations include Towels featuring the Steelers logo , embroidered lettering , and towels with reversed colors featuring yellow writing on a black towel . Throughout the years there have also been many special edition Towels . After the Steelers won Super Bowl XL in 2005 , a Towel with the words " Super Bowl XL Champions " , the date , final score , and Super Bowl XL logo was released . The victory also spawned the production of a Towel featuring the logos of the six Super Bowls that the franchise has won . During the Steelers ' 75th anniversary season in 2007 , a special edition Towel with the logo of the Steelers ' benchmark season was added to the line @-@ up of Towels . The original 1975 – 1997 Terrible Towel is sold as a throwback on the Steelers official website . A giant Terrible Towel measuring 54 ' x 90 ' was introduced at the 2014 home opener at Heinz Field and was " waved " by the 144 fans holding it . 
 = = Rights , marketing and proceeds = = 
 Upon the sudden popularity of the Terrible Towel , Pittsburgh @-@ area department stores sold out all gold and black hand towels . Because the hand towels were often sold as a set , with matching bath towels , stores were left with un @-@ even sets . In the fall of 1978 , Bernard Pollock , divisional marketing manager of Gimbel 's Department Store came up with the idea of putting a Terrible Towel logo on hand towels and sold the idea to Cope . The first Terrible Towels hit the marketplace on December 20 , 1978 at $ 6 apiece . Gimbel 's could not stock them fast enough . Gimbel 's has since gone out of business . The original version of The Terrible Towel was manufactured by <unk> and distributed by St. Mary 's Inc. of New York and was available in two colors : Gold and Black . The current manufacturer of the Towel is Little Earth Productions , Inc. of Pittsburgh , who took over from McArthur Towel & Sports Co. of Baraboo , Wisconsin in 2013 . The current cost of a towel is approximately $ 10 . 
 In 1996 , Cope gave the rights to The Terrible Towel to the Allegheny Valley School in <unk> , Pennsylvania . The school provides care for more than 900 people with mental retardation and physical disabilities , including Cope 's autistic son , Danny . Proceeds from the Terrible Towel have helped raise more than $ 2 @.@ 2 million for the school . During the 2005 season , when the Steelers won their fifth Super Bowl , more than 1 million Towels were sold ; some fans bought 200 Towels at a time . 
 = = Widespread recognition = = 
 Upon its invention , Cope commented on the multi @-@ functional ability of The Terrible Towel , " I 'll tell ' em they can use the towel to wipe their seats clean . They can use it as a muffler against the cold . They can drape it over their heads if it rains . " However , the towel is often used by fans who do not attend games . Fans often drape the towel over their radios or television sets ; some even dress their pets or babies with it . 
 It has become a tradition for Steelers fans to take Terrible Towels on vacation , taking pictures next to well @-@ known tourist destinations . Fans have taken the Towel to locations such as the Great Wall of China , the South Pole , Vatican City , and to the top of Mount Kilimanjaro . Hampton native Kevin <unk> took his Terrible Towel during his climb to the peak of Mount Everest . 
 Military personnel have taken pictures with the Towel while stationed in Iraq and Afghanistan as part of the War on Terrorism . Fans waved Terrible Towels at the gold medal match for Women 's beach volleyball at the 2008 Olympic Games . Prior to the 2008 AFC Championship Game astronaut Colonel Mike Fincke , a Pittsburgh Native , waved the Terrible Towel from the International Space Station . The Terrible Towel is seen in the Scrubs season five episode " My Bright Idea " , hanging on the cork board of Carla and Turk 's apartment as she comes out of the bathroom after performing what she believes to be another unsuccessful pregnancy test . During her campaign for the 2008 Presidential Election , Hillary Clinton received a Terrible Towel during a visit to Pittsburgh . During the 2009 G @-@ 20 Pittsburgh summit , visiting dignitaries received Terrible Towels in gift bags from the city . The Terrible Towel is displayed prominently and waved by Rapper Wiz Khalifa in the music video for his song Black and Yellow , which debuted during the 2010 NFL season . The Terrible Towel made an episode in season 12 of Dancing with the Stars on March 21 , 2011 . After Hines Ward danced , Hall of Fame Pittsburgh Steelers running back Franco Harris is seen twirling the towel . 
 = = = Honoring Cope = = = 
 In 2005 , Cope retired after 35 years as the Steelers radio announcer — the longest tenure of any broadcaster with a single team in NFL history . Cope was honored by the Steelers with the release of a limited special edition Towel , featuring his name and catch phrases . Cope was made an honorary co @-@ captain for the Steelers for a Monday night game against the Baltimore Ravens . Cope led the fans in a towel wave at half time ; the Towel that Cope used is now in the Pro Football Hall of Fame . 
 In response to how he would like to be remembered , Cope responded , " When I kick the bucket , there 'll be a little story that 'll say , ' Creator of Towel Dead ' " . On February 27 , 2008 , Cope died of respiratory failure in Pittsburgh . The following day , an article from the Associated Press concerning Cope 's death was entitled " Former Steelers broadcaster , Terrible Towel creator Cope dies " . Upon Cope 's death , over 350 fans gathered downtown Pittsburgh in snowy weather for a tribute to the inventor . The ceremony concluded with one minute of silent Towel waving . Days later , Saturday Night Live cast member Seth Meyers waved a Terrible Towel on Saturday Night Live , in tribute to Cope . 
 When Mr. Cope died in 2008 , his daughter draped his coffin with a quilt made from Terrible Towels that were sewn together by a fan . She chose the quilt because it represents the many different people who touched their lives . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 Before a 1994 playoff game against the Steelers ' long @-@ time rival Cleveland Browns , Steelers defensive tackle <unk> Buckner accidentally dropped a Towel that he was waving during the player introductions . Browns running back Earnest Byner stepped on the Towel yelling , " We don 't care about your towel . We 're going to beat you this time . " This act " provok [ ed ] other Steelers and Browns to mingle . Not affectionately . " The Steelers won the game 29 – 9 . 
 During a December 4 , 2005 , game at Heinz Field , T. J. Houshmandzadeh of the Cincinnati Bengals wiped his feet on a Towel after he scored a touchdown . Although the Bengals managed a 7 @-@ point victory in that regular season game , the Steelers came back to defeat them 31 – 17 in the playoffs , on their way to a victory in Super Bowl XL . The Bengals did not reach the playoffs again until the 2009 @-@ 10 season , after Houshmandzadeh had left the team . 
 Before the September 29 , 2008 , Steelers game at Heinz Field , Baltimore Ravens wide receiver Derrick Mason stomped on a Terrible Towel . The Ravens then went on to lose all three of their 2008 season games against the Steelers , including the 2008 AFC Championship Game . 
 On October 8 , 2008 , the Steelers played the Jacksonville Jaguars at Jacksonville Municipal Stadium . At that point of their season , the Jaguars were 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 , and feeling very hopeful for the season following a defeat at home of their division rival Colts . The game was very close going into the second half , and the Steelers were still stinging from a Mathis interception and runback for a touchdown . Shortly after the start of the third quarter , Jaguars mascot Jaxson de Ville stood alongside some cheerleaders , and produced a Terrible Towel , which he used to rub his armpits and buttocks . Shortly after that , the Steelers ran away with the game and the Jaguars lost 26 @-@ 21 . The Jaguars went on to lose eight of their remaining eleven games in the season . 
 On December 21 , 2008 , LenDale White and Keith Bulluck of the Tennessee Titans stepped on a Terrible Towel after the Titans 's 31 – 14 victory . Pittsburgh 's Larry Foote responded , " They deserved to do that , they <unk> us , they deserve to celebrate and , hopefully , we 'll see them again . " While Hines Ward said , " [ T. J. Houshmandzadeh ] did kind of the same thing and you see where they went . " Former Steelers head coach Bill Cowher , by this point working for CBS as an analyst on The NFL Today , mentioned on The NFL Today that such antics can come back to haunt teams . Tennessee was the top seed in the playoffs , however following the incident the Titans proceeded to lose eight consecutive games , including an ' 08 divisional playoff game and their ' 09 Week 1 game against the Steelers , 13 @-@ 10 . After the Titan 's 8th consecutive loss — a 59 @-@ 0 blowout to the New England Patriots , the Titans worst loss ever — Titans coach Jeff Fisher expressed regret for his team 's behavior towards the Towel , and a number of Titans players autographed a Terrible Towel and mailed it to Allegheny Valley School – the Pittsburgh charity that now owns the trademark . The Titans won their next 5 games . 
 On January 27 , 2009 , at a public sendoff in Phoenix for the Arizona Cardinals before they faced the Steelers in Super Bowl XLIII , Phoenix Mayor Phil Gordon produced a towel and called the Cardinals mascot , Big Red to the stage , where he used the towel to wipe his armpits . Gordon then blew his nose on the towel . The Cardinals then proceeded to lose the Super Bowl to the Steelers , 27 @-@ 23 . 
 On October 11 , 2009 , the Pittsburgh Steelers played the Detroit Lions at Ford Field . Nearing the end of the fourth quarter the Steelers were up by 8 points and the Lions were marching down the field . At this time the Lions mascot Roary The Lion , stepped on , bit and ripped apart a Terrible Towel . Following this the Lions suffered three straight sacks to put them in a long fourth and twenty @-@ eight situation . The Lions did not convert and the Steelers won the game 28 @-@ 20 . 
 Several Blue and White " Terrific Towels " were made for the Indianapolis Colts ' in the 2009 season playoffs , one of which received some airtime during their AFC championship victory . The Colts subsequently lost Super Bowl XLIV to the New Orleans Saints . 
 After a 13 @-@ 10 Ravens win in Pittsburgh on November 18 , 2012 Ray Rice walked off the field waving a Terrible Towel over his head and singing Steelers rally song " Renegade " with teammates . Rice publicly stated after the game that no disrespect was intended . Two weeks later on December 2 , the Ravens lost to the Steelers 23 @-@ 20 despite being at home and facing Pittsburgh 's third @-@ string quarterback , Charlie Batch . Losing 4 of their last 5 games notwithstanding , Baltimore would go on to win the AFC North and follow that with a playoff run to become Super Bowl XLVII Champions , giving them the distinction of being the first and only team in NFL history to have shown disrespect toward the Terrible Towel and win the Super Bowl . However , prior to the 2014 season , Ray Rice was suspended due to a domestic violence incident in the offseason and was subsequently released and has not been signed by another team since . 
 On an October 5 , 2014 game between the Steelers and the Jacksonville Jaguars at EverBank Field , in which the Steelers won 17 @-@ 9 , Jaguars mascot Jaxson de Ville was seen holding a Terrible Towel on one hand and a handwritten sign that reads " Towels Carry Ebola " on the other hand , mentioning the deadly outbreak that started in West Africa . The next day , the Jaguars issued an apology for the incident , but would go on to lose 13 of their next 17 games . 
 On February 7 , 2016 , the Florida Panthers ' mascot , Stanley C Panther , blew his nose into a Terrible Towel , with the Pittsburgh Penguins down 0 @-@ 2 with around 6 mins left in the 3rd period . After this , the Penguins then tied the game in regulation , and won it in overtime . According to Elias Sports Bureau , this was the first time in Pittsburgh Penguins franchise history that they have overcome a 2 @-@ 0 deficit to win with 6 mins left in the game . Kris Letang scored the OT winner , and Sidney Crosby tied the game with the goaltender pulled late in regulation . Including the game against the Penguins , the Panthers are 1 @-@ 4 since the incident . 
 = = Similar gimmicks = = 
 During his coaching career from 1922 to 1964 , E. A. Diddle of Western Kentucky University began carrying a red towel with him during the basketball games he coached . Diddle would wave and throw the towel during games , and the concept was adopted by fans of the college . It became an official part of the school logo in 1971 . Fans of the undefeated 1972 Miami Dolphins cheered the team by waving the " Horrible Hanky " — white handkerchiefs . However , the handkerchiefs were deemed " too dainty " for football , and the tradition faded . " Hate the Yankees <unk> " , in reference to the franchise 's rivalry with the New York Yankees , were handkerchiefs distributed to Cleveland Indians fans in September 1977 in a promotion . 
 The Terrible Towel is traditionally known as the first " rally towel " ; its popularity has spawned similar traditions for other teams . Fans of the Minnesota Twins cheer the team with the " Homer Hanky " during the playoffs . The Philadelphia Phillies have distributed white towels to fans during home games . During a 2006 playoff game against the Steelers , the Indianapolis Colts handed out blue towels to rally fans , however , Pittsburgh went on to win the game . In a 2000 preseason game , played in Mexico City , many fans that filled the 100 @,@ 000 seat Aztec Stadium waved Towels . Cope , glad that the Allegheny Valley School would receive a sizable donation from the proceeds , was later disappointed to learn the towels waved by the fans were " knockoffs " made by local artists , and therefore no proceeds would go to the school . In 2008 , the NFL approved a white towel entitled the Trophy Towel , which will be sold to fans and given to the winning team of Super Bowl XLIII . Members of the Steelers criticized the idea , broadcaster Bill Hillgrove — who worked with Cope — called the idea " a cheap imitation . " Steelers player Aaron Smith stated , " It started here , so why would anyone else want to have a towel ? Why not kazoos ? " During the 2010 Memorial Cup the host committee made up 8 @,@ 000 yellow towels to represent the host team , the Brandon Wheat Kings , who played the Moncton Wildcats . Many fans brought the towels back for games after that . 
 = Invasion of Dominica = 
 The Invasion of Dominica ( 7 September 1778 ) was a successful French invasion of the island of Dominica in the British West Indies , during the Anglo @-@ French War . The action took place before British authorities in the Caribbean were aware that France had entered the war as an ally of the United States of America . The French governor in the West Indies , François Claude Amour , marquis de Bouillé , was notified on 17 August that France was at war , and organized the invasion , infiltrating spies to rally sympathetic French @-@ speaking Dominican support . 
 Early on 7 September 1778 , French forces landed on the southeastern coast of the island . They rapidly took over some of the island 's defenses , and eventually gained control of the high ground overlooking the island capital , Roseau . Lieutenant Governor William Stuart then surrendered the remaining forces . Dominica remained in French hands until the end of the war , when it was returned to British control . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the pivotal Battles of Saratoga in October 1777 and the ensuing surrender of British General John Burgoyne 's army , France decided to openly enter the American War of Independence as an ally of the young United States of America . France 's objectives in entering the war included the recovery of territories that had been lost to Britain in the Seven Years ' War . One key territory that was of particular interest was the West Indies island of Dominica , which lay between French @-@ held Martinique and Guadeloupe , and had been captured by Britain in 1761 . Recapture of the island would improve communication among the islands , and deny the use of Dominican ports to privateers who preyed on French shipping . 
 On Dominica , Governor Thomas Shirley had been concerned about the island 's security since the war began in 1775 . Operating against instructions from colonial authorities in London to minimize expenses for defence , he had pushed forward the improvement of a fort at Cachacrou and other sites . This work was incomplete when Shirley took leave in June 1778 , sailing for England . Command was left with Lieutenant Governor William Stuart , and work to improve the defenses was still incomplete in August 1778 , when François Claude Amour , marquis de Bouillé , the governor of the French West Indies , received word that war had been declared . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The French frigate Concorde reached Martinique on August 17 with orders from Paris to take Dominica at the earliest opportunity , and de Bouillé made immediate plans for such an operation . He had maintained contacts in the Dominican population , which had remained largely French during the years of British administration . As a result he had an accurate picture of the condition of the Dominican defenses , and knew that the island 's garrison numbered fewer than " fifty soldiers fit for duty " . He was also concerned with the whereabouts of the British Leeward Islands fleet of Admiral Samuel Barrington , which was significantly more powerful than his own . Unbeknownst to de Bouillé , Barrington , who had only recently assumed his post , was under orders to retain most of his fleet at Barbados until further instructions were received . The British regular forces on the island , which in total numbered about 100 , were distributed among defences in the capital Roseau , the hills that overlooked it , and at Cachacrou . 
 De Bouillé carefully maintained a facade of peace in his dealings with Dominican authorities while he began preparing his forces on Martinique . On 2 September he and Stuart signed an agreement that formally prohibited privateering crews from plundering . The next day de Bouillé sent one of his officers to Dominica to see whether a Royal Navy frigate was still anchored in Prince Rupert 's Bay ( near present @-@ day Portsmouth ) . Stuart , suspicious of the man , had him questioned and then released . On 5 September de Bouillé was informed that the frigate had sailed for Barbados . He immediately moved to launch his invasion . Some Frenchmen ( some British sources suggest they were French soldiers infiltrated onto the island ) gained entry to the battery at Cachacrou that evening , plied its garrison with drink , and poured sand into the <unk> of the fort 's cannons , temporarily rendering them useless . De Bouillé had in fact infiltrated some agents onto the island who had convinced some of the local French @-@ speaking militia to abandon their duties when called up . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 After sunset on 6 September , 1 @,@ 800 French troops and 1 @,@ 000 volunteers departed Martinique aboard the frigates Tourterelle , Diligente , and Amphitrite , the corvette <unk> , and a flotilla of smaller vessels . ( Sources describing the action give significantly varying numbers for the size of the French force . The numbers here are from de Bouillé 's report of the action ; some British sources claim his force numbered as much as 4 @,@ 500 . ) The first point of attack was the battery at Cachacrou , where the British garrison , befuddled by drink and with inoperative cannons , was overcome without significant resistance around dawn on 7 September . Two of the 48th Regiment 's soldiers were driven over the ramparts and fell to their deaths . After securing the battery the French fired cannons and sent signal rockets skyward to signal their allies . These actions also alerted Stuart at Roseau , and the alarm was immediately raised . Many of the French Dominican militia failed to muster , as arranged . About 100 militia ended up mustering for duty , and were deployed among Roseau 's defenses . 
 The French proceeded to land more troops between Cachacrou and Roseau , with the objective of gaining the high ground above the capital . The main force of 1 @,@ 400 men was landed about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Roseau near Pointe Michel , with heavy fire from the hill batteries resulting in 40 casualties . De Bouillé landed with another 600 at <unk> , between Pointe Michel and Roseau , while another 500 landed north of Roseau , and the fleet 's frigates moved to bombard Roseau 's defenses . The French briefly captured the coastal fort at <unk> , but were three times driven out by fire from above . They ended up withdrawing until forces were able to reach and capture the hill batteries . By noon , the French occupied the high ground above the capital , and Stuart realized the situation was hopeless . 
 Negotiations followed , and Stuart and de Bouillé signed the terms of capitulation at about 3 : 00 pm . The proceedings were interrupted by one of the French frigates , whose captain , apparently unaware of the proceedings , fired on Fort Young , where the British flag was still flying . The two commanders rushed to the fort to prevent further exchanges of gunfire before they completed the agreement . The French then formally took control of Roseau . The British regulars were made prisoners of war , and the militia were released to return home . De Bouillé , who was interested in keeping on good terms with the population , did not allow his troops to plunder the town . Instead , he levied a fee of £ 4 @,@ 400 on the island 's population that was distributed among his men . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 De Bouillé in official correspondence claimed the French suffered no casualties . Stuart reported that the French appeared to be concealing the casualties that occurred during the invasion . De Bouillé left a garrison of 800 ( 700 French regulars and 100 free black militia ) on the island , turned its command over to the Marquis de <unk> , and returned to Martinique . 
 News of Dominica 's fall was received with surprise in London . Considering a single ship of the line might have prevented the attack , Admiral Barrington was widely blamed for the loss , and criticized for adhering too closely to his orders . The orders and reinforcements whose late arrival had held Barrington at Barbados were to launch an attack on St. Lucia , which took place in December 1778 . These events were the first in a series of military actions resulting in the change of control of Caribbean islands during the war , in which de Bouillé was often involved . Thomas Shirley was appointed Governor of the Leeward Islands in 1781 , and was taken prisoner by de Bouillé in the 1782 British surrender of Saint Kitts . 
 Dominica remained in French hands until 1784 , when , much to de Bouillé 's annoyance , it was returned to British control under the terms of the 1783 Treaty of Paris . The fact that the French had supplied natives and mixed @-@ blood locals with arms during the invasion caused problems for the British . These local forces , who were previously somewhat pacific , resisted British attempts to expand their holdings on the island , leading to expanded conflict in 1785 . 
 = Flexible @-@ fuel vehicle = 
 A flexible @-@ fuel vehicle ( FFV ) or dual @-@ fuel vehicle ( colloquially called a flex @-@ fuel vehicle ) is an alternative fuel vehicle with an internal combustion engine designed to run on more than one fuel , usually gasoline blended with either ethanol or methanol fuel , and both fuels are stored in the same common tank . Modern flex @-@ fuel engines are capable of burning any proportion of the resulting blend in the combustion chamber as fuel injection and spark timing are adjusted automatically according to the actual blend detected by a fuel composition sensor . Flex @-@ fuel vehicles are distinguished from bi @-@ fuel vehicles , where two fuels are stored in separate tanks and the engine runs on one fuel at a time , for example , compressed natural gas ( CNG ) , liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) , or hydrogen . 
 The most common commercially available FFV in the world market is the ethanol flexible @-@ fuel vehicle , with about 49 million automobiles , motorcycles and light duty trucks manufactured and sold worldwide by mid 2015 , and concentrated in four markets , Brazil ( 29 @.@ 5 million by mid 2015 ) , the United States ( 17 @.@ 4 million by the end of 2014 ) , Canada ( 1 @.@ 6 million by 2014 ) , and Europe , led by Sweden ( 243 @,@ 100 ) . The Brazilian flex fuel fleet includes over 4 million flexible @-@ fuel motorcycles produced since 2009 through March 2015 . In addition to flex @-@ fuel vehicles running with ethanol , in Europe and the US , mainly in California , there have been successful test programs with methanol flex @-@ fuel vehicles , known as M85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles . There have been also successful tests using P @-@ series fuels with E85 flex fuel vehicles , but as of June 2008 , this fuel is not yet available to the general public . These successful tests with P @-@ series fuels were conducted on Ford Taurus and Dodge Caravan flexible @-@ fuel vehicles . 
 Though technology exists to allow ethanol FFVs to run on any mixture of gasoline and ethanol , from pure gasoline up to 100 % ethanol ( E100 ) , North American and European flex @-@ fuel vehicles are optimized to run on E85 , a blend of 85 % anhydrous ethanol fuel with 15 % gasoline . This upper limit in the ethanol content is set to reduce ethanol emissions at low temperatures and to avoid cold starting problems during cold weather , at temperatures lower than 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) . The alcohol content is reduced during the winter in regions where temperatures fall below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) to a winter blend of E70 in the U.S. or to E75 in Sweden from November until March . Brazilian flex fuel vehicles are optimized to run on any mix of E20 @-@ E25 gasoline and up to 100 % hydrous ethanol fuel ( E100 ) . The Brazilian flex vehicles are built @-@ in with a small gasoline reservoir for cold starting the engine when temperatures drop below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . An improved flex motor generation was launched in 2009 which eliminated the need for the secondary gas tank . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 As ethanol FFVs became commercially available during the late 1990s , the common use of the term " flexible @-@ fuel vehicle " became synonymous with ethanol FFVs . In the United States flex @-@ fuel vehicles are also known as " E85 vehicles " . In Brazil , the FFVs are popularly known as " total flex " or simply " flex " cars . In Europe , FFVs are also known as " flexifuel " vehicles . <unk> , particularly in Brazil and the European market , use badging in their FFV models with the some variant of the word " flex " , such as Volvo Flexifuel , or Volkswagen Total Flex , or Chevrolet <unk> or Renault Hi @-@ Flex , and Ford sells its Focus model in Europe as Flexifuel and as Flex in Brazil . In the US , only since 2008 FFV models feature a yellow gas cap with the label " E85 / Gasoline " written on the top of the cap to differentiate E85s from gasoline only models . 
 Flexible @-@ fuel vehicles ( FFVs ) are based on dual @-@ fuel systems that supply both fuels into the combustion chamber at the same time in various calibrated proportions . The most common fuels used by FFVs today are unleaded gasoline and ethanol fuel . Ethanol FFVs can run on pure gasoline , pure ethanol ( E100 ) or any combination of both . Methanol has also been blended with gasoline in flex @-@ fuel vehicles known as M85 FFVs , but their use has been limited mainly to demonstration projects and small government fleets , particularly in California . 
 Bi @-@ fuel vehicles . The term flexible @-@ fuel vehicles is sometimes used to include other alternative fuel vehicles that can run with compressed natural gas ( CNG ) , liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ; also known as <unk> ) , or hydrogen . However , all these vehicles actually are bi @-@ fuel and not flexible @-@ fuel vehicles , because they have engines that store the other fuel in a separate tank , and the engine runs on one fuel at a time . Bi @-@ fuel vehicles have the capability to switch back and forth from gasoline to the other fuel , manually or automatically . The most common available fuel in the market for bi @-@ fuel cars is natural gas ( CNG ) , and by 2008 there were 9 @,@ 6 million natural gas vehicles , led by Pakistan ( 2 @.@ 0 million ) , Argentina ( 1 @.@ 7 million ) , and Brazil ( 1 @.@ 6 million ) . Natural gas vehicles are a popular choice as taxicabs in the main cities of Argentina and Brazil . Normally , standard gasoline vehicles are retrofitted in specialized shops , which involve installing the gas cylinder in the trunk and the CNG injection system and electronics . 
 Multifuel vehicles are capable of operating with more than two fuels . In 2004 GM do Brasil introduced the Chevrolet Astra 2 @.@ 0 with a " <unk> " engine built on flex fuel technology developed by Bosch of Brazil , and capable of using CNG , ethanol and gasoline ( E20 @-@ E25 blend ) as fuel . This automobile was aimed at the taxicab market and the switch among fuels is done manually . In 2006 Fiat introduced the Fiat Siena Tetra fuel , a four @-@ fuel car developed under Magneti Marelli of Fiat Brazil . This automobile can run as a flex @-@ fuel on 100 % ethanol ( E100 ) ; or on E @-@ 20 to E25 , Brazil 's normal ethanol gasoline blend ; on pure gasoline ( though no longer available in Brazil since 1993 , it is still used in neighboring countries ) ; or just on natural gas . The Siena <unk> was engineered to switch from any gasoline @-@ ethanol blend to CNG automatically , depending on the power required by road conditions . Another existing option is to retrofit an ethanol flexible @-@ fuel vehicle to add a natural gas tank and the corresponding injection system . This option is popular among taxicab owners in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , allowing users to choose among three fuels ( E25 , E100 and CNG ) according to current market prices at the pump . Vehicles with this adaptation are known in Brazil as " tri @-@ fuel " cars . 
 Flex @-@ fuel hybrid electric and flex @-@ fuel plug @-@ in hybrid are two types of hybrid vehicles built with a combustion engine capable of running on gasoline , E @-@ 85 , or E @-@ 100 to help drive the wheels in conjunction with the electric engine or to recharge the battery pack that powers the electric engine . In 2007 Ford produced 20 demonstration Escape Hybrid E85s for real @-@ world testing in fleets in the U.S. Also as a demonstration project , Ford delivered in 2008 the first flexible @-@ fuel plug @-@ in hybrid SUV to the U.S. Department of Energy ( DOE ) , a Ford Escape Plug @-@ in Hybrid , which runs on gasoline or E85 . GM announced that the Chevrolet Volt plug @-@ in hybrid , launched in the U.S. in late 2010 , would be the first commercially available flex @-@ fuel plug @-@ in capable of adapting the propulsion to several world markets such as the U.S. , Brazil or Sweden , as the combustion engine can be adapted to run on E85 , E100 or diesel respectively . The Volt was initially expected to be flex @-@ fuel @-@ capable in 2013 . Lotus Engineering unveiled the Lotus <unk> at the 2010 Paris Motor Show . The <unk> is a plug @-@ in hybrid concept car designed for flex @-@ fuel operation on ethanol , or methanol as well as regular gasoline . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ford Model T , produced from 1908 through 1927 , was fitted with a carburetor with adjustable jetting , allowing use of gasoline or ethanol , or a combination of both . Other car manufactures also provided engines for ethanol fuel use . Henry Ford continued to advocate for ethanol as fuel even during the prohibition . However , cheaper oil caused gasoline to prevail , until the 1973 oil crisis resulted in gasoline shortages and awareness on the dangers of oil dependence . This crisis opened a new opportunity for ethanol and other alternative fuels , such as methanol , gaseous fuels such as CNG and LPG , and also hydrogen . Ethanol , methanol and natural gas CNG were the three alternative fuels that received more attention for research and development , and government support . 
 Since 1975 , and as a response to the shock caused by the first oil crisis , the Brazilian government implemented the National Alcohol Program -Pró @-@ Álcool- ( Portuguese : Programa Nacional do Álcool ) , a nationwide program financed by the government to phase out automotive fuels derived from fossil fuels in favor of ethanol made from sugar cane . It began with a low blend of anhydrous alcohol with regular gasoline in 1976 , and since July 2007 the mandatory blend is 25 % of alcohol or gasohol E25 . In 1979 , and as a response to the second oil crisis , the first vehicle capable of running with pure hydrous ethanol ( E100 ) was launched to the market , the Fiat 147 , after testing with several prototypes developed by Fiat , Volkswagen , GM and Ford . The Brazilian government provided three important initial drivers for the ethanol industry : guaranteed purchases by the state @-@ owned oil company Petrobras , low @-@ interest loans for agro @-@ industrial ethanol firms , and fixed gasoline and ethanol prices . After reaching more than 4 million cars and light trucks running on pure ethanol by the late 1980s , the use of E100 @-@ only vehicles sharply declined after increases in sugar prices produced shortages of ethanol fuel . 
 After extensive research that began in the 90s , a second push took place in March 2003 , when the Brazilian subsidiary of Volkswagen launched to the market the first full flexible @-@ fuel car , the Gol 1 @.@ 6 Total Flex . Several months later was followed by other Brazilian automakers , and by 2010 General Motors , Fiat , Ford , Peugeot , Renault , Volkswagen , Honda , Mitsubishi , Toyota , Citroën , Nissan and Kia Motors were producing popular models of flex cars and light trucks . The adoption of ethanol flex fuel vehicles was so successful , that production of flex cars went from almost 40 thousand in 2003 to 1 @.@ 7 million in 2007 . This rapid adoption of the flex technology was facilitated by the fuel distribution infrastructure already in place , as around 27 @,@ 000 filling stations countrywide were available by 1997 with at least one ethanol pump , a heritage of the Pró @-@ Álcool program . 
 In the United States , initial support to develop alternative fuels by the government was also a response to the first oil crisis , and some time later , as a goal to improve air quality . Also , liquid fuels were preferred over gaseous fuels not only because they have a better volumetric energy density but also because they were the most compatible fuels with existing distribution systems and engines , thus avoiding a big departure from the existing technologies and taking advantage of the vehicle and the refueling infrastructure . California led the search of sustainable alternatives with interest focused in methanol . Ford Motor Company and other automakers responded to California 's request for vehicles that run on methanol . In 1981 , Ford delivered 40 dedicated methanol fuel ( M100 ) Escorts to Los Angeles County , but only four refueling stations were installed . The biggest challenge in the development of alcohol vehicle technology was getting all of the fuel system materials compatible with the higher chemical reactivity of the fuel . Methanol was even more of a challenge than ethanol but much of the early experience gained with neat ethanol vehicle production in Brazil was transferable to methanol . The success of this small experimental fleet of <unk> led California to request more of these vehicles , mainly for government fleets . In 1983 , Ford built 582 M100 vehicles ; 501 went to California , and the remaining to New Zealand , Sweden , Norway , United Kingdom , and Canada . 
 As an answer to the lack of refueling infrastructure , Ford began development of a flexible @-@ fuel vehicle in 1982 , and between 1985 and 1992 , 705 experimental FFVs were built and delivered to California and Canada , including the <unk> Ford Escort , the <unk> Taurus , and the <unk> LTD Crown Victoria . These vehicles could operate on either gasoline or methanol with only one fuel system . Legislation was passed to encourage the US auto industry to begin production , which started in 1993 for the M85 FFVs at Ford . In 1996 , a new FFV Ford Taurus was developed , with models fully capable of running on either methanol or ethanol blended with gasoline . This ethanol version of the Taurus became the first commercial production of an E85 FFV . The momentum of the FFV production programs at the American car companies continued , although by the end of the 1990s , the emphasis shifted to the FFV E85 version , as it is today . Ethanol was preferred over methanol because there is a large support from the farming community , and thanks to the government 's incentive programs and corn @-@ based ethanol subsidies available at the time . Sweden also tested both the M85 and the E85 flexifuel vehicles , but due to agriculture policy , in the end emphasis was given to the ethanol flexifuel vehicles . Support for ethanol also comes from the fact that it is a biomass fuel , which addresses climate change concerns and greenhouse gas emissions , though nowadays these benefits are questioned and depend on the feedstock used for ethanol production and their indirect land use change impacts . 
 The demand for ethanol fuel produced from field corn in the United States was stimulated by the discovery in the late 90s that methyl tertiary butyl ether ( MTBE ) , an oxygenate additive in gasoline , was contaminating groundwater . Due to the risks of widespread and costly litigation , and because MTBE use in gasoline was banned in almost 20 states by 2006 , the substitution of MTBE opened a new market for ethanol fuel . This demand shift for ethanol as an oxygenate additive took place at a time when oil prices were already significantly rising . By 2006 , about 50 percent of the gasoline used in the U.S. contained ethanol at different proportions , and ethanol production grew so fast that the US became the world 's top ethanol producer , overtaking Brazil in 2005 . This shift also contributed to a sharp increase in the production and sale of E85 flex vehicles since 2002 . 
 = = Flexible @-@ fuel vehicles by country = = 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 Flexible @-@ fuel technology started being developed by Brazilian engineers near the end of the 1990s . The Brazilian flexible fuel car is built with an ethanol @-@ ready engine and one fuel tank for both fuels . The small gasoline reservoir for starting the engine with pure ethanol in cold weather , used in earlier neat ethanol vehicles , was kept to avoid start up problems in the central and southern regions , where winter temperatures normally drop below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . An improved flex motor generation was launched in 2009 and allowed to eliminate the need for this secondary gas reservoir tank . Another improvement was the reduction of fuel consumption and tailpipe emissions , between 10 % to 15 % as compared to flex motors sold in 2008 . In March 2009 Volkswagen do Brasil launched the Polo E @-@ Flex , the first flex fuel model without an auxiliary tank for cold start . 
 A key innovation in the Brazilian flex technology was avoiding the need for an additional dedicated sensor to monitor the ethanol @-@ gasoline mix , which made the first American M85 flex fuel vehicles too expensive . 
 Brazilian flex cars are capable of running on just hydrated ethanol ( E100 ) , or just on a blend of gasoline with 20 to 25 % anhydrous ethanol ( the mandatory blend since 1993 ) , or on any arbitrary combination of both fuels . 
 The flexibility of Brazilian FFVs empowers the consumers to choose the fuel depending on current market prices . As ethanol fuel economy is lower than gasoline because of ethanol 's energy content is close to 34 % less per unit volume than gasoline , flex cars running on ethanol get a lower mileage than when running on pure gasoline . However , this effect is partially offset by the usually lower price per liter of ethanol fuel . As a rule of thumb , Brazilian consumers are frequently advised by the media to use more alcohol than gasoline in their mix only when ethanol prices are 30 % lower or more than gasoline , as ethanol price fluctuates heavily depending on the result of seasonal sugar cane harvests . 
 In March 2003 Volkswagen do Brasil launched in the market the Gol 1 @.@ 6 Total Flex , the first commercial flexible fuel vehicle capable of running on any blend of gasoline and ethanol . GM do Brasil followed three months later with the Chevrolet Corsa 1 @.@ 8 Flexpower , using an engine developed by a joint @-@ venture with Fiat called PowerTrain . Passenger flex @-@ fuel vehicles became a commercial success in the country , and as of December 2013 , a total of 15 car manufacturers produce flex @-@ fuel engines for the Brazilian market , dominating all light vehicle segments except sports cars , off @-@ road vehicles and minivans . 
 The production of flex @-@ fuel cars and light commercial vehicles since 2003 reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010 . At the end of 2012 registrations of flex @-@ fuel cars and light trucks represented 87 % of all passenger and light duty vehicles sold in the country in 2012 , and climbed to a 94 % market share of all new passenger vehicles sales in 2013 . Production passed the 20 million @-@ unit mark in June 2013 . By the end of 2014 , flex @-@ fuel cars represented 54 % of the Brazilian registered stock of light @-@ duty vehicles , while gasoline only vehicles represented 34 @.@ 3 % . As of June 2015 , flex @-@ fuel light @-@ duty vehicle sales totaled 25 @.@ 5 million units . 
 The rapid success of flex vehicles was made possible by the existence of 33 @,@ 000 filling stations with at least one ethanol pump available by 2006 , a heritage of the early Pró @-@ Álcool ethanol program . These facts , together with the mandatory use of E25 blend of gasoline throughout the country , allowed Brazil in 2008 to achieve more than 50 % of fuel consumption in the gasoline market from sugar cane @-@ based ethanol . 
 According to two separate research studies conducted in 2009 , at the national level 65 % of the flex @-@ fuel registered vehicles regularly used ethanol fuel , and the usage climbed to 93 % in São Paulo , the main ethanol producer state where local taxes are lower , and prices at the pump are more competitive than gasoline . However , as a result of higher ethanol prices caused by the Brazilian ethanol industry crisis that began in 2009 , combined with government subsidies to keep gasoline price lower than the international market value , by November 2013 only 23 % flex @-@ fuel car owners were using ethanol , down from 66 % in 2009 . 
 One of the latest innovation within the Brazilian flexible @-@ fuel technology is the development of flex @-@ fuel motorcycles . The first flex @-@ fuel motorcycle was launched by Honda in March 2009 , the CG 150 Titan Mix . In September 2009 , Honda launched a second flexible @-@ fuel motorcycle , the on @-@ off road NXR 150 Bros Mix . By December 2012 the five available models of flexible @-@ fuel motorcycles from Honda and Yamaha reached a cumulative production of 2 @,@ 291 @,@ 072 units , representing 31 @.@ 8 % of all motorcycles manufactured in Brazil since 2009 , and 48 @.@ 2 % of motorcycle production in 2012 . Flexible @-@ fuel motorcycle production passed the 3 million @-@ unit milestone in October 2013 . The 4 million mark was reached in March 2015 . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 = = = = Sweden = = = = 
 Flexible @-@ fuel vehicles were introduced in Sweden as a demonstration test in 1994 , when three Ford Taurus were imported to show the technology existed . Because of the existing interest , a project was started in 1995 with 50 Ford Taurus E85 flexifuel in different parts of Sweden : Umeå , Örnsköldsvik , <unk> , Stockholm , Karlstad , Linköping , and Växjö . From 1997 to 1998 an additional 300 Taurus were imported , and the number of E85 fueling grew to 40 . Then in 1998 the city of Stockholm placed an order for 2 @,@ 000 of FFVs for any car manufacturer willing to produce them . The objective was to jump @-@ start the FFV industry in Sweden . The two domestic car makers Volvo Group and Saab AB refused to participate arguing there were not in place any ethanol filling stations . However , Ford Motor Company took the offer and began importing the flexifuel version of its Focus model , delivering the first cars in 2001 , and selling more than 15 @,@ 000 FFV Focus by 2005 , then representing an 80 % market share of the flexifuel market . 
 In 2005 both Volvo and Saab introduced to the Sweden market their flexifuel models . Saab began selling its 9 @-@ 5 2 @.@ 0 Biopower , joined in 2006 by its 9 @-@ 5 2 @.@ 3 Biopower . Volvo introduced its S40 and V50 with flexible @-@ fuel engines , joined in late 2006 by the new C30 . All Volvo models were initially restricted to the Sweden market , until 2007 , when these three models were launched in eight new European markets . In 2007 , Saab also started selling a BioPower version of its popular Saab 9 @-@ 3 line . In 2008 the Saab @-@ derived Cadillac BLS was introduced with E85 compatible engines , and Volvo launched the V70 with a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ litre turbocharged Flexifuel engine . 
 All flexible @-@ fuel vehicles in Sweden use an E75 winter blend instead of E85 to avoid engine starting problems during cold weather . This blend was introduced since the winter 2006 @-@ 07 and E75 is used from November until March . For temperature below − 15 ° C ( 5 ° F ) E85 flex vehicles require an engine block heater . The use of this device is also recommended for gasoline vehicles when temperatures drop below − 23 ° C ( − 9 ° F ) . Another option when extreme cold weather is expected is to add more pure gasoline in the tank , thus reducing the ethanol content below the E75 winter blend , or simply not to use E85 during extreme low temperature spells . 
 Sweden has achieved the largest E85 flexible @-@ fuel vehicle fleet in Europe , with a sharp growth from 717 vehicles in 2001 to 243 @,@ 136 through December 2014 . As of 2008 a total of 70 % of all flexifuel vehicles operating in the EU were registered in Sweden . The recent and accelerated growth of the Swedish fleet of E85 flexifuel vehicles is the result of the National Climate Policy in Global Cooperation Bill passed in 2005 , which not only ratified the Kyoto Protocol but also sought to meet the 2003 EU Biofuels Directive regarding targets for use of biofuels , and also let to the 2006 government 's commitment to eliminate oil imports by 2020 . 
 In order to achieve these goals several government incentives were implemented . Ethanol , as the other biofuels , was exempted of both , the CO2 and energy taxes until 2009 , resulting in a 30 % price reduction at the pump of E85 fuel over gasoline . Furthermore , other demand side incentives for flexifuel vehicle owners include a US $ 1 @,@ 800 bonus to buyers of FFVs , exemption from the Stockholm congestion tax , up to 20 % discount on auto insurance , free parking spaces in most of the largest cities , owner annual registration taxes , and a 20 % tax reduction for flexifuel company cars . Also , a part of the program , the Swedish Government ruled that 25 % of their vehicle purchases ( excluding police , fire and ambulance vehicles ) must be alternative fuel vehicles . By the first months of 2008 , this package of incentives resulted in sales of flexible @-@ fuel cars representing 25 % of new car sales . 
 On the supply side , since 2005 the gasoline fuelling stations selling more than 3 million liters of fuel a year are required to sell at least one type of biofuel , resulting in more than 1 @,@ 200 gas stations selling E85 by August 2008 . Despite all the sharp growth of E85 flexifuel cars , by 2007 they represented just two percent of the four million Swedish vehicles . In addition , this law also mandated all new filling stations to offer alternative fuels , and stations with an annual volume of more than one million liters are required to have an alternative fuel pump by December 2009 . Therefore , the number of E85 pumps is expected to reach by 2009 nearly 60 % of Sweden 's 4 @,@ 000 filling stations . 
 The Swedish @-@ made Koenigsegg <unk> , a limited edition and version of the <unk> , is currently the fastest and most powerful flexible fuel vehicle with its twin @-@ supercharged V8 producing 1018 hp when running on biofuel , as compared to 806 hp on 91 octane US unleaded gasoline . 
 = = = = Other European countries = = = = 
 Flexifuel vehicles are sold in 18 European countries , including Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom . Ford , Volvo and Saab are the main automakers offering flexifuel autos in the region . 
 = = = = = France = = = = = 
 Biofuel cars in general get strong tax incentives in France , including a 0 or 50 % reduction on the tax on new vehicles , and a 40 % reduction on CO2 tax for new cars . For company cars there is a corporate car tax free for 2 years and a recovery of 80 % of the value added tax ( VAT ) on E85 vehicles . Also , E85 fuel price is set significantly lower than diesel or gasoline , resulting in E85 at € 0 @.@ 80 , diesel at € 1 @.@ 15 , and gasoline at € 1 @.@ 30 per liter , as of April 2007 . By May 2008 , France had 211 pumps selling E85 , even though the government made plans for the installation of up to 500 E85 pumps by year end 2007 . French automakers Renault and PSA ( Citroen & Peugeot ) announced they will start selling FFV cars beginning in the summer 2007 . 
 = = = = = Germany = = = = = 
 Biofuel emphasis in Germany is on biodiesel , and no specific incentives have been granted for E85 flex @-@ fuel cars , however there is complete exemption of taxes on all biofuels while there is a normal tax of € 0 @.@ 65 per liter of petroleum fuels . The distribution of E85 began in 2005 , and with 219 stations as of September 2008 , Germany ranks second after Sweden with the most E85 fueling stations in the EU . As of July 2012 retail prices of E85 was € 1 @.@ 09 per liter , and gasoline was priced at € 1 @.@ 60 per liter ( for gasoline RON 95 ) , then providing enough margin to compensate for ethanol 's lower fuel economy . Ford has offered the Ford Focus since August 2005 in Germany . Ford is about to offer also the Mondeo and other models as FFV versions between 2008 and 2010 . The Saab 9 @-@ 5 and Saab 9 @-@ 3 Biopower , the Peugeot 308 <unk> , the Citroën C4 <unk> , the Audi A5 , two models of the Cadillac BLS , and five Volvo models are also available in the German market by 2008 . Since 2011 , Dacia offers the Logan MCV with an <unk> <unk> <unk> engine . 
 = = = = = Ireland = = = = = 
 Ireland is the third best seller European market of E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles , after Sweden and France . <unk> ( E85 ) in Ireland is made from whey , a waste product of cheese manufacturing . The Irish government established several incentives , including a 50 % discount in vehicle registration taxes ( VRT ) , which can account for more than one third of the retail price of a new car in Ireland ( around € 6 @,@ 500 ) . The bioethanol element of the E85 fuel is excise @-@ free for fuel companies , allowing retail prices to be low enough to offset the 25 per cent cut in fuel economy that E @-@ 85 cars offer , due to ethanol 's lower energy content than gasoline . Also , the value added tax ( VAT ) on the fuel can also be claimed back . E @-@ 85 fuel is available across the country in more than 20 of <unk> service stations . In October 2005 , the 1 @.@ 8 Ford Focus FFV became the first flexible @-@ fuel vehicle to be commercially sold in Ireland . Later Ford launched the C @-@ max and the Mondeo flexifuel models . Saab and Volvo also have E85 models available . 
 From 1 January 2011 E85 fuel is no longer excise @-@ free in Ireland . <unk> has announced they will not provide E85 when their current supplies have run out . 
 = = = = = Spain = = = = = 
 The first flexifuel vehicles were introduced in Spain by late 2007 , with the acquisition of 80 cars for use in the Spaniard official government fleet . At that time the country had only three gas stations selling E85 , making necessary to deploy an official E85 fueling station in Madrid to attend these vehicles . Despite the introduction in the Spaniard market of several flexifuel models , by the end of 2008 still persists the problems of adequate E85 fueling infrastructure , as only 10 gas stations were selling E85 fuel to the public in the entire country . 
 = = = = = United Kingdom = = = = = 
 The UK government established several incentives for E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles . These include a fuel duty rebate on E85 fuel of 20 p per liter , until 2010 ; a £ 10 to 15 reduction in the vehicle excise duty ( <unk> ) ; and a 2 % annual company car tax discount for flex @-@ fuel cars . Despite the small number of E85 pump stations available , limited to the Morrisons supermarket chain stations , most automakers offer the same models in the UK that are available in the European market . In 2005 the Ford Focus Flexi @-@ Fuel became the first flexible @-@ fuel car sold in the UK , though E85 pumps were not opened until 2006 . Volvo now offers its flexifuel models S80 , S40 , C30 , V50 and V70 . Other models available in the UK are the Ford C @-@ Max Flexi @-@ Fuel , and the Saab models 9 @-@ 5 and 9 @-@ 3 Flex @-@ Fuel Biopower , and the new Saab Aero X BioPower E100 bioethanol . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Since 1998 a total of 17 @.@ 7 million E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles had been sold or lease in the United States through the end of 2014 . About 11 million flex @-@ fuel cars and light trucks were still in operation as of early 2013 , up from 7 @.@ 3 million in 2008 , 4 @.@ 1 million in 2005 , and 1 @.@ 4 million on U.S roads in 2001 . For the 2011 model year there are about 70 vehicles E85 capable , including sedans , vans , SUVs and pick @-@ up trucks . Many of the models available in the market are trucks and sport @-@ utility vehicles getting less than 20 mpg @-@ US ( 12 L / 100 km ; 24 mpg @-@ imp ) when filled with gasoline . Actual consumption of E85 among flex @-@ fuel vehicle owners is limited . Nevertheless , the U.S. Department of Energy estimated that in 2011 only 862 @,@ 837 flex @-@ fuel fleet @-@ operated vehicles were regularly fueled with E85 . As a result , from all the ethanol fuel consumed in the country in 2009 , only 1 % was E85 consumed by flex @-@ fuel vehicles . 
 The E85 blend is used in gasoline engines modified to accept such higher concentrations of ethanol , and the fuel injection is regulated through a dedicated sensor , which automatically detects the amount of ethanol in the fuel , allowing to adjust both fuel injection and spark timing accordingly to the actual blend available in the vehicle 's tank . Because ethanol contains close to 34 % less energy per unit volume than gasoline , E85 FFVs have a lower mileage per gallon than gasoline . Based on EPA tests for all 2006 E85 models , the average fuel economy for E85 vehicles was 25 @.@ 56 % lower than unleaded gasoline . 
 The American E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicle was developed to run on any mixture of unleaded gasoline and ethanol , anywhere from 0 % to 85 % ethanol by volume . Both fuels are mixed in the same tank , and E85 is sold already blended . In order to reduce ethanol evaporative emissions and to avoid problems starting the engine during cold weather , the maximum blend of ethanol was set to 85 % . There is also a seasonal reduction of the ethanol content to E70 ( called winter E85 blend ) in very cold regions , where temperatures fall below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) during the winter . In Wyoming for example , E70 is sold as E85 from October to May . 
 E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles are becoming increasingly common in the Midwest , where corn is a major crop and is the primary feedstock for ethanol fuel production . Regional retail E85 prices vary widely across the US , with more favorable prices in the Midwest region , where most corn is grown and ethanol produced . Depending of the vehicle capabilities , the break @-@ even price of E85 has to be between 25 and 30 % lower than gasoline . 
 = = = = Barriers to widespread adoption = = = = 
 A 2005 survey found that 68 % of American flex @-@ fuel car owners were not aware they owned an E85 flex . This was because the exteriors of flex and non @-@ flex vehicles look exactly the same ; there is no sale price difference between them ; the lack of consumers ' awareness about E85s ; and also the initial decision of American automakers of not putting any kind of exterior labeling , so buyers could be unaware they are purchasing an E85 vehicle . Since 2008 , all new FFV models in the US feature a bright yellow gas cap to remind drivers of the E85 capabilities and proper flex @-@ fuel badging . 
 Some critics have argued that American automakers have been producing E85 flex models motivated by a loophole in the Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) requirements , that allows for a fuel economy credit for every flex @-@ fuel vehicle sold , whether or not in practice these vehicles are fueled with E85 . This loophole might allow the car industry to meet the CAFE targets in fuel economy just by spending between US $ 100 and US $ 200 that it cost to turn a conventional vehicle into a flex @-@ fuel , without investing in new technology to improve fuel economy , and saving them the potential fines for not achieving that standard in a given model year . The CAFE standards proposed in 2011 for the period 2017 @-@ 2025 will allow flexible @-@ fuel vehicles to receive extra credit but only when the carmakers present data proving how much E85 such vehicles have actually consumed . 
 A major restriction hampering sales of E85 flex vehicles , or fueling with E85 , is the limited infrastructure available to sell E85 to the public with only 2 % of the motor fuel stations offering E85 by March 2014 . As of November 2015 , there were only 3 @,@ 218 fueling stations selling E85 to the public in the entire U.S. , while about 156 @,@ 000 retail motor fuel outlets do not offer any ethanol blend . In addition , there has been a great concentration of E85 stations in the Corn Belt states . The main constraint for a more rapid expansion of E85 availability is that it requires dedicated storage tanks at filling stations , at an estimated cost of US $ 60 @,@ 000 for each dedicated ethanol tank . The Obama Administration set the goal of installing 10 @,@ 000 blender pumps nationwide until 2015 , and to support this target the US Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) issued a rule in May 2011 to include flexible fuel pumps in the Rural Energy for America Program ( <unk> ) . This ruling will provide financial assistance to fuel station owners to install E85 and blender pumps . 
 = = = = Flex fuel conversion kit = = = = 
 A flex fuel conversion kit is a kit that allows a conventional equipment manufactured vehicle to be altered to operate on propane , natural gas , methane gas , ethanol , or electricity are classified as aftermarket AFV conversions . All vehicle conversions , except those that are completed for a vehicle to run on electricity , must meet current applicable U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) standards . 
 = = = = Latest developments = = = = 
 In 2008 , Ford delivered the first flex @-@ fuel plug @-@ in hybrid as part of a demonstration project , a Ford Escape Plug @-@ in Hybrid capable of running on E85 or gasoline . General Motors announced that the new Chevrolet Volt plug @-@ in hybrid , launched in the United States market in December 2010 , would be flex @-@ fuel @-@ capable in 2013 . General Motors do Brasil announced that it will import from five to ten Volts to Brazil during the first semester of 2011 as part of a demonstration and also to lobby the federal government to enact financial incentives for green cars . If successful , GM would adapt the Volt to operate on ethanol fuel , as most new cars sold in Brazil are flex @-@ fuel . 
 In 2008 , Chrysler , General Motors , and Ford pledged to manufacture 50 percent of their entire vehicle line as flexible fuel in model year 2012 , if enough fueling infrastructure develops . The Open Fuel Standard Act ( OFS ) , introduced to Congress in May 2011 , is intended to promote a massive adoption of flex @-@ fuel vehicles capable of running on ethanol or methanol . The bill requires that 50 percent of automobiles made in 2014 , 80 percent in 2016 , and 95 percent in 2017 , would be manufactured and warranted to operate on non @-@ petroleum @-@ based fuels , which includes existing technologies such as flex @-@ fuel , natural gas , hydrogen , biodiesel , plug @-@ in electric and fuel cell . 
 As of December 2014 , almost half of new vehicles produced by Chrysler , Ford , and General Motors are flex @-@ fuel , meaning roughly one @-@ quarter of all new vehicles sold by 2015 are capable of using up to E85 . However , obstacles to widespread use of E85 fuel remain . A 2014 analysis by the Renewable Fuels Association ( RFA ) found that oil companies prevent or discourage affiliated retailers from selling E85 through rigid franchise and branding agreements , restrictive supply contracts , and other tactics . The report showed independent retailers are five times more likely to offer E85 than retailers carrying an oil company brand . 
 = = = Other countries = = = 
 = = = = Australia = = = = 
 In January 2007 GM brought UK @-@ sourced Saab 9 @-@ 5 Biopower E85 flex @-@ fuel vehicles to Australia as a trial , in order to measure interest in ethanol @-@ powered vehicles in the country . Saab Australia placed the vehicles with the fleets of the Queensland Government , the media , and some ethanol producers . E85 is not available widely in Australia , but the <unk> Group provided the E85 blend fuel for this trial . 
 Saab Australia became the first car maker to produce an E85 flex @-@ fuel car for the Australian market with the Saab 9 @-@ 5 BioPower . One month later launched the new 9 @-@ 3 BioPower , the first vehicle in Australia to give drivers a choice of three fuels , E85 , diesel or gasoline , and both automobiles are sold for a small premium . Australia 's largest independent fuel retailer , United Petroleum , announced plans to install Australia 's first commercial E85 fuel pumps , one in Sydney and one in Melbourne . 
 GM Holden , the Victorian state government , <unk> , Caltex , Veolia Environmental Services and Mitsui have announced a consortium with a co @-@ ordinated plan to build a bio @-@ ethanol plant from household waste for use as E85 fuel . In August 2010 Caltex launched the E85 ethanol fuel called Bio E @-@ Flex , designed for use in the Holden Commodore VE Series II flex @-@ fuel vehicles to be released later in 2010 . Caltex Australia plans to begin selling Bio E @-@ Flex in Melbourne from September and expects to have Bio E @-@ Flex available in more than 30 service stations in Melbourne , Sydney , Brisbane , Adelaide and Canberra by the end of October , with plans to increase to 100 metropolitan and regional locations in 2011 . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 As part of the North American auto market , by 2007 Canada had available 51 models of E85 flex @-@ vehicles , most from Chrysler , Ford and General Motors , including automobiles , pickup trucks , and SUVs . The country had around 1 @.@ 6 million capable flex fuel E85s on the roads by 2014 . However , most users are not aware they own an E85 , as vehicles are not clearly labeled as such , and even though the newer models have a yellow cap in the fuel tank informing that the vehicle can handle E85 , most users are still not aware because there are hardly any gas stations offering E85 . Another major restriction for greater E85 fuel use is the fact that by June 2008 Canada had only three public E85 pumps , all located in Ontario , in the cities of Guelph , Chatham , and Woodstock . E85 fueling is available primarily for fleet vehicles , including 20 government refueling stations not available for the public . The main feedstocks for E85 production in Canada are corn and wheat , and there were several proposals being discussed to increase the actual use of E85 fuel in FFVs , such as creating an ethanol @-@ friendly highway or ethanol corridor . 
 = = = = Colombia = = = = 
 On March 2009 the Colombian government enacted a mandate to introduce E85 flexible @-@ fuel cars . The executive decree applies to all gasoline @-@ powered vehicles with engines smaller than 2 @.@ 0 liters manufactured , imported , and commercialized in the country beginning in 2012 , mandating that 60 % of such vehicles must have flex @-@ fuel engines capable of running with gasoline or E85 , or any blend of both . By 2014 the mandatory quota is 80 % and it will reach 100 percent by 2016 . All vehicles with engines bigger than 2 @.@ 0 liters must be E85 capable starting in 2013 . The decree also mandates that by 2011 all gasoline stations must provide infrastructure to guarantee availability of E85 throughout the country . The mandatory introduction of E85 flex @-@ fuels has caused controversy among carmakers , car dealers , gasoline station owners , and even some ethanol producers complained the industry is not ready to supply enough ethanol for the new E85 fleet . 
 = = = = New Zealand = = = = 
 In 2006 New Zealand began a pilot project with two E85 Ford Focus Flexi @-@ Fuel evaluation cars . The main feedstock used in New Zealand for ethanol production is whey , a by @-@ product of milk production . 
 = = = = Paraguay = = = = 
 Government officials and businessmen from Paraguay began negotiations in 2007 with Brazilian automakers in order to import flex cars that run on any blend of gasoline and ethanol . If successful , Paraguay would become the first destination for Brazilian flex @-@ fuel car exports . In May 2008 , the Paraguayan government announced a plan to eliminate import taxes of flex @-@ fuel vehicles and an incentive program for ethanol production . The plan also includes the purchase of 20 @,@ 000 flex cars in 2009 for the government fleet . 
 = = = = Thailand = = = = 
 In 2006 , tax incentives were established in Thailand for the introduction of compressed natural gas ( CNG ) as an alternative fuel , by eliminating import duties and lowering excise taxes on CNG @-@ compatible cars . Then in 2007 , Thai authorities approved incentives for the production of " eco @-@ cars " , with the goal of the country to become a regional hub for the production of small , affordable and fuel @-@ efficient cars . Seven automakers joint in the program , Toyota , Suzuki , Nissan , Mitsubishi , Honda , Tata and Volkswagen . In 2008 the government announced priority for E85 , expecting these flex @-@ fuel vehicles to become widely available in Thailand in 2009 , three years ahead of schedule . The incentives include cuts in excise tax rates for E85 @-@ compatible cars and reduction of corporate taxes for ethanol producers to make sure E85 fuel supply will be met . This new plan however , brought confusion and protests by the automakers which sign @-@ up for the " eco @-@ cars " , as competition with the E85 flex @-@ fuel cars will negatively affect their ongoing plans and investments , and their production lines will have to be upgraded at a high cost for them to produce flex @-@ fuel cars . They also complained that flex @-@ fuel vehicles popular in a few countries around the world , limiting their export potential as compared with other engine technologies . 
 Despite the controversy , the first E85 flexible fuel vehicles were introduced in November 2008 . The first two models available in the Thai market were the Volvo S80 and the C30 . The S80 is manufactured locally and the C30 is imported . By the time of the introduction of flex vehicles there were already two gas stations with E85 fuel available . During 2009 it was expected that 15 fueling stations in Bangkok will have E85 fuel available . In October 2009 the Mitsubishi Lancer Ex was launched becoming the first mass @-@ production E85 flexi @-@ fuel vehicle produced in Thailand . 
 = = = Comparison among the leading markets = = = 
 = = List of currently produced flexible @-@ fuel vehicles = = 
 = = = Worldwide = = = 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Citroën C4 1 @.@ 6 <unk> 
 Dacia Duster , Dacia Logan , Dacia <unk> 
 Fiat 500X 1 @.@ 6 16V <unk> , Fiat <unk> 1 @.@ 6 16V <unk> 
 Ford Focus , Ford C @-@ MAX , Ford Mondeo , Ford S @-@ Max , Ford Galaxy 
 Koenigsegg <unk> 
 Peugeot 307 1 @.@ 6 <unk> 
 Saab 9 @-@ 5 , Saab 9 @-@ 3 
 SEAT León 1 @.@ 6 MPI MultiFuel , SEAT Altea 1 @.@ 6 MPI MultiFuel , SEAT Altea XL 1 @.@ 6 MPI MultiFuel 
 Volvo C30 1.8F FlexiFuel , S40 1.8F FlexiFuel , V50 1.8F FlexiFuel , <unk> ( concept ) , V70 <unk> FlexiFuel , S80 <unk> FlexiFuel 
 = = = Thailand = = = 
 Mitsubishi : Lancer Ex 1 @.@ 8 
 Honda : Civic FB , City 6th gen , CR @-@ V 4th gen , Accord 9th gen 
 Mazda : Mazda 3 BM 
 = = = United States = = = 
 = Mount Hope Estate = 
 Mount Hope Estate is a National Register of Historic Places @-@ listed property in <unk> and Penn Townships , Lancaster County , Pennsylvania , Lancaster County , Pennsylvania . The original estate was the center of operations of the Grubb Family Iron Dynasty during the 19th century and included over 2 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 000 ha ) , a charcoal iron furnace , a grist mill , housing for employees and tenants , plus supporting structures such as a post office , a general store , a railroad station , a school and a church . The existing mansion and grounds remain from what was once a thriving industrial headquarters complex and small village . 
 The mansion itself was originally constructed as a Federal @-@ style home by the prominent family of iron masters ; an 1895 remodeling transformed the structure with the addition of Victorian features . The mansion is constructed of locally quarried red sandstone , as are the outbuildings , which at one time numbered nearly 30 . The grounds is also notable for its pre @-@ 1840 American formal garden , of which there are very few surviving . The estate currently hosts the Mount Hope Estate and Winery , the Swashbuckler Brewing Company , the Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire , and other events held throughout the year ( see below ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The estate was the home and center of operations of the Grubb Family Iron Dynasty during the 19th century . The Mount Hope Grubbs were from an early American family whose founder , John Grubb , had come to America from Stoke <unk> , Cornwall , England and settled in Delaware . John 's youngest son Peter Grubb came to the local area about 1734 , when he discovered the vast iron deposits in Lebanon County and purchased 300 acres ( 120 ha ) . By 1742 he had founded the highly successful Cornwall Ironworks , named to recall his father 's ancestral home . By 1783 the family 's holdings covered 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) . The property was split several times among heirs , and various lands passed between the Grubb and Coleman families in the late 18th century . In 1784 , Peter Grubb 's youngest son Peter Grubb , Jr. purchased an additional 212 @.@ 5 acres ( 86 @.@ 0 ha ) and built a charcoal furnace at a place that he called " Mount Hope " . Peter Jr. left the land to his two sons , who inherited a total of 2 @,@ 307 acres ( 934 ha ) that were to become known as the " Mount Hope Estate " . His youngest son , Henry Bates Grubb , acquired his brother 's share and built the mansion by 1805 . 
 The Grubbs were locally prominent by at least 1784 , and from 1840 to 1870 were the leading iron manufacturers in Pennsylvania , with Mount Hope Estate serving as the center of their operations . During this period the estate played host to many leading Pennsylvanians including the Shippen family , Episcopalian ministers including Bishop William White and Bishop Alonzo Potter , and other leading ironmasters including Robert Coleman . At the Grubb family 's height in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 19th century , the estate included a charcoal furnace , mill workers ' houses , Mount Hope Episcopal Church ( also called Hope Church , and " principally erected for the Grubb family " ) , the mansion , many stone outbuildings , and large formal gardens . 
 After the death of Henry Bates Grubb , the estate was managed by his widow , Harriet Amelia Buckley Grubb , until her children reached adulthood . In 1848 – 49 , at a cost of about $ 2 @,@ 000 , she had an Episcopal church , known today as " Hope Church " , erected on the property , " for the moral and spiritual uplift of the tenants on her estate and the employees of the Mount Hope Furnace " . In 1885 , Clement Brooke Grubb , one of Henry 's sons , purchased the mansion and surrounding land for $ 300 @,@ 000 from the heirs of his younger brother , Alfred Bates Grubb . That October , Clement gave the church and churchyard to the Episcopal Diocese of Central Pennsylvania . 
 Upon Clement 's death , he left it to his daughter , the last descendant of the Grubb family to own it , Daisy Elizabeth Brooke Grubb , who renovated the 32 @-@ room mansion in the Victorian architectural style . After Daisy 's death , the property was subdivided and passed through numerous owners until Charles Romito purchased the mansion and immediately surrounding land for $ 1 million in 1980 to open a winery . 
 = = = Mount Hope Estate and Winery = = = 
 After planting the vineyards and <unk> wines , Romito opened the Mount Hope Estate and Winery in 1980 . To promote his new business the first year , Romito hosted several events including an art show , a bluegrass concert , a fifties revival , a country @-@ western weekend , a classical orchestra concert , and a one @-@ day modern jousting tournament . The jousting tournament was so popular that Romito held a two @-@ day renaissance festival the following year in the winery 's parking lot , and gradually expanded this into a permanent attraction , the Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire . The property was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 , and in 1991 the boundaries were increased as part of the Iron and Steel Resources of Pennsylvania Multiple Property Submission ( MPS ) . 
 = = = Swashbuckler Brewing Company = = = 
 The Swashbuckler Brewing Company , founded by Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire general contractor Scott Bowser , has operated on the grounds since 2000 , and has an annual capacity of 1 @,@ 200 barrels . The company also has a brewpub on the faire grounds , called the Swashbuckler Brew Pub , which serves up its own beers . Bowser has described the beers as " middle of the road , " saying " ... we 're not going for medals . We can 't ; we can sell out completely on a big , hot weekend . " The pub is also open from October through November during theater hours . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Two distinct architectural styles are visible in the Estate . Originally constructed in the Federal style for Henry Bates Grubb between 1800 and 1805 , Mount Hope Estate was the most formal ironmaster 's mansion built in the area between 1750 and 1850 . In 1895 , Daisy Grubb oversaw significant changes , adding a Victorian ballroom , a billiard room , chandeliers , and parquet floors , and converting original hinged doors to sliding doors , while still maintaining much of the original construction , including the original facade and fireplace mantels . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The south @-@ facing two @-@ story facade , made of locally cut red sandstone , remains substantially unchanged from the original 1800 – 05 construction . The wooden porch running the length of the facade appears to be a reconstruction , as part of the 1895 remodeling , of a similar original porch . 
 The entire west end of the house went through substantial changes in the 1895 remodelling . This included the construction of a striking three @-@ story bay window rising to an octagonal turret with a patterned roof , and a two @-@ story bay window near the southwest corner . The most significant additions made during the 1895 remodelling are located at the rear ( north ) of the house . These include a conservatory with a polygonal glass dome , a greenhouse just east of the conservatory , and an enlarged kitchen . The eastern end of the house was also remodeled in 1895 , in locally cut red sandstone to match the facade . Aside from several gothic arches from the original construction , the entire visible structure at this end was built in 1895 . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior of the mansion , like the exterior , is a mixture of original 1800 – 05 construction and decoration , blended rooms , and Victorian construction and decor . 
 The entry hall is almost entirely original construction . Nearly all the woodwork and decoration in this area dates to the 1800 – 05 period , with the exception of several balusters and newel posts on the spiral staircase , which were Victorian replacements . The major change to the entry hall was the construction of false walls , allowing the conversion of the original hinged doors into sliding doors . The second floor central hall and Washington Room ( on the second floor , in the southeast corner ) were also changed very little in the renovation . 
 The dining room , on the other hand , saw extensive remodeling in 1895 . The room size was increased by the construction of a bay window , parquet floor was installed , and the room was decorated in cherry woodwork , with a gilt and crystal chandelier and sconces . The only original item remaining left in the room was the fireplace mantel . The Pink Room , named for the pink damask which covered the walls in 1895 , the library , the Best Chamber ( Daisy Grubb 's bedroom ) , was also extensively remodeled . 
 A number of new rooms were added to the house as part of the 1895 work . A billiard room and ballroom were added in the rear of the house , and several ornate bathrooms were added on the second and third floors . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 = = = Outbuildings = = = 
 At one time there were nearly 30 outbuildings on the estate , as well as a wall surrounding the estate , all constructed of the same locally quarried red sandstone as the mansion , " of which there seems to be an inexhaustible supply on the estate " . Some of the buildings , like Hope Church , are on property that was given away or subdivided over the years , and today , only four remain on the estate , all located to the north ( rear ) and northeast of the mansion . 
 The smokehouse is a square two @-@ story building with a hipped roof , and is believed to date to the early 19th century . East of the smokehouse , a 11 ⁄ 2 @-@ story building with a three bay facade and a gabled roof was used as a post office in the late 19th century , and may have served as a schoolhouse originally . The manager 's farmhouse stands 21 ⁄ 2 stories high and is L @-@ shaped with a porch . The <unk> is also 21 ⁄ 2 stories . 
 = = = Gardens = = = 
 The overall plan of the gardens , based on English formal gardens , can be traced to the original 1800 – 05 construction . Although some flower beds , ornamental urns , and the round fountain in front of the mansion were installed at the time of the 1895 remodeling , the overall plan was not changed , leaving the garden as " a very rare and largely intact example of a documented American formal garden predating 1840 . " 
 = = Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire = = 
 In 1980 , a jousting tournament was held in the parking lot of the newly opened winery , followed by a two @-@ day Renaissance fair the following year . This gradually expanded to become the Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire , which is now held over 12 weekends and draws more than 250 @,@ 000 patrons annually . Featuring a recreation of a 16th @-@ century Tudor village , a replica of the Globe Theatre , Shakespearean plays , musical acts , and artisans fashioning period items such as pottery and potpourri . In 1998 , the faire was named one of the top 100 motorcoach @-@ accessible events in America by the American Bus Association . 
 = = Other events = = 
 In addition to hosting the Renaissance fair , the grounds are opened to the public for a number of other events . Tours of the mansion and wine tastings are available throughout the year . Each June , the site is used for the Celtic Fling and Highland Games . The Fling features traditional and modern Celtic music , food , crafts , demonstrations and competitions , and a <unk> is also held . The Highland Games are officially sanctioned by the Mid @-@ Atlantic Scottish Athletics Association , and include standard events such as caber tossing and hammer throwing . 
 In late fall and early winter , the mansion is host to several theatrical performances . From the end of October to mid @-@ November , Poe Evermore , a storytelling event based on the works of Edgar Allan Poe is held . Between Thanksgiving and Christmas , Victorian Christmas or A Dickens of a Christmas , the telling of the story of A Christmas Carol , is performed . 
 = 1986 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1986 Pacific hurricane season saw several tropical cyclones bring significant flooding to the Central United States . The hurricane season officially started May 15 , 1986 in the eastern Pacific , and June 1 , 1986 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1986 in both regions . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . A total of 17 named storms and 9 hurricanes developed during the season ; this is slightly above the averages of 15 named storms and 8 hurricanes , respectively . In addition , 25 tropical depressions formed in the eastern Pacific during 1986 , which , at the time , was the second most ever recorded ; only the 1982 Pacific hurricane season saw a higher total . 
 Several storms throughout the season affected land . Hurricane Estelle passed south of Hawaii , resulting in $ 2 million in damage and two deaths . Hurricanes Newton , Paine and Roslyn each struck Northwestern Mexico . While damage was minimal from these three systems near their location of landfall , Paine brought considerable flooding to the Great Plains . The overall flooding event resulted in $ 350 million in damage , with the worst effects being recorded in Oklahoma . Hurricane Roslyn was the strongest storm of the season , attaining peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 Activity in the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center 's ( EPHC ) area of responsibility was above average . There were 25 tropical depressions , one short of the record set in 1982 , which had 26 . Only one storm formed in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's ( CPHC ) area of responsibility , Tropical Depression One @-@ C. Six other cyclones entered the CPHC area of responsibility from the EPHC area of responsibility . In all , 17 systems formed , which is two storms above normal . In addition , 9 hurricanes were reported during the season , one more than average . An average number ( 3 ) of major hurricanes – Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale – was also reported . 
 The season began with the formation of Hurricane Agatha on May 22 and ended with the dissipation of Tropical Depression Twenty Five on October 25 , spanning 147 days . Although it was nearly two weeks shorter than the 1985 Pacific hurricane season , the season was six days longer than average . The EPHC issued 406 tropical cyclone advisories , which were issued four times a day at 0000 , 0600 , 1200 , and 1800 UTC . In 1986 , Hurricane Hunters flew into three storms ; Newton , Roslyn , and Estelle . In Newton , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) conducted environmental research in the cyclone . In addition , the National Weather Service Field Service Station provided the East Pacific with excellent satellite coverage . 
 During the months of May and June , four named systems developed . In July , one tropical storm and two hurricanes formed . The following month , five tropical systems developed . Towards the end of the season , tropical cyclone activity declined somewhat . While five storms formed in September , only one formed in October and none during the month of November . A moderate El Nino was present throughout the season ; water temperatures across the equatorial Central Pacific were 1 @.@ 3 ° C ( 3 ° F ) above normal . In addition , the Pacific Decadal Oscillation ( PDO ) was in a warm phase during this time period . 
 Three tropical cyclones made landfall in 1986 . The first , Hurricane Newton made landfall near Cabo San Lucas , bringing minor damage . Another storm , Hurricane Paine brushed Cabo San Lucas , and later moved inland over Sonora . Paine caused minimal impacts at landfall , but its remnants were described as one of the worst floods in Oklahoma history . Flooding affected 52 counties in Oklahoma , which resulted in a total of $ 350 million in damage . The final storm to make landfall during the hurricane season was Hurricane Roslyn . The hurricane produced some flooding , but no serious damage . In addition , Hurricane Estelle came close enough to Hawaii to require a hurricane watch . Two drownings were reported , and the total damage was around $ 2 million . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Agatha = = = 
 The 1986 Pacific hurricane season 's first tropical disturbance formed 865 mi ( 1 @,@ 390 km ) from the tip of Baja California Sur on May 20 . By 0000 UTC May 22 , the circulation began to tighten and become more organized , and thus the EPHC upgraded the disturbance into Tropical Depression One @-@ E that morning . Approximately 48 hours after becoming a tropical depression , the system was upgraded into Tropical Storm Agatha , the first storm of the season . After moving southeast , the cyclone made an abrupt change in direction , turning towards the north . Agatha strengthened into a hurricane on May 25 near the coast of Mexico , reaching its peak intensity of 75 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Turning southeast , The system quickly weakened into a tropical depression , but regained tropical storm strength on May 28 , only to dissipate that day . Rainfall spread around both the Atlantic and Pacific Mexican coasts , peaking at 10 @.@ 75 in ( 273 mm ) at <unk> de Juarez , Puebla . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed on May 30 in the eastern Gulf of Tehuantepec . The disturbance was moving very slowly when it was upgraded to Tropical Depression Two on May 31 . The depression began to weaken six hours later and the final advisory by the EPHC was released on June 1 . Most of Mexico received rainfall , with over 3 in ( 76 mm ) falling on Yucatán Peninsula . The worst rain occurred in Central Mexico , where over 15 in ( 380 mm ) of precipitation fell , peaking at 18 @.@ 63 in ( 473 mm ) in Tenosique , Tabasco . The rest of the country was hit by 1 – 3 in ( 25 – 76 mm ) of rainfall . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Blas = = = 
 A tropical disturbance originated from the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) on June 16 . The disturbance moved west @-@ northwest at 13 mph ( 21 km / h ) below a weak upper @-@ level high , becoming the third tropical depression of the 1986 season on June 17 . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Blas the next day . It kept that strength for only six hours , weakening into a depression again as it moved into cooler waters . After Blas 's convection dissipated , the EPHC ceased advisories on June 19 while situated roughly 600 mi ( 970 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = = Hurricane Celia = = = 
 On June 24 , five days after Tropical Storm Blas dissipated , a tropical disturbance developed south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Later that day , its circulation had become well @-@ defined enough for the EPHC to upgrade the disturbance into Tropical Depression Four . Winds reached 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , enough to upgrade the system into Tropical Storm Celia on June 26 . While located off the coast of Mexico , Celia strengthened into a hurricane at 1800 UTC June 27 . An eye became evident on satellite imagery and the hurricane reached its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) on June 28 at 1600 UTC . Hurricane Celia then passed by Socorro Island . Meanwhile , Celia moved into much cooler water which enabled the hurricane to weaken rapidly . By June 30 , Celia had become a tropical depression . The EPHC released its final advisory at 1800 UTC that day as the system was dissipating . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Darby = = = 
 The fifth tropical cyclone of the season formed as a tropical disturbance on July 2 . Moving northwest at about 13 mph ( 21 km / h ) , the disturbance entered warmer waters and strengthening rapidly . The disturbance was upgraded into Tropical Depression Five at 1800 UTC July 3 . Turning west @-@ northwest , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Darby on July 5 . Darby peaked at 40 mph ( 60 km / h ) . The stormed continued northwest for about six hours , when it reached 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) waters and began a weakening trend . Clouds spread northward over the US states of Arizona and California on July 6 . The cyclone dissipated on July 7 . 
 = = = Hurricane Estelle = = = 
 During the afternoon of July 16 , a tropical depression formed thousands of miles west of Mexico , and within 12 hours it strengthened into a tropical storm . On July 18 , Estelle intensified into a hurricane . Located in a favorable environment , Estelle continued strengthening to become the first major hurricane of the season on July 20 . The hurricane entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility near its peak strength of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , a Category 4 hurricane . The hurricane veered to the west and passed south of Hawaii . Estelle weakened to a tropical storm on July 23 , and on July 25 , it weakened to a depression . The storm dissipated two days later . 
 In advance of Hurricane Estelle , the National Weather Service issued a hurricane watch and high @-@ surf advisory for the Island of Hawaii . More than 200 people evacuated from their homes . Huge waves crashed on the shores of the Big Island on the afternoon of July 22 . The high waves washed away five beachfront homes and severely damaged dozens of others on the beach resort of Vacation Land . The total damage was around $ 2 million ( 1986 US $ ; $ 4 @.@ 32 million 2016 USD ) . However , only two deaths reported from the storm , both of whom drowned offshore Oahu . 
 = = = Hurricane Frank = = = 
 The EPHC began monitoring a tropical disturbance located 195 mi ( 315 km ) southwest of San Salvador on 1800 UTC July 23 . About 24 hours later , the disturbance was upgraded into a tropical depression . Initially moving towards the west @-@ northwest due to an upper @-@ level low and a ridge over Mexico , the storm then turned to the west as the upper @-@ level low changed direction . By July 28 , the depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Frank . After turning back to the west @-@ northwest , Frank reached hurricane intensity early on July 30 . The storm quickly developed a well @-@ defined eye and three hours later , Hurricane Frank reached its peak intensity as a moderate Category 1 hurricane , with winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . Hurricane Frank maintained this intensity for 18 hours . Subsequently , the hurricane began to rapidly weaken over 76 ° F ( 24 ° C ) sea surface temperatures . Wind shear soon increased , thus accelerating the weakening process . On July 31 , Frank was reduced to tropical storm intensity . Not long after weakening into a depression , the storm entered the CPHC 's area of responsibility . Wind shear increased further , and upon entering the region , Frank moved over slightly cooler water . It transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on August 3 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Georgette = = = 
 On August 3 , a tropical depression developed in the open ocean over 600 mi ( 970 km ) west of the Mexican coastline . Twelve hours later , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Georgette before weakening to a depression on August 4 . It then accelerated to a very rapid speed of 23 – 45 mph ( 37 – 75 km / h ) . Due to its fast speed , Georgette could not maintain a closed circulation , and thus degenerated into a non @-@ cyclonic disturbance on August 4 . The disturbance kept up its rapid forward motion , crossed the dateline and entered the western Pacific , where it reformed and reached its peak intensity as Severe Tropical Storm Georgette . By August 16 , Georgette merged with another system . It is one of only seven tropical cyclones to exist in all three tropical cyclone basins in the Pacific Ocean . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Howard = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed Southwestern Mexico and Belize in mid @-@ August . A tropical disturbance developed from this wave 50 mi ( 80 km ) south of Acapulco on August 15 , the same day that the system moved offshore . Moving west @-@ northwest south of an upper @-@ level high , the system was classified as a tropical depression the next day about 125 mi ( 200 km ) south of Manzanillo . Several hours later , the depression reached tropical storm intensity . Turning towards the northwest due to a trough , it failed to intensify beyond minimal tropical storm strength . Passing south of the Baja California Peninsula , the storm rapidly moved over cooler waters . Howard weakened into a tropical depression at 0600 UTC August 18 . <unk> 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) water , Howard dissipated . Rainfall along the southern coast reached 1 in ( 25 mm ) in some places , with totals in excess of 5 in ( 130 mm ) in isolated locations . Further north , rainfall was more scattered . The maximum rainfall was 9 @.@ 25 in ( 235 mm ) in Reforma , near the southern part of the country . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Isis = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed 265 mi ( 426 km ) south of Socorro Island at 1800 UTC August 18 . Twenty @-@ four hours later the disturbance was upgraded into a tropical depression on August 19 . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Isis the next day . After peaking as a moderate tropical storm at 1200 UTC August 23 , Isis weakened into a depression over 74 ° F ( 23 ° C ) waters early on August 24 . While located some 1 @,@ 500 mi ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) west of the Mexican coast , the tropical cyclone dissipated later that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Javier = = = 
 On August 19 , a tropical disturbance formed 460 mi ( 740 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec and 319 mi ( 513 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . Satellite imagery began to show signs of developing a circulation , and the disturbance became a tropical depression on August 20 and intensified into Tropical Storm Javier hours later . Southwest of a ridge , Javier began to turn towards the west @-@ northwest . Despite an increase in forward speed , Tropical Storm Javier underwent rapid intensification , reaching hurricane intensity at 0900 UTC August 21 . About three hours later , Javier reached Category 2 strength , and briefly became a major hurricane on August 22 , only to rapidly weaken back to a Category 1 hurricane late on August 23 . Hurricane Javier sharply turned towards the north and eventually towards the northwest . Early on August 24 , Javier resumed intensification , regaining Category 3 intensity at 0600 UTC . Passing midway between Socorro Island and Clarion Island , the storm reached its peak intensity of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Moving beneath the ridge , Hurricane Javier turned to the west and subsequently weakened back into a Category 3 hurricane . 
 After briefly re @-@ intensifying into a Category 4 , the storm resumed weakening due to increasing wind shear , and by late on August 25 , Hurricane Javier had weakened directly into a Category 2 hurricane . Shortly thereafter , Javier was downgraded into a Category 1 hurricane . While it managed to maintain marginal hurricane intensity for 24 <unk> on 1200 UTC August 28 , the EPHC announced that Javier had weakened back into a tropical storm . Shortly after that , Javier turned towards the west @-@ northwest due an upper @-@ level trough . Now over 74 ° F ( 23 ° C ) waters , the system continued to weaken as wind shear increased further . On August 30 , Javier weakened into a depression and dissipated the next day over 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) southwest of Southern California . Waves were 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) high in some areas , prompting meteorologists to issue a high surf advisory . Hurricane Javier brought the highest waves of the summer to southern California . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Kay = = = 
 In late August , a tropical disturbance formed 725 mi ( 1 @,@ 165 km ) east @-@ southeast of Hurricane Javier and nearly 370 mi ( 595 km ) south of the Baja California Peninsula . Moving slowly west , the disturbance began to develop a well @-@ defined circulation , and was respectively upgraded into a tropical depression on August 23 . Passing 10 mi ( 20 km ) south of Clarion Island , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Kay . The cyclone 's forward speed increased ; subsequently , Kay reached its peak intensity . After maintaining its intensity for 18 hours , Kay rapidly weakened over cold water , and was downgraded into a depression at 0000 UTC September 2 . Kay dissipated the next day several hundred miles west of the Baja California Peninsula . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Lester = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave increased in thunderstorm activity , soon organizing into a tropical depression on September 13 . At the time of the upgrade , Lester was located more than 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 450 km ) west of the Mexican coast . Moving towards the west , the depression soon intensified into Tropical Storm Lester . After turning towards the west @-@ northwest , Lester peaked in intensity as a moderate tropical storm . Due to a combination of strong wind shear and cold water , Lester began a slow weakening trend . While entering the CPHC 's area of responsibility at 1800 UTC September 17 , Lester had already weakened to a tropical depression . Unable to maintain a closed circulation , the final advisory was issued . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Madeline = = = 
 A tropical disturbance first developed during September 13 and September 14 over the warm waters south of Acapulco . On September 15 , the EPHC first classified the system as a tropical depression . Rapidly moving towards the west , the depression was embedded in deep easterly flow . The system attained tropical storm intensity on 1800 UTC September 16 , thus received the name Madeline . After turning towards the west @-@ northwest , Tropical Storm Madeline accelerated . It began a slow intensification trend , and peaked as a high @-@ end tropical storm on 0600 UTC September 18 . An upper @-@ level low introduced strong wind shear , and Madeline began to fall apart almost immediately thereafter . After turning towards the north , and slowing down , Madeline dissipated on September 22 . 
 = = = Hurricane Newton = = = 
 A tropical disturbance became a tropical depression on September 18 . Intensification was slow as the depression did not reach storm status until September 20 . Paralleling the coast , Newton steadily <unk> . Newton strengthened into a hurricane on September 21 . On September 22 , Newton slammed into Cabo San Lucas , and after entering the Gulf of California , Hurricane Newton attained its peak intensity 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Shortly after that , Newton moved inland into the mainland of Mexico . Over land , Newton dissipated on September 23 . 
 Upon making landfall on the Baja California Peninsula , moderate rainfall was recorded . After the hurricane 's second landfall , damage was also minor , though 40 roofs were ripped off of homes ; trees and utility poles were also downed due to high winds . However , no injuries or fatalities were reported in association with Newton . Newton 's remnants later combined with a cold front to produce heavy rainfall that downed power lines in Kansas City , leaving 20 @,@ 000 customers without power . 
 = = = Hurricane Orlene = = = 
 Hurricane Orlene originated from a stationary tropical disturbance that was upgraded into a tropical depression on September 21 . Despite a poorly defined circulation , the cyclone intensified into Tropical Storm Orlene 12 hours after formation . Steadily gaining strength , Orlene reached hurricane intensity on September 22 . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane entered the CPHC 's area of responsibility . Upon the formation of an eye , Orlene reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . After maintaining peak intensity for 24 hours , Hurricane Orlene began to encounter strong wind shear . Subsequently , Orlene weakened rapidly and lost hurricane status at 1800 UTC September 23 . The system weakened into a tropical depression on September 24 . Tropical Depression <unk> dissipated the next day . 
 = = = Hurricane Paine = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed on September 27 within 250 mi ( 400 km ) of the Mexican coastline . The disturbance was upgraded into Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Three on 0000 UTC September 28 . Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Three moved west @-@ northwestward , lured poleward by an upper @-@ level trough near northern Mexico . At 0000 UTC September 30 , the depression became Tropical Storm Paine , southwest of Acapulco . Roughly 21 hours later , a NOAA Hurricane Hunter flight found winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) , upgrading Paine into hurricane . The hurricane peaked as a Category 2 hurricane on October 1 as it turned northwest , headed towards the Gulf of California . Hurricane Paine did not intensify further due to the presence of mid @-@ level wind shear and dry air . The outer eyewall moved across Cabo San Lucas , and the resultant land interaction was believed to have slightly weakened the inner core of the hurricane . Paine moved ashore near San José , Sonora with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The storm weakened as it moved over land going through Mexico and then entering the United States . Paine dissipated on October 4 over Lake Michigan . 
 Rainfall from the tropical cyclone was significant in Mexico and the United States . Light rain fell in Cabo San Lucas . Meanwhile , rains around the Mexican Mainland peaked at 12 in ( 300 mm ) in Acapulco . Near the area around where it made landfall , strong winds knocked down trees and caused disruptions to city services . In the United States , rainfall peaked at 11 @.@ 35 inches ( 288 mm ) in Fort Scott , Kansas . The <unk> , Oklahoma weather station recorded 10 @.@ 42 inches ( 26 @.@ 5 cm ) on September 29 , which set a record for the highest daily precipitation for any station statewide . The flooding affected 52 counties in Oklahoma , which resulted in a total of $ 350 million in damage . In all , Paine was described as one of the worst floods in Oklahoma history . Flooding from Paine resulted in about 1 @,@ 200 people homeless in East Saint Louis , Illinois and resulted in record discharge rates along many streams and creeks . Subsequently , many reservoirs were nearly filled to its capacity . For example , the Mississippi River in St. Louis reached the fifth highest flood stage on record . 
 = = = Hurricane Roslyn = = = 
 A tropical disturbance moved westward offshore Nicaragua and was declared Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Four on October 15 .. During the early afternoon of the next day , ship reports indicated the formation of a tropical depression close to land . The cyclone moved at a quick pace towards the west @-@ northwest south of a warm @-@ core ridge . Early on the morning on October 16 , Roslyn became a tropical storm . By the morning of the October 17 , Roslyn had developed into a hurricane south of Acapulco . A vigorous upper trough was deepening offshore Baja California , and Roslyn began to re @-@ curve within a few hundred miles of Manzanillo . The system struck Mazatlán as a marginal hurricane on October 20 . The low @-@ level center rapidly dissipated , although a frontal low developed in the western Gulf of Mexico , which moved over southeastern Texas and later through the Mississippi Valley . The original upper @-@ level circulation maintained its northeast movement , bringing rainfall to the Southeastern United States . 
 Affecting a sparsely @-@ populated area , the highest reported winds from a land station were 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) . Roslyn produced some flooding , but no serious damage . Impact was limited to flooded homes and factories , as well as some crop damage and beach erosion and only one yacht sunk . The remnants of Hurricane Roslyn produced heavy rainfall across the central and southern United States . In Matagorda , Texas , a total of 13 @.@ 8 in ( 35 cm ) was reported . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the 17 named storms , there were eight tropical depressions during the season that failed to reach tropical storm strength . The second , Tropical Depression Seven , began as a large area of thunderstorms near Hurricane Estelle on July 17 . Moving at a steady pace , the cyclone failed to intensify and attained peak intensity of 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) . Cool sea surface temperatures and its proximity to Hurricane Estelle eventually caused the depression to dissipate late on July 18 . 
 Tropical Depression Eight formed on July 21 while located 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) southwest of the Baja California Peninsula . Initially moving west @-@ northwest around an upper @-@ level high , the depression peaked with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . It dissipated on July 24 . Another tropical disturbance formed on July 24 . An circulation developed two days later , and thus it was classified as Tropical Depression Ten . The cyclone remained a tropical depression for about three days before moving into the CPHC 's area of responsibility on 1000 UTC July 27 . A slow weakening trend began as the depression continued to move west at speeds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . By 1800 UTC on July 29 , it had become poorly organized around 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Hawaiian Islands , and the final advisory was issued . 
 Tropical Depression One @-@ C formed on July 27 , possibly from the remnants of Tropical Depression Eight that dissipated a few days earlier well to the east of 140 ° W. The depression tracked westward at a fairly rapid forward speed of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) ; however , it failed to develop past the depression stage . One @-@ C passed well south of the Hawaiian Islands on July 28 . On July 29 at 0000 UTC , it had dissipated to the southwest of the Hawaiian Islands and the final advisory was issued by the CPHC . 
 An area of disturbed weather developed a circulation on August 12 and was upgraded into Tropical Depression Twelve nearly 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) south of the Baja California Peninsula . It drifted slowly to the northwest until it dissipated near 22 ° N 110 ° W on August 14 . Peak maximum sustained winds were estimated at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Tropical Depression Seventeen formed on September 8 , 30 km ( 20 mi ) east of Socorro Island and dissipated on September 9 over cold water without becoming a tropical storm . 
 One of the last cyclones of the season formed from a westward @-@ moving tropical disturbance in the ITCZ . The disturbance moved at about 10 mph ( 20 km / h ) and upon developing a circulation , was declared Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ One at 0600 UTC September 19 . However the depression lasted for only six hours before dissipating , likely due to the close distance between it and Tropical Storm Madeline . Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Five was the final tropical depression of the 1986 season . It formed on October 22 at 1800 UTC near the 140 ° W line . Due to strong wind shear , the stationary storm had dissipated within 30 hours of formation . Even though no more official systems developed , a forecaster at the National Hurricane Center remarked that an unnamed tropical storm may have formed in November . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1986 . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 1992 season . This is the same list used for the 1980 season . Storms were named Paine and Roslyn for the first time in 1986 , while Orlene was previously used on the old four @-@ year lists . No central Pacific names were used ; the first name used would have been Oka . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Alfred Denning , Baron Denning = 
 Alfred Thompson " Tom " Denning , Baron Denning , OM , PC , DL ( 23 January 1899 – 5 March 1999 ) , commonly known as Lord Denning , was an English lawyer and judge . He gained degrees in mathematics and law at Oxford University , although his studies were disrupted by his service in the First World War . He then began his legal career , distinguishing himself as a barrister and becoming a King 's Counsel in 1938 . 
 Denning became a judge in 1944 with an appointment to the Probate , Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High Court of Justice and was made a Lord Justice of Appeal in 1948 after less than five years in the High Court . He became a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary in 1957 and after five years in the House of Lords returned to the Court of Appeal as Master of the Rolls in 1962 , a position he held for twenty years . In retirement he wrote several books and continued to offer opinions on the state of the common law through his writing and his position in the House of Lords . 
 One of the most publicly known judges thanks to his report on the Profumo Affair , Denning was held in high regard by much of the judiciary , the Bar and the public , and was noted for his bold judgments running counter to the law at the time . During his 38 @-@ year career as a judge he made large changes to the common law , particularly while in the Court of Appeal , and although many of his decisions were overturned by the House of Lords several of them were confirmed by Parliament , which passed statutes in line with his judgments . Although appreciated for his role as ' the people 's judge ' and his support for the individual , Denning was also controversial for his campaign against the common law principle of precedent , for comments he made regarding the Birmingham Six and Guildford Four and as Master of the Rolls for his conflict with the House of Lords . 
 = = Early life and studies = = 
 Denning was born on 23 January 1899 in Whitchurch , Hampshire , to Charles Denning , a draper , and his wife Clara Denning ( née Thompson ) . He was one of six children ; his older brother Reginald Denning later became a noted staff officer with the British Army , and his younger brother Norman Denning became Director of Naval Intelligence and Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff ( Intelligence ) . Denning was born two months earlier than expected and almost died at birth ; he was so small and weak that he was nicknamed ' Tom Thumb ' and could fit in a pint pot . He was named after Alfred the Great by his sister Marjorie , and was baptised on 23 April 1899 at All Hallows Church , Whitchurch . 
 Denning , along with his older brother Gordon , began his schooling at the National School of Whitchurch , one of many set up by the National Society for the Education of the Poor . Both boys won scholarships to Andover Grammar School , where Denning excelled academically , winning four prizes for English essays on the subjects of " The Great Authors " , " Macaulay " , " Carlyle " and " Milton " . The outbreak of the First World War saw most of the schoolmasters leave to join the British armed forces , being replaced by female teachers . At the time Denning wanted to become a mathematician , but none of the new teachers knew enough mathematics to teach him ; instead , he taught himself . He qualified to study at University College , Southampton , but was advised to stay at school and apply to Oxford or Cambridge in a few years . He sat the Oxbridge examination when he was sixteen and was awarded a £ 30 a year exhibition to study mathematics at Magdalen College , Oxford ; the money was not enough to live on , but he accepted nevertheless . Although he had been accepted by a college he still needed to gain entry to the university as a whole , which meant passing exams including Greek – which had not been taught at Andover Grammar School . Denning managed to teach himself enough of the subject to pass , and matriculated to Oxford in 1916 . 
 In addition to his Magdalen Scholarship he had a scholarship from Hampshire County Council worth £ 50 a year . After arriving he made a favourable impression on Sir Herbert Warren , the President of Magdalen College , who upgraded the exhibition to a <unk> of £ 80 a year and arranged for the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths to give Denning a £ 30 a year scholarship . Despite military training in the early morning and evening , Denning worked hard at his studies , and obtained a First in Mathematical Moderations , the first half of his mathematics degree , in June 1917 . 
 = = War service = = 
 Denning was told he would be ineligible to serve in the Armed Forces because of a systolic heart murmur , which he believed the doctor diagnosed because he was tired of sending young men off to die . He successfully appealed against the decision , and enlisted on 14 August 1917 as a cadet in the Hampshire Regiment before being sent to the Royal Engineers Oxford University Officer Training Corps . He trained at Newark and was temporarily commissioned as a second lieutenant on 17 November 1917 . Although he was old enough to serve in the armed forces , regulations meant that he was not allowed to serve in France until he was nineteen . 
 In March 1918 the German Army advanced closer to Amiens and Paris , and Denning 's unit was sent to France to help stop the advance . Under continuous shell fire for three months , the company and the 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division held their section of the line , with a unit under Denning 's command building a bridge to allow infantry to advance over the River Ancre . Denning went two days without sleep while building these bridges ; shortly after one was completed , a German aeroplane dropped a bomb on it , forcing them to start again . The unit advanced over the River Ancre and the Canal du Nord , but Denning fell ill with influenza and was in hospital for the last few days of the war . 
 = = Return to Oxford = = 
 Denning was demobilised on 6 February 1919 , and returned to Magdalen College four days later . He initially thought about turning to applied mathematics , but decided on pure mathematics . He studied hard , not participating in any of the university 's numerous societies or clubs so that he could better focus on his work , and graduated in 1920 with a first in Mathematical Greats . He was offered a job teaching mathematics at Winchester College for £ 350 a year , which he accepted . As well as mathematics , he taught geology , despite not having studied it ; instead , he " read up on [ it ] the night before " . He found the job boring , and after viewing the Assize Court at Winchester Castle decided he would like to be a barrister . 
 On the advice of Herbert Warren , he returned to Magdalen to study Jurisprudence in October 1921 . Thanks to Warren , Denning was elected to the Eldon Law Scholarship , worth £ 100 a year , to finance his studies ; when the news of Denning 's election was brought , Warren wrote " you are a marked man . Perhaps you will be a Lord of Appeal some day " . Denning took his final examinations in June 1922 and impressed the examiner , Geoffrey Cheshire , by correctly answering questions on the Law of Property Act which had been given Royal Assent only a few days before . 
 Denning gained a first in all his subjects except jurisprudence , which he described as " too abstract a subject for my liking " . He did not return to study for a Bachelor of Civil Law ( BCL ) but instead attempted to gain a " prize fellowship " at All Souls College , Oxford ; he failed to be accepted , something he put down to his poor pronunciation of Latin . 
 = = The Bar = = 
 Denning was admitted to Lincoln 's Inn on 4 November 1921 , choosing it because the Under Treasurer was a graduate of Magdalen College . On the advice of his brother 's friend Frank Merriman he applied to 4 Brick Court , Middle Temple Lane , a small set of chambers run by Henry O 'Hagan . He was accepted and began work there in September 1922 , before he had taken his final bar exam . He finished his final exam in May 1923 and came top in the bar examination , with the Inn awarding him a 100 guineas a year studentship of three years . He was called to the Bar on 13 June 1923 , and was offered a tenancy by O 'Hagan . His first few years were spent receiving small briefs from a variety of clients , including work prosecuting those who failed to pay rail tickets and fines . During this time he also wrote a manual for the railway police giving guidance on incidents such as taxi drivers who refused to take a customer to a destination within the area specified by the Public Carriage Office ( which they were legally obliged to do ) . He wrote his first article in 1924 titled " Quantum <unk> and the Statute of Frauds " on the decision in Scott v Pattison [ 1923 ] 2 KB 723 ; it was accepted by the Law Quarterly Review and published in January 1925 . 
 His work steadily increased in amount and quality throughout the 1920s and ' 30s . By the 1930s he was making most of his court appearances in the senior courts such as the High Court of Justice ; in 1932 he was advised by his clerk that he should not be seen in the County Courts , and that he should leave this work for lesser members of the chambers . In 1929 he helped edit several chapters of Smith 's Leading Cases ( 13th ed . ) and in 1932 acted as a supervising editor for the 9th edition of Bullen & Leake 's Precedents for <unk> in the King 's Bench Division . In 1932 he moved to his own set of chambers in Brick Court , and by 1936 he was earning over £ 3 @,@ 000 a year . A notable case was L 'Estrange v F <unk> Ltd [ 1934 ] 2 KB 394 , where he successfully argued an exemption clause was incorporated because a contract was signed . This was counter to his work as a judge , where he tried to minimise their impact , but he said that ' If you are an advocate you want your client to win . If you are a judge you don 't care who wins exactly . All you are concerned about is justice ' . 
 From 1937 until 1944 he worked as Chancellor of the Diocese of Southwark , and from 1942 to 1944 was Chancellor of the Diocese of London . He applied to become a King 's Counsel on 15 January 1938 . The appointments were announced on 7 April ; he was sworn in on 9 April and received letters of congratulation from , among others , Rayner Goddard . After the start of the Second World War , Denning volunteered ; he was too old for active service , and was instead appointed legal advisor to the North East Region . In 1942 he took the case of Gold v Essex County Council [ 1942 ] 2 KB 293 , which changed the law to make hospitals liable for the professional negligence of their staff . 
 In December 1943 a judge was taken ill , and Denning was asked to take his place as a Commissioner of Assize . This was regarded as a ' trial ' for membership of the judiciary , and Denning was appointed Recorder of Plymouth on 17 February 1944 . On 6 March 1944 , while arguing a case in the House of Lords , Denning was taken aside by the Lord Chancellor and told that he wanted Denning to become a judge at the High Court of Justice in the Probate , Admiralty and Divorce Division . Denning accepted , and the announcement was made before the conclusion of the trial . 
 = = High Court = = 
 Denning was officially appointed on 7 March 1944 with a salary of £ 5 @,@ 000 , and received the customary knighthood on 15 March 1944 . After becoming a judge Denning was also elected a Bencher of Lincoln 's Inn , and became its Treasurer in 1964 . Denning had little experience with divorce law and disliked it ; it was seen as an inferior type of law . There were few good barristers specialising in divorce law ; two other barristers were sworn into the Probate , Divorce and Admiralty Division along with Denning , and of the three only one had ever practised divorce law . His work as a divorce judge was relatively sound ; his decisions were overturned only once , in Churchman v Churchman [ 1945 ] 2 All ER 190 . 
 With the appointment of Lord Jowitt as Lord Chancellor in 1945 Denning was transferred to the King 's Bench Division , where Jowitt thought his talents would be better put to use ( with Hildreth Glyn @-@ Jones QC , later a High Court judge , greeting him with the words ' welcome home ' ) . 
 In 1946 he travelled the Western Circuit but was recalled by the Lord Chancellor to chair a committee looking at the reform of procedure in divorce cases . He continued working as a judge while chairing the daily committee . The committee was appointed on 26 June 1946 and published its first report in July , which reduced the time between decree nisi and decree absolute from 6 months to 6 weeks . The second report was published in November , recommending that County Court judges should be appointed to try cases , and the final report was published in February 1947 recommending the establishment of a Marriage Welfare Service . The reports were well received by the public and led to Denning being invited in 1949 to become President of the National Marriage Guidance Council . 
 His appointment to the King 's Bench Division allowed him to hear pension appeals , and he attempted to reform the principles applied by the government minister and the Pensions Tribunals . In Starr v Ministry of Pensions [ 1946 ] 1 KB 345 he ruled that it was up to the tribunals to prove that an injury was not due to war service , reversing the previous state of affairs where a claimant would have to prove their injuries were due to war service before they would be granted a pension . In James v Minister of Pensions [ 1947 ] KB 867 he also allowed for judges to approve time extensions for the claimant to gather more evidence when such extensions had been rejected by the Tribunal . These two cases made a large difference to applicants , and he received praise from both the British Legion and the public . 
 The government refused to do anything about those servicemen who had been rejected by the courts prior to Denning 's judgment , which provoked public outcry under the slogan ' Fit for Service , Fit for Pension ' . The British Legion chose 73 cases and asked Denning to let the Legion present them while the courts were not sitting ; Denning heard all 73 cases on 11 July 1946 . 
 In 1947 he decided in Central London Property Trust Ltd v High Trees House Ltd [ 1947 ] KB 130 ( known as the ' High Trees ' case ) , which was a milestone in English contract law . It resurrected the principle of promissory estoppel established in Hughes v Metropolitan Railway Co ( 1876 – 77 ) LR 2 App Cas 439 and has been both praised and criticised by lawyers and legal theorists . 
 As a High Court judge Denning sentenced people to death , which he said at the time " didn 't worry [ him ] in the least " . Denning maintained that for murder , death was the most appropriate penalty , and that in cases where mistakes had been made there was always an appeals system . In the 1950s there was growing opposition to the use of the death penalty , and a Royal Commission was appointed to investigate abolishing it . Denning told the Commission in 1953 that " the punishment inflicted for grave crimes should adequately reflect the revulsion felt by the great majority of citizens for them " . 
 He later changed his mind about capital punishment , regarding it as unethical . In 1984 he wrote " Is it right for us , as a society , to do a thing – hang a man – which none of us individually would be prepared to do or even witness ? The answer is ' no , not in a civilised society ' " . 
 = = Court of Appeal = = 
 After less than five years as a judge , Denning was appointed a Lord Justice of Appeal on 14 October 1948 . He was sworn in as a Privy Counsellor on 25 October 1948 . As a Lord Justice of Appeal he continued to make reforming judgments in a variety of areas , particularly in family law and the rights of deserted wives . In 1952 the Court of Appeal heard Bendall v McWhirter [ 1952 ] 2 QB 466 and ruled that a deserted wife occupying the marital home had a personal licence to stay there . The decision provoked disapproval among the judiciary and from the public ; a correspondent wrote : 
 Dear Sir : You are a disgrace to all mankind to let these women break up homes and expect us chaps to keep them while they rob us of what we have worked for and put us out on the street . I only hope you have the same trouble as us . So do us all a favour and take a Rolls and run off Beachy Head and don 't come back . 
 The House of Lords effectively nullified Denning 's work with the case National Provincial Bank Ltd v Ainsworth [ 1965 ] AC 1175 in 1965 , which ruled that the deserted wife had no licence to stay . The decision was very unpopular and led to the passing of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 , which partially restored Denning 's judgment in the form of a statute . Much of his work in favour of the deserted wife was based around his interpretation of the Married Women 's Property Act 1882 , which the House of Lords unanimously overruled in Pettitt v Pettitt [ 1970 ] AC 777 in 1970 . Further notable decisions by Denning in this area were Heseltine v Heseltine [ 1971 ] 1 WLR 342 in 1971 and Wachtel v Wachtel [ 1973 ] Fam 72 in 1973 , which created basic rules for dividing family assets in a divorce case , something which had not previously been established in the law . 
 In 1951 he gave a noted dissenting judgment in the case Candler v Crane , Christmas & Co regarded as a ' brilliant advancement to the law of negligent misstatements ' and which was later approved of by the House of Lords in Hedley Byrne v Heller & Partners Ltd [ 1963 ] 2 All ER 575 . In Combe v Combe in 1952 he elaborated on his resurrected doctrine of promissory estoppel , saying that it could be a ' shield ' not a ' sword ' ; it could be used to defend a claim , but not to create a cause of action where none existed . In 1954 his decision in Roe v Minister of Health [ 1954 ] 2 AER 131 altered the grounds on which hospital staff could be found negligent , a legal precedent he himself had set in Gold v Essex County Council in 1942 . In 1955 his leading judgment in <unk> Ltd v Miles Far East Corporation [ 1955 ] 2 QB 327 implemented a way to judge the moment of acceptance in an instantaneous or near @-@ instantaneous method of communication ; like the ' High Trees ' case it is still valid . 
 = = House of Lords = = 
 After the resignation of Lord Oaksey in 1956 Denning was offered a job as a Law Lord . After a period of contemplation ( he worried that such an appointment would reduce his chances of becoming Master of the Rolls or Lord Chief Justice ) he accepted , and was formally offered the job on 5 April 1957 . He was appointed on 24 April 1957 , as Baron Denning , of Whitchurch in the County of Southampton ; for the supporters of his coat of arms he chose Lord Mansfield and Sir Edward Coke . Many members of the judiciary and the Bar approved of his appointment , but he was warned that he should move slowly to reform the court . During his time in the House of Lords he also served as Chairman of the Quarter Sessions of East Sussex . During his time in the House of Lords Denning frequently expressed dissenting opinions , including in a Privy Council case where he argued a dissenting opinion despite the fact that Privy Council cases only allowed one opinion to be expressed . Denning did not enjoy his time in the House of Lords and clashed frequently with Viscount Simonds , who was known as a conservative and orthodox judge . Despite his reputation as a fiercely individual judge , Denning dissented in only 16 % of cases he heard in the House of Lords ; fewer than Lord Keith , who dissented 22 % of the time . On 9 May 1960 , Denning was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant of Sussex . 
 = = Master of the Rolls = = 
 In 1962 Lord Evershed resigned as Master of the Rolls , and Denning was appointed to replace him on 19 April 1962 with a salary of £ 9 @,@ 000 . Although Denning himself described it as ' a step down ' he was pleased with his appointment , as he had much preferred his time with the Court of Appeal than the House of Lords . Court of Appeal judges sit in threes , and the Lords in fives ( or more ) , so it was suggested that to get his way in the Court of Appeal Denning only had to persuade one other judge whereas in the House of Lords it was at least two . The other ' benefit ' of the Court of Appeal is that it hears more cases than the House of Lords , and so has a greater effect on the law . During his twenty years as Master of the Rolls , Denning could choose both which cases he heard , and the judges with whom he sat . Therefore , on most issues , he effectively had the last word ; comparatively few cases went on to the House of Lords , which was at that time Britain 's highest court of law . 
 As Master of the Rolls he selected cases he felt to be particularly important to hear and , rather than having an American system ( where judges had a rota for taking cases ) , assigned cases to those judges who had expertise in that particular area of law . In 1963 he chaired a committee investigating ways to reduce the archive of legal documents kept by the Public Record Office ; by that point the files for civil cases of the High Court alone occupied four miles of shelving . The final report was presented to the Lord Chancellor on 16 May 1966 , with the conclusion being that ' if our proposals are implemented the Public Record Office alone will be relieved of two hundred tons of records ( occupying 15 @,@ 000 feet of shelving ) ' . The Lord Chancellor took Denning 's report to heart , and had the changes he recommended implemented immediately . 
 = = = Contract law = = = 
 Denning gave the leading judgment in D & C Builders Ltd v Rees [ 1965 ] 2 QB 617 in 1965 . D & C Builders Ltd ( the respondent ) had been hired by Rees ( the appellant ) to do some construction work at his shop , where he sold building materials . The respondent finished the work and repeatedly phoned the appellant to request the money they were owed . After three phone calls spread out over several months the appellant 's wife spoke to the respondents ; she said there were several problems with the work that they had done , and she would only pay £ 300 of the £ 482 owed . The respondents replied that £ 300 would barely cover the costs of the materials , but that they would accept it anyway . If the respondents had not received the money they would have gone bankrupt , something the appellant 's wife was well aware of . In his judgement , Denning modified English case law on part payment and accord and satisfaction , saying that the rules on part payment can be set aside in situations where one of the parties is under duress . The fact that D & C Builders were effectively forced into accepting the lesser amount meant that the payment was not valid . 
 In Thornton v Shoe Lane Parking Ltd [ 1971 ] 2 QB 163 in 1971 the Court of Appeal under Denning ruled that when dealing with offer and acceptance between a person and an automated machine the offer was made by the machine . In Butler Machine Tool Co Ltd v Ex @-@ Cell @-@ O Corp Ltd [ 1979 ] 1 WLR 401 in 1979 Denning reformed case law in relation to the so @-@ called ' Battle of the Forms ' . 
 = = = Tort law = = = 
 Denning gave the leading judgment in Letang v Cooper [ 1964 ] 2 All ER 929 in 1964 . Mrs Letang , on holiday in Cornwall , decided to lie down and rest in grass outside a hotel . Cooper drove into the hotel car park and , not seeing Letang , ran over her legs . More than three years after the events , Letang brought a tort case against Cooper , claiming damages for her injuries . The standard tort for personal injuries is that of negligence , which has a three @-@ year statute of limitations , and Letang instead claimed damages under the tort of Trespass to the Person . In his judgment , Denning stated that the tort of Trespass could only be used if the injury was inflicted intentionally ; if it was unintentionally , only negligence could be used . 
 In Spartan Steel and Alloys Ltd v Martin & Co . Ltd [ 1973 ] 1 QB 27 in 1973 he delivered a leading judgment on the subject of the recovery of pure economic loss in negligence . Spartan Steel were a company that manufactured stainless steel in Birmingham , and their factory was powered by electricity . Less than a mile away from the factory Martin & Co were doing maintenance work on a road when they accidentally unearthed and damaged the power cable providing the factory with electricity . Due to the power being off the factory lost a large amount of money ; £ 368 on damaged goods , £ 400 on the profits they would have made from those goods and £ 1 @,@ 767 for the steel they could not make due to the power outage . The question was what Spartan Steel could claim money for . Martin & Co agreed they were negligent , and offered to pay for the damaged goods and the profit that Spartan Steel would have made on those goods , but refused to pay damages for the steel Spartan Steel could not make due to the power outage . In his judgment Denning agreed that they would only have to pay for losses associated with the damaged goods , not the money lost on the steel that could not be made due to the power outage because it counted as pure economic loss . For public policy reasons Denning would not allow the recovery of pure economic loss , stating in his judgement that : 
 Statutory utility providers are never liable for damages caused by their negligence . 
 A blackout is a common hazard and a risk which everyone can be expected to tolerate from time to time . 
 If claims for pure economic loss in such cases were allowed , it might lead to countless claims , some of which may be spurious . 
 It would be unfair to place the entire weight of many comparatively small losses upon the shoulders of one person in such cases . 
 The law does not leave the claimant without remedy by allowing him to recover the economic losses that are directly consequential upon physical damage . 
 The Court of Appeal 's decision in Spartan Steel has been criticised , firstly for being based on public policy rather than any legal principle , and secondly because the main public policy ground for their decision ( that allowing claims of pure economic loss would lead to countless claims ) has never been backed up by evidence . The House of Lords eventually ruled in Junior Books v <unk> [ 1982 ] 3 All ER 201 that pure economic loss was recoverable . 
 = = = The Profumo Affair = = = 
 Denning became best known as a result of his report into the Profumo Affair . John Profumo was the Secretary of State for War with the British government . At a party in 1961 Profumo was introduced to Christine Keeler , a showgirl , and began having an affair with her . At the same time she was in a relationship with Yevgeni Ivanov , a naval attaché at the embassy of the Soviet Union . On 26 January 1963 Keeler was contacted by police on an unrelated matter and voluntarily gave them information about her relationship with Profumo . 
 The police did not initially investigate ; no crime had been committed , and the morals of ministers were not their concern . Although the relationship lasted only a few weeks it became public knowledge in 1962 . Keeler attempted to publish her memoirs in the Sunday Pictorial in January 1963 but Profumo , still insisting that he had done nothing wrong , forced them to back down with threats of legal action should the story be published . 
 Profumo made a statement in the House of Commons on 22 March , saying that " there was no impropriety whatsoever in my acquaintanceship with Miss Keeler " . On 4 June 1963 he contacted the Chief Whip and the Prime Minister 's private secretary and informed them that he had indeed been having an affair with Keeler ; therefore , he sent a letter of resignation to the Prime Minister , which was accepted . 
 On 21 June 1963 Harold Macmillan , the Prime Minister at the time , asked Denning to lead an enquiry into the " circumstances leading to the resignation of the former Secretary of State for War , Mr J. D. Profumo " . He started work on 24 June and began speaking to witnesses a day later . This period of the inquiry took 49 days and involved his speaking to 160 people . He concluded that the primary responsibility for the scandal was with Profumo , for associating with Keeler and for lying to his colleagues , with the greatest error being his false statement in the House of Commons . 
 He also said that the situation had been looked at in the wrong way by police , members of parliament and the security services ; rather than asking if Profumo had committed adultery they should have asked if his conduct had led ordinary people to believe he committed adultery . His analogy was with divorce law ; a man does not need to have committed adultery for his wife to have grounds to divorce him , but rather she simply has to believe that he has committed adultery . This is because such a belief would destroy the trust and confidence within the relationship . This brought criticism from several government ministers including Sir John Hobson , the Attorney @-@ General for England and Wales , saying that it would mean condemning a man on the basis of suspicion rather than evidence . 
 Denning 's final report was 70 @,@ 000 words long and was completed in the summer of 1963 . He signed it on 16 September and it was published ten days later . It was a best @-@ seller ; 105 @,@ 000 copies were sold , 4 @,@ 000 in the first hour , with people queuing outside Her Majesty 's Stationery Office to buy copies . The full report was published in The Daily Telegraph as a supplement and was described as " the raciest and most readable Blue Book ever published " . 
 The report was criticised as a " whitewash " , a claim Denning rejected ; he said that " while the public interest demands that the facts should be ascertained as completely as possible there is a higher interest to be considered , namely the interest of justice to the individual which overrides all others " . 
 = = = National Security = = = 
 In 1977 , Denning upheld the deportation of Mark <unk> , a journalist who had worked on a story which referred to the existence of GCHQ , which was considered to be a state secret . In the ruling , he argued that the government 's decisions in these cases were beyond legal review , writing : 
 " There is a conflict here between the interests of national security on the one hand and the freedom of the individual on the other . The balance between these two is not for a court of law . It is for the Home Secretary . He is the person entrusted by Parliament with the task . In some parts of the world national security has on occasions been used as an excuse for all sorts of infringements of individual liberty . But not in England . " 
 = = = Illness and controversy = = = 
 In 1979 he began to experience hip and leg problems ; one of his legs had shortened an inch and a half and he had to learn to walk again . Although he remained otherwise in good health this was a sign of his increasing age , and the disabilities that came with it began to affect his judgments as well . While speaking at Cumberland Lodge in 1980 he forgot the details of the case , something shocking for a judge noted for his excellent memory . 
 In the UPW 's anti @-@ apartheid boycott of postal services to and from South Africa , the Freedom Association sought an injunction to prevent the boycott . Lord Denning granted a temporary injunction , and years later wrote of " bad workers " ( who joined the boycott ) and " good workers " ( who worked normally ) . 
 In 1980 , during an appeal by the Birmingham Six ( who were later acquitted ) Lord Denning judged that the men should be stopped from challenging legal decisions . He listed several reasons for not allowing their appeal : 
 Just consider the course of events if their action were to proceed to trial ... If the six men failed it would mean that much time and money and worry would have been expended by many people to no good purpose . If they won , it would mean that the police were guilty of perjury ; that they were guilty of violence and threats ; that the confessions were involuntary and improperly admitted in evidence ; and that the convictions were erroneous . ... That was such an appalling vista that every sensible person would say , " It cannot be right that these actions should go any further . " 
 In 1982 he published What Next in the Law ; in it , he seemed to suggest some members of the black community were unsuitable to serve on juries , and that immigrant groups may have had different moral standards to native Englishmen . His remarks followed a trial over the St Pauls riot in Bristol ; two jurors on the case threatened to sue him and the Society of Black Lawyers wrote to the Lord Chancellor to request that Denning " politely and firmly " be made to retire . Denning apologised for his remarks on 21 May and handed a letter to the Lord Chancellor detailing his resignation , effective as of 29 September . 
 On 5 July George Thomas held a dinner in Denning 's honour at the Speaker 's House . Attending were Margaret Thatcher , Robert Runcie , Lord Hailsham , Geoffrey Howe , Lord Lane , William Whitelaw , Michael Havers and Christopher Leaver . On 30 July 1982 , his last day in court , Denning prepared four judgments and , dressed in his official robes and in the company of the Lord Chief Justice , delivered his farewell speech to over 300 lawyers crowded into the court . He delivered his last judgment on 29 September in George Mitchell ( <unk> ) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [ 1983 ] 2 AC 803 and , characteristically , dissented . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 In retirement Denning moved to Whitchurch and continued the work he had done outside court hours , lecturing and presenting awards . He also on occasion dispensed legal advice ; in February 1983 he advised Patrick Evershed on the statutory duties of water suppliers . Further hip troubles were resolved with a full replacement in March 1983 , although a fall later that year forced him to stay at home for six weeks . With free time on his hands Denning spoke in the House of Lords on matters that interested him , supporting an amendment to the Abortion Act 1967 and bills designed to allow the administration of companies in financial difficulties . 
 In 1983 he published the final volume of his autobiography The Closing Chapter and a year later published Landmarks in the Law . His final book titled Leaves from my Library was published in 1986 ; it was a collection of his favourite pieces of prose , and was subtitled " An English Anthology " . He appeared in an episode of the children 's television programme Jim 'll Fix It , helping to grant a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old girl 's wish to be a barrister for a day . By 1989 his health was failing ; he was suffering from dizzy spells , and after falling from a train at Waterloo Station he was advised he should not visit London again unless he was driven . 
 In the summer of 1990 he agreed to a taped interview with A.N. Wilson , to be published in The Spectator . They discussed the Guildford Four ; Denning remarked that if the Guildford Four had been hanged " They 'd probably have hanged the right men . Just not proved against them , that 's all " . His remarks were controversial and came at a time when the issue of miscarriage of justice was a sensitive topic . He had expressed a similar controversial opinion regarding the Birmingham Six in 1988 , saying : " Hanging ought to be retained for murder most foul . We shouldn 't have all these campaigns to get the Birmingham Six released if they 'd been hanged . They 'd have been forgotten , and the whole community would be satisfied ... It is better that some innocent men remain in jail than that the integrity of the English judicial system be impugned . " 
 On 25 November 1997 he was made a member of the Order of Merit ; by this point he was too weak to travel to London to receive it , so instead a representative of the Queen travelled to Whitchurch to present it to him . 
 He celebrated his 100th birthday in Whitchurch on 23 January 1999 , receiving telegrams from both the Queen and Queen Mother . A male choir sang " Happy Birthday to You " and the local church had a new bell named " Great Tom " cast in his honour specifically for the occasion . By this point his health had deteriorated even further ; he was legally blind , required a hearing aid and only ventured outside on a motorised buggy . On 5 March 1999 he fell ill and was rushed to Royal Hampshire County Hospital , where he died of an internal haemorrhage . 
 Denning was buried in his home town of Whitchurch , in the local churchyard . A memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey on 17 June 1999 ; among the tributes received , one was from the Lord Chief Justice Lord Bingham , who described Denning as ' the best @-@ known and best loved judge in our history ' . 
 = = Other work = = 
 As well as his work as a barrister and judge , Denning was involved in supporting student law societies and other groups ; at various times he was Vice @-@ President of Queen 's University Belfast Law Society and a patron of the Legal Research Foundation , the United Law Clerks ' Society and the Commonwealth Legal Education Association . He also spent time as the Vice @-@ President of the Society of Genealogists , Honorary President of the Council for the Protection of Rural England and Honorary President of the Glasgow University Dialectic Society . From 1950 he acted as an administrator and fund @-@ raiser for Cumberland Lodge . After being made aware of the Le Court charity for invalid ex @-@ servicemen by Geoffrey Cheshire Denning became the chairman of the organisation in 1952 . In 1953 he was elected President of Birkbeck College , University of London and on 18 March presented the 1952 Haldane Memorial Lecture on the subject of the rule of law and the welfare state . In 1964 he was made President of the English Association in recognition of his contributions to English prose . He became Chairman of the Historical Manuscripts Commission in 1962 , resigning in December 1982 . 
 In 1949 he gave four lectures at the Senate House , University of London on behalf of the Hamlyn Trust titled Freedom under the Law . The success of these lectures led to his being invited to speak at many more events ; in early 1950 he spoke at University College , Dublin and in June spoke at the Holdsworth Club meeting at Birmingham University . In February 1953 he gave a speech on ' the need for a new equity ' to the Bentham Club at University College London , and in May gave the thirty @-@ third Earl Grey Memorial Lecture at King 's College , University of Durham ( now , part of Newcastle University ) , on the influence of religion on law . Towards the end of his judicial career he gave the 1980 Richard Dimbleby Lecture on the subject of " Misuse of Power " . 
 In addition to being a Bencher of Lincoln 's Inn in 1944 he was made an Honorary Bencher of Middle Temple in 1972 , Gray 's Inn in 1979 and Inner Temple in 1982 , making him the only person to be elected a Bencher or Honorary Bencher of all four Inns of Court . In 1963 he was made a Doctor of Civil Law by the University of Oxford . He was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant of Hampshire on 2 June 1978 . 
 = = Foreign travels = = 
 Throughout his career Denning travelled to a variety of foreign countries to lecture and learn more about other legal systems . In 1954 he was sponsored by the Nuffield Foundation to travel to South Africa and visit the universities there in the court vacation . He visited all six universities , accompanied by his son Robert and wife Joan , lecturing on the role of the judiciary and the press in safeguarding freedom . In 1955 he travelled to the United States at the behest of the American Bar Association and was elected an honorary member , followed by a trip to Canada a year later as a guest of the Canadian Bar Association , where he was awarded an honorary law doctorate by the University of Ottawa and made a life member of the Canadian Bar Association . In 1958 he visited Israel and from there travelled to Poland , where he was surprised by both the number of female judges and how badly they were paid . In 1961 he travelled again to Israel to give the Lionel Cohen Lecture at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem . 
 In January 1964 he and his wife Joan travelled to India and Pakistan , visiting major cities such as Madras and Jaipur , meeting eminent jurists and speaking with Jawaharlal Nehru . He again visited Canada and the United States in the long vacation of 1964 and addressed a full conference hall in New York . On 14 August 1965 he and his wife flew to South America for a month @-@ long tour of the continent sponsored by the British Council . The couple visited Brazil , Uruguay , Argentina , Chile and Peru before flying north to visit Mexico City . On 6 January 1966 they flew to Malta , where Denning spoke at various legal conferences and lectures . In the same year they flew to San Francisco , Fiji and finally to New Zealand to take part in the law conference at Dunedin , New Zealand . His lecture at the conference so impressed an Australian visitor that he was invited in 1967 to speak at the Australian Law Society annual conference . While there , he spoke at a student meeting at the University of Sydney ; while the previous speaker received a slow hand @-@ clap , Denning was given a standing ovation and the student law society was named the Denning Law Society in his honour . On the way home the couple made a stop at Delhi , where they gave a dinner for members of the Indian Bar who had welcomed them during their visit in 1964 . In 1968 they again visited Canada , and Denning was given an honorary degree by McGill University . In 1969 he again travelled to India , this time on an official visit with Elwyn Jones and Sir John <unk> . 
 In 1970 he travelled to Fiji to arbitrate in a dispute between some Fijian sugar @-@ cane growers and the Australian owners of the refining mills , which he was permitted to do on the condition he did not take a fee . Denning refused to have any contact with the government as a way to emphasise his neutrality in the situation . The agreements between growers and millers had been based on a contract written in 1961 due to end in March 1970 . The growers did not understand the price formula used and were convinced that they were getting a bad deal ; in response to their demand for better terms the mill @-@ owners threatened to leave Fiji . Despite criticism from both sides at the beginning of the arbitration process Denning came up with a solution which appeased both sides , creating a new formula for working out prices and requiring that the mill owners have an accountant inspect their accounts and report back to the growers . Denning 's decision impressed the Foreign and Commonwealth Office , who invited him to report on the banana growing industry in Jamaica in the vacation of 1971 . His foreign travels to lecture on English law led to him being described as the " Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large for the common law " . 
 = = Judicial style = = 
 Denning was noted for his excellent memory , repeating notes almost verbatim in his exams at Oxford and on one occasion identifying the exact book , page and paragraph of text in a judgment that covered a particular situation . As a judge he attempted to make his decisions and the law publicly understandable , believing that the public would not want to follow the law unless they believed and understood that it was just . In his cases he referred to the parties by name in his judgments rather than as " plaintiff " and " defendant " and used short sentences and a " storytelling " style of speech shown in the case Beswick v Beswick where his judgment started : 
 Old Peter Beswick was a coal merchant in Eccles , Lancashire . He had no business premises . All he had was a lorry , scales , and weights . He used to take the lorry to the yard of the National Coal Board , where he bagged coal and took it round to his customers in the neighbourhood . His nephew , John Joseph Beswick , helped him in his business . In March 1962 , old Peter Beswick and his wife were both over 70 . He had had his leg amputated and was not in good health . The nephew was anxious to get hold of the business before the old man died . So they went to a solicitor , Mr. Ashcroft , who drew up an agreement for them . 
 In court Denning preferred to let counsel talk on for as long as they wanted to so that he could get a grasp of the situation without wading through irrelevant court papers ; to prevent them going on too long he sat quietly and allowed them to wind down at their own pace . 
 Denning was also known for his long working schedule ; when he served as Master of the Rolls he sat for five full days a week , and required reserved judgments ( about one case in ten ) to be written during the weekend . He expected the other justices to keep to the same schedule as him , and was repeatedly warned about overwork . Henn Collins wrote him a poem : 
 My brother pray be warned by me 
 And always rise in time for tea 
 And when you feel you must sit late 
 Remember my untoward fate 
 Don 't go on sitting until seven 
 But sit next morning at eleven 
 Unlike most of the judiciary Denning firmly believed that the press should have access to the courts and freedom to criticise magistrates and judges . He believed all legal proceedings should be held in public , quoting Jeremy Bentham when he said that " in the darkness of secrecy all sorts of things can go wrong . If things are really done in public you can see that the judge does behave himself , the newspapers can comment on it if he <unk> — it keeps everyone in order " . 
 For many years Denning was the president of the Lawyers ' Christian Fellowship , and he once wrote that " Without religion there is no morality , and without morality there is no law . " His Christian beliefs sometimes affected his judgments , particularly on the subject of the sanctity of marriage . In Re L ( infants ) he reversed a decision to give the children of a couple to the wife in a divorce case , believing that should the wife get custody of the children there would be no chance of saving the marriage . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Denning has been described as the most influential judge of the 20th century , in part because of his changes to the common law and also due to his <unk> of the legal profession . With his judgments on war pensions and his role in the enquiry into the Profumo Affair , Denning became possibly the best known judge ever to belong to the English judiciary , with the public treating Lord Denning and the Court of Appeal as synonymous . He was equally well @-@ loved and controversial , appreciated for his role as ' the peoples judge ' and his support for the common man and disliked by elements of the bar and judiciary for ' uncertainty in the law ' created by his broad judgments . 
 Denning made sweeping changes to the Common Law , with the resurrection of equitable estoppel and his reform of divorce law . A common misconception is that most of his judgments were overturned in the House of Lords ; many were , including the expansion to the doctrine of fundamental breach he set out in Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd , but they let many judgments stand and on occasion agreed with his judgment in situations where he dissented , such as in his final case George Mitchell ( <unk> ) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd in 1983 . 
 Several law @-@ related things have been named after Denning due to his reputation as a judge , in particular the Lord Denning Scholarship of Lincoln 's Inn and the Denning Law Journal of the University of Buckingham . The law library of Magdalen College , Oxford , where he studied , is known as the Denning Law Library . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Denning met his future wife Mary Harvey on 25 October 1914 aged fifteen at his confirmation ; she was the daughter of the Vicar of Whitchurch . Denning attempted to court her for many years , but for a long time his love was unrequited , with Mary wanting them to be only friends . After a dance at Beaulieu on 18 January 1930 she finally admitted her love for him , and he returned to Hampshire with her to pick out an engagement ring . Barely six months away from the set date for their wedding Mary was diagnosed with tuberculosis , but she recovered and the couple were married on 28 December 1932 , with the wedding officiated by Cecil Henry <unk> , Bishop of Southampton . 
 The couple moved to London in 1933 but the city at the time was sooty and foggy . This affected Mary 's health , and after treatment at Guy 's Hospital she was transferred to Brompton Hospital , where she had a lung removed . After recovering , she moved to Southampton to stay with her parents for two years , with Denning visiting every weekend . By 1935 she had fully recovered , and the couple bought a house in Tylers Green , Cuckfield , called Fair Close . Their son , Robert , was born on 3 August 1938 ; he later became a Dean at Magdalen College , Oxford , teaching inorganic chemistry . Mary developed gallstones in 1941 , and after an initial recovery had a haemorrhage on 21 November , dying the next morning . 
 In 1945 Denning met Joan Stuart , a widow with three children : Pauline , Hazel and John . They married on 27 December 1945 , and were by all accounts happy together . On 19 October 1992 she suffered a massive heart attack ; although she survived the initial attack she died a few days later on 23 October . 
 = Typhoon Meranti ( 2004 ) = 
 Typhoon Meranti was the first of the record nine named storms to develop during August within the 2004 Pacific typhoon season . Forming from an area of low pressure on August 3 , Meranti gradually strengthened . On August 5 , the storm underwent a brief period of rapid intensification , attaining its peak intensity later day . According to the Japan Meteorological Agency , the storm attained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center reported that the storm attained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . The following day , the typhoon quickly weakened to a tropical storm due to unfavorable conditions . By August 9 , the system completed an extratropical transition ; the remnants of the storm persisted until August 13 , at which time it was absorbed by a large , non @-@ tropical low . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Meranti originated out of an area of low pressure about 475 km ( 295 mi ) south of Wake Island on August 2 . Little deep convection accompanied the weak system despite being situated within an area of moderate diffluence and weak to moderate wind shear . Initially , the system was thought to have been much closer to Wake Island ; however , following the development of deep convection , the location of the center of circulation was corrected . Around 0000 UTC on August 3 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the western Pacific basin , designated the system as a tropical depression . Development continued as the depression moved into an area of divergence near a tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough cell . Several hours after the JMA issued their advisory on the depression , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , stating that the system was likely to develop into a tropical storm within 24 hours . 
 Later on August 3 , the JTWC issued their first advisory on the storm , classifying it as Tropical Depression 14W . Located to the west of a mid @-@ level ridge , the depression was steered towards the north . Early the next day , the JTWC upgraded 14W to a tropical storm ; the JMA later upgraded it to a tropical storm around 1200 UTC . At that time , the storm received the name Meranti , a name that was contributed by Cambodia . Little intensification took place until August 5 , at which time convection became increasingly organized and underwent a brief period of rapid intensification . By 1200 UTC , both the JMA and JTWC upgraded Meranti to a typhoon . Several hours later , the storm reached its peak intensity ; the JMA assessed it to have had winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) while the JTWC assessed it to have attained Category 2 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . 
 Upon attaining typhoon status , Meranti turned towards the northeast in response to a strengthening near @-@ equatorial ridge south of the typhoon . Visible satellite images of the typhoon depicted a small , ragged eye within a well @-@ developed cyclone . Gale @-@ force winds extended 155 km ( 100 mi ) at this time . Well @-@ developed outflow allowed the storm to maintain its peak intensity for roughly 18 hours before dry air became entrained in the circulation . The combined effects of decreasing sea surface temperatures and increasing wind shear caused Meranti to quickly weaken . By 0600 UTC on August 6 , the eye was no longer visible on satellite imagery and several hours later deep convection rapidly diminished , leading to both agencies downgrading the typhoon to a tropical storm . 
 Later on August 6 , the weakening trend briefly halted as outflow significantly improved due to an area of low pressure north of Meranti . However , wind shear drastically increased , displacing convection to the northwest of the circulation center . By this time , the storm began to undergo an extratropical transition . Due to the influence of a major shortwave trough approaching from the west , Meranti took a sharp northward turn . The JTWC issued their final advisory on the weakening cyclone around 0600 UTC on August 8 . The JMA continued to monitor Meranti as a tropical cyclone until August 9 . Shortly after becoming extratropical , the remnants of the storm executed a slow , counter @-@ clockwise loop until August 12 . Shortly after crossing the International Date Line on August 13 , the storm was absorbed by a large non @-@ tropical low over the Bering Sea . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As Typhoon Meranti never threatened any land masses , no watches or warnings were issued in response to the storm . Although Meranti passed near Wake Island as a tropical depression , no effects were recorded . 
 = Mindaugas = 
 Mindaugas ( German : <unk> , Latin : Mindowe , Old East Slavic : <unk> — <unk> , Belarusian : <unk> or <unk> , c . 1203 – fall 1263 ) was the first known Grand Duke of Lithuania and the only King of Lithuania . Little is known of his origins , early life , or rise to power ; he is mentioned in a 1219 treaty as an elder duke , and in 1236 as the leader of all the Lithuanians . The contemporary and modern sources discussing his ascent mention strategic marriages along with banishment or murder of his rivals . He extended his domain into regions southeast of Lithuania proper during the 1230s and 1240s . In 1250 or 1251 , during the course of internal power struggles , he was baptised as a Roman Catholic ; this action enabled him to establish an alliance with the Livonian Order , a long @-@ standing antagonist of the Lithuanians . During the summer of 1253 he was crowned King of Lithuania , ruling between 300 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 subjects . 
 While his ten @-@ year reign was marked by various state @-@ building accomplishments , Mindaugas 's conflicts with relatives and other dukes continued , and Samogitia ( western Lithuania ) strongly resisted the alliance 's rule . His gains in the southeast were challenged by the Tatars . He broke peace with the Livonian Order in 1261 , possibly renouncing Christianity , and was assassinated in 1263 by his nephew Treniota and another rival , Duke Daumantas . His three immediate successors were assassinated as well . The disorder was not resolved until Traidenis gained the title of Grand Duke c . 1270 . 
 Although his reputation was unsettled during the following centuries and his descendants were not notable , he gained standing during the 19th and 20th centuries . Mindaugas was the only King of Lithuania ; while most of the Lithuanian Grand Dukes from Jogaila onward also reigned as Kings of Poland , the titles remained separate . Now generally considered the founder of the Lithuanian state , he is also now credited with stopping the advance of the Tatars towards the Baltic Sea , establishing international recognition of Lithuania , and turning it towards Western civilization . In the 1990s the historian Edvardas Gudavičius published research supporting an exact coronation date – 6 July 1253 . This day is now an official national holiday , Statehood Day . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 Lithuania was ruled during the early 13th century by a number of dukes and princes presiding over various fiefdoms and tribes . They were loosely bonded by commonalities of religion and tradition , trade , kinship , joint military campaigns , and the presence of captured prisoners from neighboring areas . Western merchants and missionaries began seeking control of the area during the 12th century , establishing the city of Riga , Latvia in 1201 . Their efforts in Lithuania were temporarily halted by defeat at the Battle of Saule in 1236 , but armed Christian orders continued to pose a threat . The country had also undergone incursions by the Mongol Empire . 
 A treaty with Galicia – Volhynia , signed in 1219 , is usually considered the first conclusive evidence that the Baltic tribes in the area were uniting in response to these threats . The treaty 's signatories include twenty Lithuanian dukes and one dowager duchess ; it specifies that five of these were elder and thus took precedence over the remaining sixteen . Mindaugas , despite his youth , as well as his brother Dausprungas are listed among the elder dukes , implying that they had inherited their titles . The Livonian Rhymed Chronicle describes him as the ruler of all Lithuania in 1236 . His path to this title is not clear . Ruthenian chronicles mention that he murdered or expelled several other dukes , including his relatives . Historian S.C. Rowell has described his rise to power as taking place through " the familiar processes of marriage , murder and military conquest . " 
 During the 1230s and 1240s , Mindaugas strengthened and established his power in various Baltic and Slavic lands . Warfare in the region intensified ; he battled German forces in Kurland , while the Mongols destroyed Kiev in 1240 and entered Poland in 1241 , defeating two Polish armies and burning Kraków . The Lithuanian victory in the Battle of Saule temporarily stabilized the northern front , but the Christian orders continued to make gains along the Baltic coast , founding the city of Klaipėda ( Memel ) . Constrained in the north and west , Mindaugas moved to the east and southeast , conquering Navahrudak , Hrodna , <unk> , and the Principality of Polotsk , but there is no information about any battles for those cities . In 1246 by Chronic of <unk> he was baptized by Orthodox church in Navahrudak , but later because of political situation he was re @-@ baptized by Catholic church . In about 1239 he appointed his son Vaišvilkas to govern these areas , then known as Black Ruthenia . In 1248 , he sent his nephews Tautvilas and Edivydas , the sons of his brother Dausprungas , along with Vykintas , the Duke of Samogitia , to conquer Smolensk , but they were unsuccessful . His attempts to consolidate his rule in Lithuania met with mixed success ; in 1249 , an internal war erupted when he sought to seize his nephews ' and Vykintas ' lands . 
 = = Path to coronation = = 
 Tautvilas , Edivydas , and Vykintas formed a powerful coalition in opposition to Mindaugas , along with the Samogitians of western Lithuania , the Livonian Order , Daniel of Galicia ( Tautvilas and Edivydas ' brother @-@ in @-@ law ) , and Vasilko of Volhynia . The princes of Galicia and Volhynia managed to gain control over Black Ruthenia , disrupting Vaišvilkas ' supremacy . Tautvilas strengthened his position by traveling to Riga and accepting baptism by the Archbishop . In 1250 , the Order organized a major raid through the lands of <unk> into the domains of Mindaugas in Lithuania proper , and a raid into those parts of Samogitia that still supported him . Attacked from the north and south and facing the possibility of unrest elsewhere , Mindaugas was placed in an extremely difficult position , but managed to use the conflicts between the Livonian Order and the Archbishop of Riga to further his own interests . He succeeded in bribing Order Master Andreas von <unk> , who was still angry at Vykintas for the defeat at the Battle of Saule in 1236 , by sending him " many gifts " . 
 In 1250 or 1251 , Mindaugas agreed to receive baptism and relinquish control over some lands in western Lithuania , in return for an acknowledgment by Pope Innocent IV as king . The Pope welcomed a Christian Lithuania as a bulwark against Mongol threats ; in turn , Mindaugas sought papal intervention in the ongoing Lithuanian conflicts with the Christian orders . On 17 July 1251 , the pope signed two crucial papal bulls . One ordered the Bishop of Chełmno to crown Mindaugas as King of Lithuania , appoint a bishop for Lithuania , and build a cathedral . The other bull specified that the new bishop was to be directly subordinate to the Holy See , rather than to the Archbishop of Riga . This autonomy was a welcome development . The precise date of Mindaugas ' baptism is not known . His wife , two sons , and members of his court were baptized ; Pope Innocent wrote later that a multitude of Mindaugas ' subjects also received Christianity . 
 The process of coronation and the establishment of Christian institutions would take two years . Internal conflicts persisted ; during the spring or summer of 1251 , Tautvilas and his remaining allies attacked Mindaugas ' warriors and the Livonian Order 's crossbow @-@ men in Voruta Castle . The attack failed , and Tautvilas ' forces retreated to defend themselves in <unk> Castle ( presumed to be <unk> in Samogitia ) . Vykintas died in 1251 or 1252 , and Tautvilas was forced to rejoin Daniel of Galicia . 
 = = The Kingdom of Lithuania = = 
 Mindaugas and his wife Morta were crowned during the summer of 1253 . Bishop Henry Heidenreich of Kulm presided over the ecclesiastical ceremonies and Andreas <unk> conferred the crown . 6 July is now celebrated as Statehood Day ( Lithuanian : Valstybės <unk> ) ; it is an official holiday in modern Lithuania . The exact date of the coronation is not known ; the scholarship of historian Edvardas Gudavičius , who promulgated this precise date , is sometimes challenged . The location of the coronation also remains unknown . 
 Relative peace and stability prevailed for about eight years . Mindaugas used this opportunity to concentrate on the expansion to the east , and to establish and organize state institutions . He strengthened his influence in Black Ruthenia , in Polatsk , a major center of commerce in the Daugava River basin , and in Pinsk . He also negotiated a peace with Galicia – Volhynia , and married his daughter to Svarn , the son of Daniel of Galicia , who would later become Grand Duke of Lithuania . Lithuanian relationships with western Europe and the Holy See were reinforced . In 1255 , Mindaugas received permission from Pope Alexander IV to crown his son as King of Lithuania . A noble court , an administrative system , and a diplomatic service were initiated . Silver long coins , an index of statehood , were issued . He sponsored the construction of a cathedral in Vilnius , possibly on the site of today 's Vilnius Cathedral . 
 Immediately after his coronation , Mindaugas transferred some lands to the Livonian Order – portions of Samogitia , <unk> , and Dainava — although his control over these western lands was tenuous . There has been much discussion among historians as to whether in later years ( 1255 – 1261 ) Mindaugas gave even more lands to the order . The deeds might have been falsified by the order ; the case for this scenario is bolstered by the fact that some of the documents mention lands that were not actually under the control of Mindaugas and by various irregularities in treaty witnesses and seals . 
 Mindaugas and his antagonist Daniel reached a reconciliation in 1255 ; the Black Ruthenian lands were transferred to Roman , Daniel 's son . Afterwards Mindaugas 's son Vaišvilkas received baptism as a member of the Orthodox faith , becoming a monk and later founding a convent and monastery . Tautvilas 's antagonism was temporarily resolved when he recognized Mindaugas ' superiority and received Polatsk as a fiefdom . A direct confrontation with the Mongols occurred in 1258 or 1259 , when Berke Khan sent his general <unk> to challenge Lithuanian rule , ordering Daniel and other regional princes to participate . The Novgorod Chronicle describes the following action as a defeat of the Lithuanians , but it has also been seen as a net gain for Mindaugas . 
 A single sentence in the Hypatian Chronicle mentions Mindaugas defending himself in Voruta against his nephews and Duke Vykintas ; two other sources mention " his castle " . The location of Voruta is not specified , and this has led to considerable speculation , along with archeological research , concerning the seat of his court . At least fourteen different locations have been proposed , including Kernavė and Vilnius . The ongoing formal archeological digs at Kernavė began in 1979 after a portion of the site named " Mindaugas Throne hill @-@ fort " collapsed . The town now hosts a major celebration on Statehood Day . 
 = = Assassination and aftermath = = 
 The Livonian Order used their alliance with Mindaugas to gain control over Samogitian lands . In 1252 he approved the Order 's construction of <unk> Castle . Their governance , however , was seen as oppressive . Local merchants could only conduct transactions via Order @-@ approved intermediaries ; inheritance laws were changed ; and the choices among marriage partners and residencies were restricted . Several pitched battles ensued . In 1259 the Order lost the Battle of <unk> , and in 1260 it lost the Battle of Durbe . The first defeat encouraged a rebellion by the Semigalians , and the defeat at Durbe spurred the Prussians into the Great Prussian Rebellion , which lasted for 14 years . Encouraged by these developments and by his nephew Treniota , Mindaugas broke peace with the Order . The gains he had expected from Christianization had proven to be minor . 
 Mindaugas may have reverted to paganism afterwards . His motivation for conversion is often described by modern historians as merely strategic . The case for his apostasy rests largely on two near @-@ contemporary sources : a 1324 assertion by Pope John XXII that Mindaugas had returned to error , and the Galician – Volhynian Chronicle . The chronicler writes that Mindaugas continued to practice paganism , making sacrifices to his god , burning corpses , and conducting pagan rites in public . Historians have pointed to the possibility of bias in this account , since Mindaugas had been at war with Volhynia . Pope Clement IV , on the other hand , wrote in 1268 of " Mindaugas of happy memory " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , expressing regret at his murder . 
 In any event , the Lithuanians were not prepared to accept Christianity , and Mindaugas ' baptism had little impact on further developments . The majority of the population and the nobility remained pagan ; his subjects were not required to convert . The cathedral he had built in Vilnius was superseded by a pagan temple , and all the diplomatic achievements made after his coronation were lost , although the practice of Christianity and intermarriage were well tolerated . 
 Regional conflicts with the Order escalated . Alexander Nevsky of Novgorod , Tautvilas , and Tautvilas 's son Constantine agreed to form a coalition in opposition to Mindaugas , but their plans were unsuccessful . Treniota emerged as the leader of the Samogitian resistance ; he led an army to Cēsis ( now in Latvia ) , reaching the Estonian coast , and battled Masovia ( now in Poland ) . His goal was to encourage all the conquered Baltic tribes to rise up against the Christian orders and unite under Lithuanian leadership . His personal influence grew while Mindaugas was concentrating on the conquest of Ruthenian lands , dispatching a large army to Bryansk . Treniota and Mindaugas began to pursue different priorities . The Rhymed Chronicle mentions Mindaugas 's displeasure at the fact that Treniota did not create any alliances in Latvia or Estonia ; he may have come to prefer diplomacy . In the midst of these events Mindaugas ' wife Morta died , and he took her sister , Daumantas ' wife , as his own . In retaliation , Daumantas and Treniota assassinated Mindaugas and two of his sons in fall 1263 . According to a late medieval tradition , the assassination took place in <unk> . He was buried along with his horses , in accordance with ancestral tradition . After Mindaugas ' death , Lithuania lapsed into internal disorder . Three of his successors — Treniota , his son @-@ in @-@ law Svarn , and his son Vaišvilkas — were assassinated during the next seven years . Stability did not return until the reign of Traidenis , designated Grand Duke c . 1270 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mindaugas held a dubious position in Lithuanian historiography until the Lithuanian national revival of the 19th century . While pagan sympathizers held him in disregard for betraying his religion , Christians saw his support as lukewarm . He received only passing references from Grand Duke Gediminas and was not mentioned at all by Vytautas the Great . His known family relations end with his children ; no historic records note any connections between his descendants and the Gediminids dynasty that ruled Lithuania and Poland until 1572 . A 17th @-@ century rector of Vilnius University held him responsible for the troubles then being experienced by the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( " the seed of internal discord among the Lithuanians had been sown " . ) A 20th @-@ century historian charged him with the " destruction of the organization of the Lithuanian state " . The first academic study of his life by a Lithuanian scholar , Jonas <unk> ( Die <unk> unter dem König Mindowe bis zum Jahre 1263 ) was not published until 1905 . In the 1990s historian Edvardas Gudavičius published his findings pinpointing a coronation date , which became a national holiday . The 750th anniversary of his coronation was marked in 2003 by the dedication of the Mindaugas Bridge in Vilnius , numerous festivals and concerts , and visits from other heads of state . In Belarus , there is the legendary Mindaugas ' Hill in Navahrudak , mentioned by Adam Mickiewicz in his 1828 poem Konrad Wallenrod . A memorial stone on the Mindaugas ' hill was installed in 1993 and a metal sculpture of Mindaugas in 2014 . 
 Mindaugas is the primary subject of the 1829 drama Mindowe , by Juliusz Słowacki , one of the Three Bards . He has been portrayed in several 20th @-@ century literary works : the Latvian author <unk> <unk> ' tragedy Vara ( Power , 1944 ) , <unk> <unk> ' drama @-@ poem Mindaugas ( 1968 ) , Romualdas <unk> ' <unk> <unk> ( The Offering of the Bull , 1975 ) , and Juozas <unk> ' Mindaugas ( 1995 ) . Coronation of Mindaugas and creation of the Grand Duchy is the main topic of the 2002 Belarusian novel <unk> 's Lance by <unk> <unk> dedicated to the 750th anniversary of the coronation . 
 = The Cheese Special = 
 The Cheese Special is a 1913 American silent short comedy film featuring Max Asher and marking the film debut of Louise Fazenda . The scenario was written by Allen Curtis , but the identity of the director is unknown . It was the first production released by the newly formed Joker productions , as part of the Universal Film Manufacturing Company . The film is presumed to be lost and there is no published synopsis of the film . Known production details state that it was shot on a beach resort and used a miniature train . The film had a wide release and was reviewed by The Moving Picture World as a low comedy suited for the burlesque theaters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 No known script or plot of the film has surfaced , but the highlight of the film was summarized in the Corsicana Daily Sun as " a roaring Joker comedy in which Dauntless Dan stops the train with one hand and rescues the heroine with the other while the villain hisses between his teeth . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Max Asher 
 Louise Fazenda as heroine / Schmaltz 's daughter 
 Henry Mann as Schmaltz 
 Lee Morris 
 Bobby Vernon as <unk> De <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 Few details are known about the production of the film , but it was shot on a beach resort and used a miniature train . Due the lack of credits , both Louise Fazenda and Henry Mann 's roles were provided by Photoplay , in response to an reader inquiry . The film was the first release by the new Joker productions , which was dedicated to producing only short comedy films . <unk> C. Lahue and Samuel Gill credit this production as being Louise Fazenda 's film debut . Film historian Richard E. Braff notes that Allen Curtis as the writer , but provides no directorial credits . The single reel production was released on October 25 , 1913 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The new Joker line was billed as one of the " best comedies yet " by advertisers wanting to draw crowds to the theaters , but there may have been truth in the claims because it was cited as one of Max Asher 's best roles in a 1914 edition of Moving Picture World . The film had a wide release with showings in Indiana , Kansas , Ohio , North Carolina , Maryland , Pennsylvania , Texas , and in Chicago , Illinois . The Moving Picture World review of the film noted that it was a low comedy suitable for the burlesque houses with " less particular audiences " than finer establishments because one of the minor characters spat frequently on camera , interrupting the humor and thus making it unfit for the best theaters . Another newspaper review claimed that it was one of the best comedies released in months , but ended up referring to the film as " The Chinese Special " . The date of disappearance is unknown , but Universal destroyed its remaining copies of silent era films in 1948 . The film is presumed to be lost . 
 = James Walker ( Australian politician ) = 
 James Thomas Walker ( 20 March 1841 – 18 January 1923 ) was a Scottish @-@ born Australian banker and politician . 
 Walker was born in Scotland but spent his early childhood in New South Wales , before returning to Scotland with his family to study finance . Joining the Bank of New South Wales , he returned to Australia and held various financial positions in New South Wales and Queensland . Gaining a public reputation for financial expertise , he was active in the <unk> cause and was a delegate to the 1897 Constitutional Convention , where he was a significant figure in the development of Commonwealth finance schemes . After assisting the successful " Yes " campaign for the 1898 referendum , he was elected to the Senate in 1901 as a Free Trader . 
 As a senator , Walker continued to focus on finance , although his views on social policy sometimes saw him on the outside of his party . He supported the White Australia policy but disagreed with key elements , and was a leader in opposition to the dictation test , by which a potential immigrant was required to pass a test in any European language before their application was accepted . He also campaigned for a transcontinental railway and for a capital city to be located on federal territory . Attempts to guide financial reform through the parliament as a backbench senator led to frustration , and Walker retired due to ill health in 1913 with his legislation <unk> . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Walker was born on Leith Walk in Edinburgh to grazier John William Walker and his wife Elizabeth , née Waterston . The family migrated to New South Wales in 1844 and settled on <unk> Station near <unk> . In 1849 , John Walker sold the property to Hamilton Hume and returned to Scotland . James was educated at the Edinburgh Institution and King 's College London before returning to Edinburgh in 1857 . After several years in Scotland working first for the paper manufacturers Cowan & Sons , and then for stockbroker Robert Allan , he joined the Bank of New South Wales ' London branch in March 1860 ; his cousin , Thomas Walker , was one of the bank 's directors . In January 1862 he departed for Melbourne on Swiftsure and was posted to the bank 's Sydney office . 
 Walker was then sent by the bank to Rockhampton in Queensland , where he worked as an accountant until 1866 when he was appointed manager of the Townsville branch . In 1867 he was transferred to the Toowoomba branch , which he managed until 1878 when he was promoted assistant inspector in Brisbane . He married Janette Isabella Palmer on 16 April 1868 at Range View . In 1885 he resigned from the Bank of New South Wales to become the first manager of the Royal Bank of Queensland , but in 1887 he returned to New South Wales to manage the estate of <unk> Walker , the daughter of his late cousin Thomas . 
 = = Federation = = 
 Walker had a strong interest in Federation and was a member of the Australasian Federation League of New South Wales . In 1896 he attended the People 's Federal Convention in Bathurst , where he proposed a financial scheme that would provide savings for a federal government based on income from state taxes and federal spending . His reputation for financial expertise saw him elected to the Australian Federal Convention in 1897 . There he supported equal representation for all states in an upper house , Commonwealth control of railways , and a national capital on federal territory . He reiterated his financial proposals , but was overlooked for the finance and trade committee , having been described by Alfred Deakin as " a mere commercial man " . 
 Despite this setback , Walker continued to play an active part in the development of the Australian Constitution . He had the name of the federal upper house changed from the " States Assembly " to the Senate , although his proposal that the federated colonies adopt the name " Commonwealth of Australasia " , with a view to the future inclusion of New Guinea , New Zealand and Fiji , was not adopted . He also supported a minimum age for senators of twenty @-@ five , rather than twenty @-@ one , and voted for Paddy Glynn 's proposal to include recognition of a " Divine Sovereign " in the Constitution . 
 The second session of the Convention took place in Sydney in September 1897 . Walker was appointed to a subcommittee on federal finance , which proposed a financial scheme based on Walker 's Bathurst proposal that was adopted by the Convention . He was active in the Federation referendum campaign , travelling around New South Wales to encourage a " Yes " vote . He mostly focused on financial issues , and in 1899 went to Western Australia , the most reluctant colony , to increase support . 
 Following the success of the referendum , Walker was encouraged to stand for the Senate by a petition of over 6500 signatures . A staunch free trader , Walker campaigned as part of the Free Trade Party 's endorsed ticket . He had resigned as president of the Bank of New South Wales in 1897 , but remained a director . At the first federal election in March 1901 , Walker was elected as a New South Wales Senator at the head of the poll . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 As a senator , Walker devoted his support to a variety of causes , including a transcontinental railway and equal pay for women . He opposed a federal old @-@ age pension scheme on the grounds of lack of funds , and also opposed the Immigration Restriction Bill , although he supported the White Australia policy in principle . He opposed the proposed form of the dictation test and supported James Macfarlane 's amendment requiring the test to be administered in a language known to the immigrant , moving his own amendment after Macfarlane 's was defeated . He also expressed reservations about the deportation of Kanaka labourers , supporting the reduction in their use but advocating that those resident in Australia for at least five years be permitted to remain . He vigorously opposed compulsory arbitration , and voted against the Conciliation and Arbitration Bill . 
 Re @-@ elected as an Anti @-@ Socialist in 1906 , Walker expressed the view that the three @-@ party system of the Australian Parliament 's first decade was dysfunctional , and implored electors to vote " for either socialism or anti @-@ socialism , and so end this triangular government " . He continued to support the transcontinental railway and lamented the slow progress of the decision on a site for the federal capital , and supported a higher rate of immigration and the watering down of the Immigration Restriction Act . In 1908 , he introduced the Commonwealth Companies Reserve Liabilities Bill , which permitted special reserve funds for banks to assist shareholders during a financial crisis , and in 1910 followed with the similar Commonwealth Banking Companies Reserve Liabilities Bill . He complained of the difficulty of passing private senators ' bills , and at the 1913 election he retired , suffering from ill health . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Walker maintained an interest in politics after his retirement , and remained a director of the Bank of New South Wales until 1921 . He had been president of the Australian Golf Club ( 1903 – 19 ) , a director of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital , and a member of the Presbyterian Church 's finance committee . A fellow of the Institute of Bankers in London since 1886 and vice @-@ president of the Australian Economic Association , he also continued as a director of the Australian Mutual Provident Society and a councillor of St Andrew 's College at the University of Sydney . Walker died on 18 January 1923 at Woollahra in Sydney , and was survived by his wife and five of their seven children . Buried at South Head Cemetery , his estate at his death was worth £ 27 @,@ 697 . 
 = Hurricane Marty ( 2015 ) = 
 Hurricane Marty was a tropical cyclone that produced heavy rains and flooding in several states in Southwestern and Western Mexico . The twentieth named storm and twelfth hurricane of the annual hurricane season , Marty developed from a tropical wave on September 26 , 2015 to the southwest of Acapulco , Guerrero , in Mexico . Initially a tropical depression , the system strengthened into a tropical storm early on the following day . Due to favorable atmospheric conditions , Marty continued to intensify , but wind shear sharply increased as the storm approached a large mid- to upper @-@ level trough . Despite this , the cyclone deepened further , becoming a hurricane on September 28 and peaking with sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) shortly thereafter . Wind shear quickly took its toll on the hurricane , weakening it to a tropical storm early on September 29 . About 24 hours later , Marty degenerated into a post @-@ tropical low pressure area offshore Guerrero . The low further degenerated into a trough later on September 30 , and eventually dissipated on October 4 . 
 In anticipation of the storm , tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued in the states of Guerrero and Michoacán . Flooding occurred , particularly in Guerrero , where areas near Acapulco observed 5 to 6 in ( 130 to 150 mm ) of rainfall . There were several landslides and over 300 homes in the municipality of Coyuca de Benitez were flooded . The remnants also caused severe flooding in Sonora . About 800 homes and 400 vehicles were damaged in the city of Guaymas alone . Total damage in the state reached 500 million pesos ( US $ 30 million ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 10 . Tracking westward , the wave split into two portions , with the slower @-@ moving northern portion ultimately developing into Atlantic Tropical Depression Nine on September 16 . The southern portion crossed Venezuela and Colombia and emerged into the Pacific , where a large area of deep convection began to form . A well @-@ defined low pressure area developed on September 26 , and organized into a tropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC ( 1 p.m. CDT ) the same day while situated about 335 mi ( 540 km ) southwest of Acapulco , Guerrero . Six hours later , after banding features became more defined and intensity estimates using the Dvorak technique showed a slight increase in intensity , the depression was classified as a tropical storm and was accordingly named Marty by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) . At the time , the storm was moving slowly northward due to the influence of a large mid- to upper @-@ level trough . 
 Located in a favorable environment of sea surface temperatures around 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) and low vertical wind shear , Marty strengthened steadily . Early on September 27 , the NHC noted that rapid intensification was possible . However , as Marty neared the base of the trough , westerly vertical wind shear increased rapidly , causing the low @-@ level circulation center to be partially exposed . Despite the hostile wind shear , the cyclone reformed a central dense overcast and intensified into a hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC ( 7 a.m. CDT ) on September 28 , as a mid @-@ level eye feature was seen in microwave satellite imagery . Operationally , the NHC upgraded Marty to a hurricane nine hours later , after a reconnaissance aircraft flight observed hurricane @-@ force winds . At 18 : 00 UTC , Marty attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 987 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 15 inHg ) . Computer forecast models indicated that the storm would pass within just 25 mi ( 40 km ) of the Southwestern Mexican coast on September 29 or September 30 . 
 Turning north and northeast while under the influence of the aforementioned trough , Marty began to weaken soon after peak intensity as deep convection was displaced to the east due to the strong westerly shear ; the low @-@ level circulation center became fully exposed in a span of three hours late on September 28 . Upwelling of cooler waters further decayed the deep convection , prompting the NHC to downgrade Marty to a tropical storm at 06 : 00 UTC ( 1 a.m. CDT ) on September 29 . Continuing to steadily weaken , Marty degenerated into a post @-@ tropical low a day later about 140 mi ( 225 km ) west @-@ southwest of Acapulco , while still producing gale @-@ force winds . The shallow system turned westwards in the low @-@ level flow and eventually opened up into a trough twelve hours later about 195 mi ( 315 km ) west of Acapulco . The low became closed once again on October 1 , however , it failed to produce sufficient organized deep convection to re @-@ qualify as a tropical cyclone . It turned north @-@ northeastwards towards the southern Gulf of California , however it dissipated before reaching the coast of Western Mexico . The remnant moisture continued into Northwestern Mexico and caused flooding in Sonora . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In preparation for the arrival of Marty , classes were suspended in Acapulco and the Costa Grande region . The Mexican Navy was put on standby to deal with incidents occurring within the zones of Chiapas , Guerrero , Michoacan and Jalisco . The Government of Mexico issued multiple watches and warnings for coastal communities across Guerrero ; by 21 : 00 UTC ( 4 p.m. CDT ) on September 28 , a tropical storm watch was in effect for west of Lázaro Cárdenas to Punta San Telmo , a tropical storm warning for Acapulco to east of Tecpán de Galeana , and a hurricane warning for Tecpán de Galeana to Lázaro Cárdenas . These were discontinued as Marty weakened and moved away from the region ; all had been cancelled by early on September 30 . 
 Stalling south of Mexico , Marty produced heavy rains , mainly in the state of Guerrero . Many areas reported at least 2 in ( 50 mm ) of rain between September 26 and October 1 ; coastal areas near and west of Acapulco received up to 6 in ( 150 mm ) . As river levels rose , a state of emergency was declared for eight municipalities , which was only concluded on September 30 . Two landslides occurred in Chilpancingo ; several others occurred in Coyuca de Benitez and Sierra de Atoyac . More than 300 homes were flooded with up to 6 in ( 15 cm ) of water in Coyuca de Benitez . Three temporary shelters were opened in Barra de Coyuca , however , they were closed as no one moved in . 
 As the remnants of Marty moved into northwestern Mexico , heavy rains and flooding rendered 35 @,@ 000 people homeless in Sonora . A state of emergency was declared in 16 municipalities . Flooding in Guaymas , which was hit hardest , damaged 800 homes and 400 vehicles ; three people sustained injuries when a wall collapsed . The Mexico @-@ Nogales Highway between Guaymas and Ciudad Obregón had to be closed due to the floods . Total estimated damage in the state amounted to 500 million pesos ( US $ 30 million ) . 
 = Peace on Earth ( Casting Crowns album ) = 
 Peace on Earth is the first Christmas album by American Christian rock band Casting Crowns . Produced by Mark Hall and Mark A. Miller , it was released on October 7 , 2008 . Intended by Hall to bring out the worshipful aspect of Christmas , the album does not have songs relating to secular Christmas traditions , instead featuring a mix of traditional Christmas carols and original songs . As co @-@ producer , Hall attempted to differentiate the album from their previous ones by attempting to use creative ideas they had not tried before , and he also wanted to utilize the band 's female members in a broader and more visible role on the album . 
 Upon its release , Peace on Earth met with mixed reviews . Some critics praised the album 's emphasis on traditional Christmas songs and the worship aspect of Christmas , while others criticized the album 's original songs and felt it was a disappointment in comparison to the band 's previous albums . The album peaked at number one on the Billboard Christian Albums and Catalog Albums charts , number two on the Holiday Albums chart , and number fifteen on the Billboard 200 . Peace on Earth has been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , signifying shipments of five hundred thousand copies in the United States . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 According to Casting Crowns ' lead vocalist Mark Hall , Peace on Earth was written based on the question " How do you know there 's peace on earth in a world that isn 't very peaceful ? " Hall opined that when people hear Christmas carols , they often don 't hear their true message . Hall intended the album to help people rediscover the worshipful nature behind the carols . As an example of a message he wanted people to hear , he gave " I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day " , a song written by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow about his rediscovery of hope amidst several personal tragedies . Hall felt that the song 's message of hope was one that his kids and their generation needed to hear . As a co @-@ producer on the album , Hall wanted to introduce aspects and ideas that the band had not done before , and he felt the album offered a chance to branch out . He wanted the band 's female members , Megan Garrett and Melodee DeVevo , to play a more prominent role , in part to show people " the gifts they have " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Peace on Earth does not contain material relating to secular Christmas traditions like Santa Claus or Jack Frost , instead featuring a mix of traditional Christmas carols and original songs . " I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day " , instead of using a carol of bells , has a choir of children personifying the bells by singing the refrain of ' peace on earth ' . " While You Were Sleeping " , originally included on the band 's 2005 album Lifesong , is included in its original form . On the Lifesong version , the band had altered the song ( originally written as a Christmas song ) to remove the most " seasonal " elements ; the version included on Peace on Earth features the lyrics in their original form . On " God Is With Us " , originally recorded by Amy Grant , Hall shares lead vocal duties with the band 's female members . " O Come , O Come , Emmanuel " is an instrumental piece , which makes extensive use of DeVevo 's violin playing . " Away in a Manger " was originally included on WOW Christmas ( 2005 ) , and is included on Peace on Earth in that form . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Peace on Earth was released on October 7 , 2008 . It debuted at number four on the Billboard Christian Albums chart as well as at number two on the Holiday Albums chart and number fifty @-@ six on the Billboard 200 . It reached a peak of number one , two , and fifteen on those charts , respectively , as well as a peak of number one on the Catalog Albums chart . In the United States , it ranked as the thirtieth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2008 , the fifth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2009 , and the 151st best @-@ selling album of 2009 . Peace on Earth received a Gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in November 2009 , signifying shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 The album 's lead single , " I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day " , peaked at number three on the Billboard Christian Songs chart and number one on the Hot Christian AC chart ; it also became the band 's first and only entry on the Adult Contemporary chart , peaking at number twenty @-@ six . Several other songs from the album also charted ; " Away in a Manger " charted in 2005 following its appearance on WOW Christmas , peaking at number seven on the Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC chart . " While You Were Sleeping " peaked at number eight on the Christian Songs chart and number four on the Hot Christian AC chart , and " Joy to the World " peaked at number twenty @-@ two on the Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Upon its release , Peace on Earth met with a mixed reception from music critics . Jared Johnson of Allmusic gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , praising it for its " wide appeal " and for having " a cohesive set of songs that brings out the worship aspect of the holidays " and particularly praising " While You Were Sleeping " and " O Come , O Come , Emmanuel " . Andrew Greer of CCM Magazine gave it 3 out of 5 stars , regarding it as a let @-@ down in comparison to the band 's previous albums as well as holiday albums that other artists had put out . Russ Breimier of Christianity Today gave it 2 out of 5 stars , describing it as " predictable " . However , he praised " While You Were Sleeping " as an example of Mark Hall 's " bold , poignant songwriting " . Tony Cummings of Cross Rhythms gave the album a perfect 10 out of 10 stars , saying that it " bucks all the trends in that it doesn 't contain saccharine , sleigh bell @-@ drenched arrangements nor those ghastly songs about Santa and chestnuts roasting in an open fire " and praising it as an " inventive and on occasions brilliant exploration of the wonders of the incarnation " . Justin Mabee of Jesus Freak Hideout gave the album 3 out of 5 stars , praising the traditional Christmas songs on the album but criticizing the original songs as having a " forced feel to them , almost like Casting Crowns wanted to do a whole album of traditional songs , but were told differently " ; he remarked that " this would have probably worked better , because the originality is lacking in these few original Christmas tunes " . 
 At the 40th GMA Dove Awards , Peace on Earth was nominated for and received the award for Christmas Album of the Year . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 Credits taken from the album liner notes 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Kanche = 
 Kanche ( English : The Fence ) is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language war film written and directed by Krish . It features Varun Tej , Pragya Jaiswal , and Nikitin Dheer in the lead roles . Y. Rajeev Reddy and J. Sai Babu produced the film under their banner , First Frame Entertainment . Kanche revolves around the enmity between two friends — Dhupati Haribabu and Eeshwar Prasad . Haribabu and Eeshwar 's sister Sitadevi graduate from the University of Madras in the late 1930s and fall in love . Due to the prevailing <unk> in their native village , Eeshwar opposes their relationship and kills Sitadevi accidentally . Years later , Haribabu joins the British Indian Army as a captain to fight against the Axis Powers in World War II and Eeshwar , now a colonel , is his commanding officer . 
 Krish began research on the film 's subject after seeing a bomb , dropped by the Imperial Japanese Army , preserved in a museum in Vishakhapatnam during the filming of Vedam ( 2010 ) . He worked on the film 's screenplay for nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months and considered it his most ambitious project . Chirantan Bhatt composed the film 's soundtrack and score , marking his debut in Telugu cinema . V. S. Gnanasekhar was the film 's director of photography ; Sahi Suresh was the film 's art director , and Sai Madhav Burra penned the film 's dialogue . Principal photography commenced on 27 February 2015 in Hyderabad . Kanche was filmed in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and in <unk> <unk> near <unk> . Major sets were erected in Ramoji Film City , Hyderabad . The war sequences were filmed in Georgia and the film 's unit was allotted 700 guns , four tanks , and a machine gun from the Georgia Military Institute a military training school . Principal photography was wrapped up on 6 July 2015 . Kanche was filmed in 55 working days , 35 of which were in Georgia . 
 Promoted as Telugu cinema 's first World War II @-@ based film , Kanche was released worldwide on 22 October 2015 , on 700 screens , and received positive reception from critics . It grossed ₹ 200 million on a budget of ₹ 180 million , and became the 14th highest grossing Telugu film of the year . Kanche earned the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu at the 63rd National Film Awards ceremony . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1936 , Dhupati Haribabu and Rachakonda Sitadevi meet at the Madras Cultural Club in Madras Presidency on the latter 's birthday and realise that they are studying at the same college , the University of Madras . Sitadevi is the princess of Rachakonda estate , whereas Haribabu belongs to a lower caste and is the grandson of a local barber . By the time they graduate , they have fallen in love , and leave for their native town , Devarakonda . Haribabu is introduced to Sitadevi 's brother Eeshwar and they become friends . 
 Eeshwar , and his grandfather Pedababu , learn of Haribabu and Sitadevi 's affair and instigate a fight between people of both castes . Hundreds of people from both sides die and a fence ( Kanche ) is erected to separate the two groups forever . While Eeshwar and Pedababu decide to marry off Sitadevi to a bridegroom of their choice , Haribabu arrives back from town and is severely injured when he is stabbed . Sitadevi looks after him secretly in her bedroom , and on the wedding day , a frustrated Haribabu marries Sitadevi , in the presence of her grandmother , and leaves . That evening , Eeshwar and Haribabu duel , and in the process Sitadevi is killed accidentally . 
 During World War II , as a member of the allied nations , the British Raj send over two and a half million Indian volunteer soldiers to fight under British command against the Axis powers . Haribabu joins them as a captain and Eeshwar , now a colonel , is his commanding officer . In May 1944 , the Nazis attack the Indian army in the Italian Campaign , and capture them . Haribabu , his friend Dasu , and three other soldiers escape . They decide to save the captured troops and follow the Nazis . They take shelter in an Italian baker 's house and his granddaughter saves them from the Nazis . She reveals that the Nazis want to kill a little girl whose parents were a German doctor and a Jew . 
 The Nazis find the doctor and a group of civilians , and Haribabu , along with his cohorts , rescues them . The soldiers find the captured troops in an old building and rescue them from the Nazis . When Eeshwar asks Haribabu why he saved him despite the rivalry between them , he replies that Sitadevi 's love for Eeshwar made him do so . They leave with the civilians and find a German base near a river which they can use to escape . 
 When Haribabu formulates a plan , Eeshwar , who still hates him , points out that the plan is flawed . Haribabu reminds him that World War II commenced because of racism and he does not want to see the same bloodshed repeated here that happened in their village . The soldiers raid all the tents and find a boat in which the civilians and the other soldiers board . To divert the German army 's attention , Haribabu continues to fight alone until the boat reaches safety . Severely injured , Haribabu dies with a smile , thinking of the memories of his life with Sitadevi . 
 Eeshwar is shocked to see Haribabu die and carries his body back to his village . He also reads the letters Haribabu had written to Sitadevi during the war and realises that humans should not be divided by caste . He reaches the village and asks Haribabu 's grandfather to dig the grave . Eeshwar calls Haribabu a great human , soldier , lover , son and mainly a good friend whom he never recognised . He acknowledges that without the borderlines of caste , Haribabu would have been happy with Sitadevi and salutes him . Pedababu orders the fences ' removal and the people continue to live happily . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Varun Tej as Dhupati Haribabu 
 Pragya Jaiswal as Rachakonda Sitadevi 
 Nikitin Dheer as Eeshwar Prasad 
 Srinivas Avasarala as Dasu , Haribabu 's friend 
 Gollapudi Maruti Rao as Dhupati Haribabu 's grandfather 
 Sowcar Janaki as Sitadevi 's grandmother 
 Ravi Prakash as Janardhan Sastry 
 Singeetham Srinivasa Rao as a pianist in Madras Cultural Club ( cameo appearance ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the filming of Vedam ( 2010 ) in Vishakhapatnam , Krish visited a museum which displayed a bomb dropped by the Imperial Japanese Army on the city during World War II . The bomb was used with the intention of creating a situation similar to the attack on Pearl Harbor . After further research , Krish learned that over 2 @.@ 5 million Indian soldiers participated in World War II , and 2000 Telugu people from <unk> , West Godavari were sent to the war by the British government in India . Krish worked on the film 's screenplay for nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months , and cited the process of obtaining accurate details as the reason for the length of time it took to finish . Krish gathered most of the information using the Google search engine and two teams were employed — one in India , the other in Italy . He chose to narrate a love story set in the 1930s and focused on the macro and micro divisions between people , countries , races and religions . 
 During the production of Gabbar Is Back , Krish 's collaboration with Varun Tej was reported in January 2015 ; Ramoji Rao was to produce the film under the banner <unk> Movies jointly with Krish 's banner First Frame Entertainment . Pragya Jaiswal , who auditioned for Gabbar Is Back , was signed as the film 's female lead . The film was officially launched on 27 February in Hyderabad and was titled Kanche . Kanche translates to fence in English and Krish relates that the film focuses on the effects of a fence on friendship . On the 75th anniversary of World War II , Krish told the Indo @-@ Asian News Service on 1 September that Kanche is his " most ambitious project " and also the first Telugu film set in World War II . 
 Sai Madhav Burra , who collaborated with Krish on Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum ( 2013 ) , was signed to write the film 's dialogues . V. S. Gnanasekhar was signed as the film 's director of photography , and Sahi Suresh was selected as the film 's art director . Because of discontinuing his studies at a young age , Suresh was not knowledgeable about World War II , and spent three to four months watching old war films and reading about the war . Chirantan Bhatt , who collaborated earlier with Krish on Gabbar Is Back , was signed to compose the film 's soundtrack and score . Kanche marked Bhatt 's debut in Telugu cinema . Rama Krishna Arram and Suraj <unk> edited the film . Kanche was produced on a budget of ₹ 180 million . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Varun Tej played the role of Dhupati Haribabu , a captain in the British Indian Army . Varun Tej described the first phase of Haribabu 's character as a 23 @-@ year old " college pass @-@ out , happy @-@ go @-@ lucky , chilled out guy " . He had to modify his diction according to the timeline and observed the dialogue delivery of actors in old Telugu films . For the second phase , Varun Tej was trained by an army officer on a soldier 's body language , and the way to hold guns among other things . He watched films like Saving Private Ryan ( 1988 ) , The Thin Red Line ( 1998 ) , Inglourious Basterds ( 2009 ) , and Fury ( 2014 ) as well . He underwent training in a boot camp for more than a week , during the gap between the Indian and Georgia schedules . During the filming of the war sequences in Georgia , Varun Tej was provided with an original Thompson submachine gun , which was manufactured in 1939 , and used during the actual war . 
 Jaiswal played the role of Sitadevi , a princess whose character was modelled on Maharani Gayatri Devi of Jaipur . After auditioning for the role , Jaiswal watched Krish 's Vedam and Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum to understand his work and was " really touched " by the former . Krish advised her not to watch any old Telugu films but try to analyse old English and Hindi films instead . Jaiswal opined that her character needed to focus " more on expressions than acting " . She joined kathak classes after the film 's shoot began , and no workshops were conducted for her . 
 Nikitin Dheer was chosen to play Colonel Eeshwar Prasad in the film , because Krish , who wanted an actor to match Varun Tej 's persona , was impressed with his performance in Chennai Express ( 2013 ) . Srinivas Avasarala was cast as Dasu , Haribabu 's friend and another volunteer soldier from the British Indian Army , who quotes writer Sri Sri as his friend Srinivasa Rao . Avasarala was trained in the use of guns in Hyderabad and received training from an army officer along with Varun Tej on body language and other important aspects . 
 Gollapudi Maruthi Rao and Sowcar Janaki were cast as Haribabu 's grandfather and Sitadevi 's grandmother respectively . Filmmaker Singeetham Srinivasa Rao made a cameo appearance as a pianist in Madras Cultural Club , where Haribabu works as a part @-@ time employee . Krish described Rao 's cameo a " colourful " one and added that his look was inspired by that of Colonel Sanders , the founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken . 700 people were required to form an army and the film 's unit selected nearly 100 Non @-@ resident Indians apart from the local people . They were given formal training before they went on the film 's sets . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography commenced on 27 February 2015 at Hyderabad . The second schedule commenced on 23 March at <unk> , a village near Razole in East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh . Apart from <unk> and <unk> , the village portions were filmed in <unk> <unk> , <unk> as Krish wanted a primitive settlement with poor infrastructure and palaces , resembling one of the pre @-@ independence era . The film 's crew then put up flower and fruit markets , and purchased antiques from a flea market . The local people extended their support to the film 's crew in return for the laying down of proper roads . In other villages where there was better infrastructure , Suresh and his crew spoke to village heads and covered most of the roads with sand and mud . The houses were whitewashed for the film 's shoot and were restored with their previous colours later . 
 As all the houses in those villages were constructed using reinforced concrete , a team of 70 members were summoned from Hyderabad to recreate 1940s style . According to Suresh , the " nativity feel came alive " due to the presence of coconut trees . The steam engine and the interiors of the first class compartments in the train Haribabu and Sitadevi travel in from Madras to Devarakonda were designed in Ramoji Film City , Hyderabad . Suresh 's experience working as an art director on <unk> Express ( 2013 ) helped him . The construction of the palace where Sitadevi lives took four to five days to complete at a cost of ₹ 4 million . The war sequences were filmed in Georgia . The film 's crew finalised 20 locations and the filming of the war sequences lasted for 35 days . 
 With the assistance of the Government of Georgia , huge sets were erected , including a German military base camp fitted with trenches and bunkers . For the film 's shoot , Krish hired a few telegraph machines , typewriters , and coffee cups and saucers manufactured during the timeline of the World War II . Some key action sequences were filmed in a few old , dilapidated buildings located near Georgia and Varun Tej performed his stunts without a body double . A few sequences were filmed at the <unk> Bridge in Tbilisi , Georgia . 
 700 guns , four tanks , and a machine gun used in the war were allotted from the Georgia Military Institute military school . The Georgian Armed Forces trained the film 's unit to use these weapons properly . The rent for each tank was 5000 dollars per day , and another tank was designed by Suresh and his crew . Thousands of bullets were used every day and 15 people were employed to load the guns . On the last day of the filming of the climax episode , Varun Tej used more than 7000 bullets . For filming few bomb @-@ blast sequences , the film 's unit consulted several Hollywood technicians . Principal photography was wrapped up on 6 July , after a shoot of 55 working days . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtrack of Kanche composed by Chirantan Bhatt consists of six songs , including instrumental theme music . The lyrics for the remaining five songs were penned by Sirivennela Sitaramasastri . Kanche marked Bhatt 's debut in South Indian cinema . Krish worked with Bhatt on Gabbar Is Back and asked him to compose a song for Kanche . Impressed with it , Krish signed him as the film 's music director . Bhatt found Kanche to be " an intense and emotional story " and ensured that the music was not generic and in sync with the film 's scale . 
 Krish also provided a few references to the works of Ilaiyaraaja and M. M. Keeravani to Bhatt during the composing sessions . Bhatt used tabla tarang ( an Indian melodic percussion instrument consisting of more than ten drums ) and sarod ( an Indian lute @-@ like stringed instrument ) predominantly in the instrumentation as he felt that the songs had to : " depict a lot of mood and emotions " . The song " Nijamenani Nammani " was composed using <unk> raga and Nandini Srikar , who provided the additional vocals along with Shreya Ghoshal who was not listed in the album 's credits . Abhay <unk> initially provided the vocals for the raw cut of the song " Itu Itu Ani Chitikelu Evvarivo " , which was recorded in two hours at his friend 's studio . Bhatt found his voice apt and retained it in the final version without any further improvements . The songs " Itu Itu Ani Chitikelu Evvarivo " , and " Bhaga <unk> " were composed using the <unk> , and <unk> ragas ; Bhatt used both <unk> and <unk> ragas for " Raa <unk> " . 
 After releasing a teaser of the song " Nijamenani Nammani " on YouTube , Varun Tej released the song " Itu Itu Ani Chitikelu Evvarivo " sung by <unk> and Ghoshal at the <unk> FM station in Hyderabad on the eve of Ganesh Chaturthi ( 17 September 2015 ) . The soundtrack , marketed by Aditya Music , was released at a promotional event on the same day at Hyderabad with actor Ram Charan in attendance as the guest of honour . 
 Karthik Srinivasan of The Hindu called " Nijamenani Nammani " the soundtrack 's best song and praised the renditions by Ghoshal and Srikar . The Times of India gave the soundtrack 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 and opined that the themed style of the soundtrack is a : " delightful change from the song and dance routine seen these days " . Behindwoods gave the soundtrack 3 @.@ 25 stars out of 5 and called it a : " musical and lyrical feast for the ears " . 
 Track listing 
 All lyrics written by Sirivennela Sitaramasastri . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Kanche was initially scheduled for a worldwide release on 2 October 2015 . The film 's release was postponed to 6 November to avoid clashing with the releases of Puli and Singh Is <unk> . Due to a delay in post @-@ production activities , Akhil : The Power of Jua , which was initially scheduled for a worldwide release on 22 October , was postponed and Kanche was confirmed for release on 22 October during the Vijayadasami festival season . Kanche was released at 400 screens across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana , and at 150 screens in rest of India . Though 80 screens were booked initially in the overseas market for the film 's release , the screen count was later increased to 150 , of which 130 screens were in the United States . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Kanche received positive reviews from the critics . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu remarked that Kanche is a film that does not stand out " merely by being different , but also because it ’ s earnest " , and added that Krish " Step [ s ] across the fence to a new world of storytelling " . Praising Krish 's choice of genre , Suresh Kavirayani of the Deccan Chronicle gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , stating , " If you are looking for a change from the regular action @-@ masala @-@ song @-@ dance @-@ drama kind of films , you should watch Kanche " . Kavirayani added : " The war scenes look authentic . Credit to cinematographer [ V. S. Gnanasekhar ] for capturing the war scenes . Kanche is no less than any Hollywood film as far as the war scenes are concerned " . Rajeswari Kalyanam of The Hans India also gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 and stated : " With Kanche , <unk> Krish has once again proven his ability to choose an offbeat theme , weave an engrossing tale and give it a technically brilliant cinematic rendition " . 
 Pranita Jonnalagedda of The Times of India gave Kanche 3 stars out of 5 and stated : " Kanche is a daring attempt for mainstream [ Telugu cinema ] . While there 's an interesting story which is told really well , you will be left with the lingering feeling that it could have been a lot better " . Sify too gave Kanche 3 stars out of 5 and called it a film that is " [ s ] <unk> only for discerning audiences " and praised the storyline , performances , production design , and dialogues . Behindwoods gave the film 3 stars out of 5 as well and called it a " commendable attempt " and added : 
 You don ’ t get to see too many Indian films being made on war , especially South Indian industry hasn ’ t made many . ( sic ) Even the ones that have been made have not made a huge impact , especially with it comes to battle scenes . But that is where Kanche scores big time . The war sequence looks authoritative and intriguing . It travels throughout and the intensity has been maintained right through " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Kanche grossed approximately ₹ 55 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 38 @.@ 5 million globally , thereby performing better than Raju Gari <unk> and Columbus . According to trade analyst Taran Adarsh , Kanche earned US $ 53 @,@ 057 from its paid previews ; it amassed US $ 46 @,@ 751 on its first day and US $ 92 @,@ 998 on its second day , taking its two @-@ day United States box office total to US $ 192 @,@ 806 ( ₹ 12 @.@ 5 million ) . The first weekend global box office gross and distributor share figures stood at approximately ₹ 130 million and ₹ 70 million respectively . 
 In its first weekend at the United States box office , Kanche collected US $ 380 @,@ 361 ( ₹ 24 @.@ 7 million ) . It earned US $ 6 @,@ 826 ( ₹ 0 @.@ 443 million ) from two screens in Canada and <unk> ( ₹ 0 @.@ 243 million ) from 2 screens at the Malaysian box office in its opening weekend , thereby managing to recover 100 % of the overseas distributors ' investments . In ten days , Kanche collected US $ 489 @,@ 701 ( ₹ 32 @.@ 1 million ) at the United States box office , US $ 9 @,@ 261 ( ₹ 0 @.@ 607 million ) at the Canada box office , and <unk> ( ₹ 0 @.@ 295 million ) at the Malaysian box office respectively , taking its ten @-@ day overseas box office total to US $ 503 @,@ 461 ( ₹ 33 million ) . 
 Kanche earned US $ 522 @,@ 325 ( ₹ 34 @.@ 7 million ) in 17 days at the United States box office . After losing many screens due to new releases in the United States , Kanche 's 31 @-@ day total stood at US $ 527 @,@ 724 ( ₹ 35 million ) . In its lifetime run , Kanche grossed ₹ 200 million globally , with a distributor share of ₹ 140 million , and was declared a commercial success and also the 14th highest grossing Telugu film of the year . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Kanche earned the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu at the 63rd National Film Awards ceremony . 
 = Battle of Brunanburh = 
 The Battle of Brunanburh was fought in 937 between Æthelstan , King of England , and an alliance of Olaf Guthfrithson , King of Dublin ; Constantine , King of Scotland ; and Owen , King of Strathclyde . 
 Following an unchallenged large @-@ scale invasion of Scotland by Æthelstan in 934 , possibly launched because of a peace treaty violation by Constantine , it became apparent that Æthelstan could only be defeated by an allied force of his enemies . Olaf led Constantine and Owen in the alliance . 
 In August 937 , Olaf and his army crossed the Irish Sea to join forces with Constantine and Owen , and the invaders were routed in the subsequent battle against Æthelstan . The poem Battle of Brunanburh in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recounted that there were " never yet as many people killed before this with sword 's edge ... since from the east Angles and Saxons came up over the broad sea " . 
 Æthelstan 's victory prevented the dissolution of England 's unity . The historian Æthelweard , perhaps writing sometime around 975 , said that " [ t ] he fields of Britain were consolidated into one , there was peace everywhere , and abundance of all things " . The battle has been called " the greatest single battle in Anglo @-@ Saxon history before Hastings " . The site of the battle is unknown , but scholars have proposed many possible locations . 
 = = Background = = 
 After Æthelstan defeated the Vikings at York in 927 , King Constantine of Scotland , King Hywel Dda of Deheubarth , Ealdred I of Bamburgh , and King Owen I of Strathclyde ( or Morgan ap Owain of Gwent ) accepted Æthelstan 's overlordship at Eamont , near Penrith . He became King of England , and there was peace until 934 . 
 Æthelstan invaded Scotland with a large force , both ground and naval , in 934 . Although the motivation for this invasion is uncertain , John of Worcester stated that the cause was Constantine 's violation of the peace treaty made in 927 . Æthelstan evidently travelled through Beverley , Ripon , and Chester @-@ le @-@ Street . The army harassed the Scots up to Kincardineshire , and the navy up to Caithness . Æthelstan 's force was never engaged . 
 Following Æthelstan 's invasion of Scotland , it became apparent that he could only be defeated by an allied force of his enemies . The leader of the alliance was Olaf Guthfrithson , King of Dublin . The other two members were Constantine II , King of Scotland ; and Owen , King of Strathclyde . ( According to John of Worcester , Constantine was Olaf 's father @-@ in @-@ law . ) Though they had all been enemies in living memory , historian Michael Livingston points out that " they had agreed to set aside whatever political , cultural , historical , and even religious differences they might have had in order to achieve one common purpose : to destroy Æthelstan " . 
 In August 937 , Olaf crossed the Irish Sea with his army to join forces with Constantine and Owen , and in Livingston 's opinion this suggests that the battle of Brunanburh occurred in early October of that year . According to Paul Cavill , the invading armies raided Mercia , from which Æthelstan obtained Saxon troops as he travelled north to meet them . However , Michael Wood notes that no source mentions any intrusion into Mercia . John of Worcester wrote that the invaders entered via the Humber , and is the only chronicle writer to mention this . Because of the lack of sources supporting the claim , along with other issues , philologist Paul Cavill argues John 's statement is not true . According to Symeon of Durham , Olaf had 615 ships , but this number is likely exaggerated . 
 Livingston theorises that the invading armies entered England in two waves : Constantine and Owen coming from the north , possibly engaging in some skirmishes with Æthelstan 's forces as they followed the Roman road across the Lancashire plains between Carlisle and Manchester , with Olaf 's forces joining them on the way . It is possible , Livingston speculates , that the battle site at Brunanburh was chosen in agreement with Æthelstan , on which " there would be one fight , and to the victor went England " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Surviving documents that mention the battle include accounts from the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , the writings of Anglo @-@ Norman historian William of Malmesbury , and the Annals of Clonmacnoise . In Snorri Sturluson 's Egils saga , the antihero , mercenary , berserker and skald , Egill <unk> , served as a trusted warrior for Æthelstan . 
 The name of the battle appears in various forms in early sources : Brunanburh ( in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle or the chronicle of John of Worcester , or in accounts derived from them ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> or <unk> or <unk> ( Symeon of Durham and accounts derived from him ) , <unk> or <unk> ( William of Malmesbury and accounts derived from him ) , <unk> ( Scottish traditions ) , Brun ( Welsh traditions ) , <unk> of <unk> ( Annals of Clonmacnoise ) , and <unk> ( Egil 's Saga ) , among others . 
 The main source of information about the battle is the praise @-@ poem Battle of Brunanburh in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . After travelling north through Mercia , Æthelstan , his brother Edmund , and the combined Saxon army from Wessex and Mercia met the invading armies and attacked them . In a battle that lasted all day , the Saxons fought the invaders and finally forced them to break up and flee . There was probably a prolonged period of hard fighting before the invaders were finally defeated . According to the poem , the Saxons " split the shield @-@ wall " and " hewed battle shields with the remnants of hammers ... [ t ] here lay many a warrior by spears destroyed ; Northern men shot over shield , likewise Scottish as well , weary , war sated " . Wood states that all large battles were described in this manner , so the description in the poem is not unique to Brunanburh . The invaders had attempted to take refuge in trenches fortified with timber , but the Saxons overran them . Æthelstan and his army pursued the invaders until the end of the day , slaying great numbers of enemy troops . The poem states that " they pursued the hostile people ... hew [ ing ] the fugitive grievously from behind with swords sharp from the grinding " . Olaf fled and sailed back to Dublin with the remnants of his army , and Constantine escaped to Scotland ; Owen 's fate is not mentioned . The poem states that the Northmen " [ d ] <unk> ... in nailed ships " and " sought Dublin over the deep water , leaving <unk> mere to return to Ireland , ashamed in spirit . " In contrast , the poem records that Æthelstan and Edmund victoriously returned to Wessex , stating that " the brothers , both together , King and Prince , sought their home , West @-@ Saxon land , exultant from battle . " 
 It is universally agreed by scholars that the invaders were routed by the Saxons . According to the Chronicle , " countless of the army " died in the battle , and there were " never yet as many people killed before this with sword 's edge ... since from the east Angles and Saxons came up over the broad sea " . The Annals of Ulster describe the battle as " great , lamentable and horrible " and record that " several thousands of Norsemen ... fell " . Among the casualties were five kings and seven earls from Olaf 's army . The poem records that Constantine lost several friends and family members in the battle , including his son . The largest list of those killed in the battle is contained in the Annals of Clonmacnoise , which names several kings and princes . A large number of Saxons also died in the battle , including two of Æthelstan 's cousins , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Æthelstan 's decisive victory prevented the dissolution of England 's unity . Foot writes that " [ e ] <unk> the importance of this victory is difficult " . Livingston wrote that the battle was " the moment when Englishness came of age " and " one of the most significant battles in the long history not just of England but of the whole of the British isles " . The battle has been called " the greatest single battle in Anglo @-@ Saxon history before Hastings " by Alfred Smyth , but he also states that its consequences beyond Æthelstan 's reign have been overstated . Alex Woolf describes it a " pyrrhic victory " for Æthelstan : the campaign seems to have ended in a stalemate , his power appears to have declined , and after he died Olaf acceded to the Kingdom of Northumbria without resistance . However , England was once again unified by the time Edmund I died in 946 . The Norse lost all remaining territory in York and Northumbria in 954 , when Eric Bloodaxe died . Æthelweard , writing in the late 900s , said that the battle was " still called the ' great battle ' by the common people " and that " [ t ] he fields of Britain were consolidated into one , there was peace everywhere , and abundance of all things " . 
 = = Location = = 
 The location of the battle is unknown . However , according to Michael Livingston , the case for a location in the Wirral has wide support among current historians . Charters from the 1200s suggest that Bromborough ( a town on the Wirral Peninsula ) was originally named Brunanburh ( which could mean " Bruna 's fort " ) . In his essay " The Place @-@ Name Debate " , Paul Cavill listed the steps by which this transition may have occurred . Evidence suggests that there were Scandinavian settlements in the area starting in the late 800s , and the town is also situated near the River Mersey , which was a commonly used route by Vikings sailing from Ireland . Additionally , the Chronicle states that the invaders escaped at Dingesmere , and Dingesmere could be interpreted as " mere of the Thing " . The word Thing ( or <unk> , in Old Norse ) might be a reference to the Viking Thing ( or assembly ) at <unk> on the Wirral . In Old English , mere refers to a body of water , although the specific type of body varies depending on the context . In some cases , it refers to a wetland , and a large wetland is present in the area . Therefore , in their article " Revisiting Dingesmere " , Cavill , Harding , and Jesch propose that Dingesmere is a reference to a marshland or wetland near the Viking Thing at <unk> on the Wirral Peninsula . Since the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle describes the battle as taking place " <unk> Brunanburh " ( " around Brunanburh " ) , numerous locations near Bromborough have been proposed , including the <unk> Golf Course in Bebington , Wirral ( formerly within the Bromborough parish ) . 
 Many other sites have been suggested ; historian Paul Hill identified over thirty possibilities . Michael Wood published a 2014 article suggesting a Yorkshire location ; philologist Andrew Breeze favours Durham , and Kevin Halloran argues for southern Scotland . Tim Clarkson discounts locations other than southern Scotland or northern England as a battle site , given the logistical capacity of the kingdoms of Alba and Strathclyde . 
 Other possibilities include : 
 <unk> , South Yorkshire : The civil parish of <unk> was recorded as " Burg " in the Domesday book , likely because of a Roman fort situated near the place where the Great North Road ( Ermine Street ) is met by the road from Templeborough . The site is overlooked by a hill called " <unk> Bar " , past which flows the River Went . Michael Wood has suggested this site , noting the similarity between Went and Symeon of Durham 's <unk> . 
 Brinsworth , South Yorkshire : Michael Wood suggests Tinsley Wood , near Brinsworth , as a possible site of the battle . He notes that there is a hill nearby , White Hill , and observes that the surrounding landscape is strikingly similar to the description of the battlefield contained in Egil 's Saga . There is an ancient Roman temple on White Hill , and Wood states that the name Symeon of Durham used for the place of the battle , <unk> , means " the hill where there had been a pagan Roman sanctuary or temple " . According to Wood , Frank Stenton believed that this piece of evidence could help in finding the location of the battle . There is also a Roman fort nearby , and burh means " fortified place " in Old English ; Wood suggests that this fort may have been Brunanburh . 
 <unk> : According to Alfred Smyth , the original form of the name <unk> , <unk> , could fit with Brunanburh and other variants of the name . 
 Burnley : In 1856 , Burnley Grammar School master and antiquary Thomas T. Wilkinson published a paper suggesting that the battle occurred on the moors above Burnley , noting that the town stands on the River Brun . His work was subsequently referenced and expanded by a number of local authors . 
 Burnswark , situated near Lockerbie in southern Scotland : Burnswark is a hill 280 metres ( 920 ft ) tall , and is the site of two Roman military camps and many fortifications from the Iron Age . It was initially suggested as the site of the battle by George Neilson in 1899 and was the leading theory in the early 1900s , having obtained support from historians such as Charles Oman . Kevin Halloran argues that the different forms used by various authors when naming the battle site associate it with a hill and fortifications , since burh ( used by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle poem ) means " a fortified place " , and dune ( used by Æthelweard and Symeon of Durham , in names such as <unk> and We ( o ) <unk> ) means " a hill " . He also states that the name " Burnswark " could be related to <unk> , another alternative name for the battle site used by Symeon of Durham and Geoffrey Gaimar . 
 Lanchester , County Durham : Andrew Breeze has argued for Lanchester , since the Roman fort of <unk> overlooks the point where the road known as Dere Street crossed the River <unk> . 
 = Sandefjord Airport Station = 
 Sandefjord Airport Station ( Norwegian : Sandefjord lufthavn stasjon ) , also known as Torp Station ( Torp stasjon ) , is on the Vestfold Line in Sandefjord , Norway . It is served with regional trains operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . Located close to Sandefjord Airport , Torp , the station is served by a free four @-@ minute shuttle bus service from the station to the airport . The trains operate northwards via towns in Vestfold to Drammen and Oslo and onwards via Oslo Airport , Gardermoen to towns in Hedmark and Oppland . Southwards , the trains serve Sandefjord , Larvik and Grenland . 
 The station opened as Raastad , later Råstad , in 1881 . It had a single building , designed by Balthazar Lange . It was upgraded with a passing loop in 1910 , but this was removed in 1971 , and the station was closed in 1978 . In 2008 , the station reopened to serve the airport . The station is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 = = Service = = 
 Torp Station 's primary function is to serve as an airport rail link for Sandefjord Airport . The station is served by regional trains that operate northwards via towns such as Tønsberg , <unk> and Drammen to Oslo Central Station and onwards via Oslo Airport to Hamar and Lillehammer , calling at several other smaller stations . Southwards , the trains serve Sandefjord , Larvik , Porsgrunn and Skien . Travel time to Oslo is 1 hour and 48 minutes , and to Oslo Airport it is 2 hours 23 minutes . 
