 At the time of his death , he was the oldest United States combat veteran ever , the oldest male ever recorded in Mississippi and had outlived at least three of his eight children . It was reported that he had several dozen grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren . He was also ranked as the sixth @-@ oldest living verified person in the world , the second @-@ oldest man and World War I veteran behind only del Toro and the last African American one . Although he suffered from mild dementia in his later years , he was reported to have been completely lucid through his final days and his death was attributed to natural causes . 
 = Fresh Blood ( Supernatural ) = 
 " Fresh Blood " is the seventh episode of the paranormal drama Supernatural 's third season on The CW , and is the show 's fifty @-@ first episode overall . The episode was written by Sera Gamble and directed by Kim Manners ; it was first broadcast on November 15 , 2007 . The narrative follows the series ' protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they have their final confrontation with hunter Gordon Walker ( Sterling K. Brown ) , who has been turned into a vampire . 
 It also features the demise of recurring antagonist Gordon Walker . Brown , who was forced to leave the show due to commitments to the Lifetime Television series Army Wives , was horrified at Gordon 's actions in the episode . Mercedes McNab of Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel fame made a cameo appearance , and was also busy filming the television series Reaper during the episode 's production . 
 The episode received ratings near the season average , and garnered generally positive reviews from critics . Brown 's performance was praised , as well as the twist in his character 's storyline . Also applauded were both Sam 's confrontation with Dean over his recent reckless behavior and the resulting reconciliation at the episode 's end . Many critics found the presence of character Bela Talbot ( Lauren Cohan ) in the episode to be pointless , while the critic for TV Guide enjoyed McNab 's cameo and wished it had been longer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hunter Gordon Walker ( Brown ) , who believes that Sam Winchester ( Padalecki ) will one day turn evil and become involved in a demonic war against humanity , escapes from prison . He tracks down Bela Talbot ( Cohan ) — a thief and frequent thorn in the Winchesters ' sides — and threatens to kill her unless she reveals the location of the brothers . She refuses at first , but eventually acquiesces in exchange for a priceless mojo bag . Meanwhile , Sam and Dean ( Ackles ) capture the vampire Lucy ( McNab ) , who has previously taken two victims . They interrogate her , and discover that another vampire named Dixon spiked her drink with his own blood at a club , transforming her . Dixon had taken her back to his home , but she escaped to feed . Lucy , still believing that she has only been drugged , is then killed by Dean , as there is no known cure for vampirism . 
 The brothers locate and confront Dixon , but are interrupted by Gordon and fellow hunter Kubrick . Sam and Dean escape , but in the mayhem , Dixon kidnaps Gordon . The vampire later explains to Gordon that hunters killed his nest , and now he wants to rebuild his family . Though Dixon had planned on using Gordon as food , the hunter 's continuous taunting prompts him to feed him his blood . When the brothers — having been informed by Bela of Gordon 's location , which she discovered via Ouija board — arrive at Dixon 's hideout , they discover that the vampiric Gordon has escaped . Elsewhere , Gordon returns to Kubrick . He requests that he be allowed to live long enough to deal with Sam . Despite this , Kubrick attempts to kill him , so Gordon retaliates by punching into his guts . 
 As night approaches , the brothers have not been able to find Gordon . Dean decides to go after Gordon while Sam stays hidden , but Sam refuses . He then confronts Dean about his reckless behavior since his deal with a Crossroads Demon , which left him only a year to live . Dean claims that he is not scared of his impending death , but Sam challenges this . Dean eventually relents , agreeing to behave more like his old self again . The two then prepare to wait out the night . 
 Gordon later calls Sam and Dean , threatening to kill a young woman if they do not meet him . They head to the location and find the woman , but Gordon uses a roller door to separate the brothers . The woman is revealed to be a vampire turned by Gordon , and Dean is forced to shoot her with the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything . He then attempts to help Sam , but Gordon prepares to bite him . Sam prevents this and <unk> Gordon with a razor wire , decapitating the vampire . Sam and Dean later stop on the side of the road to check a rattling noise made by the Impala . Sam is confused when Dean starts explaining the engine 's problem . Dean , however , reasons that Sam should know how to fix the car when his remaining time runs out , and also notes that , as his older brother , he should be showing him the ropes . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 " Fresh Blood " featured the final guest appearance by Sterling K. Brown as the vampire hunter Gordon Walker . The character 's story arc for the season was intended to be longer , but Brown 's commitments to the Lifetime Television series Army Wives limited his return to only two appearances . The episode was " really hard " for the actor ; though he was fine with the character dying , the idea of Gordon turning an innocent girl into a vampire was " horrific " to him . Although Gordon 's actions in previous episodes were questionable , Brown had always believed the character to be " ultimately good " . On this change , Brown commented , " His endgame is to kill Sam , and anyone else who has to experience detrimental effects because of that is not a concern of his . That was tough for me to process and get on board with . " However , series creator Eric Kripke reasoned that the character was now a monster and should follow his instincts instead of logic . The writer of " Fresh Blood " , Sera Gamble , also penned Gordon 's initial episode and helped Kripke conceptualize the character . She felt that she " lucked out " in being able to write the character 's final appearance , and found there to be " something so satisfying about turning him into a vampire and chopping his head off with a razor wire " . 
 Mercedes McNab , well known for portraying the vampire Harmony Kendall on the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel , guest starred as the recently turned vampire Lucy . Although hesitant to play another vampire , McNab came to realize that the character was less of a vampire and more of a " girl who woke up and was basically drugged or was changed and didn 't know what was going on " . The actress also noted that Harmony was generally used for comic relief , whereas Lucy was intended to be " serious and more dramatic " . Her previous experience with director Kim Manners on the television series The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr. also influenced her decision . Because many of her recent characters tended to die , McNab was delighted by Lucy 's offscreen death . The actress was also working on an episode of Reaper during the filming of " Fresh Blood " , and the Supernatural production staff was able to fit her into the shooting schedule . The actress found them to be " really helpful " in making sure that her scenes did not take too long to film . Her portion of the opening scene only took a few hours to shoot , allowing her to return to Reaper the next morning . 
 Michael Massee returned as the hunter Kubrick , who believes himself to be on a mission from God to kill Sam Winchester . Massee discussed his character with Brown beforehand , and envisioned him as a long @-@ time friend of Gordon who could be depended upon . Brown described Kubrick as a " well @-@ meaning ... sweet guy " , and noted that his wife had a " visceral response " to the character 's death when later viewing the episode . Matthew Humphreys portrayed the vampire Dixon , and considers him a " deeply misunderstood " character . The actor found it " easy to rationalize what he did " because Dixon was at odds with how to start his own family as a vampire , and he maintains that the character had no evil intentions behind his actions . Humphreys hopes to one day return to the role . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place in Vancouver , British Columbia . The opening sequence was filmed outside at night , though the subsequent scene — Lucy 's interrogation and execution — occurred in a motel set constructed on a sound stage . Atypical to the series , the motel room did not have a noticeable theme . Production designer John Marcynuk commented , " That motel room was essentially a killing floor for the boys ... and it was kind of a cold interrogation scene , so we tried to keep it not so friendly . When you walked through it , it definitely felt like a place [ where ] a murder had been committed . It wouldn 't have been the first time a murder had been committed in that room , either . It was the type of place where bad things happen . " Marcynuk took a different approach for Gordon 's death scene , utilizing green tones and a cool color palette to create a greater visual contrast with the blood . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 To lend a strong air of realism to Gordon 's death , the scene was created by combining various special effects during filming with post @-@ production visual effects . Plastic razor wire with blood tubing aided in the initial phases of the decapitation ; it would slightly sink into Brown 's neck as pressure was applied , forcing out the fake blood . For the aftermath , Brown laid down on the floor , and the visual effects department removed his head from the shot and recreated it as a three @-@ dimensional model . The department decided to " push it a little bit farther " by having the head rocking into place and the mouth twitching , but Standards and Practices found it too graphic and forced them to remove the motion . Established in the first season episode " Dead Man 's Blood " were the shark @-@ like teeth of vampires , and the design has been subtly improved with each vampire episode . Though the special effects makeup department used molds of the actors ' mouths to create the fanged acrylic dentures , McNab noted that it was very difficult to speak while wearing them . Blood @-@ like makeup around the actors ' mouths helped to round out the vampiric visages . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The synthesized orchestral score of the episode was written by Christopher Lennertz . He feels that " people associate the sound of violins with vampires " due to the " connection with Eastern Europe and counts " , and thus used a " very violin @-@ heavy " score for the episode , avoiding woodwinds , brass , and piano . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Fresh Blood " was viewed by an estimated 2 @.@ 88 million viewers . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide praised the episode , commenting that " it was really nice to get an enjoyable episode high on intensity , brotherly interaction , blood and gore " . Although she had grown a " tad bit weary " of the character 's continuous attempts to kill Sam , she was still " really sorry to see Sterling and Gordy go " . Charles felt that his transformation was a " good twist " , and liked that his " black @-@ and @-@ white beliefs " remained the same even after becoming a vampire . She also enjoyed the character of Lucy and her " really sad " ending , and wished that McNab 's role had been larger . It was noted that the " brotherly interaction was front and center " , and Charles was " beyond happy " that Sam confronted Dean about is behavior . The " moment that [ she had ] been waiting for all season long " finally came to be when Dean took Sam seriously and actually listened to him instead of replying with sarcasm . Charles also deemed the final scene with the brothers to be " just heartbreaking " . Likewise , Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune not only gave the episode an A + , but ranked it as the sixth @-@ best episode of the 2007 @-@ 2008 television season . She praised writer Sera Gamble and director Kim Manners for " creating the best bonding scene we 've had all season " , and lauded Padalecki and Ackles for " making us care so much and believe so fully that a scene like this can leave us gasping " . 
 Brett Love of TV Squad posited that Gordon 's return in the " great " episode was " well worth the wait " . He noted that the revelation that Lucy was just an innocent girl was a " nice twist " , and deemed it a " great choice " to have Gordon turned into a vampire . Love was sad to see Gordon depart from the series , finding the " outstanding " Brown to be " so intense and committed " to the role . However , he considered Bela 's appearance to be unnecessary , and pointed out the implausibility of it being easier for Gordon to track down Bela than it would have been to just track down the Winchesters . Like Love , Julie Pyle of Airlock Alpha believed Bela 's appearance " [ felt ] forced " . She was saddened by the deaths of Gordon and Kubrick , and had hoped that their storylines would have been further explored . Pyle also criticized the episode 's lighting , commenting , " With the added gore this season , the show should seem darker . Instead , it 's like ' Supernatural Lite ' . " While Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune found the concept of Gordon hunting down Sam to be " inspired " , she noted that " ' Fresh Blood ' didn 't do much for [ her ] " . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Recalling the demon Azazel 's comments about the recently resurrected Sam in the episode " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part Two " — that what came back may not be " one hundred percent pure Sam " — Don Williams of BuddyTV questioned if something really is wrong with Sam . Williams added Gordon 's death to his list of Sam 's recent out @-@ of @-@ character actions , which already included Sam 's brutal execution of Jake Talley in " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part Two " and his killing of the Crossroads Demon in " Bedtime Stories " . However , he did point out that both characters " kind of deserved to bite the dust " . Peterson , too , noted the " cold , dead look in Sam 's eyes " after the killing . On the other hand , Padalecki posited that the " darker side of Sam " was depicted when he killed Gordon " with pure hatred " , but reasoned that Sam was thinking , " He 's a vampire ! He 's killing people ; it 's time for him to go . " 
 = Spanish conquest of Guatemala = 
 The Spanish conquest of Guatemala was a protracted conflict during the Spanish colonisation of the Americas , in which Spanish colonisers gradually incorporated the territory that became the modern country of Guatemala into the colonial Viceroyalty of New Spain . Before the conquest , this territory contained a number of competing Mesoamerican kingdoms , the majority of which were Maya . Many conquistadors viewed the Maya as " infidels " who needed to be forcefully converted and pacified , disregarding the achievements of their civilization . The first contact between the Maya and European explorers came in the early 16th century when a Spanish ship sailing from Panama to Santo Domingo was wrecked on the east coast of the Yucatán Peninsula in 1511 . Several Spanish expeditions followed in 1517 and 1519 , making landfall on various parts of the Yucatán coast . The Spanish conquest of the Maya was a prolonged affair ; the Maya kingdoms resisted integration into the Spanish Empire with such tenacity that their defeat took almost two centuries . 
 Pedro de Alvarado arrived in Guatemala from the newly conquered Mexico in early 1524 , commanding a mixed force of Spanish conquistadors and native allies , mostly from Tlaxcala and Cholula . Geographic features across Guatemala now bear Nahuatl placenames owing to the influence of these Mexican allies , who translated for the Spanish . The Kaqchikel Maya initially allied themselves with the Spanish , but soon rebelled against excessive demands for tribute and did not finally surrender until 1530 . In the meantime the other major highland Maya kingdoms had each been defeated in turn by the Spanish and allied warriors from Mexico and already subjugated Maya kingdoms in Guatemala . The Itza Maya and other lowland groups in the Petén Basin were first contacted by Hernán Cortés in 1525 , but remained independent and hostile to the encroaching Spanish until 1697 , when a concerted Spanish assault led by Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi finally defeated the last independent Maya kingdom . 
 Spanish and native tactics and technology differed greatly . The Spanish viewed the taking of prisoners as a hindrance to outright victory , whereas the Maya prioritised the capture of live prisoners and of booty . The indigenous peoples of Guatemala lacked key elements of Old World technology such as a functional wheel , horses , iron , steel , and gunpowder ; they were also extremely susceptible to Old World diseases , against which they had no resistance . The Maya preferred raiding and ambush to large @-@ scale warfare , using spears , arrows and wooden swords with inset obsidian blades ; the Xinca of the southern coastal plain used poison on their arrows . In response to the use of Spanish cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits and lining them with wooden stakes . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 The sources describing the Spanish conquest of Guatemala include those written by the Spanish themselves , among them two of four letters written by conquistador Pedro de Alvarado to Hernán Cortés in 1524 , describing the initial campaign to subjugate the Guatemalan Highlands . These letters were despatched to Tenochtitlan , addressed to Cortés but with a royal audience in mind ; two of these letters are now lost . Gonzalo de Alvarado y Chávez was Pedro de Alvarado 's cousin ; he accompanied him on his first campaign in Guatemala and in 1525 he became the chief constable of Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , the newly founded Spanish capital . Gonzalo wrote an account that mostly supports that of Pedro de Alvarado . Pedro de Alvarado 's brother Jorge wrote another account to the king of Spain that explained it was his own campaign of 1527 – 1529 that established the Spanish colony . Bernal Díaz del Castillo wrote a lengthy account of the conquest of Mexico and neighbouring regions , the Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España ( " True History of the Conquest of New Spain " ) ; his account of the conquest of Guatemala generally agrees with that of the Alvarados . His account was finished around 1568 , some 40 years after the campaigns it describes . Hernán Cortés described his expedition to Honduras in the fifth letter of his Cartas de Relación , in which he details his crossing of what is now Guatemala 's Petén Department . Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas wrote a highly critical account of the Spanish conquest of the Americas and included accounts of some incidents in Guatemala . The Brevísima Relación de la <unk> de las Indias ( " Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies " ) was first published in 1552 in Seville . 
 The Tlaxcalan allies of the Spanish who accompanied them in their invasion of Guatemala wrote their own accounts of the conquest ; these included a letter to the Spanish king protesting at their poor treatment once the campaign was over . Other accounts were in the form of questionnaires answered before colonial magistrates to protest and register a claim for recompense . Two pictorial accounts painted in the stylised indigenous pictographic tradition have survived ; these are the Lienzo de <unk> , which was probably painted in Ciudad Vieja in the 1530s , and the Lienzo de Tlaxcala , painted in Tlaxcala . 
 Accounts of the conquest as seen from the point of view of the defeated highland Maya kingdoms are included in a number of indigenous documents , including the Annals of the Kaqchikels , which includes the Xajil Chronicle describing the history of the Kaqchikel from their mythical creation down through the Spanish conquest and continuing to 1619 . A letter from the defeated Tz 'utujil Maya nobility of Santiago Atitlán to the Spanish king written in 1571 details the exploitation of the subjugated peoples . 
 Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán was a colonial Guatemalan historian of Spanish descent who wrote La Recordación Florida , also called Historia de Guatemala ( History of Guatemala ) . The book was written in 1690 and is regarded as one of the most important works of Guatemalan history , and is the first such book to have been written by a criollo author . Field investigation has tended to support the estimates of indigenous population and army sizes given by Fuentes y Guzmán . 
 = = Background to the conquest = = 
 Christopher Columbus discovered the New World for the Kingdom of Castile and Leon in 1492 . Private adventurers thereafter entered into contracts with the Spanish Crown to conquer the newly discovered lands in return for tax revenues and the power to rule . In the first decades after the discovery of the new lands , the Spanish colonised the Caribbean and established a centre of operations on the island of Cuba . They heard rumours of the rich empire of the Aztecs on the mainland to the west and , in 1519 , Hernán Cortés set sail with eleven ships to explore the Mexican coast . By August 1521 the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan had fallen to the Spanish . A single soldier arriving in Mexico in 1520 was carrying smallpox and thus initiated the devastating plagues that swept through the native populations of the Americas . Within three years of the fall of Tenochtitlan the Spanish had conquered a large part of Mexico , extending as far south as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . The newly conquered territory became New Spain , headed by a viceroy who answered to the king of Spain via the Council of the Indies . Hernán Cortés received reports of rich , populated lands to the south and dispatched Pedro de Alvarado to investigate the region . 
 = = = Preparations for conquest = = = 
 In the run up to the announcement that an invasion force was to be sent to Guatemala , 10 @,@ 000 Nahua warriors had already been assembled by the Aztec emperor Cuauhtémoc to accompany the Spanish expedition . Warriors were ordered to be gathered from each of the Mexica and Tlaxcaltec towns . The native warriors supplied their own weapons , including swords , clubs and bows and arrows . Alvarado 's army left Tenochtitlan at the beginning of the dry season , sometime between the second half of November and December 1523 . As Alvarado left the Aztec capital , he led about 400 Spanish and approximately 200 Tlaxcaltec and <unk> warriors and 100 Mexica , meeting up with the gathered reinforcements on the way . When the army left the Basin of Mexico , it may have included as many as 20 @,@ 000 native warriors from various kingdoms although the exact numbers are disputed . By the time the army crossed the Isthmus of Tehuantepec , the massed native warriors included 800 from Tlaxcala , 400 from <unk> , 1600 from <unk> plus many more from other former Aztec territories . Further Mesoamerican warriors were recruited from the Zapotec and Mixtec provinces , with the addition of more Nahuas from the Aztec garrison in Soconusco . 
 = = Guatemala before the conquest = = 
 In the early 16th century the territory that now makes up Guatemala was divided into various competing polities , each locked in continual struggle with its neighbours . The most important were the K 'iche ' , the Kaqchikel , the Tz 'utujil , the Chajoma , the Mam , the Poqomam and the Pipil . All were Maya groups except for the Pipil , who were a Nahua group related to the Aztecs ; the Pipil had a number of small city @-@ states along the Pacific coastal plain of southern Guatemala and El Salvador . The Pipil of Guatemala had their capital at <unk> . The Xinca were another non @-@ Maya group occupying the southeastern Pacific coastal area . The Maya had never been unified as a single empire , but by the time the Spanish arrived Maya civilization was thousands of years old and had already seen the rise and fall of great cities . 
 On the eve of the conquest the highlands of Guatemala were dominated by several powerful Maya states . In the centuries preceding the arrival of the Spanish the K 'iche ' had carved out a small empire covering a large part of the western Guatemalan Highlands and the neighbouring Pacific coastal plain . However , in the late 15th century the Kaqchikel rebelled against their former K 'iche ' allies and founded a new kingdom to the southeast with Iximche as its capital . In the decades before the Spanish invasion the Kaqchikel kingdom had been steadily eroding the kingdom of the K 'iche ' . Other highland groups included the Tz 'utujil around Lake Atitlán , the Mam in the western highlands and the Poqomam in the eastern highlands . 
 The kingdom of the Itza was the most powerful polity in the Petén lowlands of northern Guatemala , centred on their capital Nojpetén , on an island in Lake Petén Itzá . The second polity in importance was that of their hostile neighbours , the Kowoj . The Kowoj were located to the east of the Itza , around the eastern lakes : Lake Salpetén , Lake Macanché , Lake Yaxhá and Lake Sacnab . Other groups are less well known and their precise territorial extent and political makeup remains obscure ; among them were the Chinamita , the Kejache , the Icaiche , the Lakandon Ch 'ol , the Mopan , the Manche Ch 'ol and the Yalain . The Kejache occupied an area north of the lake on the route to Campeche , while the Mopan and the Chinamita had their polities in the southeastern Petén . The Manche territory was to the southwest of the Mopan . The Yalain had their territory immediately to the east of Lake Petén Itzá . 
 = = = Native weapons and tactics = = = 
 Maya warfare was not so much aimed at destruction of the enemy as the seizure of captives and plunder . The Spanish described the weapons of war of the Petén Maya as bows and arrows , fire @-@ sharpened poles , flint @-@ headed spears and two @-@ handed swords crafted from strong wood with the blade fashioned from inset obsidian , similar to the Aztec macuahuitl . Pedro de Alvarado described how the Xinca of the Pacific coast attacked the Spanish with spears , stakes and poisoned arrows . Maya warriors wore body armour in the form of quilted cotton that had been soaked in salt water to toughen it ; the resulting armour compared favourably to the steel armour worn by the Spanish . The Maya had historically employed ambush and raiding as their preferred tactic , and its employment against the Spanish proved troublesome for the Europeans . In response to the use of cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits on the roads , lining them with fire @-@ hardened stakes and camouflaging them with grass and weeds , a tactic that according to the Kaqchikel killed many horses . 
 = = Conquistadors = = 
 The conquistadors were all volunteers , the majority of whom did not receive a fixed salary but instead a portion of the spoils of victory , in the form of precious metals , land grants and provision of native labour . Many of the Spanish were already experienced soldiers who had previously campaigned in Europe . The initial incursion into Guatemala was led by Pedro de Alvarado , who earned the military title of <unk> in 1527 ; he answered to the Spanish crown via Hernán Cortés in Mexico . Other early conquistadors included Pedro de Alvarado 's brothers Gómez de Alvarado , Jorge de Alvarado and Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras ; and his cousins Gonzalo de Alvarado y Chávez , Hernando de Alvarado and Diego de Alvarado . Pedro de Portocarrero was a nobleman who joined the initial invasion . Bernal Díaz del Castillo was a petty nobleman who accompanied Hernán Cortés when he crossed the northern lowlands , and Pedro de Alvarado on his invasion of the highlands . In addition to Spaniards , the invasion force probably included dozens of armed African slaves and freemen . 
 = = = Spanish weapons and tactics = = = 
 Spanish weaponry and tactics differed greatly from that of the indigenous peoples of Guatemala . This included the Spanish use of crossbows , firearms ( including muskets and cannon ) , war dogs and war horses . Among Mesoamerican peoples the capture of prisoners was a priority , while to the Spanish such taking of prisoners was a hindrance to outright victory . The inhabitants of Guatemala , for all their sophistication , lacked key elements of Old World technology , such as the use of iron and steel and functional wheels . The use of steel swords was perhaps the greatest technological advantage held by the Spanish , although the deployment of cavalry helped them to rout indigenous armies on occasion . The Spanish were sufficiently impressed by the quilted cotton armour of their Maya enemies that they adopted it in preference to their own steel armour . The conquistadors applied a more effective military organisation and strategic awareness than their opponents , allowing them to deploy troops and supplies in a way that increased the Spanish advantage . 
 In Guatemala the Spanish routinely fielded indigenous allies ; at first these were Nahua brought from the recently conquered Mexico , later they also included Maya . It is estimated that for every Spaniard on the field of battle , there were at least 10 native auxiliaries . Sometimes there were as many as 30 indigenous warriors for every Spaniard , and it was the participation of these Mesoamerican allies that was particularly decisive . In at least one case , encomienda rights were granted to one of the Tlaxcalan leaders who came as allies , and land grants and exemption from being given in encomienda were given to the Mexican allies as rewards for their participation in the conquest . In practice , such privileges were easily removed or sidestepped by the Spanish and the indigenous conquistadors were treated in a similar manner to the conquered natives . 
 The Spanish engaged in a strategy of concentrating native populations in newly founded colonial towns , or reducciones ( also known as congregaciones ) . Native resistance to the new nucleated settlements took the form of the flight of the indigenous inhabitants into inaccessible regions such as mountains and forests . 
 = = Impact of Old World diseases = = 
 Epidemics accidentally introduced by the Spanish included smallpox , measles and influenza . These diseases , together with typhus and yellow fever , had a major impact on Maya populations . The Old World diseases brought with the Spanish and against which the indigenous New World peoples had no resistance were a deciding factor in the conquest ; the diseases crippled armies and decimated populations before battles were even fought . Their introduction was catastrophic in the Americas ; it is estimated that 90 % of the indigenous population had been eliminated by disease within the first century of European contact . 
 In 1519 and 1520 , before the arrival of the Spanish in the region , a number of epidemics swept through southern Guatemala . At the same time as the Spanish were occupied with the overthrow of the Aztec empire , a devastating plague struck the Kaqchikel capital of Iximche , and the city of Q 'umarkaj , capital of the K 'iche ' , may also have suffered from the same epidemic . It is likely that the same combination of smallpox and a pulmonary plague swept across the entire Guatemalan Highlands . Modern knowledge of the impact of these diseases on populations with no prior exposure suggests that 33 – 50 % of the population of the highlands perished . Population levels in the Guatemalan Highlands did not recover to their pre @-@ conquest levels until the middle of the 20th century . In 1666 pestilence or murine typhus swept through what is now the department of Huehuetenango . Smallpox was reported in San Pedro <unk> , in 1795 . At the time of the fall of Nojpetén in 1697 , there are estimated to have been 60 @,@ 000 Maya living around Lake Petén Itzá , including a large number of refugees from other areas . It is estimated that 88 % of them died during the first ten years of colonial rule owing to a combination of disease and war . 
 = = Timeline of the conquest = = 
 = = Conquest of the highlands = = 
 The conquest of the highlands was made difficult by the many independent polities in the region , rather than one powerful enemy to be defeated as was the case in central Mexico . After the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan fell to the Spanish in 1521 , the Kaqchikel Maya of Iximche sent envoys to Hernán Cortés to declare their allegiance to the new ruler of Mexico , and the K 'iche ' Maya of Q 'umarkaj may also have sent a delegation . In 1522 Cortés sent Mexican allies to scout the Soconusco region of lowland Chiapas , where they met new delegations from Iximche and Q 'umarkaj at <unk> ; both of the powerful highland Maya kingdoms declared their loyalty to the king of Spain . But Cortés ' allies in Soconusco soon informed him that the K 'iche ' and the Kaqchikel were not loyal , and were instead harassing Spain 's allies in the region . Cortés decided to despatch Pedro de Alvarado with 180 cavalry , 300 infantry , crossbows , muskets , 4 cannons , large amounts of ammunition and gunpowder , and thousands of allied Mexican warriors from Tlaxcala , Cholula and other cities in central Mexico ; they arrived in Soconusco in 1523 . Pedro de Alvarado was infamous for the massacre of Aztec nobles in Tenochtitlan and , according to Bartolomé de las Casas , he committed further atrocities in the conquest of the Maya kingdoms in Guatemala . Some groups remained loyal to the Spanish once they had submitted to the conquest , such as the Tz 'utujil and the K 'iche ' of Quetzaltenango , and provided them with warriors to assist further conquest . Other groups soon rebelled however , and by 1526 numerous rebellions had engulfed the highlands . 
 = = = Subjugation of the K 'iche ' = = = 
 Pedro de Alvarado and his army advanced along the Pacific coast unopposed until they reached the Samalá River in western Guatemala . This region formed a part of the K 'iche ' kingdom , and a K 'iche ' army tried unsuccessfully to prevent the Spanish from crossing the river . Once across , the conquistadors ransacked nearby settlements in an effort to terrorise the K 'iche ' . On 8 February 1524 Alvarado 's army fought a battle at <unk> , called Zapotitlán by his Mexican allies ( modern San Francisco Zapotitlán ) . Although suffering many injuries inflicted by defending K 'iche ' archers , the Spanish and their allies stormed the town and set up camp in the marketplace . Alvarado then turned to head upriver into the Sierra Madre mountains towards the K 'iche ' heartlands , crossing the pass into the fertile valley of Quetzaltenango . On 12 February 1524 Alvarado 's Mexican allies were ambushed in the pass and driven back by K 'iche ' warriors but the Spanish cavalry charge that followed was a shock for the K 'iche ' , who had never before seen horses . The cavalry scattered the K 'iche ' and the army crossed to the city of <unk> ( modern Quetzaltenango ) only to find it deserted . Although the common view is that the K 'iche ' prince Tecun Uman died in the later battle near Olintepeque , the Spanish accounts are clear that at least one and possibly two of the lords of Q 'umarkaj died in the fierce battles upon the initial approach to Quetzaltenango . The death of Tecun Uman is said to have taken place in the battle of El Pinar , and local tradition has his death taking place on the Llanos de Urbina ( Plains of Urbina ) , upon the approach to Quetzaltenango near the modern village of <unk> . Pedro de Alvarado , in his third letter to Hernán Cortés , describes the death of one of the four lords of Q 'umarkaj upon the approach to Quetzaltenango . The letter was dated 11 April 1524 and was written during his stay at Q 'umarkaj . Almost a week later , on 18 February 1524 , a K 'iche ' army confronted the Spanish army in the Quetzaltenango valley and were comprehensively defeated ; many K 'iche ' nobles were among the dead . Such were the numbers of K 'iche ' dead that Olintepeque was given the name <unk> , roughly meaning " bathed in blood " . In the early 17th century , the grandson of the K 'iche ' king informed the alcalde mayor ( the highest colonial official at the time ) that the K 'iche ' army that had marched out of Q 'umarkaj to confront the invaders numbered 30 @,@ 000 warriors , a claim that is considered credible by modern scholars . This battle exhausted the K 'iche ' militarily and they asked for peace and offered tribute , inviting Pedro de Alvarado into their capital Q 'umarkaj , which was known as Tecpan Utatlan to the Nahuatl @-@ speaking allies of the Spanish . Alvarado was deeply suspicious of the K 'iche ' intentions but accepted the offer and marched to Q 'umarkaj with his army . 
 The day after the battle of Olintepeque , the Spanish army arrived at Tzakahá , which submitted peacefully . There the Spanish chaplains Juan <unk> and Juan Díaz conducted a Roman Catholic mass under a makeshift roof ; this site was chosen to build the first church in Guatemala , which was dedicated to Concepción La <unk> . Tzakahá was renamed as San Luis <unk> . The first Easter mass held in Guatemala was celebrated in the new church , during which high @-@ ranking natives were baptised . 
 In March 1524 Pedro de Alvarado entered Q 'umarkaj at the invitation of the remaining lords of the K 'iche ' after their catastrophic defeat , fearing that he was entering a trap . He encamped on the plain outside the city rather than accepting lodgings inside . Fearing the great number of K 'iche ' warriors gathered outside the city and that his cavalry would not be able to manoeuvre in the narrow streets of Q 'umarkaj , he invited the leading lords of the city , Oxib @-@ Keh ( the ajpop , or king ) and Beleheb @-@ Tzy ( the ajpop k 'amha , or king elect ) to visit him in his camp . As soon as they did so , he seized them and kept them as prisoners in his camp . The K 'iche ' warriors , seeing their lords taken prisoner , attacked the Spaniards ' indigenous allies and managed to kill one of the Spanish soldiers . At this point Alvarado decided to have the captured K 'iche ' lords burnt to death , and then proceeded to burn the entire city . After the destruction of Q 'umarkaj and the execution of its rulers , Pedro de Alvarado sent messages to Iximche , capital of the Kaqchikel , proposing an alliance against the remaining K 'iche ' resistance . Alvarado wrote that they sent 4000 warriors to assist him , although the Kaqchikel recorded that they sent only 400 . 
 = = = San Marcos : Province of Tecusitlán and Lacandón = = = 
 With the capitulation of the K 'iche ' kingdom , various non @-@ K 'iche ' peoples under K 'iche ' dominion also submitted to the Spanish . This included the Mam inhabitants of the area now within the modern department of San Marcos . Quetzaltenango and San Marcos were placed under the command of Juan de León y Cardona , who began the reduction of indigenous populations and the foundation of Spanish towns . The towns of San Marcos and San Pedro Sacatepéquez were founded soon after the conquest of western Guatemala . In 1533 Pedro de Alvarado ordered de León y Cardona to explore and conquer the area around the <unk> , Tajumulco , Lacandón and San Antonio volcanoes ; in colonial times this area was referred to as the Province of Tecusitlán and Lacandón . De León marched to a Maya city named <unk> by his Nahuatl @-@ speaking allies with a force of fifty Spaniards ; his Mexican allies also referred to the city by the name <unk> . De León renamed the city as San Pedro Sacatepéquez in honour of his friar , Pedro de Angulo . The Spanish founded a village nearby at <unk> in April that year , renaming it as San Marcos . 
 = = = Kaqchikel alliance = = = 
 On 14 April 1524 , soon after the defeat of the K 'iche ' , the Spanish were invited into Iximche and were well received by the lords Belehe Qat and Cahi Imox . The Kaqchikel kings provided native soldiers to assist the conquistadors against continuing K 'iche ' resistance and to help with the defeat of the neighbouring Tz <unk> kingdom . The Spanish only stayed briefly in Iximche before continuing through Atitlán , Escuintla and Cuscatlán . The Spanish returned to the Kaqchikel capital on 23 July 1524 and on 27 July ( 1 Q 'at in the Kaqchikel calendar ) Pedro de Alvarado declared Iximche as the first capital of Guatemala , Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( " St. James of the Knights of Guatemala " ) . Iximche was called Guatemala by the Spanish , from the Nahuatl <unk> meaning " forested land " . Since the Spanish conquistadors founded their first capital at Iximche , they took the name of the city used by their Nahuatl @-@ speaking Mexican allies and applied it to the new Spanish city and , by extension , to the kingdom . From this comes the modern name of the country . When Pedro de Alvarado moved his army to Iximche , he left the defeated K 'iche ' kingdom under the command of Juan de León y Cardona . Although de León y Cardona was given command of the western reaches of the new colony , he continued to take an active role in the continuing conquest , including the later assault on the Poqomam capital . 
 = = = Conquest of the Tz 'utujil = = = 
 The Kaqchikel appear to have entered into an alliance with the Spanish to defeat their enemies , the Tz 'utujil , whose capital was Tecpan Atitlan . Pedro de Alvarado sent two Kaqchikel messengers to Tecpan Atitlan at the request of the Kaqchikel lords , both of whom were killed by the Tz 'utujil . When news of the killing of the messengers reached the Spanish at Iximche , the conquistadors marched against the Tz 'utujil with their Kaqchikel allies . Pedro de Alvarado left Iximche just 5 days after he had arrived there , with 60 cavalry , 150 Spanish infantry and an unspecified number of Kaqchikel warriors . The Spanish and their allies arrived at the lakeshore after a day 's hard march , without encountering any opposition . Seeing the lack of resistance , Alvarado rode ahead with 30 cavalry along the lake shore . Opposite a populated island the Spanish at last encountered hostile Tz 'utujil warriors and charged among them , scattering and pursuing them to a narrow causeway across which the surviving Tz 'utujil fled . The causeway was too narrow for the horses , therefore the conquistadors dismounted and crossed to the island before the inhabitants could break the bridges . The rest of Alvarado 's army soon reinforced his party and they successfully stormed the island . The surviving Tz 'utujil fled into the lake and swam to safety on another island . The Spanish could not pursue the survivors further because 300 canoes sent by the Kaqchikels had not yet arrived . This battle took place on 18 April . 
 The following day the Spanish entered Tecpan Atitlan but found it deserted . Pedro de Alvarado camped in the centre of the city and sent out scouts to find the enemy . They managed to catch some locals and used them to send messages to the Tz 'utujil lords , ordering them to submit to the king of Spain . The Tz 'utujil leaders responded by surrendering to Pedro de Alvarado and swearing loyalty to Spain , at which point Alvarado considered them pacified and returned to Iximche . Three days after Pedro de Alvarado returned to Iximche , the lords of the Tz 'utujil arrived there to pledge their loyalty and offer tribute to the conquistadors . A short time afterwards a number of lords arrived from the Pacific lowlands to swear allegiance to the king of Spain , although Alvarado did not name them in his letters ; they confirmed Kaqchikel reports that further out on the Pacific plain was the kingdom called Izcuintepeque in Nahuatl , or <unk> in Kaqchikel , whose inhabitants were warlike and hostile towards their neighbours . 
 = = = Kaqchikel rebellion = = = 
 Pedro de Alvarado rapidly began to demand gold in tribute from the Kaqchikels , souring the friendship between the two peoples . He demanded that their kings deliver 1000 gold leaves , each worth 15 pesos . 
 A Kaqchikel priest foretold that the Kaqchikel gods would destroy the Spanish , causing the Kaqchikel people to abandon their city and flee to the forests and hills on 28 August 1524 ( 7 <unk> in the Kaqchikel calendar ) . Ten days later the Spanish declared war on the Kaqchikel . Two years later , on 9 February 1526 , a group of sixteen Spanish deserters burnt the palace of the Ahpo Xahil , sacked the temples and kidnapped a priest , acts that the Kaqchikel blamed on Pedro de Alvarado . Conquistador Bernal Díaz del Castillo recounted how in 1526 he returned to Iximche and spent the night in the " old city of Guatemala " together with Luis Marín and other members of Hernán Cortés 's expedition to Honduras . He reported that the houses of the city were still in excellent condition ; his account was the last description of the city while it was still inhabitable . 
 The Spanish founded a new town at nearby Tecpán Guatemala ; Tecpán is Nahuatl for " palace " , thus the name of the new town translated as " the palace among the trees " . The Spanish abandoned Tecpán in 1527 , because of the continuous Kaqchikel attacks , and moved to the Almolonga Valley to the east , refounding their capital on the site of today 's San Miguel Escobar district of Ciudad Vieja , near Antigua Guatemala . The Nahua and <unk> allies of the Spanish settled in what is now central Ciudad Vieja , then known as Almolonga ( not to be confused with Almolonga near Quetzaltenango ) ; Zapotec and Mixtec allies also settled San Gaspar Vivar about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) northeast of Almolonga , which they founded in 1530 . 
 The Kaqchikel kept up resistance against the Spanish for a number of years , but on 9 May 1530 , exhausted by the warfare that had seen the deaths of their best warriors and the enforced abandonment of their crops , the two kings of the most important clans returned from the wilds . A day later they were joined by many nobles and their families and many more people ; they then surrendered at the new Spanish capital at Ciudad Vieja . The former inhabitants of Iximche were dispersed ; some were moved to Tecpán , the rest to Sololá and other towns around Lake Atitlán . 
 = = = Siege of Zaculeu = = = 
 Although a state of hostilities existed between the Mam and the K 'iche ' of Q 'umarkaj after the rebellion of the Kaqchikel against their former K 'iche ' allies prior to European contact , when the conquistadors arrived there was a shift in the political landscape . Pedro de Alvarado described how the Mam king Kayb 'il B 'alam was received with great honour in Q 'umarkaj while he was there . The expedition against Zaculeu was apparently initiated after K 'iche ' bitterness at their failure to contain the Spanish at Q 'umarkaj , with the plan to trap the conquistadors in the city having been suggested to them by the Mam king , Kayb 'il B 'alam ; the resulting execution of the K 'iche ' kings was viewed as unjust . The K 'iche ' suggestion of marching on the Mam was quickly taken up by the Spanish . 
 At the time of the conquest , the main Mam population was situated in Xinabahul ( also spelled <unk> ) , now the city of Huehuetenango , but Zaculeu 's fortifications led to its use as a refuge during the conquest . The refuge was attacked by Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras , brother of conquistador Pedro de Alvarado , in 1525 , with 40 Spanish cavalry and 80 Spanish infantry , and some 2 @,@ 000 Mexican and K 'iche ' allies . Gonzalo de Alvarado left the Spanish camp at Tecpán Guatemala in July 1525 and marched to the town of Totonicapán , which he used as a supply base . From Totonicapán the expedition headed north to Momostenango , although it was delayed by heavy rains . Momostenango quickly fell to the Spanish after a four @-@ hour battle . The following day Gonzalo de Alvarado marched on Huehuetenango and was confronted by a Mam army of 5 @,@ 000 warriors from nearby Malacatán ( modern <unk> ) . The Mam army advanced across the plain in battle formation and was met by a Spanish cavalry charge that threw them into disarray , with the infantry mopping up those Mam that survived the cavalry . Gonzalo de Alvarado slew the Mam leader <unk> Acab with his lance , at which point the Mam army 's resistance was broken , and the surviving warriors fled to the hills . Alvarado entered Malacatán unopposed to find it occupied only by the sick and the elderly . Messengers from the community 's leaders arrived from the hills and offered their unconditional surrender , which was accepted by Alvarado . The Spanish army rested for a few days , then continued onwards to Huehuetenango only to find it deserted . Kayb 'il B 'alam had received news of the Spanish advance and had withdrawn to his fortress at Zaculeu . Alvarado sent a message to Zaculeu proposing terms for the peaceful surrender of the Mam king , who chose not to answer . 
 Zaculeu was defended by Kayb 'il B 'alam commanding some 6 @,@ 000 warriors gathered from Huehuetenango , Zaculeu , <unk> and <unk> . The fortress was surrounded on three sides by deep ravines and defended by a formidable system of walls and ditches . Gonzalo de Alvarado , although outnumbered two to one , decided to launch an assault on the weaker northern entrance . Mam warriors initially held the northern approaches against the Spanish infantry but fell back before repeated cavalry charges . The Mam defence was reinforced by an estimated 2 @,@ 000 warriors from within Zaculeu but was unable to push the Spanish back . Kayb 'il B 'alam , seeing that outright victory on an open battlefield was impossible , withdrew his army back within the safety of the walls . As Alvarado dug in and laid siege to the fortress , an army of approximately 8 @,@ 000 Mam warriors descended on Zaculeu from the Cuchumatanes mountains to the north , drawn from those towns allied with the city . Alvarado left Antonio de Salazar to supervise the siege and marched north to confront the Mam army . The Mam army was disorganised , and although it was a match for the Spanish and allied foot soldiers , it was vulnerable to the repeated charges of the experienced Spanish cavalry . The relief army was broken and annihilated , allowing Alvarado to return to reinforce the siege . After several months the Mam were reduced to starvation . Kayb 'il B 'alam finally surrendered the city to the Spanish in the middle of October 1525 . When the Spanish entered the city they found 1 @,@ 800 dead Indians , and the survivors eating the corpses of the dead . After the fall of Zaculeu , a Spanish garrison was established at Huehuetenango under the command of Gonzalo de Solís ; Gonzalo de Alvarado returned to Tecpán Guatemala to report his victory to his brother . 
 = = = Conquest of the Poqomam = = = 
 In 1525 Pedro de Alvarado sent a small company to conquer Mixco Viejo ( Chinautla Viejo ) , the capital of the Poqomam . At the Spanish approach , the inhabitants remained enclosed in the fortified city . The Spanish attempted an approach from the west through a narrow pass but were forced back with heavy losses . Alvarado himself launched the second assault with 200 Tlaxcalan allies but was also beaten back . The Poqomam then received reinforcements , possibly from Chinautla , and the two armies clashed on open ground outside of the city . The battle was chaotic and lasted for most of the day but was finally decided by the Spanish cavalry , forcing the Poqomam reinforcements to withdraw . The leaders of the reinforcements surrendered to the Spanish three days after their retreat and revealed that the city had a secret entrance in the form of a cave leading up from a nearby river , allowing the inhabitants to come and go . 
 Armed with the knowledge gained from their prisoners , Alvarado sent 40 men to cover the exit from the cave and launched another assault along the ravine from the west , in single file owing to its narrowness , with crossbowmen alternating with soldiers bearing muskets , each with a companion sheltering him from arrows and stones with a shield . This tactic allowed the Spanish to break through the pass and storm the entrance of the city . The Poqomam warriors fell back in disorder in a chaotic retreat through the city , and were hunted down by the victorious conquistadors and their allies . Those who managed to retreat down the neighbouring valley were ambushed by Spanish cavalry who had been posted to block the exit from the cave , the survivors were captured and brought back to the city . The siege had lasted more than a month and because of the defensive strength of the city , Alvarado ordered it to be burned and moved the inhabitants to the new colonial village of Mixco . 
 = = = Resettlement of the Chajoma = = = 
 There are no direct sources describing the conquest of the Chajoma by the Spanish but it appears to have been a drawn @-@ out campaign rather than a rapid victory . The only description of the conquest of the Chajoma is a secondary account appearing in the work of Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán in the 17th century , long after the event . After the conquest , the inhabitants of the eastern part of the kingdom were relocated by the conquerors to San Pedro Sacatepéquez , including some of the inhabitants of the archaeological site now known as Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) . The rest of the population of Mixco Viejo , together with the inhabitants of the western part of the kingdom , were moved to San Martín Jilotepeque . The Chajoma rebelled against the Spanish in 1526 , fighting a battle at <unk> 'il , an unidentified site somewhere near the modern towns of San Juan Sacatepéquez and San Pedro Sacatepéquez . 
 In the colonial period , most of the surviving Chajoma were forcibly settled in the towns of San Juan Sacatepéquez , San Pedro Sacatepéquez and San Martín Jilotepeque as a result of the Spanish policy of congregaciones ; the people were moved to whichever of the three towns was closest to their pre @-@ conquest land holdings . Some Iximche Kaqchikels seem also to have been relocated to the same towns . After their relocation some of the Chajoma drifted back to their pre @-@ conquest centres , creating informal settlements and provoking hostilities with the Poqomam of Mixco and Chinautla along the former border between the pre @-@ Columbian kingdoms . Some of these settlements eventually received official recognition , such as San Raimundo near <unk> . 
 = = = El Progreso and Zacapa = = = 
 The Spanish colonial <unk> of San Cristóbal Acasaguastlán was established in 1551 with its seat in the town of that name , now in the eastern portion of the modern department of El Progreso . Acasaguastlán was one of few pre @-@ conquest centres of population in the middle Motagua River drainage , due to the arid climate . It covered a broad area that included <unk> , Rabinal , and Salamá ( all in Baja Verapaz ) , San Agustín de la Real Corona ( modern San Agustín Acasaguastlán ) and La Magdalena in El Progreso , and <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Zacapa , all in the department of Zacapa . <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were all satellite settlements of Acasaguastlán . San Cristóbal Acasaguastlán and the surrounding area were reduced into colonial settlements by friars of the Dominican Order ; at the time of the conquest the area was inhabited by <unk> ' Maya and by the Nahuatl @-@ speaking Pipil . In the 1520s , immediately after conquest , the inhabitants paid taxes to the Spanish Crown in the form of cacao , textiles , gold , silver and slaves . Within a few decades taxes were instead paid in beans , cotton and maize . Acasaguastlán was first given in encomienda to conquistador Diego Salvatierra in 1526 . 
 = = = Chiquimula = = = 
 Chiquimula de la Sierra ( " Chiquimula in the Highlands " ) , occupying the area of the modern department of Chiquimula to the east of the Poqomam and Chajoma , was inhabited by Ch 'orti ' Maya at the time of the conquest . The first Spanish reconnaissance of this region took place in 1524 by an expedition that included Hernando de Chávez , Juan Durán , Bartolomé Becerra and Cristóbal Salvatierra , amongst others . In 1526 three Spanish captains , Juan Pérez <unk> , Sancho de Barahona and Bartolomé Becerra , invaded Chiquimula on the orders of Pedro de Alvarado . The indigenous population soon rebelled against excessive Spanish demands , but the rebellion was quickly put down in April 1530 . However , the region was not considered fully conquered until a campaign by Jorge de Bocanegra in 1531 – 1532 that also took in parts of Jalapa . The afflictions of Old World diseases , war and overwork in the mines and encomiendas took a heavy toll on the inhabitants of eastern Guatemala , to the extent that indigenous population levels never recovered to their pre @-@ conquest levels . 
 = = = Campaigns in the Cuchumatanes = = = 
 In the ten years after the fall of Zaculeu various Spanish expeditions crossed into the Sierra de los Cuchumatanes and engaged in the gradual and complex conquest of the Chuj and Q 'anjob 'al . The Spanish were attracted to the region in the hope of extracting gold , silver and other riches from the mountains but their remoteness , the difficult terrain and relatively low population made their conquest and exploitation extremely difficult . The population of the Cuchumatanes is estimated to have been 260 @,@ 000 before European contact . By the time the Spanish physically arrived in the region this had collapsed to 150 @,@ 000 because of the effects of the Old World diseases that had run ahead of them . 
 = = = = Uspantán and the Ixil = = = = 
 After the western portion of the Cuchumatanes fell to the Spanish , the Ixil and Uspantek Maya were sufficiently isolated to evade immediate Spanish attention . The Uspantek and the Ixil were allies and in 1529 , four years after the conquest of Huehuetenango , Uspantek warriors were harassing Spanish forces and Uspantán was trying to foment rebellion among the K 'iche ' . Uspantek activity became sufficiently troublesome that the Spanish decided that military action was necessary . Gaspar Arias , magistrate of Guatemala , penetrated the eastern Cuchumatanes with sixty Spanish infantry and three hundred allied indigenous warriors . By early September he had imposed temporary Spanish authority over the Ixil towns of Chajul and Nebaj . The Spanish army then marched east toward Uspantán itself ; Arias then received notice that the acting governor of Guatemala , Francisco de <unk> , had deposed him as magistrate . Arias handed command over to the inexperienced Pedro de Olmos and returned to confront de <unk> . Although his officers advised against it , Olmos launched a disastrous full @-@ scale frontal assault on the city . As soon as the Spanish began their assault they were ambushed from the rear by more than two thousand Uspantek warriors . The Spanish forces were routed with heavy losses ; many of their indigenous allies were slain , and many more were captured alive by the Uspantek warriors only to be sacrificed on the altar of their deity <unk> . The survivors who managed to evade capture fought their way back to the Spanish garrison at Q 'umarkaj . 
 A year later Francisco de Castellanos set out from Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( by now relocated to Ciudad Vieja ) on another expedition against the Ixil and Uspantek , leading eight corporals , thirty @-@ two cavalry , forty Spanish infantry and several hundred allied indigenous warriors . The expedition rested at Chichicastenango and recruited further forces before marching seven leagues northwards to Sacapulas and climbed the steep southern slopes of the Cuchumatanes . On the upper slopes they clashed with a force of between four and five thousand Ixil warriors from Nebaj and nearby settlements . A lengthy battle followed during which the Spanish cavalry managed to outflank the Ixil army and forced them to retreat to their mountaintop fortress at Nebaj . The Spanish force besieged the city , and their indigenous allies managed to scale the walls , penetrate the stronghold and set it on fire . Many defending Ixil warriors withdrew to fight the fire , which allowed the Spanish to storm the entrance and break the defences . The victorious Spanish rounded up the surviving defenders and the next day Castellanos ordered them all to be branded as slaves as punishment for their resistance . The inhabitants of Chajul immediately capitulated to the Spanish as soon as news of the battle reached them . The Spanish continued east towards Uspantán to find it defended by ten thousand warriors , including forces from <unk> , <unk> , Sacapulas and Verapaz . The Spaniards were barely able to organise a defence before the defending army attacked . Although heavily outnumbered , the deployment of Spanish cavalry and the firearms of the Spanish infantry eventually decided the battle . The Spanish overran Uspantán and again branded all surviving warriors as slaves . The surrounding towns also surrendered , and December 1530 marked the end of the military stage of the conquest of the Cuchumatanes . 
 = = = = Reduction of the Chuj and Q 'anjob 'al = = = = 
 In 1529 the Chuj city of San Mateo Ixtatán ( then known by the name of <unk> ) was given in encomienda to the conquistador Gonzalo de Ovalle , a companion of Pedro de Alvarado , together with Santa Eulalia and <unk> . In 1549 , the first reduction ( reducción in Spanish ) of San Mateo Ixtatán took place , overseen by Dominican missionaries , in the same year the Q 'anjob 'al reducción settlement of Santa Eulalia was founded . Further Q 'anjob 'al reducciones were in place at San Pedro <unk> , San Juan <unk> and San Miguel <unk> by 1560 . Q 'anjob 'al resistance was largely passive , based on withdrawal to the inaccessible mountains and forests from the Spanish reducciones . In 1586 the Mercedarian Order built the first church in Santa Eulalia . The Chuj of San Mateo Ixtatán remained rebellious and resisted Spanish control for longer than their highland neighbours , resistance that was possible owing to their alliance with the lowland Lakandon Ch 'ol to the north . The continued resistance was so determined that the Chuj remained pacified only while the immediate effects of the Spanish expeditions lasted . 
 In the late 17th century , the Spanish missionary Fray Alonso de León reported that about eighty families in San Mateo Ixtatán did not pay tribute to the Spanish Crown or attend the Roman Catholic mass . He described the inhabitants as quarrelsome and complained that they had built a pagan shrine in the hills among the ruins of pre @-@ Columbian temples , where they burnt incense and offerings and sacrificed turkeys . He reported that every March they built bonfires around wooden crosses about two leagues from the town and set them on fire . Fray de León informed the colonial authorities that the practices of the natives were such that they were Christian in name only . Eventually , Fray de León was chased out of San Mateo Ixtatán by the locals . 
 In 1684 , a council led by Enrique Enríquez de Guzmán , the governor of Guatemala , decided on the reduction of San Mateo Ixtatán and nearby Santa Eulalia , both within the colonial administrative district of the <unk> of Huehuetenango . 
 On 29 January 1686 , Captain Melchor Rodríguez Mazariegos , acting under orders from the governor , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán , where he recruited indigenous warriors from the nearby villages , 61 from San Mateo itself . It was believed by the Spanish colonial authorities that the inhabitants of San Mateo Ixtatán were friendly towards the still unconquered and fiercely hostile inhabitants of the Lacandon region , which included parts of what is now the Mexican state of Chiapas and the western part of the Petén Basin . To prevent news of the Spanish advance reaching the inhabitants of the Lacandon area , the governor ordered the capture of three of San Mateo 's community leaders , named as Cristóbal Domingo , Alonso Delgado and Gaspar Jorge , and had them sent under guard to be imprisoned in Huehuetenango . The governor himself arrived in San Mateo Ixtatán on 3 February , where Captain Rodríguez Mazariegos was already awaiting him . The governor ordered the captain to remain in the village and use it as a base of operations for penetrating the Lacandon region . The Spanish missionaries Fray de Rivas and Fray Pedro de la Concepción also remained in the town . Governor Enriquez de Guzmán subsequently left San Mateo Ixtatán for Comitán in Chiapas , to enter the Lacandon region via Ocosingo . 
 In 1695 , a three @-@ way invasion of the Lacandon was launched simultaneously from San Mateo Ixtatán , Cobán and Ocosingo . Captain Rodriguez Mazariegos , accompanied by Fray de Rivas and 6 other missionaries together with 50 Spanish soldiers , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán . Following the same route used in 1686 , they managed on the way to recruit 200 indigenous Maya warriors from Santa Eulalia , San Juan <unk> and San Mateo itself . On 28 February 1695 , all three groups left their respective bases of operations to conquer the Lacandon . The San Mateo group headed northeast into the Lacandon Jungle . 
 = = Pacific lowlands : Pipil and Xinca = = 
 Before the arrival of the Spanish , the western portion of the Pacific plain was dominated by the K 'iche ' and Kaqchikel states , while the eastern portion was occupied by the Pipil and the Xinca . The Pipil inhabited the area of the modern department of Escuintla and a part of Jutiapa ; the main Xinca territory lay to the east of the main Pipil population in what is now Santa Rosa department ; there were also Xinca in Jutiapa . 
 In the half century preceding the arrival of the Spanish , the Kaqchikel were frequently at war with the Pipil of Izcuintepeque ( modern Escuintla ) . By March 1524 the K 'iche had been defeated , followed by a Spanish alliance with the Kaqchikel in April of the same year . On 8 May 1524 , soon after his arrival in Iximche and immediately following his subsequent conquest of the Tz 'utujil around Lake Atitlán , Pedro de Alvarado continued southwards to the Pacific coastal plain with an army numbering approximately 6000 , where he defeated the Pipil of <unk> or <unk> ( called <unk> in the Annals of the Kaqchikels ) near Izcuintepeque on 9 May . Alvarado described the terrain approaching the town as very difficult , covered with dense vegetation and swampland that made the use of cavalry impossible ; instead he sent men with crossbows ahead . The Pipil withdrew their scouts because of the heavy rain , believing that the Spanish and their allies would not be able to reach the town that day . However , Pedro de Alvarado pressed ahead and when the Spanish entered the town the defenders were completely unprepared , with the Pipil warriors indoors sheltering from the torrential rain . In the battle that ensued , the Spanish and their indigenous allies suffered minor losses but the Pipil were able to flee into the forest , sheltered from Spanish pursuit by the weather and the vegetation . Pedro de Alvarado ordered the town to be burnt and sent messengers to the Pipil lords demanding their surrender , otherwise he would lay waste to their lands . According to Alvarado 's letter to Cortés , the Pipil came back to the town and submitted to him , accepting the king of Spain as their overlord . The Spanish force camped in the captured town for eight days . A few years later , in 1529 , Pedro de Alvarado was accused of using excessive brutality in his conquest of Izcuintepeque , amongst other atrocities . 
 In <unk> , now a municipality in Santa Rosa , Pedro de <unk> described his encounter with people who were neither Maya nor Pipil , speaking a different language altogether ; these people were probably Xinca . At this point Alvarado 's force consisted of 250 Spanish infantry accompanied by 6 @,@ 000 indigenous allies , mostly Kaqchikel and <unk> . Alvarado and his army defeated and occupied the most important Xinca city , named as <unk> , usually considered to be in the Taxisco area . The defending warriors were described by Alvarado as engaging in fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat using spears , stakes and poisoned arrows . The battle took place on 26 May 1524 and resulted in a significant reduction of the Xinca population . Alvarado 's army continued eastwards from <unk> , seizing several more Xinca cities . <unk> feigned a peaceful reception only to unsuccessfully raise arms against the conquistadors within an hour of their arrival . Taxisco and Nancintla fell soon afterwards . Because Alvarado and his allies could not understand the Xinca language , Alvarado took extra precautions on the march eastward by strengthening his vanguard and rearguard with ten cavalry apiece . In spite of these precautions the baggage train was ambushed by a Xinca army soon after leaving Taxisco . Many indigenous allies were killed and most of the baggage was lost , including all the crossbows and ironwork for the horses . This was a serious setback and Alvarado camped his army in Nancintla for eight days , during which time he sent two expeditions against the attacking army . Jorge de Alvarado led the first attempt with thirty to forty cavalry and although they routed the enemy they were unable to retrieve any of the lost baggage , much of which had been destroyed by the Xinca for use as trophies . Pedro de Portocarrero led the second attempt with a large infantry detachment but was unable to engage with the enemy due to the difficult mountain terrain , so returned to Nancintla . Alvarado sent out Xinca messengers to make contact with the enemy but they failed to return . Messengers from the city of <unk> , in the modern department of Jutiapa , offered peace to the conquistadors but when Alvarado arrived there the next day the inhabitants were preparing for war . Alvarado 's troops encountered a sizeable quantity of gathered warriors and quickly routed them through the city 's streets . From <unk> Alvarado crossed the Río Paz and entered what is now El Salvador . 
 After the conquest of the Pacific plain , the inhabitants paid tribute to the Spanish in the form of valuable products such as cacao , cotton , salt and vanilla , with an emphasis on cacao . 
 = = Northern lowlands = = 
 The Contact Period in Guatemala 's northern Petén lowlands lasted from 1525 through to 1700 . Superior Spanish weaponry and the use of cavalry , although decisive in the northern Yucatán , were ill @-@ suited to warfare in the dense forests of lowland Guatemala . 
 = = = Cortés in Petén = = = 
 In 1525 , after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , Hernán Cortés led an expedition to Honduras over land , cutting across the Itza kingdom in what is now the northern Petén Department of Guatemala . His aim was to subdue the rebellious Cristóbal de Olid , whom he had sent to conquer Honduras , but Cristóbal de Olid had set himself up independently on his arrival in that territory . Cortés had 140 Spanish soldiers , 93 of them mounted , 3 @,@ 000 Mexican warriors , 150 horses , a herd of pigs , artillery , munitions and other supplies . He also had with him 600 Chontal Maya carriers from Acalan . They arrived at the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá on 13 March 1525 . 
 Cortés accepted an invitation from Aj Kan Ek ' , the king of the Itza , to visit Nojpetén ( also known as Tayasal ) , and crossed to the Maya city with 20 Spanish soldiers while the rest of his army continued around the lake to meet him on the south shore . On his departure from Nojpetén , Cortés left behind a cross and a lame horse . The Spanish did not officially contact the Itza again until the arrival of Franciscan priests in 1618 , when Cortés ' cross was said to still be standing at Nojpetén . From the lake , Cortés continued south along the western slopes of the Maya Mountains , a particularly arduous journey that took 12 days to cover 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) , during which he lost more than two @-@ thirds of his horses . When he came to a river swollen with the constant torrential rains that had been falling during the expedition , Cortés turned upstream to the Gracias a Dios rapids , which took two days to cross and cost him more horses . 
 On 15 April 1525 the expedition arrived at the Maya village of Tenciz . With local guides they headed into the hills north of Lake Izabal , where their guides abandoned them to their fate . The expedition became lost in the hills and came close to starvation before they captured a Maya boy who led them out to safety . Cortés found a village on the shore of Lake Izabal , perhaps Xocolo . He crossed the Dulce River to the settlement of Nito , somewhere on the Amatique Bay , with about a dozen companions , and waited there for the rest of his army to regroup over the course of the next week . By this time the remnants of the expedition had been reduced to a few hundred ; Cortés succeeded in contacting the Spaniards he was searching for , only to find that Cristóbal de Olid 's own officers had already put down his rebellion . Cortés then returned to Mexico by sea . 
 = = = Land of War : Verapaz = = = 
 By 1537 the area immediately north of the new colony of Guatemala was being referred to as the Tierra de Guerra ( " Land of War " ) . Paradoxically , it was simultaneously known as Verapaz ( " True Peace " ) . The Land of War described an area that was undergoing conquest ; it was a region of dense forest that was difficult for the Spanish to penetrate militarily . Whenever the Spanish located a centre of population in this region , the inhabitants were moved and concentrated in a new colonial settlement near the edge of the jungle where the Spanish could more easily control them . This strategy resulted in the gradual depopulation of the forest , simultaneously converting it into a wilderness refuge for those fleeing Spanish domination , both for individual refugees and for entire communities , especially those congregaciones that were remote from centres of colonial authority . The Land of War , from the 16th century through to the start of the 18th century , included a vast area from Sacapulas in the west to Nito on the Caribbean coast and extended northwards from Rabinal and Salamá , and was an intermediate area between the highlands and the northern lowlands . It includes the modern departments of Baja Verapaz and Alta Verapaz , Izabal and Petén , as well as the eastern part of El Quiché and a part of the Mexican state of Chiapas . The western portion of this area was the territory of the Q 'eqchi ' Maya . 
 Pedro Orozco , the leader of the Sacatepéquez Mam of San Marcos department , lent willing help to the Dominicans in their campaign to peacefully subject the inhabitants of Verapaz . On 1 May 1543 Carlos V rewarded the Sacatepéquez Mam by issuing a royal order promising never to give them in encomienda . 
 Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas arrived in the colony of Guatemala in 1537 and immediately campaigned to replace violent military conquest with peaceful missionary work . Las Casas offered to achieve the conquest of the Land of War through the preaching of the Catholic faith . It was the Dominicans who promoted the use of the name Verapaz instead of the Land of War . Because of the fact that the land had not been possible to conquer by military means , the governor of Guatemala , Alonso de Maldonado , agreed to sign a contract promising he would not establish any new encomiendas in the area should Las Casas ' strategy succeed . Las Casas and a group of Dominican friars established themselves in Rabinal , Sacapulas and Cobán , and managed to convert several native chiefs using a strategy of teaching Christian songs to merchant Indian Christians who then ventured into the area . 
 In this way they congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal . Las Casas became instrumental in the introduction of the New Laws in 1542 , established by the Spanish Crown to control the excesses of the conquistadors and colonists against the indigenous inhabitants of the Americas . As a result , the Dominicans met substantial resistance from the Spanish colonists , who saw their own interests threatened by the New Laws ; this distracted the Dominicans from their efforts to establish peaceful control over the Land of War . 
 In 1543 the new colonial reducción of Santo Domingo de Cobán was founded at Chi Mon 'a to house the relocated Q 'eqchi ' from Chichen , <unk> and Al Run Tax Aj . Santo Tomás Apóstol was founded nearby the same year at Chi Nim <unk> , it was used in 1560 as a reducción to resettle Ch 'ol communities from <unk> and Lacandon in the Usumacinta Valley . In 1555 the Acala Ch 'ol and their Lacandon allies killed the Spanish friar Domingo de Vico . De Vico had established a small church among the inhabitants of San Marcos , a region that lay between the territories of the Lacandon and the Manche Ch 'ol ( an area unrelated to the department of San Marcos ) . De Vico had offended the local ruler by repeatedly scolding him for taking several wives . The indigenous leader shot the friar through the throat with an arrow ; the angry natives then seized him , cut open his chest and extracted his heart . His corpse was then decapitated ; the natives carried off his head , which was never recovered by the Spanish . In response a punitive expedition was launched , headed by Juan <unk> , a Q 'eqchi ' leader from <unk> ; the independent Indians captured by the Q 'eqchi ' expedition were taken back to Cobán and resettled in Santo Tomás Apóstol . 
 = = = Lake Izabal and the lower Motagua River = = = 
 The Dominicans established themselves in Xocolo on the shore of Lake Izabal in the mid @-@ 16th century . Xocolo became infamous among the Dominican missionaries for the practice of witchcraft by its inhabitants . By 1574 it was the most important staging post for European expeditions into the interior , and it remained important in that role until as late as 1630 , although it was abandoned in 1631 . 
 In 1598 Alfonso Criado de Castilla became governor of the Captaincy General of Guatemala . Owing to the poor state of Puerto Caballos on the Honduran coast and its exposure to repeated pirate raids he sent a pilot to scout Lake Izabal . As a result of the survey , and after royal permission was granted , Criado de Castilla ordered the construction of a new port , named Santo Tomás de Castilla , at a favourable spot on the Amatique Bay not far from the lake . Work then began on building a highway from the port to the new capital of the colony , modern Antigua Guatemala , following the Motagua Valley into the highlands . Indigenous guides scouting the route from the highlands would not proceed further downriver than three leagues below Quiriguá , because the area was inhabited by the hostile Toquegua . 
 The leaders of Xocolo and Amatique , backed by the threat of Spanish action , persuaded a community of 190 Toquegua to settle on the Amatique coast in April 1604 . The new settlement immediately suffered a drop in population , but although the Amatique Toquegua were reported extinct before 1613 in some sources , Mercedarian friars were still attending to them in 1625 . In 1628 the towns of the Manche Ch 'ol were placed under the administration of the governor of Verapaz , with Francisco Morán as their ecclesiastical head . Morán favoured a more robust approach to the conversion of the Manche and moved Spanish soldiers into the region to protect against raids from the Itza to the north . The new Spanish garrison in an area that had not previously seen a heavy Spanish military presence provoked the Manche to revolt , which was followed by abandonment of the indigenous settlements . By 1699 the neighbouring Toquegua no longer existed as a separate people because of a combination of high mortality and intermarriage with the Amatique Indians . At around this time the Spanish decided on the reduction of the independent ( or " wild " from the Spanish point of view ) Mopan Maya living to the north of Lake Izabal . The north shore of the lake , although fertile , was by then largely depopulated , therefore the Spanish planned to bring the Mopan out of the forests to the north into an area where they could be more easily controlled . 
 During the campaign to conquer the Itza of Petén , the Spanish sent expeditions to harass and relocate the Mopan north of Lake Izabal and the Ch 'ol Maya of the Amatique forests to the east . They were resettled in the Colonial reducción of San Antonio de las Bodegas on the south shore of the lake and in San Pedro de Amatique . By the latter half of the 18th century the indigenous population of these towns had disappeared ; the local inhabitants now consisted entirely of Spaniards , mulattos and others of mixed race , all associated with the Castillo de San Felipe de Lara fort guarding the entrance to Lake Izabal . The main cause of the drastic depopulation of Lake Izabal and the Motagua Delta was the constant slave raids by the Miskito <unk> of the Caribbean coast that effectively ended the Maya population of the region ; the captured Maya were sold into slavery in the British colony of Jamaica . 
 = = = Conquest of Petén = = = 
 From 1527 onwards the Spanish were increasingly active in the Yucatán Peninsula , establishing a number of colonies and towns by 1544 , including Campeche and Valladolid in what is now Mexico . The Spanish impact on the northern Maya , encompassing invasion , epidemic diseases and the export of up to 50 @,@ 000 Maya slaves , caused many Maya to flee southwards to join the Itza around Lake Petén Itzá , within the modern borders of Guatemala . The Spanish were aware that the Itza Maya had become the centre of anti @-@ Spanish resistance and engaged in a policy of encircling their kingdom and cutting their trade routes over the course of almost two hundred years . The Itza resisted this steady encroachment by recruiting their neighbours as allies against the slow Spanish advance . 
 Dominican missionaries were active in Verapaz and the southern Petén from the late 16th century through the 17th century , attempting non @-@ violent conversion with limited success . In the 17th century the Franciscans came to the conclusion that the pacification and Christian conversion of the Maya would not be possible as long as the Itza held out at Lake Petén Itzá . The constant flow of escapees fleeing the Spanish @-@ held territories to find refuge with the Itza was a drain on the encomiendas . Fray Bartolomé de Fuensalida visited Nojpetén in 1618 and 1619 . The Franciscan missionaries attempted to use their own reinterpretation of the k 'atun prophecies when they visited Nojpetén at this time , to convince the current Aj Kan Ek ' and his Maya priesthood that the time for conversion had come . But the Itza priesthood interpreted the prophecies differently , and the missionaries were fortunate to escape with their lives . In 1695 the colonial authorities decided to connect the province of Guatemala with Yucatán , and Guatemalan soldiers conquered a number of Ch 'ol communities , the most important being Sakb 'ajlan on the Lacantún River in eastern Chiapas , now in Mexico , which was renamed as Nuestra Señora de Dolores , or Dolores del Lakandon . The Franciscan friar Andrés de Avendaño oversaw a second attempt to overcome the Itza in 1695 , convincing the Itza king that the K 'atun 8 Ajaw , a twenty @-@ year Maya calendrical cycle beginning in 1696 or 1697 , was the right time for the Itza to finally embrace Christianity and to accept the king of Spain as overlord . However the Itza had local Maya enemies who resisted this conversion , and in 1696 Avendaño was fortunate to escape with his life . The Itza 's continued resistance had become a major embarrassment for the Spanish colonial authorities , and soldiers were despatched from Campeche to take Nojpetén once and for all . 
 = = = = Fall of Nojpetén = = = = 
 Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi arrived on the western shore of lake Petén Itzá with his soldiers in February 1697 , and once there built a galeota , a large and heavily armed oar @-@ powered attack boat . The Itza capital fell in a bloody waterborne assault on 13 March 1697 . The Spanish bombardment caused heavy loss of life on the island ; many Itza Maya who fled to swim across the lake were killed in the water . After the battle the surviving defenders melted away into the forests , leaving the Spanish to occupy an abandoned Maya town . The Itza and Kowoj kings ( Ajaw Kan Ek ' and Aj Kowoj ) were soon captured , together with other Maya nobles and their families . With Nojpetén safely in the hands of the Spanish , Ursúa returned to Campeche ; he left a small garrison on the island , isolated amongst the hostile Itza and Kowoj who still dominated the mainland . Nojpetén was renamed by the Spanish as Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , Laguna del Itza ( " Our Lady of Remedy and Saint Paul , Lake of the Itza " ) . The garrison was reinforced in 1699 by a military expedition from Guatemala , accompanied by mixed @-@ race ladino civilians who came to found their own town around the military camp . The settlers brought disease with them , which killed many soldiers and colonists and swept through the indigenous population . The Guatemalans stayed just three months before returning to Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , taking the captive Itza king with them , together with his son and two of his cousins . The cousins died on the long journey to the colonial capital ; Ajaw Kan Ek ' and his son spent the rest of their lives under house arrest in the capital . 
 = = = Final years of conquest = = = 
 In the late 17th century the small population of Ch 'ol Maya in southern Petén and Belize was forcibly removed to Alta Verapaz , where the people were absorbed into the Q 'eqchi ' population . The Ch 'ol of the Lacandon Jungle were resettled in Huehuetenango in the early 18th century . Catholic priests from Yucatán founded several mission towns around Lake Petén Itzá in 1702 – 1703 . Surviving Itza and Kowoj were resettled in the new colonial towns by a mixture of persuasion and force . Kowoj and Itza leaders in these mission towns rebelled against their Spanish overlords in 1704 , but although well @-@ planned , the rebellion was quickly crushed . Its leaders were executed and most of the mission towns were abandoned . By 1708 only about 6 @,@ 000 Maya remained in central Petén , compared to ten times that number in 1697 . Although disease was responsible for the majority of deaths , Spanish expeditions and internecine warfare between indigenous groups also played their part . 
 = = Legacy of the Spanish conquest = = 
 The initial shock of the Spanish conquest was followed by decades of heavy exploitation of the indigenous peoples , allies and foes alike . Over the following two hundred years colonial rule gradually imposed Spanish cultural standards on the subjugated peoples . The Spanish reducciones created new nucleated settlements laid out in a grid pattern in the Spanish style , with a central plaza , a church and the town hall housing the civil government , known as the ayuntamiento . This style of settlement can still be seen in the villages and towns of the area . The civil government was either run directly by the Spanish and their descendents ( the criollos ) or was tightly controlled by them . The introduction of Catholicism was the main vehicle for cultural change , and resulted in religious syncretism . Old World cultural elements came to be thoroughly adopted by Maya groups , an example being the marimba , a musical instrument of African origin . The greatest change was the sweeping aside of the pre @-@ Columbian economic order and its replacement by European technology and livestock ; this included the introduction of iron and steel tools to replace Neolithic tools , and of cattle , pigs and chickens that largely replaced the consumption of game . New crops were also introduced ; however , sugarcane and coffee led to plantations that economically exploited native labour . Sixty per cent of the modern population of Guatemala is estimated to be Maya , concentrated in the central and western highlands . The eastern portion of the country was the object of intense Spanish migration and <unk> . Guatemalan society is divided into a class system largely based on race , with Maya peasants and artisans at the bottom , the mixed @-@ race ladino salaried workers and bureaucrats forming the middle and lower class and above them the creole elite of pure European ancestry . Some indigenous elites such as the Xajil did manage to maintain a level of status into the colonial period ; a prominent Kaqchikel noble family , they chronicled the history of their region . 
 = 1994 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1994 Giro d 'Italia was the 77th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro started off in Bologna on 22 May with a short 86 km ( 53 @.@ 4 mi ) stage . The race came to a close on 12 June with a flat stage that stretched 198 km ( 123 @.@ 0 mi ) from Turin to Milan . Seventeen teams entered the race , which was won by Evgeni Berzin of the Gewiss – Ballan team . Second and third respectively were the Italian Marco Pantani and the Spanish rider , Miguel Indurain . 
 Berzin first gained the race lead after the fourth stage where he attacked on the final climb to win the day . The race 's overall classification was first headed by Endrio Leoni who won the Giro 's opening road stage . However , Leoni lost the lead later that day during the afternoon individual time trial to Armand de Las Cuevas . De Las Cuevas held the lead for a single stage before losing it to Moreno Argentin who won the race 's second stage . Argentin held the general classification lead for two stages , before Berzin took it after stage 4 . After gaining the lead , Berzin began to build upon his advantage after winning the stage 8 and 18 individual time trials and maintaining good form throughout the mountains . 
 Berzin became the first Russian to win the Giro d 'Italia . Berzin also won the young rider classification for the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification . In the race 's other classifications , Swiss rider Pascal Richard won the mountains classification , and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov of Team Polti – Vaporetto was the winner of the points and intergiro classifications . Carrera Jeans – Tassoni finished as the winners of the team classification , which ranked each of the seventeen teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . Team Polti – Vaporetto finished as the winners of the team points classification , where the teams ' riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage . 
 = = Teams = = 
 A total of 18 teams were invited to participate in the 1994 Giro d 'Italia , of which 17 participated . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , so the Giro began with a peloton of 153 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager were introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place on 22 May , in the courtyard of the Bologna . Of the riders that started this edition of the Giro d 'Italia , a total of 99 riders made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton did 1993 winner , Miguel Indurain , came into the race having only raced twenty days during the season according to author Bill McGann . In addition , there were reports surfacing before the race that Indurain 's knee was troubling him . The race did not feature Tony Rominger , who elected to ride the Vuelta a España instead . El País writer Carlos Arribas felt that Evgeni Berzin had a strong spring with his victory in Liège – Bastogne – Liège and second @-@ place finish in the Tour of the Basque Country . Arribas felt that Russian Pavel Tonkov , who had won the young rider classification the previous two years , would challenge for the victory as his normal team leader , Maurizio Fondriest , was absent from the race due to injury . 
 Avui 's Adrian R. Huber believed that Djamolidine Abdoujaparov , Adriano Baffi , and Fabio Baldato had a great chance to win a stage in the race . Notable sprinter Mario Cipollini did not participate in the race as he was still recovering from injuries sustained in the second stage at the Vuelta a España . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1994 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 13 November 13 , 1993 in Milan . The race route in its <unk> was leaked to the press before Castellano held the official presentation . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were ten stages containing high mountains , of which three had summit finishes : stage 4 , to Campitello Matese ; stage 20 , to Les Deux Alpes ; and stage 21 , to Sestriere . Another stage with a mountain @-@ top finish was stage 18 , which consisted of a climbing time trial to the summit of the Passo dello Bocco . The organizers chose to include no rest days . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 28 km ( 17 mi ) longer , contained one less rest day , and one more stage . The race was televised in Italy by RAI TV . 
 There were five stages that began or ended outside of Italy . Stage 12 ended in the Slovenian city Kranj and served as the start for the race 's thirteenth stage . Stage 13 ended at Lienz in Austria , and the fourteenth began there . The Giro 's mountainous stage 20 ended on the slopes of Les Deux Alpes , and the penultimate stage began on the mountain the next day . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 This edition of the Giro began with a split stage , with the morning leg consisting of a 86 km ( 53 mi ) flat route and the afternoon part being a 7 km ( 4 mi ) flat individual time trial . Italian Endrio Leoni won the morning stage by means of a sprint finish where the speeds were so high the peloton split in the final kilometer . Armand de Las Cuevas won the afternoon time trial by two seconds over Evgeni Berzin and in the process took the overall lead away from Leoni . Stage two featured an uphill finish into the city of Osimo . Moreno Argentin attacked close to the line and was able to distance himself from the rest of the peloton and win the stage , while also taking the lead of the race . Gianni Bugno failed several times to get away from the peloton before finally breaking free on the climb into Loreto <unk> to win the third stage . 
 Stage 4 featured the race 's first summit finish , with a final climb to the top of Campitello Matese . While on the climb , Evgeni Berzin attacked and made his way up to the top in first place . Due to his efforts , Berzin gained the overall lead of the race . The next two stages , 5 and 6 , both came down to sprint finishes that were won by Endrio Leoni and Marco Saligari , respectively . The race 's seventh stage saw the Spaniard Laudelino Cubino outsprint his fellow breakaway members for the stage victory . Stage 8 was a 44 km ( 27 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from Grosseto to <unk> . The race leader Evgeni Berzin dominated the time trial as he won the stage by over a minute than the second @-@ place finisher , which also allowed him to extend his lead in the general classification . 
 The next three stages of the race were all primarily flat , had no real impact on the overall standings , and all concluded with a bunch sprint . Ján Svorada won stage nine and then stage eleven after dodging a crash that marred the stage 's finish . Djamolidine Abdoujaparov out @-@ sprinted the rest of the field to win the race 's tenth stage . The Giro 's twelfth stage featured a few categorized climbs as the race made its way into Slovenia for the stage 's finish in Kranj . Despite the climbs , the stage ended with a field sprint that was won by Andrea <unk> . Italian Michele Bartoli won the race 's undulating thirteenth stage by being a part of the stage 's initial breakaway and then attacking later on and soloing to the stage 's conclusion in Lienz , Austria . 
 As the Giro left Austria , the race began to enter the Dolomites during stage fourteen . The eventual stage winner Marco Pantani was in a chasing group on the final climb of the stage , the Passo di Monte <unk> . He attacked , bridged the gap to the leading group , and left them behind to claim his first professional victory of his career . The next stage saw Pantani win again after he rode away from the attack group on the last climb of the Valico di Santa Cristina and he then soloed to the finish in <unk> . Pantani 's efforts on the day moved him up to second overall in the race . The race 's sixteenth stage took a break from the mountains with the stage being primarily fled , which ultimately led to the sprint finish that was won by Italian Maximilian Sciandri . Ján Svorada won the next day 's stage after attacking from the breakaway group in the closing seconds . 
 The Giro 's eighteenth stage was a 35 km ( 22 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from <unk> to the summit finish on the Passo del Bocco . The race leader Evgeni Berzin won the stage by twenty seconds over Miguel Indurain . Stage 19 saw the day of racing come down to a sprint finish that was won by Massimo Ghirotto . The twentieth stage saw the Giro race through the Alps and up to the summit of Les Deux Alpes for the stage finish . The lead group up Les Deux Alpes contained the likes of Evgeni Berzin , Marco Pantani , and Miguel Indurain who had attacked each other multiple times but to no avail . The trio was later joined by Vladimir Poulnikov and Nelson Rodriguez who both eventually left them to go on for the stage win . <unk> edged out Rodriguez to the stage win atop the mountain . The penultimate stage of the Giro saw a summit finish atop the Sestriere . The stage saw snow and chilling temperatures which led to the general classification contenders sticking together , while Pascal Richard went on to win the summit finish and solidify his lead atop the mountains classification . The Giro 's final stage came down to a sprint finish that was won by Stefano Zanini as Evgeni Berzin won the Giro d 'Italia . 
 Success in stages was limited to eleven of the competing teams , six of which achieved multiple stage victories , while four individual riders won multiple stages . The riders that won more than once were Endrio Leoni in stages 1a and 5 , Evgeni Berzin in stages 4 , 8 , and 18 , Ján Svorada in stages 9 , 11 , and 17 , and Marco Pantani in stages 14 and 15 . Jolly Componibili @-@ Cage won two stages with Leoni . Gewiss @-@ Ballan won multiple stages , with Moreno Argentin in stage 2 and three stages with Berzin . Team Polti – Vaporetto won two stages , with Gianni Bugno in stage 3 and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov in stage 10 . GB @-@ MG Maglificio won three stages , with Marco Saligari in stage 6 , Maximilian Sciandri in stage 16 , and Pascal Richard in stage 21 . Lampre – Panaria won three stages with Ján Svorada . ZG Mobili @-@ Selle Italia won two stages , with Andrea <unk> in stage 12 and Massimo Ghirotto in stage 19 . Carrera Jeans – Tassoni also won multiple stages , with Marco Pantani in winning two stages and Vladimir Poulnikov in stage 20 . 
 Castorama , Kelme – Avianca – <unk> , Mercatone Uno – Medeghini , and Navigare – Blue Storm each won one stage apiece . Castorama rider Armand de Las Cuevas won stage 1b individual time trial , Kelme @-@ Avianca @-@ <unk> 's Laudelino Cubino won stage 7 , Mercatone Uno @-@ Medeghini rider Michele Bartoli won stage 13 , and Navigare @-@ Blue Storm 's Stefano Zanini stage 22 by means of a sprint finish . 
 = = = Doping = = = 
 Despite not testing positive during the race or season , the Gewiss @-@ Ballan team has since been speculated to have executed a systematic doping program that utilized EPO throughout the 1994 season . The team achieved several victories in stage races and one @-@ day races during the year , including a sweep of the podium at La Flèche Wallonne weeks before the start of the Giro . Team doctor Michele Ferrari was banned for life from sports in 2012 by United States Anti @-@ Doping Agency for distribution of performance @-@ enhancing drugs to several of his clients . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Five different jerseys were worn during the 1994 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . The time bonuses for the 1988 Giro were thirty seconds for first , twenty @-@ five for second , and decreasing by five seconds each place until five seconds for sixth place on the stage . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo dello Stelvio . The first rider to cross the Stelvio was Italian Franco Vona . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1970 were eligible for it . The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = Riverton – Belvidere Bridge = 
 The Riverton – Belvidere Bridge is a bridge crossing the Delaware River . It connects Belvidere , New Jersey with Riverton , Pennsylvania , United States . There is no toll for crossing on either side , after tolls were abolished by the Joint Commission for the Elimination of Toll Bridges in 1929 . The bridge is 653 feet ( 199 m ) long , holding a load of 8 short tons ( 16 @,@ 000 lb ) of traffic from County Route 620 Spur ( Water Street ) in Belvidere to former Pennsylvania Route 709 on the Riverton side . The bridge was first constructed in 1836 , replacing the local ferry across the river . The board of freeholders in Warren County supported the replacement of the ferry with a bridge for safety of passengers . In 1832 , the state created the Belvidere Delaware Bridge Company , which was funded with the job of building a bridge from Riverton to Belvidere . The new covered bridge was built by Solon Chapin , a contractor from Easton , Pennsylvania . The bridge survived two large storms in 1836 and 1841 , although sustained major damage both times . In 1903 , the floods that destroyed bridges along the Delaware River Valley , including taking out the entire covered structure at Riverton and Belvidere . They rebuilt the structure in 1904 , using steel instead of wood , and the new span has remained since , with rehabilitations at certain points . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The first bridge ( 1836 – 1903 ) = = = 
 Original reports indicate that a ferry , operated by a doctor who went by " Dr. Belvidere " , once ran along the alignment of the Riverton – Belvidere Bridge . This ferry , crossing one of the most dangerous parts of the Delaware , was reported to have opened as early as 1802 . On May 17 , 1825 , the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the ferry permitted raising the rate to cross the river via ferry . However , by 1832 , the ferry crossing was becoming dangerously busy , and required a bridge be constructed in its place . That year , the Belvidere Delaware Bridge Company was established by both the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania . However , in constructing the bridge , the company was only allowed $ 20 @,@ 000 ( 1832 USD ) to construct the bridge . The bridge company had the designs for the bridge run by Solon Chapin , a contractor from Easton , Pennsylvania . Chapin was also the construction contractor on the nearby <unk> Bridge as well . 
 Although things seemed to start off smoothly , when construction began on the bridge in 1834 , things went downhill . The bridge was constructed fast , and when completed in the spring of 1836 , it was a wooden covered bridge at a length of 654 feet ( 199 m ) . Within days of opening the bridge , on April 9 , 1836 , a storm blew through the valley , destroying two of the bridges three piers and rendered the new bridge unusable . After restarting construction later , the bridge was redone using the same piers and in 1839 , was completed and opened once again . However , in January 1841 , another storm , dubbed the Bridges <unk> of January 1841 , blew through the valley , destroying most of the bridges in the area , and causing major damage to the structure from Riverton to Belvidere . However , this time , the bridge survived the storm . A local historian stated that because of the constant <unk> on the bridge itself , the bridge company had never paid one dividend of money to its stockholders . Although , after society on both sides of the bridge began to live life with it , money started flowing into the accounts of the stockholders . 
 In 1903 , the demise of wooden covered bridge would be seen , as a storm , dubbed the Pumpkin Flood of 1903 , struck in October of that year . The storm struck both communities , and the bridge in between , causing the loss of many lives , and on October 17 , the toll collector on the bridge closed off the gate and did not allow any person to cross . At 6 : 40 that evening , a crash was heard , and seconds later , the bridge was no more , after tumbling into the Delaware River below . Remnants of the bridge were swept downstream , and smashed on the side of the new Northampton Street Bridge , constructed just a few years before . After the storm cleared , the community of Belvidere put a ferry to Riverton back in almost immediately . 
 = = = Construction of the current bridge ( 1904 ) = = = 
 After the 1903 destruction of the original wooden bridge at Belvidere , plans to construct another bridge started immediately . After the storm , the substructure of the crossing had survived the strong storm . The bridge corporation set a completion date , August 17 , 1904 , which was the day that the Farmer 's Picnic was held in Belvidere . However , the contractor of which they hired to reconstruct the bridge , the New Jersey Bridge Company of Manasquan , New Jersey , believed that the new bridge would need new abutments and piers to be completed by that time , instead of using the old wooden bridge 's piers . The three piers from the wooden bridge were used , and would require them to be heightened to be above any high flood waters . On June 3 , 1904 , the bridge construction began on a barge in the river , with promises to be complete by the set date of August 17 . On August 17 , the bridge was not complete , but usable , that when the Farmer 's Picnic ( the predecessor to the Warren County Fair , occurred , people were allowed to cross a majority of the bridge . The picnic itself was a complete success , attracting over 15 @,@ 000 people , most of which walked the bridge . 
 Although the bridge was usable , work still had to be completed on the new bridge . The contractor promised the bridge corporation that the bridge would be finished by Labor Day of 1904 , or September 5 , 1904 . The bridge corporation and a local group called The Red Men scheduled festivities and the official turnover of the bridge back to the corporation . On September 5 , 1904 , the day of the transfer , the chief executive of the contracting company , W.H. Keepers arrived , he found the bridge to be unacceptable . Bolts were missing in places of the bridge and paint was not completed , both of which were in violation of the contract . The festivities for the bridge were canceled , and visitors were disappointed . The Red Men held events , but the turnout was light . A high point of the events that day was done by a man named Murphy Jones , who as a stunt , jumped a 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) plunge into the Delaware River from the bridge . The festive stunt got Jones a total of $ 15 ( 1904 USD ) and the event became an annual one . Work finally came to a conclusion in 1904 , and the people were beginning to cross the new structure . However , since the turnover had never occurred , the bridge was free of charge . 
 = = = The current bridge ( 1904 – present ) = = = 
 On September 5 , 1904 , the bridge finally got its transfer to the bridge corporation , and a new toll @-@ taker was hired for the new bridge . After this , life went back to normal in both communities . In October 1928 , after the charter and opening of the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , the bridge company was asked to sell the bridge to the commission for $ 60 @,@ 000 ( 1928 USD ) , and on June 14 , 1929 , the commission abolished tolls along the bridge , making it free to cross at either end . With the bridge now under the control of the toll bridge commission , extensive repairs began on the 25 @-@ year @-@ old structure . This construction included new beams for the bridge , new flooring , and an extensive repair to one bridge pier . Although the construction had only taken four months to complete , it still caused havoc in commuting across the structure . In 1940 , the Pennsylvania approach to the bridge was designated as Pennsylvania Route 709 , a designation that would last six years , being decommissioned in 1946 . The structure would face its most recent strength test in 1955 , after the massive flooding from Hurricane Diane wreaked havoc in the area . The structure received minor damage in the flood , and the traffic was only halted for a day or two afterward . The design in the 1904 plan worked , as the structure was not at flood level . 
 Starting in October 2006 , the Toll Bridge Commission began an $ 8 @.@ 8 @.@ million rehabilitation of the structure . The rehabilitation helped extend the life of the bridge for years rather than shutting the bridge down constantly for the next 15 years for major repairs . The Commission replaced the flooring , repairing or replacing of certain steel portions of the bridge , blast @-@ cleaning and repainted the structure . 
 = Cleeve Abbey = 
 Cleeve Abbey is a medieval monastery located near the village of Washford , in Somerset , England . It is a Grade I listed building and has been scheduled as an ancient monument . 
 The abbey was founded in the late twelfth century as a house for monks of the austere Cistercian order . Over its 350 @-@ year monastic history Cleeve was undistinguished amongst the abbeys of its order , frequently ill @-@ governed and often financially troubled . The sole member of the community to achieve prominence was John Hooper , who became a bishop during the Reformation . 
 In 1536 Cleeve was closed by Henry VIII in the course of the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the abbey was converted into a country house . Subsequently , the status of the site declined and the abbey was used as farm buildings until the latter half of the nineteenth century when steps were taken to conserve the remains . In the twentieth century Cleeve was taken into state care ; the abbey is now looked after by English Heritage and is open to the public . Today Cleeve Abbey is one of the best @-@ preserved medieval Cistercian monastic sites in Britain . While the church is no longer standing , the <unk> buildings are still roofed and habitable and contain many features of particular interest including the ' angel ' roof in the refectory and the wall paintings in the painted chamber . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 The abbey was founded by William de <unk> , Earl of Lincoln in a grant of 1191 , on land he had been given by king Æthelred the Unready . On 25 June 1198 a colony of 12 monks led by Abbot Ralph arrived at the site from <unk> Abbey in Lincolnshire . The official name of the abbey was Vallis Florida , ( Latin : ' Flowering Valley ' ) but throughout its history it was generally known as Cleeve after the nearby village . The initial funding for the foundation was increased by land and money from the family of William de Mohun of Dunster , 1st Earl of Somerset and the <unk> family . In addition to various landholdings with produced rent for the abbey they held the Right of Wreck , which meant they could claim shipwrecks washed up on the shore of their lands . 
 = = Abbey buildings = = 
 Work immediately began on constructing the abbey church , a task that took many decades . It was a conservative design , heavily influenced by the thoughts of St. Bernard and the order 's early churches in its homeland of Burgundy . It was cruciform in shape with an aisled nave of seven bays , a short , square east end , and transepts each with two side chapels . The eastern parts of the church were built first , and were likely finished in 1232 , at which point the abbey received a royal donation of oak to build choir stalls . The remainder was probably completed by mid @-@ century . 
 To the south of the church a cloister was laid out , surrounded by the domestic buildings of the house . The east range , which was completed first ( probably by around 1250 ) , held the chapter house , sacristy , the monks ' dormitory , day room , and a 19 @.@ 7 metres ( 65 ft ) long reredorter ( latrine ) . The south range was built next , it contained the kitchens , warming house and refectory which projected south beyond the main body of the building , following the usual Cistercian plan . 
 It is suggested from the heraldry used in the tiled floors of the refectory that it was finished at the end of the thirteenth century . The <unk> tiles , which are 23 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) square , include the arms of Henry III , Richard , 1st Earl of Cornwall and the Clare family . It is believed they were produced to celebrate the marriage of Edmund , 2nd Earl of Cornwall and Margaret de Clare in 1272 . The final part to be finished was the small west range , which was used for storage and quarters for the lay brothers . East of the core buildings , and linked to them , was a second cloister around which was the monastic infirmary . 
 The monastery , which is next to the River Washford , would have been surrounded by gardens , fishponds , orchards , barns , guesthouses , stables , a farmyard and industrial buildings . The abbey grounds were defended by a water filled moat and a gatehouse . Excavation has revealed that a large stone cross , like a market cross , stood just west of the main building . 
 Though Cleeve was by no means a wealthy house , the monks were able to make significant investment in remodelling their home so as to match the rising living standards of the later mediaeval period . In the fourteenth @-@ century elaborate polychrome tiled floors ( an expensive and high status product ) were laid throughout the abbey and in the mid @-@ fifteenth century radical works were undertaken . A wooden shelter was constructed over the tiled floor in 2016 . Abbot David Juyner ( r . 1435 – 87 ) commissioned a complete redesign of the south range of the monastery . He demolished the old refectory and built a new one parallel to the cloister on the first floor . This grand chamber with its wooden vaulted ceiling ( carved with angels ) was the equal of the hall of any contemporary secular lord . Beneath it he built several self @-@ contained apartments . These were probably used by <unk> , pensioners of the abbey . Juyner may also have been responsible for decorating the abbey with wall paintings of religious and allegorical subjects . Some of these wall paintings survive . As well as one depicting the Crucifixion , there is an arrangement of St Catherine and St Margaret on either side of , and facing , a man standing on a bridge : the bridge is over water full of fish , and the man has an angel on either side of his head , and is being attacked by a lion to his left on the bridge , and a dragon to his right . Work continued under Juyner 's successors to the eve of the Dissolution . The last building work to be completed was the remodelling of the gatehouse , performed after 1510 , though as late as 1534 the monks were engaged in a major project of renewing the cloister walks in the latest fashion . As at the neighbouring house of Forde Abbey , this was never completed , due to the dissolution of the abbey . 
 = = Monastic history = = 
 Like most of the smaller Cistercian houses , comparatively little is known about the internal history of the abbey . In its early years Cleeve received grants of land and property from local lords and the Crown to supplement its initial endowment and in the prosperous years of the thirteenth century grew steadily , reaching 26 monks in 1297 . The abbey held various local churches , including those at Cleeve , Queen Camel , <unk> while also holding the rectory of Lundy . The abbey was also responsible for the chapel of Our Lady between Old Cleeve and what is now Blue Anchor ; however although this has since disappeared , the inn for pilgrims attending the chapel has been expanded into the present Chapel Cleeve Manor . 
 A major source of income was the export of wool . However , the fourteenth century saw a change in fortunes : the Black Death , a worsening economic climate and poor administration left the abbey ( like many others of its order ) with sharply declining numbers of monks and saddled with major debt . The internal discipline and morals of the community declined too : in 1400 – 01 it was reported to the government that the abbot of Cleeve and three other monks were leading a group of 200 bandits and attacking travellers in the region . However , things improved in the fifteenth century and despite the vast expense caused by the extravagant building projects of the last abbots , better management , access to new resources ( for instance from the profits from the right to hold markets granted by the crown ) and a general improvement in the circumstances facing the house meant that just prior to the dissolution Cleeve was enjoying an Indian Summer of comfortable stability . 
 = = Dissolution = = 
 In 1535 , the abbey 's income was only assessed at £ 155 in the Valor Ecclesiasticus , Henry VIII 's great survey of church finances . It meant the following year that it came under the terms of the first Suppression Act , Henry 's initial move in the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Abbot William Dovell and his 16 monks were forced to surrender the abbey on 6 September 1536 . There were proposals from local gentry and even some of the king 's officials for the Dissolution such as Sir Thomas Arundell that Cleeve should be granted a reprieve , as a number of others among the smaller monasteries were , however , it was not to be and the monks finally left in the spring of 1537 . Abbot William was given a pension of 40 marks per year , not large but certainly comfortable , which he was still drawing 20 years later . Most of the other monks were given pensions too . One former monk of Cleeve rose to prominence and came to a sticky end . This was John Hooper who became Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester and was killed in 1555 for his Protestant beliefs by Mary I. 
 = = Later history = = 
 Soon after Cleeve became Crown property , it was leased to Anthony <unk> for 21 years . In 1538 , the freehold of the site was granted to Robert Radcliffe , 1st Earl of Sussex . The church was demolished , save for the south wall which bounded the cloister , and the rest of the abbey converted into a mansion suitable for a gentleman . By the early seventeenth century , however , Cleeve had turned into a farm . The dormitory was now a large barn , the cloister was the farmyard and the rest of the buildings were used for agricultural purposes and a farm house . A red sandstone barn was built which abuts the south @-@ west corner of the abbey . 
 George Luttrell of Dunster Castle acquired the site in 1870 . The abbey stopped being used as a farm and extensive archaeological excavations took place . The farm house was converted into rental cottages , and the site became a tourist attraction , partly to bring traffic to the West Somerset Railway . <unk> Clapp a local farmers daughter , who was named after the abbey , acted as a guide and described her nightly " <unk> " with the ghosts of the monks for a shilling a head . 
 Cleeve Abbey was passed back to the Crown in 1950 – 51 to pay Death Duties on the Luttrell estate and was managed by the Department for the Environment . Major restoration and archaeological work followed . In 1984 , English Heritage took over responsibility for Cleeve Abbey , carrying out excavations and earthwork surveys and continues to care for it today . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The church and infirmary have almost entirely vanished , but the site boasts some of the finest and best @-@ preserved monks ' living quarters still surviving in southern England . The buildings round the cloister are still roofed and habitable and many of the rooms retain their vaults . Among the most important preserved rooms are the chapter house , the refectory with its magnificent arch braced wooden vault and the painted chamber . Much of the abbey 's medieval tiled flooring remains . Other major survivals include the abbey gatehouse , which still provides entrance to the visitor , the moat and fishponds . Cleeve is open to the public . 
 The remains of the buildings have been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building , and it is listed as a Scheduled monument . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Abbey was the original site on which ' <unk> ' , the setting for the Abbey Series of books by Elsie J. Oxenham , was based . Many of its features described by Oxenham , who visited Cleeve in the early years of the twentieth century , can be identified at the site today , although literary licence allowed her to add features from elsewhere or from her imagination . 
 The castle scenes in the children 's musical @-@ comedy television series Maid Marian and her Merry Men were filmed in Cleeve Abbey . 
 = Serbia – United States relations = 
 Serbian – American relations are bilateral relations between the governments of Serbia and the United States . They were first established in 1882 . From 1918 to 2006 the United States maintained relations with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , SFR Yugoslavia , and Serbia and Montenegro , of which Serbia is considered the legal successor state . 
 At the end of the 19th century , the United States sought to take advantage of the Ottoman Empire 's withdrawal from Eastern Europe by establishing diplomatic relations with newly emerged nations , among them Serbia . Serbia and the United States were both allies during World War I. After the first World War , Serbia united with the Kingdom of Montenegro and territories previously held by Austria @-@ Hungary . This unified state became known as Yugoslavia , with which the United States had diplomatic relations up to the beginning of World War II . In the front in Yugoslavia during World War II , the US ultimately supported Serbian royalists known as Chetniks . However , Josip Broz Tito , the leader of Yugoslav Partisans during the war , ended up governing Yugoslavia after World War II , which resulted in a period of cutoff between Yugoslavia and the United States in the late 1940s . The end of World War II also resulted in the mass emigration of refugees from Yugoslavia , many of which were Serbs who ended up moving to the United States . This helped create the first major Serbian diaspora in the United States . Some of the Serbian refugees who settled in the United States after World War II were anti @-@ communist exiles who attempted to undermine Tito during the Cold War , using the United States as a venue for their anti @-@ communist aims . 
 Through the breakup of Yugoslavia , the United States engaged in both combative and economic conflict , particularly with Serbia , known at the time as Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( successor of SFR Yugoslavia ) . The United States imposed sanctions and spearheaded a NATO bombing campaign of Yugoslavia in 1999 . Throughout the period of conflict during the 1990s , another wave of Serbian emigration ensued , and many Serbian refugees moved to the United States . In the 2000s , diplomatic relations between the United States and Yugoslavia were restored , but were changed when Montenegro seceded in 2006 , after which Serbia was the successor state to continue relations previously held by FR Yugoslavia . In 2008 Kosovo Assembly unilaterally declared independence from Serbia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Yugoslavia = = = 
 Diplomatic relations between the then @-@ Kingdom of Serbia and the United States were established in the 19th century . In 1879 , the Serbian Consulate @-@ General in New York was opened . On February 3 , 1882 , the Serbian Parliament adopted a contract and Convention of diplomatic relations between the Kingdom of Serbia and the United States , given by King Milan Obrenović . The United States Senate adopted both documents on July 5 , 1882 without debate or amendments . On November 10 , 1882 , Eugene Schuyler became the first United States ambassador in Serbia . 
 = = = US support of Serbian monarchists during World War II = = = 
 During World War II in Yugoslavia , the United States initially supported the royal government of Yugoslavia . When the Nazis invaded Yugoslavia in the spring of 1941 , the United States decisively supported the Chetniks in the first years of the war . This support took place in the form of extensive clandestine relations between the Office of Strategic Services and Chetniks with William Donovan 's administration . Such cooperation was highlighted by complex operations such as Operation <unk> , in which several hundred American pilots were rescued by Chetniks . However , OSS support for the Chetniks was compromised by the United Kingdom 's MI6 policy of favoring the Yugoslav Partisans over the Chetniks . In 1943 , the US government 's support for the Chetniks over the Yugoslav Partisans was such that president Franklin D. Roosevelt discussed with Winston Churchill in a private conversation that he imagined that Yugoslavia 's boundaries would be completely redrawn into three separate states , with Peter Karađorđević Jr. being the monarch of an independent Serbian kingdom at the end of the war . The USAF and the British RAF began bombing Belgrade indiscriminately in April 1944 when they thought that Nazi occupation could not be removed by home @-@ grown resistance alone . The United States intelligence circles gradually conceded its influence on Yugoslav guerrilla operations to the British . At the end of the war , President Harry S. Truman dedicated a Legion of Merit to Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović , but the award wasn 't revealed publicly until 2005 . 
 = = = Cold War relations ( 1945 – 1991 ) = = = 
 After the end of World War II , the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( <unk> ) was formed . One of the first diplomatic contacts made with the new communist government was the US Department of State 's request for the US Army to testify at the Mihailović trial . However , the request was shunned and early relations between the United States and the government of Josip Broz Tito became strained , as American diplomats were furious over Mihailović 's execution in 1946 . Relations degraded even further a month later , when two USAF C @-@ 47 Skytrain cargo aircraft were shot down over Yugoslavia in the space of two weeks . More USAF aircraft were shot down over Yugoslavia up to 1948 . As a result , U.S. senator Thomas Dodd staunchly opposed American financial aid to Tito 's government , even saying that " Tito had bloodied hands . " In one of Josip Broz Tito 's early visits to the United States , protesters in San Pedro drowned an effigy of him . 
 The communist governments in Europe deferred to Stalin and rejected Marshall Plan aid from the United States in 1947 . At first , Tito went along and rejected the Marshall plan . However , in 1948 Tito broke decisively with Stalin on other issues , making Yugoslavia an independent communist state . Yugoslavia then requested American aid . American leaders were internally divided , but finally agreed and began sending money on a small scale in 1949 , and on a much larger scale 1950 @-@ 53 . The American aid was not part of the Marshall Plan . 
 Yugoslavia began opening more diplomatic dialogue to western nations after the Tito – Stalin split , which assured that Yugoslavia was not to become a member of the Warsaw Pact . On January 1 , 1967 , Yugoslavia was the first communist country to open its borders to all foreign visitors and abolish visa requirements . Regular commercial air travel between the United States and Yugoslavia was introduced with Pan Am and <unk> Yugoslav Airlines . Due to this , trade opportunities reopened between the United States and Yugoslavia , and American businesses began exporting to Yugoslavia . Likewise , by the 1980s Yugoslavia was even exporting many of its manufactured automobiles from Zastava Automobili 's assembly line in Kragujevac to the United States . U.S. president Jimmy Carter discussed issues regarding Palestine and Egypt with Tito and referred to him as a " great world leader " . Subsequently , the Reagan administration began targeting the Yugoslav economy in a Secret Sensitive 1984 National Security Decision Directive <unk> 133 . " U.S. Policy towards Yugoslavia . " A censored version declassified in 1990 elaborated on <unk> 54 on Eastern Europe , issued in 1982 . The latter advocated " expanded efforts to promote a ' quiet revolution ' to overthrow Communist governments and parties , " while reintegrating the countries of Eastern Europe into a market @-@ oriented economy . 
 = = = = Serbian radicals in the United States during the existence of Yugoslavia = = = = 
 For much of the socialist period , the United States was a haven for many Serbian anti @-@ communists living outside Yugoslavia . On 20 June 1979 , a Serbian nationalist named Nikola <unk> hijacked American Airlines Flight 293 from New York City with the intention of crashing the Boeing 707 into League of Communists of Yugoslavia headquarters in Belgrade . The aircraft , however , landed in Shannon , Ireland , where <unk> were arrested . 
 A group of six Serbian nationalists , among them Boško Radonjić , placed a home @-@ made bomb in the home of the Yugoslav consulate in Chicago in 1975 . Radonjić later became the leader of the Westies gang in New York City , where he participated in organized crime and racketeering . He eventually became one of the most feared gangsters in the New York City underworld , and developed extensive friendships with John Gotti and the Gambino family . After Sammy Gravano turned John Gotti in to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in December 1990 , Radonjić was highly suspected to have attempted to fix the trial on John Gotti 's behalf . As a result of this , Radonjić was arrested on December 1999 during a lockdown at Miami International Airport when he was tracked down by the FBI . He was arrested in the United States again in January 2000 for further investigation of the 1992 Gotti trial . Upon release in 2001 , he left the United States and moved back to Serbia where he lived until his death in 2011 . He was also an admirer and long @-@ time friend of Radovan Karadžić until the latter went into hiding in 1996 . 
 In the 1980s , Vojislav Šešelj taught political science at the University of Michigan after being expelled by the League of Communists of Yugoslavia in 1981 . In June 1989 , he traveled to the United States again to meet with Momčilo Đujić in San Marcos , California , where Đujić named him Chetnik Vojvoda ( duke in Serbian ) . He went on to form the Serbian Radical Party in 1991 and was accused by the ICTY tribunal of leading the Beli <unk> militants in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in war @-@ state Republic of Serbian Krajina . Radovan Karadžić pursued post @-@ graduate medical studies at Columbia University from 1974 to 1975 , but did so without any specific political agenda at the time being ; he later became the war @-@ time president of the Republika Srpska during the Bosnian War and subsequently went into hiding in Serbia until his capture in 2008 for ICTY charges of war crimes and genocide . 
 = = = Deteriorating relations and war with FR Yugoslavia ( 1991 – 2000 ) = = = 
 The first form of sanctions initiated by the US against Yugoslavia took place already from 1990 as the Nickels Amendment , which was sponsored by senators Don Nickles and Bob Dole . The amendment was passed due to concerns about Albanians being arrested in Kosovo . The amendment officially came into legal effect from May 6 , 1992 ; although it applied only to $ 5 million @-@ worth of US foreign aid , it was reported as instrumental in denying SFR Yugoslavia its last application for IMF loans before its breakup and hyperinflation episode . 
 The breakup of Yugoslavia began in 1992 , the territories consisting of Serbia , Montenegro , and Kosovo composed the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . In the midst of the Yugoslav Wars , the United States as well as an overwhelming majority of states from the United Nations severed economic ties and imposed sanctions on FR Yugoslavia on May 30 , 1992 . 
 = = = = The Panić – Ćosić – Milošević triangle and the United States = = = = 
 The Yugoslav government of the newly formed FR Yugoslavia ( successor to SFR Yugoslavia ) ended up having three ideologically @-@ opposed leaders occupying executive positions . From 1992 , while Slobodan Milošević was the president of the Federal Republic of Serbia , national theorist Dobrica Ćosić was named President of FR Yugoslavia . Meanwhile , Milan Panić , a business magnate based in Newport Beach , California , accepted Milošević 's invitation to be Prime Minister . Panić was subsequently elected as Prime Minister in the 1992 Yugoslav parliamentary elections . The United States did not revoke Panić 's citizenship even though his occupation of an executive position in the Yugoslav government clearly contradicted the United States Constitution . Nevertheless , Panić would become a person of interest in US diplomatic circles , given his business and residence backgrounds . At a CSCE meeting in Helsinki in July 1992 , US Secretary of State James Baker abruptly dismissed Panić 's appeal to reduce the sanctions to Yugoslavia , even after an agreement ( between Panić , Milošević , and Dušan <unk> ) was reached by which Milošević would resign in return for sanction @-@ relief . This ended up severely damaging Panić 's unique diplomatic position internationally , as well as his standing in Yugoslavia . The Los Angeles Times published an article which described Panić as a doubtful upholder of potential American @-@ Yugoslavian peacemaking , when in fact , many years later made to be known , Panić was actually invited by Baker in the first place rather than voluntarily coming to Helsinki . 
 Panić and former US ambassador to Yugoslavia John Douglas Scanlan cooperated on a deep level in a campaign to challenge conservative politicians which echoed Baker 's disapproval of giving Yugoslavia sanctions @-@ relief in return for Milošević 's planned resignation . One of Panić 's advisors , academic Ljubiša Rakić , was dispatched to explain to Larry <unk> that the H.W. Bush administration was mistaken in seeing Panić as a Milošević puppet . <unk> replied , " Don 't worry , we are going to do our own thing " . 
 The three @-@ pronged government lasted only from May to December 1992 , as Panić and Ćosić decided to challenge Milošević in institutionally @-@ revised elections in December that same year . The December election ended up as a failure for the opposition to Milošević , as Ćosić pulled out of the campaign in the last moment due to health problems . Multiple politicians of the opposition parties criticized the US @-@ instigated fossil @-@ fuel sanctions in the midst of a cold 1992 @-@ 93 winter , saying that they actually further helped sympathy for Milošević and not against him . 
 = = = = Post @-@ Dayton lull and US macroeconomic influence in Yugoslavia ( 1995 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 On November 21 , 1995 , Serbian president Slobodan Milošević travelled to the United States to sign the Dayton Peace Accords with Croatian president Franjo Tuđman and Bosnian president Alija Izetbegović near Dayton , Ohio . Months later , sanctions against Yugoslavia were finally lifted in October 1996 . 
 In 1997 , a group of 17 economists wrote a letter titled " Program <unk> <unk> <unk> u <unk> " , advocating liberal macroeconomic policy by creating alarming predictions of the Yugoslav economy from 1998 to 2010 . Not by coincidence , the letter was first published by B92 , arguably the most West @-@ friendly media outlet in Yugoslavia at the time . This would be the base for what would become a highly controversial political party in Serbia , G17 Plus , which began as an NGO funded by the National Endowment for Democracy . The original writers of the 1997 letter subsequently divided , as some either shunned or even criticized G17 's fundamentals , whereas others would end up occupying positions in the post @-@ Milošević government from 2000 . 
 = = = = NATO bombing of Yugoslavia = = = = 
 The United States reinstated sanctions against Yugoslavia in March 1998 when the Kosovo War started . Shortly after the controversies at <unk> and Rambouillet , American diplomat Richard Holbrooke traveled to Belgrade in March 1999 to deliver the final ultimatum requesting entry of UN forces into Kosovo . Milošević rejected the ultimatum , so the United States completely severed ties with Yugoslavia on March 23 , 1999 . Bill Clinton became the first president to declare war while bypassing a Congressional majority . The establishment of the bombing campaign was contested by one of the tightest <unk> ( 213 @-@ 213 ) in the entire history of the House of Representatives . The United States declared war on Yugoslavia on March 24 , 1999 to take part in Operation Allied Force led by U.S. general Wesley Clark . Out of all the territories in Yugoslavia at the time , Serbia was bombed the most due to its concentration of military targets . As a result of Slobodan Milošević granting entry to KFOR in Kosovo , the war against Yugoslavia ceased on June 10 , 1999 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war relations = = = 
 = = = = Bulldozer Revolution ( 2000 ) = = = = 
 A group named <unk> ! , originally formed by students in 1998 with the financial assistance of USAID , International Republican Institute , and NED , was one of multiple significant participants in the Bulldozer Revolution , from which Milošević was overthrown . USAID donated over $ 30 million for <unk> to " purchase cell phones and computers for DOS 's leadership and to recruit and train an army of 20 @,@ 000 election monitors " as well as to supplement them with " a sophisticated marketing campaign with posters , badges and T @-@ shirts . " After the Bulldozer Revolution on October 5 , 2000 , the United States reestablished a diplomatic presence in Belgrade . In 2013 , the Associated Press published an article which reported that a CIA operative , Francis Archibald , participated in the organization of the October 5 coup and that the overthrow was " regarded inside the CIA as a blueprint for running a successful peaceful covert action " . 
 = = = = Transition with DOS and its party remnants ( 2001 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Sanctions against FR Yugoslavia were lifted in January 2001 . The United States under the Bush administration denied giving any aid to Yugoslavia even several months after UN sanctions were lifted before Vojislav Koštunica promised to cooperate with demands from The Hague regarding the Slobodan Milošević trial . 
 In March 2001 , American economist Joseph Stiglitz traveled to Belgrade to talk to a prominent Democratic Opposition leader , Zoran Đinđić , about the potential consequences of IMF @-@ sponsored austerity . On June 25 , 2001 , Stiglitz published a paper , " Serbia 's Advantages in Coming Late " , about the necessity for Serbia not to rush privatization and not to pursue " shock therapy " , which was the established macroeconomic advise of the Bretton Woods institutions . Đinđić , however , did not live long to analyze the advice of the Bretton Woods institutions or the anti @-@ austerity plan of Stiglitz , as he was assassinated on March 12 , 2003 . This accumulated to a crescendo when G17 Plus got into an intense standoff with the Serbian government , composed mostly by DOS , due to the fact that G17 Plus continuously lobbied for the dissolution of the state union of Serbia and Montenegro . Later , in May 2006 , Montenegro declared independence from the Serbo @-@ Montenegrin state union ; the United States immediately respected the results and urged the new government in Podgorica to keep close ties with Serbia . The United States recognized Serbia as the official successor state of the Serbia and Montenegro and the preceding Yugoslav state . 
 Outside of fiscal policy , American influence was evident in executive positions . In September 2002 , it was announced that the Military Court in Belgrade was to press charges against Momčilo Perišić , who was the vice president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at the time , for espionage in the favour of the CIA . The trial never took place , although upon his release from The Hague on February 28 , 2013 , it was announced by Perišić 's lawyer Novak Lukić that his client was " ready to be judged " on the same 2002 accusations of espionage . As of 2015 no further investigation has taken place . 
 = = = = 2008 – 12 : Tadić era = = = = 
 On February 15 , 2008 , it was announced that the pro @-@ Western Boris Tadić won the 2008 Serbian presidential election . The 2008 elections were particularly important to Serbia 's relations with the United States , as the main challenging party which lost the election , SRS , disintegrated when Tomislav Nikolić split with Vojislav Šešelj over integration into the European Union . When Nikolić split from SRS and began pursuing a pro @-@ European profile ( a reversal from SRS 's eurosceptic position ) , he was being advised by American lobbying firm Quinn Gillespie & Associates . 
 Only a few days after this election result , the declaring of independence by Kosovo on February 17 , 2008 spurred off widespread unrest in Serbia , during which the embassy of the United States was evacuated and then torched by a mob . One man of Serbian nationality was killed inside of the embassy during the unrest . Serbia temporarily withdrew its ambassador from Washington , D.C. , but the U.S. embassy in Belgrade was closed only for several days . Ambassador Cameron Munter said that no degrading of relations were expected regardless of the unrest . 
 = = = = SNS @-@ era ( 2012 – ) = = = = 
 On April 19 , 2012 , shortly before the 2012 Serbian parliamentary election , former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani traveled to Belgrade to attend a news conference with Belgrade mayor candidate Aleksandar <unk> . The US Embassy to Serbia gave a statement that it did not support any specific candidate in the upcoming election . Belgrade mayor Dragan Đilas slammed the conference which Giuliani attended , telling press that " Giuliani should not speak about Belgrade 's future as a man who supported the bombing of Serbia . " After the 2012 presidential elections in Serbia , a large number of local news outlets and even some intellectuals interpreted Philip T. <unk> 's visit to Belgrade in July 2012 as an attempt to create a parliamentary coalition between the Demokratska Stranka and the Serbian Progressive Party as opposed to the Progressive @-@ SPS bloc which had been composed by the election results . The election ultimately gave SNS along with its partners a victory , while Demokratska Stranka was removed into the opposition . The newly elected government ultimately continued largely the same Euro @-@ Atlantic integration programs pursued by the Tadić administration . According to the 2012 U.S. Global Leadership Report , only 20 % of Serbs approved of U.S. leadership , with 57 % disapproving and 22 % uncertain , the fifth @-@ lowest rating for any surveyed European country that year . 
 = = Immigration , brain drain , and professionals from Serbia = = 
 There is a sizable Serbian American diaspora in the United States ; in 2007 a total of 172 @,@ 834 people of Serbian nationality or descent were recorded to be inhabiting the U.S. The first documented wave of Serbian immigrants to the United States was recorded in the 1970s when many Serbian factory workers emigrated to Detroit to manufacture automobiles for Ford . In 2011 , Serbia was ranked second in the world ( after Guinea Bissau ) in human capital flight according to USAID . Brain drain to the United States and Canada has been cited as a chronic phenomenon in Serbia , especially from 1990 to 2000 during the decade of UN sanctions and war . 
 = = Trade and investment = = 
 Serbia 's strongest exports to the United States include Fiat automobiles manufactured in Kragujevac . Fiat purchased Zastava Automobili in 2008 and subsequently managed the factory in Kragujevac so that it would produce new Fiat automobiles as opposed to Zastava models ( the last <unk> were produced in 2008 ) ; in May 2013 alone , 3 @,@ 000 Fiat 500L units were shipped from Serbia to Baltimore for sale in the United States . The Fiat 500L is the first automobile to have been exported from Serbia to the United States since the Zastava Koral before 1992 , and is proving to be a popular model with a large amount of advertising in the United States . Serbia is also the largest exporter of raspberries in the world ( as of 2009 ) , and much of the raspberries consumed in the United States are grown in Šumadija . In 2015 , the two states discussed to find ways to increase investments in Serbia . 
 = M @-@ 221 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 221 is a short state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) of the US state of Michigan that connects M @-@ 28 with the community of Brimley and Brimley State Park . The highway was originally part of M @-@ 28 until the 1940s when it was briefly a local road . It has been a state highway again since it was designated as M @-@ 221 in 1945 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 221 runs for 2 @.@ 494 miles ( 4 @.@ 014 km ) north from M @-@ 28 into the unincorporated community of Brimley in Superior Township . The highway passes through rural fields and woods until it enters downtown . At the corner of Main Street and Lakeshore Drive , the signed portion of M @-@ 221 ends , but state maintenance continues on Lakeshore Drive across the <unk> River . The total length of the highway , including the unsigned segment , is 2 @.@ 545 miles ( 4 @.@ 096 km ) . 
 M @-@ 221 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2009 showed that the traffic levels along M @-@ 221 were 2 @,@ 940 vehicles daily north of the junction with 7 ½ Mile Road and 1 @,@ 476 vehicles per day south of the intersection ; along the whole highway , 26 trucks were recorded in the survey . No sections of M @-@ 221 have been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 221 was part of the original M @-@ 25 that ran through the eastern UP in 1919 . This specific segment of roadway ran north into Brimley and turned east onto 6 Mile Road to connect with US Highway 2 ( now H @-@ 63 / Mackinac Trail ) The trunkline became part of M @-@ 28 . In early 1942 , M @-@ 28 was rerouted on the current alignment south of Brimley and this highway was turned back to local control . In 1945 , M @-@ 221 was designated along a portion of the former M @-@ 28 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Superior Township , Chippewa County . 
 = Juniper MX @-@ Series = 
 The Juniper MX @-@ Series is a family of ethernet routers and switches designed and manufactured by Juniper Networks . In 2006 , Juniper released the first of the MX @-@ series , the <unk> , MX240 , and <unk> . The second generation routers , called MX " 3D " , were first released in 2009 and featured a new Trio chipset and IPv6 support . In 2013 , the MX routers were improved to increase their bandwidth , and a virtualized MX 3D router , the <unk> 3D , was released in 2014 . Utilizing the Juniper Extension Toolkit ( JET ) , third party software can be integrated into the routers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early releases = = = 
 On October 18 , 2006 , the MX Series was publicly announced . Before its release , Ethernet aggregation was a missing component of Juniper 's edge network products , which was causing it to lose market @-@ share to Alcatel . The MX Series was late to market , but it was well received by analysts and customers . It was part of a trend at @-@ the @-@ time to incorporate additional software features in routers and switches . 
 The first product release of the MX series was the <unk> , a 14 @-@ slot , 480 Gbit / s switch and router . In late 2006 , Juniper introduced the MX240 and <unk> , which are smaller versions of the 960 . They had a throughput of 240 Gbit / s and 480 Gbit / s respectively . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 In 2009 a new line of MX " 3D " products were introduced , using Juniper 's programmable Trio chipset . Trio is a proprietary semiconductor technology with custom network instructions . It provides a cross between network processing units and ASICs . IPv6 features were added and the <unk> , a smaller <unk> / s router , was introduced the following year . 
 In 2011 new switch fabric cards increased the capacity of MX 3D routers . In May 2011 Juniper introduced several new products including the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> 3D routers , which have a throughput of 20 , 40 and 60 Gbit / s respectively and can each be upgraded to an <unk> . A collection of features called <unk> was introduced in 2011 at Mobile World Congress , then discontinued in August 2013 . According to Network World , it allowed MX 3D products to serve as a mobile " gateway , an authentication and management control plan for 2G / 3G and LTE mobile packet cores and as a policy manager for subscriber management systems . " 
 In October 2012 , Juniper introduced the <unk> and 2010 3D Universal Edge <unk> , with <unk> of 80 Tbit / s and 40 Tbit / s respectively . Juniper also released a video caching system for the MX family and a suite of software applications that include parental control , firewall and traffic monitoring . New " Virtual Chassis " features allowed network operators to manage multiple boxes as though they were a single router or switch . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 In 2013 , Juniper introduced new line cards for the MX series and a new switch fabric module , intended to upgrade the MX series ' for higher bandwidth needs and for software defined networking applications . The capacity of the MX240 , 480 and 960 were increased by double or more . A new <unk> Modular Interface Card ( MS @-@ MIC ) was incorporated that supports up to 9 Gbit / s for services like tunneling software . 
 In March 2013 , Juniper released the <unk> switch , which isn 't part of the MX Series , but uses the same software and Trio chipset . A virtualized MX series 3D router , the <unk> 3D , was introduced in November 2014 . A suite of updates were announced in late 2015 . New MPC line cards were introduced , which have a throughput of up to 1 @.@ 6 Tbit / s . Simultaneously the Juniper Extension Toolkit ( JET ) was announced . JET is a programming interface for integrating third @-@ party applications that automate provisioning , maintenance and other tasks . The Junos Telemetry Interface was also announced at the same time . It reports data to applications and other equipment to automate changes to the network in response to faults or in order optimize performance . 
 = = Current products and specifications = = 
 According to Juniper 's website , Juniper 's current MX Series products include the following : 
 = Lord Howe Island = 
 Lord Howe Island ( / <unk> / , local / <unk> / ; formerly Lord Howe 's Island ) is an irregularly crescent @-@ shaped volcanic remnant in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand , 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) directly east of mainland Port Macquarie , and about 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) south @-@ west of Norfolk Island . It is about 10 km long and between 2 @.@ 0 km and 0 @.@ 3 km wide with an area of 14 @.@ 55 km2 , though just 3 @.@ 98 km2 of that comprises the low @-@ lying developed part of the island . Along the west coast there is a sandy semi @-@ enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon . Most of the population lives in the north , while the south is dominated by forested hills rising to the highest point on the island , Mount Gower ( 875 m or 2 @,@ 871 ft ) . The Lord Howe Island Group comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the volcanic and uninhabited Ball 's Pyramid about 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) to the south @-@ east of Howe . To the north lies the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands . 
 The first reported sighting of Lord Howe Island took place on 17 February 1788 , when Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply was en route from Botany Bay to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey Ball sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . It subsequently became a provisioning port for the whaling industry , and was permanently settled in June 1834 . When whaling declined , the 1880s saw the beginning of the worldwide export of the endemic kentia palms , which remains a key component of the Island 's economy . The other continuing industry , tourism , began after World War II ended in 1945 . 
 The Lord Howe Island Group is part of the state of New South Wales and for legal purposes is regarded as an unincorporated area administered by the Lord Howe Island Board which reports to the New South Wales Minister for Environment and Heritage . The island 's standard time zone is UTC + 10 : 30 , or UTC + 11 when daylight saving time applies . The currency is the Australian dollar . Commuter airlines provide flights to Sydney , Brisbane , and Port Macquarie . 
 UNESCO records the Lord Howe Island Group as a World Heritage Site of global natural significance . Most of the island is virtually untouched forest , with many of the plants and animals found nowhere else in the world . Other natural attractions include the diversity of the landscapes , the variety of upper mantle and oceanic basalts , the world 's southernmost barrier coral reef , nesting seabirds , and the rich historical and cultural heritage . The Lord Howe Island Act of 1981 established a " Permanent Park Preserve " ( covering about 70 per cent of the island ) . The surrounding waters are a protected region designated the Lord Howe Island Marine Park . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1788 – 1834 : First European visits = = = 
 It appears that , prior to European discovery and settlement , Lord Howe Island was uninhabited , and unknown to Polynesian peoples of the South Pacific . The first reported European sighting of Lord Howe Island was on 17 February 1788 by Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply ( the oldest and smallest of the First Fleet ships ) , which was on its way from Botany Bay with a cargo of nine male and six female convicts to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey of 13 March 1788 Ball observed Ball 's Pyramid and sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . Numerous turtles and tame birds were captured and returned to Sydney . Ball named Mount Lidgbird and Balls Pyramid after himself and the main island after Richard Howe , First Earl Howe , who was First Lord of the Admiralty at the time . 
 Many names on the island date from this time , and also from May of the same year when the island was visited by four ships of the First Fleet , HMS Supply , Charlotte , Lady Penrhyn and Scarborough when much of the plant and animal life was first recorded in the journals and diaries of visitors like David Blackburn , Master of the Supply , and Arthur Bowes Smyth , surgeon of the Lady Penrhyn . <unk> sketches of native birds including the Lord Howe woodhen ( Gallirallus sylvestris ) , white gallinule ( Porphyrio albus ) , and Lord Howe pigeon ( Columba vitiensis <unk> ) , were made by artists including George Raper and John Hunter . As the latter two birds were soon hunted to extinction these paintings are their only remaining pictorial record . Over the next three years the Supply returned to the island several times in search of turtles and the island was also visited by ships of the Second and Third Fleets . Between 1789 and 1791 the Pacific whale industry was born with British and American whaling ships chasing sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) along the equator to the Gilbert and Ellice archipelago , then south into Australian and New Zealand waters . The American fleet numbered 675 ships and Lord Howe was located in a region known as the Middle Ground noted for sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) and southern right whales ( Eubalaena australis ) . 
 The island was subsequently visited by many government and whaling ships sailing between New South Wales and Norfolk Island and across the Pacific , including many from the American whaling fleet , so its reputation as a provisioning port preceded settlement , some ships leaving goats and pigs on the island as food for future visitors . Between July and October 1791 the Third Fleet ships arrived at Sydney and within days the <unk> was being reconstructed for a future in the lucrative whaling industry . Whale oil was to become New Holland 's ( Australia ) most profitable export until the 1830s , and it was the whaling industry that shaped Lord Howe Island 's early history . 
 = = = 1834 – 1841 : Settlement = = = 
 Permanent settlement on Lord Howe was established in June 1834 when the British whaling barque Caroline , sailing from New Zealand and commanded by Captain John <unk> , landed at what is now known as Blinky Beach . They left three men , George Ashdown , James Bishop and ( unknown ) Chapman , who were employed by a Sydney whaling firm to establish a supply station . The men were initially to provide meat by fishing and by raising pigs and goats from feral stock . They landed with ( or acquired from a visiting ship ) their Maori wives and two Maori boys . Huts were built in an area now known as Old Settlement which had a supply of fresh water , and a garden was established west of Blinky Beach . 
 This was a cashless society ; the settlers bartered their stores of water , wood , vegetables , meat , fish and bird feathers for clothes , tea , sugar , tools , tobacco and other commodities not available on the island – but it was the whalers ’ valuation that had to be accepted . These first settlers eventually left the island when they were bought out for £ 350 in September 1841 by businessmen Owen Poole and Richard Dawson ( later joined by John Foulis ) whose employees and others then settled on the island . 
 = = = 1842 – 1860 : Trading provisions = = = 
 The new business was advertised and ships trading between Sydney and the New Hebrides ( Vanuatu ) would also put into the island . Rover 's Bride , a small cutter , became the first regular trading vessel . Between 1839 and 1859 between five and twelve ships made landfall each year , occasionally closer to 20 with seven or eight at a time laying off the reef . In 1842 and 1844 the first children were born on the island . Then in 1847 Poole , Dawson and Foulis , bitter at failing to obtain a land lease from the New South Wales Government , abandoned the settlement although three of their employees remained . One family , the Andrews , after finding some onions on the beach in 1848 , cultivated them as the " Lord Howe red onion " which was popular in the Southern Hemisphere for about 30 years until the crop was attacked by smut disease . 
 In 1849 there were just 11 people living on the island but it was not long before the island farms expanded . In the 1850s gold was discovered on mainland Australia where crews would abandon their ships , preferring to dig for gold than to risk a life at sea . As a consequence many vessels avoided the mainland and Lord Howe Island experienced an increasing trade which peaked between 1855 and 1857 . In 1851 about 16 people were living on the island . Vegetable crops now included potatoes , carrots , maize , pumpkin , taro , watermelon – even grapes , <unk> and coffee . Between 1851 and 1853 there were several aborted proposals by the NSW Government to establish a penal settlement on the island . 
 From 1851 to 1854 Henry Denham captain of HMS Herald , which was on a scientific expedition to the southwest Pacific ( 1852 – 1856 ) , completed the island 's first hydrographic survey . On board were three Scottish biologists , William Milne ( a gardener @-@ botanist from the Edinburgh Botanic Garden ) , John Macgillivray ( naturalist ) who collected fish and plant specimens , and Assistant Surgeon and zoologist Denis Macdonald . Together these men established much basic information on the geology , flora and fauna of the island . 
 In about 1853 a further three settlers arrived on the American whaling barque Belle , captained by Ichabod Handy . As well as George Campbell ( who died in 1856 ) and Jack Brian ( who left the island in 1854 ) , the third , Nathan Thompson , brought three women ( called Botanga , <unk> , and a girl named Bogue ) from the Gilbert Islands . When his first wife Botanga died he then married Bogue . Thompson was the first resident to build a substantial house in the 1860s from mainland cedar washed up on the beach . Most of the residents with island ancestors have blood relations or are connected by marriage to Thompson and his second wife Bogue . 
 In 1855 the island was officially designated as part of New South Wales by the Constitution Act . 
 = = = 1861 – 1890 : Scientific expeditions = = = 
 From the early 1860s whaling declined rapidly with the increasing use of petroleum , the onset of the Californian goldrush , and the American Civil War – with unfortunate consequences for the island . To explore alternative means of income Thompson , in 1867 , purchased the Sylph which was the first local vessel to trade with Sydney ( mainly pigs and onions ) . It anchored in deep water at what is now Sylph 's Hole off Old Settlement Beach , but was eventually tragically lost at sea in 1873 which added to the woes of the island at this time . 
 In 1869 the island was visited by a magistrate P. Cloete aboard the Thetis investigating a possible murder . He was accompanied by Charles Moore , Director of the Botanic Gardens , Sydney and his assistant , William Carron who forwarded plant specimens to Ferdinand Mueller at the botanic gardens in Melbourne who , by 1875 , had catalogued and published 195 species . Also on the ship was William Fitzgerald a surveyor and Mr Masters from the Australian Museum . Together they surveyed the island with the findings published in 1870 when the population was listed as 35 people , their 13 houses built of split palm battens thatched on the roof and sides with palm leaves . At about this time there began a downturn of trade with the demise of the whaling industry and sometimes six or twelve months passed without a vessel calling . With the provisions rotting in the storehouses the older families lost interest in market gardening . 
 From 1860 to 1872 forty @-@ three ships had collected provisions , but from 1873 to 1887 there were fewer than a dozen . This prompted some activity from the mainland . In 1876 a government report on the island was submitted by surveyor William Fitzgerald based on a visit in the same year . He suggested that coffee be grown but the kentia palm was already catching world attention . In 1878 the island was declared a Forest Reserve and Captain Richard Armstrong became the first resident government administrator . He encouraged schools , tree @-@ planting and the palm trade , dynamited the north passage to the lagoon , and built roads . He also managed to upset the residents , and parliamentarian John Wilson was sent from the mainland in April 1882 to investigate the situation . With Wilson was a team of scientists that included H. Wilkinson from the Mines Department , W. Condor from the Survey Department , J. Duff from the Sydney Botanical Gardens and A. Morton from the Australian Museum . J. Sharkey from the Government Printing Office took the earliest known photographs of the Island and its residents . A full account of the island appeared in the report from this visit , published as " Lord Howe Island 1882 " , which recommended that Armstrong be replaced . Meanwhile , the population had increased considerably and included 29 children ; the report recommended that a schoolmaster be appointed . This study sealed a lasting relationship with three scientific organisations , the Australian Museum , Sydney Royal Botanic Gardens and Kew Royal Botanic Gardens . 
 = = = 1890 – 1999 = = = 
 In 1883 the company Burns Philp started a regular shipping service and the number of tourists gradually increased . By 1932 , with the regular tourist run of SS Morinda , tourism became the second biggest source of external income after palm sales to Europe . Morinda was replaced by Makambo in 1932 , and she in turn by other vessels . The service continues into the present day with the fortnightly Island Trader service from Port Macquarie . 
 The palm trade began in the 1880s when the lowland kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) was first exported to Britain , Europe and America but the trade was only placed on a firm financial footing when the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery was formed in 1906 ( see below ) . 
 The first plane to appear on the island was in 1931 when Francis Chichester alighted on the lagoon in a Gipsy Moth converted into a floatplane . It was damaged there in an overnight storm but repaired with the assistance of islanders and then took off successfully nine weeks later for a flight to Sydney . After World War II , in 1947 , tourists arrived on Catalina and then four @-@ engined Sandringham flying boats of Ansett Flying Boat Services operating out of Rose Bay , Sydney , and landing on the lagoon , the journey taking about 3 @.@ 5 hours . When the Lord Howe Island Airport was completed in 1974 , the seaplanes were eventually replaced with Qantaslink twin @-@ engined turbo @-@ prop Dash 8 @-@ 200 aircraft . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In 2002 , the Royal Navy destroyer HMS Nottingham struck Wolf Rock , a reef at Lord Howe Island , and almost sank . In recent times tourism has increased and the government of New South Wales has been increasingly involved with issues of conservation . 
 On 17 October 2011 , a supply ship , M / V Island Trader with twenty tons of fuel ran aground in the lagoon . The ship refloated at high tide with no loss of crew or cargo . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As at the 2011 census , the resident population was 360 people and the number of tourists was not allowed to exceed 400 . Early settlers were European and American whalers and many of their offspring have remained on the island for more than six generations . Residents are now involved with the kentia palm industry , tourism , retail , some fishing and farming . In 1876 it was observed that on Sundays although there was a suspension of games and labour , there were no religious services . Nowadays , in an area known locally as ' Church Paddock ' , there are Anglican , Catholic and Adventist churches , the religious affiliations on the island being 30 % Anglican , 22 % no religion , 18 % Catholic and 12 % Seventh Day Adventist . There is about an equal division of the sexes with 47 % of the population in the age group 25 – 54 and 92 % holding Australian citizenship . 
 = = Governance and land tenure = = 
 Official control of Lord Howe Island lay initially with the British Crown until it passed to New South Wales in 1855 , although until at least 1876 the islanders lived in " a relatively harmonious and self @-@ regulating community " . In 1878 Richard Armstrong was appointed administrator when the NSW Parliament declared the island a Forest Reserve . But as a result of ill feeling , and an enquiry , he was eventually removed from office on 31 May 1882 ( he returned later that year though to view the transit of Venus from present @-@ day Transit Hill ) . After his removal the island was administered by four successive magistrates until 1913 when a Sydney @-@ based Board was formed until 1948 when a resident superintendent was appointed . In 1913 the three @-@ man Lord Howe Island Board of Control was established , mostly to regulate the palm seed industry , but also administering the affairs of the island from Sydney until the present Lord Howe Island Board was set up in 1954 . 
 The Lord Howe Island Board is a NSW Statutory Authority established under the Lord Howe Island Act , 1953 , to administer the island as part of the state of New South Wales . It reports directly to the state 's Minister for Environment and Heritage , and is responsible for the care , control and management of the island . Its duties include : the protection of World Heritage values ; the control of development ; the administration of Crown Land , including the island 's protected area ; provision of community services and infrastructure ; and regulating sustainable tourism . In 1981 the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act gave islanders the administrative power of three members on a five @-@ member Board . The Board also manages the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery which , together with tourism , provides the island 's only sources of external income . Under an amendment bill in 2004 the Board now comprises seven members , four of whom are elected from the islander community , thus giving about 350 permanent residents a high level of autonomy . The remaining three members are appointed by the Minister to represent the interests of business , tourism and conservation . The full Board meets on the island every three months while the day @-@ to @-@ day affairs of the island are managed by the Board 's administration , with a permanent staff that had increased to 22 people by 1988 . 
 Land tenure has been an issue since first settlement as island residents repeatedly requested freehold title or an absolute gift of cultivated land . Original settlers were squatters . The granting of a 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) lease to Richard Armstrong in 1878 drew complaints and a few short @-@ term leases ( <unk> <unk> ) were granted . In 1913 , with the appointment of a Board of Control , permissive occupancies were revoked and the Board itself given permissive occupancy of the island . Then the Lord Howe Island Act of 1953 made all land the property of the Crown . Direct descendants of islanders with permissive occupancies in 1913 were granted perpetual leases on blocks of up to 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) for residential purposes . Short @-@ term special leases were granted for larger areas used for agriculture , so in 1955 , 55 perpetual leases and 43 special leases were granted . The 1981 amendment to the act extended political and land rights to all residents of 10 years or more . There remains an active debate concerning the proportion of residents with tenure and the degree of influence on the Board of resident islanders in relation to long @-@ term planning for visitors , and issues relating to the environment , amenity and global heritage . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Trading vegetables , meat , fish and other perishables with visiting ships ceased in the 1870s when the whaling industry collapsed . With such a small population , Lord Howe Island 's economy is now extremely simple with external income derived from only two significant sources : tourism and the overseas sale of kentia palm seeds and seedlings . 
 = = = Kentia palm industry = = = 
 The first exporter of palm seeds was Ned King , a mountain guide for the Fitzgerald surveys of 1869 and 1876 , who sent seed to the Sydney Botanic Gardens . Overseas trade began in the 1880s when it was found that one of the four palms endemic to the island , kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) , which grows naturally in the lowlands , was ideally suited to the fashionable conservatories of the well @-@ to @-@ do in Britain , Europe and the United States , but the assistance of mainland magistrate Frank Farnell was needed to put the business on a sound commercial footing when in 1906 he became Director of a company , the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery , whose shareholders included 21 islanders and a Sydney @-@ based seed company . However , the formation of the Lord Howe Island Board of Control was needed in 1913 to resolve outstanding issues . 
 The native kentia palm ( known locally as the thatch palm as it was used to thatch the houses of the early settlers ) is now the most popular decorative palm in the world . The mild climate of the island has evolved a palm which can tolerate low light , a dry atmosphere and <unk> temperatures – ideal for indoor conditions . Up to the 1980s the palms were only sold as seed but from then onwards only as high quality seedlings . The nursery received certification in 1997 for its high quality management complying with the requirements of Australian Standard AS / <unk> ISO 9002 . 
 Seed is gathered from natural forest and plantations , most collectors being descendants of the original settlers . Seed is then germinated in soil @-@ less media and sealed from the atmosphere to prevent contamination . After testing they are picked , washed ( bare @-@ rooted ) , sanitised and certified then packed and sealed into insulated containers for export . They grow both indoors and out and are popular for hotels and motels world @-@ wide . Nursery profits are returned to enhance the island ecosystem . The nursery plans to expand the business to include the curly palm and other native plants of special interest . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is known for its geology , birds , plants , and marine life . Popular tourist activities include scuba diving , birdwatching , snorkelling , surfing , kayaking , and fishing . To relieve pressure on the small island environment only 400 tourists are permitted at any one time . The island is reached by plane from Sydney or Brisbane in less than two hours . The Permanent Park Preserve declared in 1981 has similar management guidelines to a National Park . 
 = = = = Facilities = = = = 
 With fewer than 800 people on the island at any time , facilities are limited ; they include a bakery , butcher , general store , liquor store , restaurants , post office , museum and information centre , a police officer , a ranger , and an ATM at the bowling club . Stores are shipped to the island fortnightly by the Island Trader from Port Macquarie . There is a small four @-@ bed hospital and dispensary . A small botanic garden displays labelled local plants in its grounds . Diesel @-@ generated power is 240 V AC , as on the mainland . There is no public transport or mobile phone coverage , but there are public telephones , fax facilities and internet access as well as a local radio station and newsletter , The Signal . 
 Tourist accommodation ranges from luxury lodges to apartments and villa units . The currency is the Australian dollar and there are two banks . There are no camping facilities on the island and remote @-@ area camping is not permitted . To protect the fragile environment of Balls Pyramid ( which carries the last remaining wild population of the endangered Howe Island stick insect ) , recreational climbing there is prohibited . No pets are allowed without permission from the Board . Islanders use tanked rainwater , supplemented by bore water for showers and washing clothes . 
 = = = = Activities = = = = 
 As distances to sites of interest are short , cycling is the main means of transport on the island . Tourist activities include golf ( 9 @-@ hole ) , lawn bowls , tennis , fishing ( including deep @-@ sea game fishing ) , yachting , windsurfing , kite surfing , kayaking , and boat trips ( including glass @-@ bottom tours of the lagoon ) . Swimming , snorkelling and scuba diving are also popular in the lagoon , as well as off Tenth of June Island , a small rocky outcrop in the Admiralty group where an underwater plateau drops 36 metres to reveal extensive <unk> and black corals growing on the vertical walls . Other diving sites are found off Ball 's Pyramid , 26 km away , where there are trenches , caves and volcanic drop @-@ offs . 
 Bushwalking , natural history tours , talks , and guided walks take place along the many tracks , the most challenging being the eight @-@ hour guided hike to the top of Mount Gower . There are 11 beaches and hand @-@ feeding the metre @-@ long kingfish ( Seriola <unk> ) and large wrasse at Ned 's Beach is very popular . Walking tracks cover the island with difficulty graded from 1 – 5 , they include – in the north : Transit Hill 2 hours return , 2 km ; Clear Place , 1 – 2 hours return ; Stevens Reserve ; North Bay , 4 hours return , 4 km ; Mount Eliza ; Old Gulch , 20 minutes return , 300 m ; Malabar Hill and <unk> Lookout , 3 hours , or 5 hours return , 7 km and – in the south : Goat House Cave , 5 hours return , 6 km ; Mount Gower , 8 hours return , 14 km ; Rocky Run and Boat Harbour ; Intermediate Hill , 45 minutes return , 1 km ; Little Island , 40 minutes return , 3 km . Recreational climbers must obtain permission from the Lord Howe Island Board . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Lord Howe Island is an irregularly crescent @-@ shaped volcanic remnant in the southwest Pacific Ocean . Lying in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand the island is 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) east of mainland Port Macquarie , 702 kilometres ( 436 mi ) northeast of Sydney , and about 772 kilometres ( 480 mi ) from Norfolk Island to its northeast . The island is about 10 km long and between 2 @.@ 0 km and 0 @.@ 3 km wide with an area of 14 @.@ 55 km2 . Along the west coast there is a semi @-@ enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon with white sand , the most accessible of the island 's eleven beaches . Both the north and south sections of the island are high ground of relatively untouched forest , in the south comprising two volcanic mountains , Mount Lidgbird ( 777 m or 2 @,@ 549 ft ) and Mount Gower which , rising to 875 m ( 2 @,@ 871 ft ) , is the highest point on the island . The two mountains are separated by the saddle at the head of Erskine Valley . In the north , where most of the population live , high points are Malabar ( 209 m or 686 ft ) and Mount Eliza ( 147 m or 482 ft ) . Between these two uplands is an area of cleared lowland with some farming , the airstrip , and housing . The Lord Howe Island Group of islands comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the pointed rocky islet Ball 's Pyramid , a 551 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 1 @,@ 808 ft ) eroded volcano about 23 km to the south @-@ east , which is uninhabited but bird @-@ colonised . It contains the only known wild population of the Lord Howe Island stick insect , formerly thought to be extinct . To the north there is the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands . Just off the east coast is 4 @.@ 5 ha Mutton Bird Island , and in the lagoon is 3 ha Blackburn ( Rabbit ) Island . 
 = = = Geological origins = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is the highly eroded remains of a 7 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old shield volcano , the product of eruptions that lasted for about a half @-@ million years . It is one of a chain of islands that occur on the western rim of an undersea shelf , the Lord Howe Rise , which is 3000 km long and 300 km wide extending from New Zealand to the west of New Caledonia and consisting of continental rocks that separated from the Australian plate 60 to 80 million years ago to form a new crust in the deep Tasman Basin . The shelf is part of Zealandia , a microcontinent nearly half the size of Australia that gradually submerged after breaking away from the Gondwanan supercontinent . The Lord Howe seamount chain is defined by coral @-@ capped guyots stretching to the north of the island for 1000 km ( 600 mi ) and including the Middleton 220 kilometres ( 140 mi ) and Elizabeth ( 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) away ) reefs of the Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve . This chain of nine volcanic peaks was probably produced by the northward movement of the Indo @-@ Australian Plate over a stationary hotspot so the oldest guyots were the first formed and most northerly as the plate moved northward at a rate of 6 cm per year ( see plate tectonics ) . 
 = = = Basalts and calcarenite = = = 
 Two periods of volcanic activity produced the major features of the island . The first about 6 @.@ 9 million years ago produced the northern and central hills while the younger and highly eroded Mount Gower and Mount Lidgbird were produced about 6 @.@ 3 million years ago by successive basalt ( an extrusive igneous rock ) lava flows that once filled a large volcanic caldera ( crater ) and can now be seen as horizontal basalt strata on mountain cliffs ( at Malabar and Mount Gower ) occasionally interspersed with dikes ( vertical lava intrusions ) . Geological pyroclastic remnants of volcanic eruption can be seen on 15 ha Roach Island ( where the oldest rocks occur ) and Boat Harbour as tuff ( ash ) , breccia ( with angular blocks ) , and agglomerate ( rounded ' bombs ' ) . Offshore on the Lord Howe Rise water depths reach 2000 m falling to 4000 m to the west of the rise . From the dimensions of the rock on which the island stands it has been calculated that the island has eroded to one fortieth of its original size . 
 Rocks and land at the foot of these mountains is calcarenite , a coral sand , blown inland during the Pleistocene between 130 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years ago and cemented into stratified layers by water percolation . In this rock are fossils of bird bones and eggs , land and marine snails and the extinct endemic horned turtle ( <unk> <unk> ) now thought to be an ancient relictual non @-@ swimming tortoise with relatives in South America . The crescent of the island protects a coral reef and lagoon , the barrier reef , at 31 ° S , is the most southerly in the world . Beach sands , rather than consisting of quartz grains derived from granite , as on the mainland , are made of fragments of shell , coral and coralline algae , together with basalt grains , and basaltic minerals like black diopside , and green olivine . The lowland consists of alluvial soils . 
 The island continues to erode rapidly and is expected to be fully submerged within 200 @,@ 000 years taking an appearance akin to the Middleton and Elizabeth Reefs . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Lord Howe Island has a subtropical climate . Under the Köppen climate classification , Lord Howe Island has a Humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) . 
 In general the summers are mild or warm with rainfall erratic but occasionally heavy while in winter it is cool with rainfall more or less uniform . There is a gradual transition from summer to winter conditions and vice versa . Winds are frequent and salt @-@ laden being moderate easterlies in the summer and fresh to strong westerlies in the winter . July is the windiest month , and the winter months are subject to frequent gales and strong winds . The island has 67 @.@ 8 clear days , annually . 
 Storms and occasional cyclones also affect the island . Rainfall records are maintained in the north where rainfall is less than in the frequently cloud – shrouded mountains of the south . There can be wide variation in rainfall from year to year . July and August are the coldest months with average minimum temperatures of about 13 ° C and no frost . Average maximum temperatures range from between 17 ° C and 20 ° C in the winter to between 24 ° C and 27 ° C in the summer . The humidity averages in the 60 % to 70 % range year round becoming more noticeable on warmer summer days than in the cooler winter months . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 = = = Plants = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is a distinct terrestrial ecoregion known as the Lord Howe Island subtropical forests . It is part of the Australasia ecozone and shares many biotic affinities with Australia , New Guinea , and New Caledonia . Almost half of the island 's native plants are endemic and many of the island 's unique plants grow on or around the mountain summits where the height has allowed the development of a true cloud forest and many different microhabitats from sealevel to the summits . One of the best known is Howea , an endemic genus of palms ( Arecaceae ) that are commonly known as kentia palms and make handsome houseplants . Annual exports provide a revenue of over A $ 2 million , providing the only major industry on the island apart from tourism . 
 = = = = Origin = = = = 
 In geological terms at 7 million years old Lord Howe Island is relatively young and was never part of any continent , its flora and fauna colonising the island from across the sea , carried by wind , water or birds , possibly assisted at a geological time when other islands were exposed , enabling island hopping . Nevertheless , it is far enough away and has had sufficient time to evolve endemic species . The high degree of endemism is emphasised by the presence of five endemic genera : Negria , Lordhowea , Howea , Lepidorrhachis , and Hedyscepe . Island plants are similar to those of Norfolk Island , the two islands sharing some endemic species , for example , the critically endangered species of creeping vine Calystegia affinis . The combined flora of these two islands is more closely related to that of New Zealand and New Caledonia than to that of Australia . There is also a small but clear link with the plants of Vanuatu . The closest mainland affinities are with the vegetation of subtropical south @-@ eastern Queensland . A link with Gondwanaland is indicated by the presence of endemic species like the wedding lily ( <unk> <unk> ) whose only living relatives occur in South Africa . 
 The flora of the island is relatively untouched with a large number of rare plants , 44 % being endemic to the island . With a diversity of conditions ranging from valleys , to ridges , plains and misty mountain tops there is habitat for a wide range of plant communities which have been comprehensively analysed and mapped . There are 57 species of fern of which 25 are endemic : they are most abundant in the moist environments of the southern island , especially the higher parts of Mount Gower , perhaps the most apparent being the four endemic tree ferns in the genus Cyathea that occur on the southern mountains . 
 = = = = Communities and special plants = = = = 
 Plant communities have been classified into nine categories : lowland subtropical rainforest , <unk> rainforest , cloud @-@ forest and scrub , lowland swamp forest , mangrove scrub and seagrass , coastal scrub and cliff vegetation , inland scrub and <unk> , offshore island vegetation , shoreline and beach vegetation , and disturbed vegetation . 
 Several plants are immediately evident to the visitor . Banyan ( Ficus macrophylla subsp. <unk> ) is a remarkable tree with a buttressed trunk and pendulous aerial roots : it can be seen on the track to Clear Place and near Ned 's Beach . Pandanus tree ( Pandanus forsteri ) has spectacular teepee @-@ like prop roots and pineapple @-@ like fruits that are orange @-@ red when mature , the tough leaves being used for basketry . It occurs in damp areas like creek beds and fine specimens can be seen along the Boat Harbour track . There are ten species of orchid on the island , the most noticeable being the bush orchid ( Dendrobium macropus subsp. <unk> ) on lowland trees and rocks , bearing cream flowers from August to September . Other prominent flowering plants in the summer include , on the mountain slopes , the whiskery red flowers of mountain rose ( Metrosideros <unk> and Metrosideros <unk> ) , the massed small yellow flowers of <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , orange plump flowers of pumpkin tree ( Negria <unk> ) , and white spikes of Fitzgerald tree ( Dracophyllum <unk> ) . The kava bush has large , aromatic , heart @-@ shaped leaves . After heavy rain the endemic glowing mushrooms Mycena <unk> and Omphalotus nidiformis can be found in the palm forests . 
 It is the palms that are the signature plants of the island as the kentia and curly palms especially dominate the landscape in many places , the kentia being of special economic importance . All four species are endemic to the island , often occurring in dense pure stands , the one that has proved such a world @-@ wide success as an indoor plant being the kentia or thatch palm ( Howea forsteriana ) . This is a lowland palm with drooping leaflets and seed branches in ' hands ' of 3 – 5 while the curly palm ( Howea <unk> ) , which occurs on slightly higher ground , has upwardly directed leaflets and solitary ' hands ' . Natural hybrids between these species occur on the island and there is a mature specimen of one growing in the island nursery . On the mountain sides higher than about 350 m there is the big mountain palm ( Hedyscepe <unk> ) ; it has large golf @-@ ball @-@ sized fruits while the little mountain palm ( Lepidorrhachis <unk> ) has marble @-@ sized fruits and is only found on the mountain summits . 
 = = = = = Images of native flora = = = = = 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 There are no snakes , no venomous or stinging insects , animals or plants , and no dangerous daytime sharks off the beaches . 
 = = = = Birds = = = = 
 A total of 202 different birds have been recorded on the island . Eighteen species of land birds breed on the island and there are many more migratory species that occur on the island and its adjacent islets , many tame enough that it is possible for humans to get quite close . The island has been identified by BirdLife International as an Endemic Bird Area , and the Permanent Park Preserve as an Important Bird Area , because it supports the entire population of Lord Howe <unk> , most of the breeding population of providence petrels , over 1 % of the world population of another five seabird species , and the whole populations of three endemic subspecies . 
 Fourteen species of seabirds breed on the island . Red @-@ tailed tropicbirds can be seen in large numbers circling the Malabar cliffs where they perform acrobatic courting rituals . Between August and May thousands of flesh @-@ footed and wedge @-@ tailed shearwaters return to the island at dusk each day . From the Little Island Track between March and November one of the world 's rarest birds , the providence petrel also performs courtship displays during winter breeding and it is extremely tame . The island was its only breeding location for many years after the breeding colony on Norfolk Island was exterminated in the late 19th century ; though a small population persists on the adjacent Phillip Island . The Kermadec petrel was discovered breeding on Mount Gower in 1914 by ornithologist Roy Bell while collecting specimens for Gregory Mathews and the black @-@ winged petrel was only confirmed as a breeder in 1971 ; its numbers have increased following the elimination of feral cats from the island . 
 The flesh @-@ footed shearwater , which breeds in large numbers on the main island in spring @-@ autumn , used to have its chicks harvested for food by the islanders . The wedge @-@ tailed and little shearwaters breed on the main island and surrounding islets ; though only a small number of the latter species can be found on the main island . Breeding white @-@ bellied storm petrels were another discovery by Roy Bell . Masked boobies are the largest seabirds breeding on Lord Howe and can be seen nesting and gliding along the sea cliffs at Mutton Bird Point all year round . Sooty terns can be seen on the main island at Ned 's and Middle Beaches , North Bay , and Blinkey Beach ; the most numerous of the island 's breeding seabirds , their eggs were formerly harvested for food . Common and black noddies build nests in trees and bushes , while white terns lay their single eggs precariously in a slight depression on a tree branch , and grey <unk> lay their eggs in cliff hollows . 
 Three endemic passerine subspecies are the Lord Howe golden whistler , Lord Howe silvereye and Lord Howe currawong . The iconic endemic rail , the flightless Lord Howe woodhen , is the only surviving member of its genus : its ancestors could fly but with no predators and plenty of food on the island this ability was lost . This made it easy prey for islanders and feral animals and by the 1970s the population was less than 30 birds . From 1978 to 1984 feral animals were removed and birds raised in captivity to be successfully reintroduced to the wild . The population is now relatively safe and stable . 
 = = = = Mammals , reptiles and amphibians = = = = 
 Only one native mammal remains on the islands , the large forest bat . The endemic Lord Howe long @-@ eared bat is known only from a skull and is now presumed extinct , possibly the result of the introduction of ship rats . 
 Two terrestrial reptiles are native to the island group : the Lord Howe Island skink and the Lord Howe Island gecko . Both are rare on the main island but more common on smaller islands offshore . The garden skink and the bleating tree frog have been accidentally introduced from the Australian mainland . 
 = = = = Invertebrates = = = = 
 The Lord Howe Island stick insect disappeared from the main island soon after the introduction of rats in 1918 . In 2001 a tiny population was discovered in a single Melaleuca <unk> shrub on the slopes of Ball 's Pyramid , has been successfully bred in captivity , and is nearing re @-@ introduction to the main island . The Lord Howe stag beetle is a colourful endemic beetle seen during summer months . Another endemic invertebrate , the Lord Howe flax snail ( or Lord Howe <unk> ) , has also been affected by the introduction of rats . Once common , the species is now endangered and a captive breeding program is under way to save the snail from extinction . 
 = = = = Marine life = = = = 
 Marine environments are near @-@ pristine with a mixtures of temperate , subtropical and tropical species derived from cool @-@ temperate ocean currents in the winter and the warm East Australian Current , which flows from the Great Barrier Reef , in summer . Of the 490 fish species recorded 13 are endemic and 60 % are tropical . The main angling fish are yellowtail kingfish and New Zealand bluefish while game fish include marlin , tuna and giant kingfish called " greenbacks " . Over 80 species of coral occur in the reefs surrounding the islands . Australian underwater photographer Neville Coleman has photographed various nudibranchs at Lord Howe Island . 
 Various species of cetaceans inhabit or migrate through the waters in vicinity , however very little about their biology in the area is known due to lack of studies and sighting efforts caused from locational conditions . Bottlenose dolphin is the most commonly observed and is the only species confirmed to be seasonal or yearly residents while some other dolphin species have also been observed . Humpback whales are the only of large whales showing slow but steady recoveries as their numbers annually migrating the island of Lord Howe are much smaller than that of those migrating along Australian continent . 
 Historically , migratory whales such as blue , fin , sei were very abundant in the island waters , but were severely reduced in numbers to near @-@ extinction by commercial and illegal hunts including the mass illegal hunts by Soviet Union and Japan in 1960s to 1970s . Southern right and sperm were most severely hunted among these , hence the area was called the Middle Ground by whalers . It is likely that these two were once seasonal residents around the island where right whales prefer sheltered , very shallow bays while sperm whales mainly inhabit deep waters . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 About 10 percent of Lord Howe Island 's forests have been cleared for agriculture , and another 20 percent has been disturbed , mostly by domestic cattle and feral sheep , goats and pigs . As a result , 70 % of the island remains relatively untouched with a variety of plants and animals , many of which are endemic , some of which are rare or threatened . Two species of plants , nine terrestrial birds , one bat and at least four invertebrates have become extinct since 1778 . Endemism at the generic level includes the palms Howea , Hedyscepe and Lepidorrhachis , a woody daisy Lordhowea , the tree Negria , the leech <unk> <unk> , three annelid worm genera ( <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) , an isopod shrimp <unk> , a hemipteran bug <unk> and a cricket <unk> . 
 The Lord Howe Island Board instigated an extensive biological and environmental survey ( published in 1974 ) , which has guided the island conservation program . In 1981 , the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act proclaimed a ' Permanent Park Preserve ' over the north and south ends of the island . Administration of the preserve was outlined in a management plan for the sustainable development of the island prepared by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service , which has a ranger stationed on the island . The Island was cited under the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1982 . 
 Offshore environmental assets are protected by the Lord Howe Island Marine Park . This consists of a State Marine Park managed by the Marine Parks Authority of New South Wales in the waters out to 3 nautical miles around the island and including Ball 's Pyramid . It also includes a Commonwealth Marine Park extending from 3 to 12 nautical miles out and managed by the federal Department of the Environment and Heritage . In total the Marine Park covers about 3 @,@ 005 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 160 sq mi ) . 
 = = = = Feral animals and plants = = = = 
 Pigs and goats were released on the island as potential food in the early 1800s , the goats destroying shrubs and grasses used as nesting sites and the pigs eating eggs and chicks and disturbing the land by nuzzling for food . Several birds have become extinct on the island since the arrival of humans . The first round of extinctions included the Lord Howe swamphen or white gallinule , white @-@ throated pigeon , red @-@ crowned parakeet and the Tasman booby , which were eliminated by visitors and settlers during the nineteenth century either from overhunting for food or protection of crops . Black rats were released from provisioning whaling ships in the 1840s and mice from Norfolk Island in 1860 . In 1918 the black rat was accidentally introduced with the shipwreck of the SS Makambo which ran aground at Ned 's Beach . This triggered a second wave of extinctions , including the vinous @-@ tinted thrush , robust white @-@ eye , Lord Howe starling , Lord Howe fantail and the Lord Howe gerygone as well as the destruction of the native phasmid and decimation of palm fruits . Bounties were offered for rat and pig tails and ' ratting ' became a popular pursuit . Subsequent poisoning programs have kept populations low . The Lord Howe <unk> may have become extinct through predation by , or competition with , the Tasmanian masked owls which were introduced in the 1920s in a failed attempt to control the rat population . Stray dogs are also a threat as they could harm the native wood hen and other birds . 
 Invasive plants such as Crofton weed and Formosa lily occur in inaccessible areas and probably cannot be eradicated but others are currently being managed . In 1995 the first action was taken to control the spread of introduced plants of the island , chiefly ground asparagus and bridal creeper , but also cherry guava , Madeira vine , Cotoneaster , <unk> and <unk> . This has been followed by weeding tours and the formation of the Friends of Lord Howe Island group in 2000 . Programs have also been started to remove weeds from private properties and revegetate some formerly cultivated areas . An Environmental Unit was created by the Board and it includes a Flora Management Officer and a permanent Weed Officer . Weeds have been mapped and an eradication program is in place , supported by improved education and quarantine procedures . 
 Despite the large number of introduced species that harm Lord Howe 's native flora and fauna , feral pigs and cats were eradicated by the early 2000s . The goat population has been reduced to just a few animals , and there are ongoing efforts to control rodents and introduced plants . In July 2012 it was announced by the Australian federal Environment Minister Tony Burke and the New South Wales Environment Minister Robyn Parker that the Australian and NSW Governments would each contribute 50 % of the estimated A $ 9 million cost of implementing a rodent eradication plan for the island , using aerial deployment of poison baits . The plan was put to a local vote and is considered controversial . A recovery program has restored the Lord Howe woodhen numbers from only 20 in 1970 to about 200 in 2000 , which is close to carrying capacity . 
 = = = = Climate change = = = = 
 According to an analysis by Tim Flannery , the ecosystem of Lord Howe Island is threatened by climate change and global warming , with the reefs at risk from rises in water temperature . The Great Barrier Reef is specifically identified as being at risk to the effects of global warming on Australia , and the same analysis applies to the reefs of Lord Howe Island . Cool climate flora and fauna are at risk from rises in temperature , because there is limited scope for migration to higher altitudes .. The first international conference on global artificial photosynthesis as a climate change solution occurred at Lord Howe island in 2011 , the papers being published by the Australian Journal of Chemistry . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Improbable Rendezvous , a novel by Tom Ferry , 2013 ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Virus , a 1999 sci @-@ fi horror film : the titular computer virus sets a course for Lord Howe Island to seize a British intelligence facility from which it can control the world 's military . 
 = Romance ( Luis Miguel album ) = 
 Romance is the eighth studio album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel . It was released by WEA Latina on 19 November 1991 . Although the production was originally intended as another collaboration with Juan Carlos Calderón , that plan was scrapped when Calderón was unable to compose songs for the album . Facing a new @-@ material deadline in his recording contract , at his manager 's suggestion Miguel chose bolero music for his next project . Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Armando Manzanero was hired by WEA Latina to co @-@ produce the album with Miguel . Recording began in August 1991 at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood , California , with Bebu Silvetti the arranger . 
 On the album Miguel covers twelve boleros , originally recorded from 1944 to 1986 . The first two singles , " Inolvidable " and " No Sé Tú " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States and spent six months atop the Mexican charts . " Mucho Corazón " and " Cómo " were in the top five of the Hot Latin Songs chart , and " Usted " and " La Barca " received airplay throughout Latin America . Miguel promoted the record with a tour of the United States and Latin America . The album was generally well received by music critics , who praised Miguel 's singing and the record 's production . The singer received several accolades , including a Grammy nomination for Best Latin Pop Album . 
 Romance was a commercial success , selling over seven million copies worldwide . In the United States , it spent 32 weeks at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart , and was the first Spanish @-@ language album by a non @-@ crossover Latin artist to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) ; it was also certified gold in Brazil and Taiwan , firsts for a Spanish @-@ speaking artist . Romance is the third @-@ bestselling album of all time in Mexico , and the bestselling record in Argentina by a non @-@ native artist . The album was noted by critics as reviving interest in bolero music . Its success encouraged Miguel to release three more bolero records : Segundo Romance ( 1994 ) , Romances ( 1997 ) and Mis Romances ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Since Miguel signed with WEA Latina in 1986 , his albums Soy Como Quiero Ser ( 1987 ) , <unk> una Mujer ( 1988 ) , and 20 Años ( 1990 ) have sold over three million copies cumulatively in Mexico . His early recordings consisted of soft rock and pop ballad tunes , which led to Miguel becoming a teen idol . On 14 January 1991 , WEA Latina announced a new album with longtime producer and composer Juan Carlos Calderón , who produced the three previous records by Miguel . Wanting to replicate the success of 20 Años , Calderón would compose pop songs and ballads and find tracks for Miguel to cover in Spanish . Production was scheduled to begin in April , with <unk> and English @-@ language studio albums to follow . The record label was unconvinced by Calderón 's pre @-@ selected songs ; he had to write more compositions , and production halted indefinitely . Ultimately , he was unable to compose songs for the album . 
 Miguel had a contractual deadline with his label to record new material , and considered recording boleros ( slow ballads " endowed with romantic lyrics " ) after meeting Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Armando Manzanero during a televised interview . The singer had performed boleros ( including compositions recorded by Manzanero ) during his 1991 tour . At the suggestion of manager Hugo López , and realizing that he could appeal to an older audience , Miguel chose boleros for his next album and WEA Latina hired Manzanero to take over its production . Manzanero was enthusiastic , hoping that Miguel 's popularity would introduce the genre to young listeners . On 25 October 1991 , the album 's title was announced as a homage to boleros ; it was Miguel 's first as a producer . 
 Recording began on 24 August 1991 , at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood , California . Miguel and Manzanero produced the album , with Bebu Silvetti arranging the strings with additional contributions from 32 violinists under the direction of American conductor Ezra <unk> . On Romance Miguel covers twelve boleros ( with each track being described as love numbers ) , which were selected by Manzanero from five hundred songs including his " Te Extraño " and " No Sé Tú " . Seven of the twelve tracks were recorded by 13 September when production was suspended the following day when Miguel was hospitalized with appendicitis . The album 's planned late @-@ October release was postponed until 19 November and recording resumed two weeks after Miguel was hospitalized . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 " Inolvidable " was released as Romance 's lead single in November 1991 . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States the week of 25 January 1992 , topping the chart for five weeks . Its second single , " No Sé Tú " , was released in February 1992 and reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart the week of 18 April , topping the chart for seven weeks . The music video for " No Sé Tú " was directed by Pedro Torres and filmed in Miami , it features Miguel and an orchestra performing in front of a building . The video premiered on 16 February on the Mexican variety show Siempre en Domingo . " Inolvidable " and " No Sé Tú " ended 1992 as the third- and second @-@ best @-@ performing Latin songs of the year , respectively , in the United States . In Mexico , the songs topped the charts for a total of six months . The album 's third single , " Contigo en la Distancia " , was released in Mexico in July 1992 ; its music video was also directed by Torres and filmed in Miami . " Mucho Corazón " peaked at number three on the Hot Latin Songs chart , with " Cómo " peaking at number four . " Usted " and " La Barca " received airplay throughout Latin America . 
 To promote the record , Miguel began his Romance Tour on 22 March 1992 at a sold out 10 @,@ 000 @-@ seat National Auditorium in Mexico City . After performing throughout Latin America and the United States , he concluded the tour in Chile in December . In addition to touring , Miguel performed at the Seville Expo ' 92 in Spain . His set list consisted primarily of songs from his earlier career and boleros from Romance . In October 1992 WEA Latina released América & En Vivo , a live EP featuring a new track ( " America , America " ) and tour recordings of " Contigo en la Distancia " , " No Sé Tú " and " Inolvidable " . AllMusic gave the EP three stars out of five . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 AllMusic editor Janet Rosen gave Romance three stars out of five , saying that it " features the usual smooth , well @-@ crafted pop ear candy from Luis Miguel , earnestly sung over strings and polite Latin rhythms " . However , she noted that the songs in the album booklet and the lack of liner notes made it difficult for listeners to know what " to make of this presentation " . Rosen concluded , " It doesn 't matter — the title of the release says it all . " Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune gave the record four stars out of four , praising Miguel 's refusal " to get campy , which gives the effort far more integrity than might have been imagined " and calling his take on boleros " vibrant and real . " Mark Holston reviewed the album positively in the magazine Américas , praising Miguel 's vocals , the choice of songs and Silvetti 's arrangements : " Romance is a reminder of the enduring quality of timeless music " . 
 At the 1992 Billboard Music Awards Miguel was the Top Pop Latin Artist and the Top Hot Latin Tracks Artist , and Romance was the Top Pop Latin Album . In Chile , Romance won the Laurel de Oro Award for best album of the year . The singer was the Best Artist From a Non @-@ English @-@ Speaking Country at the Korean International Music Awards . At the 1993 Grammy Awards , Romance was nominated for Best Latin Pop Album , which was awarded to Jon Secada for his album Otro Día Más Sin Verte . That year Romance was also nominated for Pop Album of the Year at the Lo Nuestro Awards , again losing to Secada for his self @-@ titled album . At the 1993 annual Premios Eres , Miguel won three awards : Best Album , Best Male Singer and Best Show ( for his tour ) . The record was the Best International Album and Miguel won the Best International Artist of the Year at the 1993 Ronda de Venezuela awards . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Romance was released internationally on 19 November 1991 , and sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in its first 10 days . In Mexico it was certified octuple platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) for shipping two million copies , the country 's all @-@ time third @-@ bestselling album ( only Juan Gabriel and José José has sold more copies with Recuerdos , Vol . II and 20 <unk> respectively ) . In the United States , Romance debuted at number ten on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart for the week of 14 December 1991 , and reached number one four weeks later . The record topped the chart for 32 consecutive weeks when it was displaced by Jon Secada 's eponymous album on the week of 22 August 1992 , ending 1992 and 1993 as the bestselling Latin pop album of the year in the country . It was the first record by a Spanish @-@ speaking artist to be certified gold in Brazil and Taiwan , and the first gold certification by a non @-@ crossover Latin artist in the United States ( later certified platinum in the U.S. by the RIAA for shipments of one million copies ) . In South America , Romance was certified platinum in Colombia and Venezuela , gold in Paraguay and double platinum in Peru . In Argentina the album was certified 16 × platinum for sales of over one million copies , the bestselling record by a non @-@ Argentine artist . It received a diamond award from the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) , and was certified quadruple platinum in Chile and double platinum in Spain . As of 2013 , Romance had sold over seven million copies worldwide and is Miguel 's bestselling record . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Romance is considered by music critics to have renewed mainstream interest in bolero music . According to Chicago Tribune editor Monica Eng , " Just as Harry Connick , Jr. re @-@ popularized the sounds of Sinatra and Tony Bennett , Mexican platinum @-@ selling heartthrob Luis Miguel brought back an appreciation for the music of Mexico 's <unk> . " In The Wall Street Journal , Mary Talbot compared renewed interest in boleros to the revival of big band and swing music in the Anglo @-@ American market , previously dominated by rock music ( which had seized bolero 's popularity during the 1960s ) . Elena Kellner of the Los Angeles Times noted the album 's " introducing old favorites to younger audiences " and Miguel 's popularity with older listeners . In Latin Beat Magazine , Franz Reynold wrote that before Miguel , boleros were considered by young people the " music of the ancients , something to be feared , since it seemed to signal the advent of senility " . Mark Holston wrote in Américas magazine that the record 's " irresistible combination of classic songs , string @-@ laden arrangements , and subtle contemporary influences proved to be the perfect formula to reawaken the bolero 's slumbering passions once again . " 
 In his book , The Latin Beat : The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond , Ed Morales wrote that Miguel 's collaboration with Manzanero " brought light to an overlooked master of [ bolero ] " and " was a significant update of the genre " . Romance enhanced Silvetti 's reputation as an arranger and producer ; according to Leila Cobo of Billboard , the album " categorically redefined the interpretations of traditional boleros " and " sparked a torrent of work for Silvetti , including records with Vic Damone and Engelbert Humperdinck " . His arrangements became known as the " Silvetti Sound " , which Cobo described as " anchored in sweeping melodies , lush string arrangements , acoustic instrumentation , and above all , unabashed romanticism " . Romance 's success encouraged Linda Ronstadt , José Luis Rodríguez and Plácido Domingo to record modern versions of traditional boleros . According to Miguel 's former manager Mauricio <unk> , although boleros were still recorded by traditional musicians at the time , " what made Luis Miguel so successful was that it was a young man singing them and that he sang them like modern ballads " . During the Billboard Hot Latin Songs Chart 's 25th anniversary in 2011 , Miguel was number one on the Hot Latin Songs Top Artists chart . Manzanero reflected on their partnership , saying that he " put in the mouths of his generation all of the great romantic songs that had a 30 @-@ year history " . In 2015 , Billboard listed Romance as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Years , an editor writes : " What ’ s become so formulaic in Latin music these days -- the tribute album by a contemporary artist honoring a genius of another era -- started with Romance " . 
 The album 's success encouraged Miguel to record three more Romance records . Its follow @-@ up , Segundo Romance , was released in 1994 ; Manzanero , Calderón and Kiko Cibrian co @-@ produced with Miguel , and it won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance . In 1997 Romances was released , with Miguel and Manzanero co @-@ producing Silvetti 's arrangements ; it sold over 4 @.@ 5 million copies , winning another Grammy for Best Latin Pop Performance . A year later WEA Latina released Todos Los Romances , a three @-@ disc compilation of the romance @-@ themed records . The fourth record in the series , Mis Romances ( produced by Miguel ) , was released in 2001 . Although the singer had planned a ten @-@ album series , Mis Romances was critically and commercially unsuccessful . The following year saw the release of Mis <unk> <unk> , with 13 previously @-@ recorded tracks from the Romance series and a new version of " Hasta Que <unk> " . According to AllMusic editor Iván <unk> , the record 's purpose was to " close this era " of the Romance series . In 2012 , Warner Music Latina reissued a commemorative Romance : 20th Anniversary set with a CD , the original LP record and three 45 rpm singles : " Inolvidable " , " No Sé Tú " and " Contigo en la Distancia " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from AllMusic and from the Romance liner notes : 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Sora ( Kingdom Hearts ) = 
 Sora ( Japanese : <unk> ) is a fictional character and the protagonist of Square Enix 's Kingdom Hearts video game series . Introduced in the first Kingdom Hearts game in 2002 , Sora is portrayed as a cheerful teenager who lives in the Destiny Islands and has been best friends with Riku and Kairi since childhood . When they plan to go on a journey to see other worlds , they are separated by creatures known as the Heartless . While fighting against them , Sora obtains a weapon called the Keyblade . Donald Duck and Goofy then recruit him in their journey across various worlds to aid King Mickey while Sora searches for his friends . Along the way , the trio protects the worlds they visit from various villains . In Kingdom Hearts II , Sora searches for Riku and fights against Organization XIII who , like Ansem the Wise from the original game , are attempting to seize Kingdom Hearts for their own . Sora has also made supporting appearances in other games from the series , and reprised his role in manga and light novel adaptations of the games . 
 Sora was originally designed by Kingdom Hearts series director and character designer Tetsuya Nomura during a discussion between Disney and Square about who should be the protagonist of the series . Wanting an original character , Nomura made various sketches of Sora until the design met the approval of Disney . Nomura came to regard Sora as his favorite character that he had designed , and pushed for the character to have a leading role in the Kingdom Hearts story in spite of the character 's youth . Throughout the series , Sora has been voiced by Haley Joel Osment in the English version and Miyu Irino in the Japanese version . As a child , Sora was voiced by Takuto Yoshinaga and Luke <unk> in Japanese and English , respectively . Sora 's character has received generally positive critical response due to his warm personality and adventurous spirit . His personal and martial growth in the series also received praise , especially in his appearance in Kingdom Hearts II . Additionally , Sora has ranked high on various video game character popularity polls . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Sora appears as a child with spiky brown @-@ hair who , when first introduced , wears a red shirt , red pants , and a white and blue jacket covered by keychains . Upon traveling to certain worlds , Sora 's appearance is altered by Donald Duck 's magic to adapt to different environments ; for example , he turns into a merman in underwater environments . After undergoing significant growth in Kingdom Hearts II , Sora is given a new outfit given by Flora , Fauna , and Merryweather similar to the previous one but mostly black . When battling , Sora 's outfit can change into other designs depending on the player 's choices . Sora 's Keyblade 's primary form is the Kingdom Key ( <unk> , Kingudamu <unk> , Kingdom Chain ) , resembling a classic skeleton key approximately 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) long , with a long , silver keychain extending from the hilt and a Mickey Mouse token on the end of the keychain . However , through the use of game items known as <unk> , the Kingdom Key can assume a variety of unique forms . During Kingdom Hearts II , Sora dual @-@ wields Keyblades , but their forms depend on the player 's use of <unk> . 
 Across the series , Sora is depicted as a cheerful teenager who cherishes his friendships and relies on them for his strength . As a result , several of Sora 's enemies use his friends as bait to use the Keyblade for their purposes . Although Sora was not chosen by the Keyblade to be its owner and the protector of worlds , his actions throughout the series cause the Keyblade to choose him over its original choice , Riku . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 At the beginning of Kingdom Hearts , Sora and his two best friends , Riku and Kairi , plan to leave their hometown , the Destiny Islands , to explore new worlds . However , they are separated when their world is attacked by a group of dark beings known as the Heartless with Sora drifting to a town known as Traverse Town where he learns the Keyblade chose him to eliminate the Heartless . Soon after , Sora meets Donald Duck and Goofy , who join forces in search of his friends while Sora helps Donald and Goofy look for King Mickey . They travel across worlds in their Gummi Ship , sealing the Keyholes of worlds along the way to protect them from being consumed by the darkness of the Heartless . They are opposed by an alliance of Disney villains led by Maleficent who seeks out the seven Princesses of Heart to unlock the Keyhole that leads to " Kingdom Hearts " , a repository of knowledge and power and the source of all hearts . To this end , Maleficent convinces Riku that Sora has betrayed him , and that while Riku searched for Sora , he replaced Riku with new friends . This causes Riku to fight with Sora on several occasions . The group travels to Maleficent 's headquarters in the Hollow Bastion and defeat her , but Sora then discovers that Riku is possessed by the spirit of Ansem , who reveals that Kairi 's heart has been hiding within Sora 's body . In order to return Kairi 's heart , Sora impales himself with Ansem 's Keyblade , briefly transforming him into a Heartless until Kairi brings him back to his human form . After taking Kairi to safety , Sora and company confront and defeat Ansem at the now open door to Kingdom Hearts . Beyond the doorway are Mickey and the now recovered Riku ; to seal it so that the darkness cannot take possession of Kingdom Hearts , Mickey and Sora use their Keyblades to lock the door . Despite being again separated , Sora , Donald , and Goofy continue their quest to reunite with Riku and Mickey . 
 In Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , Sora 's group stumbles onto a fortress known as Castle Oblivion , believing they will find Mickey and Riku inside . Upon entering , Sora 's memories are manipulated by a girl named Naminé who is being held captive by the group Organization XIII and forced to replace memories of Kairi with herself . However , as Sora travels upwards in the castle , he meets Naminé and learns the truth from her . Sora still wishes to protect Naminé and stop the Organization members in the castle . After the Organization members opposing him are defeated , Naminé helps him , Donald , and Goofy to restore their memories to their state prior to entering Castle Oblivion at the cost of losing their memories of the events in the castle . This requires them to sleep in the castle for the restoration of memories to be completed . 
 In Kingdom Hearts II , roughly one year after Chain of Memories , Sora reawakens along with Donald and Goofy in Twilight Town once his Nobody , Roxas , merges within him . They visit the King 's master , Yen Sid , from whom they learn about the existence of the Nobodies and Organization XIII . Sora sets out with Donald and Goofy to find Riku and King Mickey , traversing new and unfamiliar worlds where they encounter the remaining members of the Organization . Sora later encounters their leader , Xemnas , learning that the Organization now has Kairi captive to force Sora to gather more hearts for them . Eventually , with Mickey joining them , Sora 's group finds a way to the Organization 's main base in The World That Never Was . The group soon reunites with Kairi as well as Riku , and continue fighting the Organization . Sora and Riku are separated from Mickey , Goofy , Kairi and Donald as they finish Xemnas and find a way back to Destiny Islands where they reunite with all their friends . 
 In Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , Sora is mostly in a state of sleep as his memories are being restored by Naminé , but is also playable in the game 's multiplayer mode . In Kingdom Hearts Coded Sora himself does not appear until the game 's final scene , in which he receives King Mickey 's letter and reads it with Riku and Kairi . A computer program created from Sora 's data serves as the primary protagonist of the game , finding out the truth behind a mysterious message found inside Jiminy 's journal . A young Sora and Riku briefly appear in Destiny Islands in the prequel to Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep . After Ventus , one of the protagonists , has his heart damaged following a confrontation with his dark side , Vanitas , his heart finds its way into Sora , entering the boy 's body . In the game 's secret ending , set after the events of Kingdom Hearts II Ansem the Wise tells Aqua about Sora 's adventures , and how he may help all the people connected to him . In the final scene , Sora decides to save them after reading Mickey 's letter . 
 In Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance , Sora is summoned with Riku to Yen Sid to undergo a Mark of Mastery exam in response to Xehanort 's coming return . The two are sent to the Dreaming Realm to awaken several worlds submerged in sleep following the defeat of Ansem , but once the task is complete , Sora 's heart is damaged by Xemnas whose companions plan to turn him into the last of Xehanort 's thirteen vessels . Riku and his comrades manage to rescue Sora from his fate and brings him back to Yen Sid 's tower , where he dives into Sora 's body and repairs his heart , awakening him from his coma . Once Sora wakes up , Yen Sid only names Riku as a Keyblade Master for gaining the power used to awaken Sora . Undaunted , Sora congratulates him and departs to continue his training elsewhere . 
 Sora is stated to return as a fully @-@ fledged Keyblade Master in Kingdom Hearts III , and will have his final showdown with Master Xehanort . A 2D cartoonish avatar version of Sora wearing his original outfit in Kingdom Hearts is also present in the online community @-@ based social gaming networking service , Kingdom Hearts Mobile . Sora also appears in the Shiro Amano 's manga and Tomoko Kanemaki 's novels in which he reprises his role in the video games . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Sora was designed by Tetsuya Nomura as the protagonist of Kingdom Hearts . However , he was not originally slated to be the protagonist as Disney wanted Donald Duck to be the protagonist of the game while Square wanted to have Mickey Mouse as the protagonist . Nomura wanted neither as the protagonist of the game and went on to design his own protagonist with the concepts of the Disney characters in mind which resulted in the creation of Sora . Sora originally wielded a weapon resembling a chainsaw ; however , the weapon was not well received by Disney which led Nomura to redesign the weapon into a Keyblade . Sora 's original outfit in Kingdom Hearts was also designed with Mickey Mouse in mind with Mickey Mouse 's trademark white gloves , red shorts and giant yellow shoes due to Square 's original preference to have Mickey as the main character of the game . The tail was removed as the staff found his design to be similar to the one of the Final Fantasy IX protagonist Zidane Tribal who also had a tail . After a talk with the Disney staff , the design was further reworked , and Nomura finished it after a night 's work . 
 One of the main concepts of Sora 's character in the series is that , according to Nomura , he is a normal boy instead of a supernatural being even though he is deeply connected with other characters from the series . With Sora , Nomura wants to give players the message that even though they are not " important people " , they have the opportunity to accomplish great things . This was emphasized in Birth by Sleep 's secret ending , which Nomura hoped players would find because it showed Sora 's potential to influence everyone 's lives . In early versions of development of Birth by Sleep , Nomura thought that Ventus would actually be Sora before being reborn , but due to negative feedback from overseas , that plot line was discarded . Nomura has stated that Sora 's name can be interpreted as " sky " since the Japanese word sora ( 空 ) , means sky . This name was also chosen to symbolize Sora 's role and his personality . It was also chosen to show Sora 's close relationship with Riku and Kairi , making their three names together " Sky , Land , and Sea . " He was also described by Nomura as having an outgoing personality , which allows him to make friends throughout the series . Of all of the characters Nomura has designed , Sora is his favorite , calling him " special " after having worked to develop the character over many games . 
 Following the first Kingdom Hearts , Nomura was worried that players would be unhappy that Sora would start Kingdom Hearts II as a weak character with few powers who once again had to be leveled up like the first title . Therefore , Nomura developed the plot of Chain of Memories to explain how Sora loses his abilities in Castle Oblivion and then started anew . Additionally , with Chain of Memories a new mystery regarding Sora 's memories from Twilight Town was added and while Sora did not have any memories from such town , this fact would be explained in Kingdom Hearts II . The team in charge of Kingdom Hearts II expressed difficulties in animating Sora 's Drive Valor Form for having a completely different motion except in the part that Sora walks which is shared with his regular motion . After finishing Kingdom Hearts II , Nomura wanted to give Sora a rest from the series in order to focus the following games on other characters from the series . Moreover , the events from the endings of Kingdom Hearts coded and Birth by Sleep hinted a new mystery regarding Sora 's character which will be revealed in Kingdom Hearts III . Although Nomura stated in March 2010 that Sora will once again be the focus of the next Kingdom Hearts , he will share it with another character with a big importance . In response to rumors saying that Sora 's story would end in Kingdom Hearts III , Nomura answered that Sora is the protagonist of the series and that his role will end once the series ends . For this game , Nomura was interested in giving Sora a new costume , but was worried about doing so because of the popularity of the characters Kingdom Hearts II outfit . In the end he decided to create a new one as Kingdom Hearts III was a new numbered title . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Various types of merchandising have been released based on Sora 's character . There are several types of action figures which show Sora with a different appearance such as his original form , the Kingdom Hearts II design and others variants . Other accessories include plush , necklaces and phone charm straps . 
 In January 2010 , Famitsu featured Sora as its reader 's fifth most popular character of all time . They also featured him on its issue # 1105 cover , <unk> him a tribute , showing his many appearances through the years . UGO Networks placed Sora nineteenth on their list of " Top 25 Japanese RPG Characters " calling him a " charismatic and visually interesting " character . Although he did not make to the top ten of Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Top Ten : List of Videogame Characters " , Sora was nevertheless noted for his growing popularity . In an ASCII Media Works poll in which fans voted selected whose video game or manga character would like to name their children after , Sora 's name was second in the male category . In a Famitsu poll from 2011 , Sora was voted as the most popular Kingdom Hearts character with his fight against Roxas from Kingdom Hearts II also being listed as the best scene from the series . He was also 15th in the Game Informer poll of best characters from the 2000s . 
 Overall , critics and fans have generally praised the character of Sora . When Sora 's character was first revealed in 2002 , GameSpot 's Giancarlo Varanini regarded him as " an appropriate amalgamation of the Square and Disney universes . " He also comically noted he " doesn 't look like much , but you know how it goes . " A 1UP.com writer called Sora " one of my all @-@ time favorite Square characters " , praising his cheerful personality . Gamasutra commented on Sora 's journey along the series in their feature " The Birth of Collecting : The Osiris Archetype In Games " by Jason Johnson ; while comparing Sora with Isis , Johnson found Sora 's adventure appealing . IGN praised Sora 's resilient character noting how such an ordinary " youngster " could face up to his challenges during his adventures for the sake of friendship , while RPGFan 's Nicole Monet Kirk labelled him as an " extremely likable hero " . Furthermore , in the book " Interactive Storytelling for Video Games : A Player @-@ Centered Approach to Creating Memorable Characters and Stories " it is noted that while Sora follows a " standard hero archetype " , his character becomes more believable and strong when worrying about his friends ' fates . Haley Joel Osment , Sora 's English voice actor , has also been praised by Gaming Target 's Matt <unk> who mentioned Osment " makes a perfect fit for Sora " . While remarking Osment 's work , Louis Bedigian from GameZone mentioned that " Sora had something rarely found in video @-@ game characters : depth " also praising his role in Kingdom Hearts . Game Informer 's Bryan Vore found that in Kingdom Hearts II , Osment has improved in voicing the character , praising his work . In their Super Smash Bros Brawl list , IGN described Sora as " ... the most active and evolved hero on this week 's list . " IGN listed him as a possible character in Super Smash Bros. Brawl ; though he was not chosen as the " reader 's choice " . 
 Sora 's transformations in the various Disney worlds in Kingdom Hearts II were commented to be entertaining by Julia <unk> from AllGame due to how variated they are . Also reviewing Kingdom Hearts II , Greg Bemis from G4TV praised Sora 's development in the game , including his growth and the fact each of his attacks from the title are entertaining . Although Computer and Video Games also found an improvement in Sora 's movements due to sequences made with the Reaction Commands , they found them " fairly straightforward . " RPGamer 's Cortney Stone stated that Sora now moved " like an acrobatic honed fighter " in contrast to his " adolescent awkwardness " seen in the first Kingdom Hearts and remarked Sora 's transformation into a lion seen in the sequel as enjoyable . His new outfit was also well received by GameSpy who found an improvement from the original one that looked like " wardrobe from Mickey Mouse 's closet " . GamesRadar had similar opinions and particularly focused on Sora 's transformation and his new abilities . Game Informer viewed Sora 's Drive Forms as well as his combined techniques with other characters as one of the best additions to the gameplay . Although IGN also praised Sora 's growth in Kingdom Hearts II in their article " Kingdom Hearts III : The IGN Concept " , they stated that in order to make his role in a future sequel more entertaining , he would need more development making him " be confident , collected and committed to the tasks at hand " . Also commenting on his role in a future sequel , GamesRadar stated that having Sora 's character older would be necessary to make the story more mature . 
 On the other hand , Sora also received negative comments regarding his characterization . He was third in 1UP.com 's " Top 5 Most Irritating RPG Protagonists " with writer Bob Mackey commenting he is " a human version of Mickey Mouse " , criticizing his original outfit and relationship with Riku and Kairi , and finding him to be less popular than the Disney characters featured in the series . In January 2007 , Sora was listed the fourth " biggest dork " of 2006 by Game Informer , citing the Atlantica singing portions of the game . 
 = Dennis Johnson = 
 Dennis Wayne Johnson ( September 18 , 1954 – February 22 , 2007 ) , nicknamed " DJ " , was an American professional basketball player for the National Basketball Association 's ( NBA ) Seattle SuperSonics , Phoenix Suns and Boston Celtics and coach of the Los Angeles Clippers . He was an alumnus of Dominguez High School , Los Angeles Harbor College and Pepperdine University . 
 A prototypical late bloomer , Johnson overcame early struggles and had a successful NBA playing career . Drafted 29th overall in 1976 by the Seattle SuperSonics , Johnson began his professional career as a shooting guard . He eventually led the Sonics to their only NBA championship in 1979 , winning the Finals MVP Award . After a short stint with the Phoenix Suns , he became the starting point guard for the Boston Celtics , with whom he won two more championships . Johnson was voted into five All @-@ Star Teams , one All @-@ NBA First and one Second Team , and nine consecutive All @-@ Defensive First and Second Teams . Apart from his reputation as a defensive stopper , Johnson was known as a clutch player who made several decisive plays in NBA playoffs history . 
 The Celtics franchise has retired Johnson 's # 3 jersey , which hangs from the rafters of the TD Garden , the home arena of the team . On April 5 , 2010 , the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame officially announced that Johnson had been posthumously elected to the Hall . He was formally inducted on August 13 . He is considered by several sports journalists to be one of the most underrated players of all time . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Dennis Wayne Johnson was born the eighth of sixteen children , to a social worker and a bricklayer who lived in Compton , California , a suburb of Los Angeles . Originally a baseball fan and a Little Leaguer , Johnson learned basketball from his father , but seemed to have neither the size nor the talent to compete with his peers : as a teenager at Dominguez High School , Johnson measured just 5 ' 9 " and played only " a minute or two each game " . After high school , he worked several odd jobs , including a $ 2 @.@ 75 @-@ per @-@ hour job as a forklift driver , and played with his brothers in summer league games after work . During this period , Johnson grew to a height of 6 ' 3 " , and developed what some later described as " rocket launcher legs " , which enabled him to jump high to grab rebounds against taller opponents . 
 Jim White , the coach at Los Angeles Harbor College , had watched Johnson play street basketball ; feeling that Johnson excelled in defense , White asked him to enroll . Johnson gave up his jobs and developed into a promising young guard , averaging 18 @.@ 3 points and 12 @.@ 0 rebounds per game and leading Harbor to a college junior state title . However , the young guard lacked discipline , often clashed with White and was thrown off the team three times in two years . 
 At the end of his junior college career , two universities offered Johnson scholarships : Azusa Pacific University and Pepperdine University . Johnson chose the latter , and in his only year in college , he averaged 15 @.@ 7 points , 5 @.@ 8 rebounds and 3 @.@ 3 assists per game , and developed a reputation for tough defense . After that year , Johnson made himself eligible for the 1976 NBA Draft , but was skeptical that any team would take him . NBA teams were wary of drafting a player with character issues , and Johnson was known to be a troublemaker . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Seattle SuperSonics ( 1976 – 80 ) = = = 
 The Seattle SuperSonics took Johnson in the second round of the 1976 draft with the 29th pick and gave him a four @-@ year contract , with which he earned a salary of $ 45 @,@ 000 in the first year and $ 90 @,@ 000 in the last . In his rookie year , the 1976 – 77 NBA season , Johnson , playing backup to the experienced Sonics backcourt tandem of Slick Watts and Fred Brown , averaged 9 @.@ 2 points and 1 @.@ 5 assists per game . The Sonics finished with a 40 – 42 record and missed the 1977 NBA Playoffs , leading head coach Bill Russell to resign . In the following season , the team lost 17 of the first 22 games under Russell 's replacement Bob Hopkins , who was replaced by Hall of Fame coach Lenny Wilkens , who gave Johnson a starting spot and paired him with Gus Williams . Johnson revelled in this new role , improving his averages to 12 @.@ 7 points and 2 @.@ 8 assists per game . During this period Johnson played shooting guard and was known for his aggressive slam dunking , in contrast to the more cerebral roles he played later in his career . It was at this time that Johnson 's nickname " DJ " was coined by play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Bob Blackburn , to help distinguish him from teammates , John Johnson and Vinnie Johnson ( whom Blackburn referred to as " JJ " and " VJ " , respectively ) . 
 Finishing strongly , the Sonics ended the regular season with a 47 – 35 record and made the 1978 NBA Playoffs . After eliminating the Los Angeles Lakers , the defending champion Portland Trail Blazers , and the Denver Nuggets , they almost defeated the Washington Bullets by taking a 3 – 2 lead in the 1978 NBA Finals . In a 93 – 92 Game 3 victory , Johnson blocked seven shots — the most blocks in NBA Finals history for a guard . The Sonics lost in seven games , however , partly because of Johnson 's Game 7 scoring drought , in which the second @-@ year guard missed all of his 14 field goal attempts . Johnson later acknowledged that he simply " choked " ; he vowed never to repeat this again and credited this game as an important lesson to become a better player . 
 Johnson and the Sonics got their revenge in the 1978 – 79 season . After clinching the Pacific Division with a 52 – 30 record , the team met the Bullets again in the 1979 NBA Finals . After losing Game 1 , the Sonics won the next four games to take the finals series , helped by Johnson who averaged almost 23 points along with six rebounds and assists per game . He scored 32 points in a Game 4 overtime victory , and was named NBA Finals MVP . It was during this season that Johnson established himself as one of the best guards in the league ; he averaged 15 @.@ 9 points and 3 @.@ 5 assists per game , and made his first All @-@ Defensive First Team and All @-@ Star Game appearance . 
 During the following season , Johnson averaged 19 @.@ 0 points and 4 @.@ 1 assists , appeared in his second All @-@ Star Game and was named to the All @-@ Defensive First Team and All @-@ NBA Second Team . The Sonics , however , lost in the Western Conference Finals to the Lakers , who had Hall of Famers Jamaal Wilkes , Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar . Because of the abundance of talent on the Sonics team , Johnson later called this loss one of the worst disappointments of his professional career . Coach Wilkens grew tired of Johnson , who often clashed with him and was perceived as a growing liability to the team . At the end of the season , Johnson was traded to the Phoenix Suns for Paul Westphal and draft picks . The Sonics finished 22 games worse in the next season despite the addition of Westphal . 
 = = = Phoenix Suns ( 1980 – 83 ) = = = 
 Johnson further established himself as a quality player in Phoenix . In his three years as a Sun , Johnson averaged 14 – 20 points a game and provided tough defense . He played in two All @-@ Star Games , was voted into three consecutive All @-@ Defensive First Teams and earned his only All @-@ NBA First Team appearance . In this period Johnson , like in Seattle , played shooting guard and became the main scorer on the team , as opposed to being the second or third option as a Sonic . 
 In the first two years of Johnson 's stint , the Suns were fairly successful , reaching the Western Conference Semifinals both seasons . The Suns bowed out in the first round in Johnson 's last year . Johnson 's situation deteriorated towards the end of his career at Phoenix . Like in Seattle , he often clashed with his coach , John MacLeod , and finally was traded by general manager , Jerry Colangelo , to the Boston Celtics for Rick Robey and draft picks . Like Seattle after Johnson 's departure , the Suns finished 12 games worse in the next season despite the addition of Robey . 
 = = = Boston Celtics ( 1983 – 90 ) = = = 
 Between the 1979 – 80 season and 1981 – 82 season seasons , the Celtics had lost to the Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern <unk> Finals 2 out of 3 times , mainly because physical Sixers guard Andrew Toney routinely caused problems for their defensively fragile backcourt . After subsequently getting swept by the Bucks in the 1982 @-@ 83 Eastern Conference Semifinals , Celtics general manager Red Auerbach added the perennial All @-@ Defensive Team member Johnson to his squad , hoping that it would help the Celtics fare better in the Eastern Conference playoffs , particular against the 76ers . Johnson joined a squad led by Hall of Fame forward Larry Bird , who played in the frontcourt with two fellow Hall of Famers , center Robert Parish and forward Kevin McHale , a combination often called the best frontcourt of all time by the NBA . Johnson described joining the Celtics as a " dream come true " and enjoyed the tutelage of highly successful general manager Auerbach , who was " living history " according to Johnson . 
 With the Celtics Johnson changed his playing style for the third time in his career : after being known as a slam dunking shooting guard with the Sonics , and an all @-@ around scorer with the Suns , he now established himself as a point guard who was defined more by playmaking than scoring . In his first year as a Celtic , he averaged 13 @.@ 2 points and 4 @.@ 2 assists and was elected to the All @-@ Defensive Second Team . The Celtics reached the 1984 NBA Finals , where they met the Los Angeles Lakers , their intense rivals since the 1960s . The Celtics won 4 – 3 , and Johnson took credit for playing smothering defense on Hall of Fame Lakers playmaker Earvin Johnson , limiting him to a sub @-@ average 17 points in the last four games , and being at least partly responsible for several of the Laker point guard 's game @-@ deciding errors in Games 2 , 4 and 7 . As a result , Magic Johnson was taunted as " Tragic Johnson " whenever the Lakers and Celtics played against each other . 
 In the 1984 – 85 season , Johnson continued playing smothering defense , earning his next All @-@ Defensive Second Team call @-@ up while averaging 16 @.@ 9 points and 7 @.@ 3 assists per game . The Celtics met the Lakers in the 1985 NBA Finals again . Johnson 's big moment came in Game 4 : when the score was tied at 105 , teammate Larry Bird had the ball in the last seconds . Being double @-@ teamed by Lakers Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Magic Johnson , Bird passed to the open Johnson , and the guard sank a 19 @-@ ft buzzer beater to win the game . The Lakers , however , took their revenge this time , winning the series in six games , powered by venerable 38 @-@ year @-@ old Finals MVP Abdul @-@ Jabbar . Johnson described this loss as one of the toughest in his career , because the Celtics were " close [ to winning the series ] " , but " could not get the job done " . 
 In the following season the Celtics made the playoffs , helped by the performance of Johnson , who made the All @-@ Defensive Second Team again while tallying 17 @.@ 8 points and 6 @.@ 7 assists per game . After defeating the Milwaukee Bucks in the Eastern Conference Finals , the Celtics reached the 1986 NBA Finals against the up @-@ and @-@ coming Houston Rockets , led by the " Twin Towers " of centers Ralph Sampson and Hakeem Olajuwon . Led by Finals MVP Larry Bird , the Celtics beat the Rockets 4 – 2 , and Johnson won his third title . 
 The Celtics were unable to repeat their title in 1987 despite several dramatic playoff victories . Johnson played strong defense again , earning yet another appearance on the All @-@ Defensive First Team , and the Celtics embarked on a nail @-@ biting playoff campaign . In the 1987 Eastern Conference Semifinals , the Celtics split the first six games against the Milwaukee Bucks . In the deciding Game 7 , which the Celtics won , Johnson had a spectacular play with 1 : 30 left in the game : a Celtics ball threatened to fly out of bounds , but Johnson dived for it and whipped it backwards in mid @-@ air against Bucks center Jack <unk> . The ball bounced off <unk> before going out of bounds , and the Celtics maintained possession . 
 In the next round the 1987 Eastern Conference Finals , the Celtics faced the Detroit Pistons . The series was described as a grudge match between two intense rivals , featuring a great level of personal animosity , sharp rhetoric , and several physical altercations . The center of this feud was Pistons pivot Bill Laimbeer , who brawled with Celtics players Bird and Parish . In Game 5 Johnson was involved in a crucial play : down 107 @-@ 106 , Larry Bird stole the in @-@ bounds pass by Pistons point guard Isiah Thomas with 5 seconds left and passed it to a sprinting Johnson , who converted a difficult layup with 1 second left in the game . This play caused Celtics broadcaster Johnny Most to shout out one of his most famous calls : 
 According to Johnson this was his favorite play of all @-@ time . Games 6 and 7 also featured a feud , this time between Pistons forward Dennis Rodman and Johnson . In Game 6 , which the Pistons won , Rodman taunted Johnson in the closing seconds by waving his right hand over his head . When the Celtics took Game 7 , Johnson went back at Rodman in the last moments of the game and mimicked his taunting gesture . In the 1987 NBA Finals , however , the Celtics succumbed to the Los Angeles Lakers 4 – 2 as Lakers playmaker and Finals MVP Magic Johnson put up a great performance , averaging 26 points and 13 assists throughout the series . 
 The next three seasons were disappointing for the aging Celtics . In the 1987 – 88 season , Johnson averaged 12 @.@ 6 points and 7 @.@ 8 assists , but in the 1988 Playoffs , the Celtics were unable to beat the Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference Finals . In the next season , Johnson ( who statistically declined to 10 @.@ 0 points and 6 @.@ 6 assists per game ) and his team made the 1989 NBA Playoffs on a meager 42 – 40 record ( largely due to the absence of star forward Larry Bird for almost the entire season ) , but were immediately eliminated in the first round ( again , largely due to the absence of the injured Larry Bird . ) The following 1989 – 90 NBA season was Johnson 's last . The now 35 @-@ year @-@ old playmaker relinquished his starting point guard role to younger John Bagley , but when Bagley dislocated his shoulder , Johnson returned with high level of performance and was lovingly called " our glue man " by coach Jimmy Rodgers . In that season , Johnson started in 65 of his 75 games , averaging 7 @.@ 1 points and 6 @.@ 5 assists , but the Celtics failed to survive the first round of the 1990 NBA Playoffs . 
 Johnson retired after the Celtics did not offer him a new contract at the beginning of the 1991 season . During his retirement ceremony , his perennial Los Angeles Lakers opponent Magic Johnson telegraphed him and lauded him as " the best backcourt defender of all @-@ time " . In addition Celtics colleague and triple NBA Most Valuable Player award winner Larry Bird called Johnson the best teammate he ever had . 
 = = = Post @-@ player career = = = 
 After retiring as a player , Johnson worked as a scout for the Celtics . In 1993 he became an assistant coach for the Celtics , a position he held until 1997 . After spending several years outside the limelight , he returned as an assistant coach for the Los Angeles Clippers in 2000 , and spent four seasons there . For 24 games toward the end of the 2002 – 03 season , Johnson served as interim head coach after the departure of Alvin Gentry . Johnson later worked as a scout for the Portland Trail Blazers , and in 2004 he was named head coach of the NBA Development League 's Florida Flame . He became head coach of the NBADL 's Austin Toros a year later , and held that position until his death two years later . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1 @,@ 100 games , Johnson scored 15 @,@ 535 points , grabbed 4 @,@ 249 rebounds and gave 5 @,@ 499 assists , translating to career averages of 14 @.@ 1 points , 3 @.@ 9 rebounds and 5 @.@ 0 assists per game . Known as a defensive stalwart , he was elected into nine straight All @-@ Defensive First or Second Teams . NBA legend George Gervin said in a podcast with journalist Bill Simmons that Johnson was the hardest defender he ever played against . Johnson is also acknowledged by the NBA as a " money player " who was clutch in decisive moments , such as scoring 32 points for his team in a Game 4 overtime victory in the 1979 NBA Finals , playing smothering defense on Magic Johnson in the 1984 NBA Finals , and converting a last @-@ second layup in Game 5 of the 1987 Eastern Conference Finals after a Larry Bird steal . 
 Furthermore , Johnson is lauded by the NBA as a versatile all @-@ around weapon who played with " contagious competitiveness " and was known for his durability : in 14 NBA seasons , he played in 1 @,@ 100 of a possible 1 @,@ 148 games and participated in 180 playoff games , the latter figure the 11th highest number of all time . At his retirement , Johnson was only the 11th NBA player to amass more than 15 @,@ 000 points and 5 @,@ 000 assists . 
 On December 13 , 1991 , the Celtics franchise retired his number 3 jersey . Johnson said he would always be a Boston Celtic , and remarked that seeing his number in the rafters gave him a " special feeling " . However , Johnson did not live to see an induction into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame , a fact that has been a considerable point of debate with sports journalists . Bill Simmons of ESPN called his Hall of Fame snub an " ongoing injustice " , stating that according to him , Joe Dumars – a Hall of Famer known for strong defense rather than spectacular scoring , like Johnson – was no better [ a basketball player ] than him . Colleague Ken <unk> called Johnson " one of the first guys I 'd give a Hall [ of Fame ] pass " . Contemporary Boston Celtics Hall of Fame forward Larry Bird gave Johnson ultimate praise , calling him the best teammate he ever had in his autobiography Drive , which is especially significant considering Bird 's teammates included Hall of Famers Kevin McHale , Robert Parish , Bill Walton , and Tiny Archibald . On April 3 , 2010 , ESPN Boston reported that Johnson was posthumously elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame . This was officially confirmed two days later when the Hall released the list of 2010 inductees . 
 On October 26 , 2007 , a learning center was dedicated in Johnson 's name in the Central Branch of the YMCA of Greater Boston . The center was made possible by the donations and effort of Larry Bird and M.L. Carr . Johnson 's family , Danny Ainge , Carr , and members of the YMCA and local community were present for the ribbon cutting ceremony . Donna Johnson said on behalf of her husband , " If Dennis were alive he would really appreciate the thought and love the idea of the Learning Center . " 
 The NBA D @-@ League Coach of the Year award is named after Johnson . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Dennis Johnson was married to Donna , his wife of 31 years , and had three children named Dwayne , Denise , and Daniel . Johnson also was known for his appearance : he had freckles and reddish hair . Dennis 's brother , Joey , is a former Arizona State Sun Devils basketball star . And Dennis 's nephews , Nick , who was drafted by the Houston Rockets in the 2nd Round of the 2014 NBA Draft , and Chris Johnson who currently plays with the Arizona Wildcats , are well @-@ known basketball stars . 
 On October 20 , 1997 , he was arrested and detained overnight for allegedly holding a knife to his wife 's throat and threatening his 17 @-@ year @-@ old son . Johnson was later charged with aggravated assault and was ordered to stay away from his family . The prosecutors dropped the case several months later after his wife declined to press charges . Johnson reportedly went to counseling to repair his marriage . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On February 22 , 2007 , at the Austin Convention Center , Johnson had a heart attack and collapsed at the end of the Toros ' practice . After being rushed to a nearby hospital , he could not be revived and was later pronounced dead . Johnson was survived by his wife and his children . Johnson 's death was met with shock throughout the NBA . Among others , contemporary Celtics colleague Danny Ainge called him one of " the most underrated players of all time [ ... ] and one of the greatest Celtics acquisitions " , and one @-@ time rival Bill Laimbeer called him " a great player on a great ballclub " . 
 = The World Before the Flood = 
 The World Before the Flood is an oil painting on canvas by English artist William Etty , first exhibited in 1828 and currently in the Southampton City Art Gallery . It depicts a scene from Paradise Lost in which , among a series of visions of the future shown to Adam , he sees the world immediately before the Great Flood . The painting illustrates the stages of courtship as described by Milton ; a group of men select wives from a group of dancing women , drag their chosen woman from the group , and settle down to married life . Behind the courting group , an oncoming storm looms , a symbol of the destruction which the dancers and lovers are about to bring upon themselves . 
 When first exhibited at the 1828 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition the painting attracted large crowds , and strongly divided critical opinion . It was greatly praised by many critics , who counted it among the finest works of art in the country . Other reviewers condemned it as crude , tasteless , offensive and poorly executed . 
 The painting was bought at the Summer Exhibition by the Marquess of Stafford , which greatly pleased Etty . It was sold in 1908 , long after Etty had fallen out of fashion , for a substantial loss , and sold again in 1937 for a further substantial loss to the Southampton City Art Gallery , where it remains . Another work by Etty , sold as A Bacchanalian Scene in 1830 and later renamed Landscape with Figures , was identified in 1953 as a preliminary oil sketch for The World Before the Flood and purchased by the York Art Gallery . The two paintings were exhibited together as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work in 2011 – 12 . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty was born in 1787 , the son of a York baker and miller . He began as an apprentice printer in Hull . On completing his seven @-@ year apprenticeship he moved at the age of 18 to London " with a few pieces of chalk crayons " , with the intention of becoming a history painter in the tradition of the Old Masters . Strongly influenced by the works of Titian and Rubens , he submitted paintings to the Royal Academy of Arts and the British Institution , all of which were either rejected or received scant attention when exhibited . 
 In 1821 the Royal Academy accepted and exhibited one of Etty 's works , The Arrival of Cleopatra in Cilicia ( also known as The Triumph of Cleopatra ) . The painting was extremely well received , and many of Etty 's fellow artists greatly admired him . He was elected a full Royal Academician in 1828 , at that time the most prestigious honour available to an artist . He became well respected for his ability to capture flesh tones accurately in painting , and for his fascination with contrasts in skin tones . Following the exhibition of Cleopatra , over the next decade Etty tried to replicate its success by painting nude figures in biblical , literary and mythological settings . 
 While some nudes by foreign artists were held in private English collections , the country had no tradition of nude painting and the display and distribution of nude material to the public had been suppressed since the 1787 Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice . Etty was the first British artist to specialise in the nude , and the reaction of the lower classes to these paintings caused concern throughout the 19th century . Many critics condemned his repeated depictions of female nudity as indecent , although his portraits of male nudes were generally well received . 
 = = Subject = = 
 The World Before the Flood illustrates lines 580 – 97 from Book XI of John Milton 's Paradise Lost . Among the visions of the future shown to Adam by the Archangel Michael , Michael shows Adam the world after the expulsion from the Garden of Eden but before the Great Flood . This section of Paradise Lost reflects a passage from the sixth chapter of the Book of Genesis : " That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair ; and they took them wives of all which they chose " , an act which would shortly cause God to regret creating humanity and to cleanse the earth in the Great Flood . 
 The World Before the Flood shows the stages of courtship as described by Milton , as men are seduced by women and pass from enjoying the company of other men into married life . Etty worked through a number of various configurations for the characters in the painting before settling on his final design . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The World Before the Flood is strongly influenced by A Bacchanalian Revel Before a Statue of Pan ( 1632 – 33 ) by Nicolas Poussin , whom Etty greatly admired and of whose works he had previously made several copies . Adam and Michael are not visible in the painting . Instead , the viewer sees the scene from Adam 's point of view . The painting is a Bacchanalian scene , centred on a group of six scantily @-@ clad women dancing , while a group of men watch . The women 's cheeks are flushed both with the exertion of their dancing and with their lustful attempts to seduce the watching men . The men " let their eyes rove without rein " , each choosing the woman he wants to be with . 
 At the left , five men eye the six dancing women , with " grave " expressions as described by Milton . Three of the men discuss their choice of women , while the other two watch the dancing group alone . A sixth man has made his choice , and lunges forward to grab the arms of a bare @-@ breasted dancing woman . 
 In the centre , the women dance . Their interlocked arms and hands create a pattern at the centre of the canvas , which acts as the focus of the painting . To the right of the central group of dancers a young man drags another woman away from the group of dancers , to join a pair of lovers who lie down together at the right of the painting . 
 Across the entire width of the background , a darkening sky and oncoming storm clouds presage the destruction that the dancers are unwittingly about to bring upon themselves . 
 In a preliminary study for the The World Before the Flood now in the York Art Gallery , while the broad structure of the piece is similar to that of the finished work the focus is more strongly on the central group of women . In early versions the right @-@ most of the dancing figures , wearing a green skirt , faces outward with her arms behind her back , forming a closed circle together with the central group of dancers . In the finished work , she gestures outwards from the circle , creating a clear narrative flow in the positions of the figures : from the single men on the left , to the man choosing a wife , to the group of dancing women , to the couple leaving the circle of dancers to join the reclining lovers on the far right . 
 As was the case with most of his works , Etty did not give the painting a title . It was initially exhibited as A Composition , taken from the Eleventh Book of Milton 's Paradise Lost , and was referred to by Etty himself as The <unk> of Fair Women and The Origin of Marriage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical opinion concerning The World Before the Flood was divided when the painting , along with two other of Etty 's works , was exhibited at the 1828 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition . Some reviewers were intensely critical of the piece . A writer in the Literary Gazette called the painting a " deadly sin against good taste " , describing the background as " unnecessarily harsh and crude " with " much to blame and lament " and the dancing figures " outrageous " , complaining that the women reminded him not of Paradise Lost , but of the scantily clad witches in Robert Burns 's Tam o ' Shanter . An anonymous critic in the Monthly Magazine disparaged the " <unk> and <unk> " of the painting 's subjects , describing them as " as close to the unpardonable limits as anything that has lately appealed to the public eye " . This same writer disapproved of the dark skin tones of some of the figures , arguing that " the brown visage of the <unk> gives but a dingy image of the roses and lilies that , from time immemorial , have made the charm of British beauty " . The correspondent for The London Magazine felt that while the painting was " in many respects worthy of admiration ... [ there ] is a spirit , a boldness , and a startling effect " , the work was poorly executed overall . Its depiction of women drew particular ire : " the expression of the faces is vapid ; the features rather homely ; the limbs , though not ill @-@ drawn , have not that finish and play of the muscles , which alone give lightness and elasticity . They seem lifted up with difficulty , and ready to fall . " The review upbraided Etty as an artist who had " advanced half way on his road to classic excellence ; and there , when he should have proceeded with increased ardour and more careful exactness from being in view of his object , he has stopped short . " Etty 's fellow artist John Constable privately described the work as " a revel rout of Satyrs and lady bums as usual " . 
 Other critics offered a more positive impression of the piece . The Examiner celebrated Etty 's having " outdone his former self , and most of his contemporaries " . A reviewer in The Mirror of Literature , Amusement , and Instruction said that " few pictures have attracted or deserved more attention than this masterly production , " describing the figures as " graceful and elegant " . The <unk> considered it " decidedly the most attractive picture in the whole Exhibition " , noting that their review was delayed because in the opening week of the exhibition , " the crowds which continually stood in front of it rendered it quite impossible to get such a view of it as would enable us to do it justice " . Colburn 's New Monthly Magazine considered it " another instance of the rapid advances which this rising artist is making towards perfection . " The most effusive praise was offered in poetic form by John Taylor , who in September 1828 imagined that if Milton and Nicolas Poussin were both alive to see the painting , Milton would view it with " proud delight " , while Poussin would suffer an " envious thorn " with the realization that Etty 's abilities had surpassed his own . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The World Before the Flood was bought at its 1828 exhibition by The Marquess of Stafford for 500 guineas ( about £ 39 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms ) , to add to his private collection of nudes by Titian . Etty was delighted with his success at the exhibition , at which all three of the paintings he had exhibited were successfully sold to prestigious buyers . 
 I know you will rejoice with us all , when I tell you that the principal part of the cargo of the ship " William Etty " ( of whose arrival you had been advised ) , now landed at the Royal Academy Wharf , has been consigned to the Right Honourable the Marquis of Stafford , for five hundred guineas : the rest of the cargo being already owned by Lord Normanton and Digby Murray , Esq . ... After clearing out , we shall again put to sea and hope for equally favouring gales next voyage . 
 From 1832 onwards , needled by repeated attacks from the press on his supposed indecency and tastelessness , Etty often made a conscious effort to project a moral dimension into his work , although he continued to be a prominent painter of nudes . He died in 1849 , working and exhibiting up until his death despite consistently being regarded by many as a pornographer . Charles Robert Leslie observed shortly after Etty 's death that " [ Etty ] himself , thinking and meaning no evil , was not aware of the manner in which his works were regarded by grosser minds " . Interest in his work declined as new movements came to characterise painting in Britain , and by the end of the 19th century the cost of all his paintings had fallen below their original prices . 
 The World Before the Flood was sold to F. E. Sidney in 1908 for 230 guineas ( about £ 22 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms ) , and sold on to the Southampton City Art Gallery in 1937 for 195 guineas ( about £ 11 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms ) , where as of 2015 it remains . In addition to its initial exhibition in 1828 , the painting was exhibited at a number of significant exhibitions throughout the 19th century . Etty 's preliminary oil sketch entered the collection of Etty 's former mentor Sir Thomas Lawrence . Following Lawrence 's death in 1830 , it was sold as A Bacchanalian Scene for 27 guineas ( about £ 2 @,@ 200 in 2016 terms ) , and sold on as Landscape with Figures in 1908 . In 1953 it was identified as a study for The World Before the Flood , and purchased by the York Art Gallery , where as of 2015 it remains . Both versions of the painting were shown together as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery in 2011 – 12 . 
 = When Love Takes Over = 
 " When Love Takes Over " is a song by French DJ @-@ music producer David Guetta with vocals by Kelly Rowland from his fourth studio album , One Love . It was released as the lead single from the album on 21 April 2009 by Virgin Records ( EMI France ) . The song was conceived when Guetta played the instrumental version during one of his DJ sets in summer 2008 ; American recording artist Kelly Rowland , who fell in love with the track , convinced Guetta to allow her to take it so that she could write and record vocals for it . It was co @-@ written by Nervo . 
 According to Rowland , the song inspired her to pursue a more dance @-@ oriented sound for her album Here I Am ( 2011 ) , while Guetta noted " When Love Takes Over " for providing the framework for his future musical explorations and inspiring him to experiment with more urban sounds . Guetta and Frédéric Riesterer produced the song with piano riffs and a melodic backing track . Veronica Ferraro mixed the song , focussing primarily on giving Rowland 's vocals a magical and inspiring tone . Critics would later state that Rowland 's vocals on " When Love Take Over " helped to establish herself as a solo vocalist . The song 's lyrics carry a message of the euphoria one feels when in love with a significant other , while the production bears some similarities to Coldplay 's 2002 hit single , " Clocks " , particularly the opening riff . 
 " When Love Takes Over " has been praised by many critics . Most noted the addition of Rowland 's powerful and emotionally charged vocals which made the single the most memorable song from One Love . The production was praised for its lush production and euphoric sentiments . It achieved worldwide success by topping the charts in ten countries , including in the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , Italy and Switzerland . At the time of release , it became Guetta 's highest charting single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and Rowland 's second number one single in the United Kingdom . " When Love Takes Over " ranked at number one on Billboard 's Best of 2009 Dance Club Songs chart . In 2013 , Billboard named " When Love Takes Over " its number one dance @-@ pop collaboration of all time , in addition to noting the lasting cultural impact that the collaboration would have on dance music and its indication of the emerging electronic dance music trend in America at its time of release . 
 In the song 's accompanying music video , Rowland and Guetta reminisce of how the song came together . It follows the duo as they prepare for a party before coming together for the final result . " When Love Takes Over " was promoted mainly at award shows , including the MTV Latin Music Video Awards , NRJ Music Awards and the World Music Awards . Guetta and Rowland reunited in late 2009 to perform " When Love Takes Over " for the annual Miss Universe competition . The single earned seven Platinum certifications as well as five Gold certificates , selling over 5 @,@ 5 million copies worldwide . Additionally , it earned Guetta two Grammy Award nominations for " Best Dance Recording " and " Best Non @-@ Classical , Remixed Recording " , the latter of which Guetta won for his " Electro Extended Mix " of " When Love Takes Over " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rowland has acknowledged on several occasions that although she loved dance music , it was not really the type of music she would record . While in Europe in 2008 , she met Guetta at one of his DJ shows in Southern France , and commented that " Listening to him was just crazy . " Guetta was playing the instrumental version of " When Love Takes Over " . Recalling that it brought tears to her eyes , Rowland remarked , " I felt so much emotion from the track ; something happened the first time I heard it , and it was just beautiful . And I remember thinking ' Why is this touching me like this ? ' You know , it was like there was a kinda soul @-@ tie to it ! " Upon meeting Guetta , she asked him for the song so she could write its lyrics . " So I met David and asked him for the track ... He gave it to me , and I brought it back here to London , UK and wrote the actual song " . At a writing session in a London hotel room , Rowland and songwriting duo Nervo wrote the lyrics and melody over Guetta 's backing track . Rowland later joined Guetta and Julie Terry Lefèvre @-@ Han in the recording studio to finish off the song . 
 Later in a 2010 interview , The Nervo Twins revealed that Rowland 's record label were not keen on the song despite their and Rowland 's enthusiasm . Consequently , " When Love Takes Over " was shelved until Guetta rediscovered the song when compiling his fourth studio album , One Love . The finished song with Rowland 's vocals and Guetta 's production was premiered in March 2009 at the Ultra Music Festival in Miami . A month later on 21 April 2009 , the single was released in Europe , and the United States . In the UK , the single 's release had to be brought forward to 11 June 2009 to combat an " inferior " cover version released on 9 May 2009 . Additionally , beginning in July / August 2009 , American TV channel Bravo licensed the song for a two @-@ month period , to use for in @-@ house advertising . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The recording and mixing of " When Love Takes Over " took place in summer and autumn of 2008 . After Rowland heard the instrumental of " When Love Takes Over " — a piano loop @-@ based melody with throbbing percussion — she asked Guetta if she could take the demo and several other tracks to work on . She wrote the lyrics and recorded the vocals in London , within a day . She was aided by Australian songwriters and producers Miriam and Olivia Nervo ( The Nervo Twins ) . However the song remained unfinished until Guetta rediscovered the track while compiling his One Love album . After getting selected for the album , " When Love Takes Over " was given to Frédéric Riesterer who , aside from producing the song with Guetta , was tasked the final audio mixing of the song . However Riesterer decided to give the track to French mixing engineer Veronica Ferraro , who would later go on to say that " <unk> was supposed to mix it , but he wanted me to do it and see how it turned out . The first time I heard the track I immediately knew it would be a huge hit . " The track was mixed in September 2008 , at Ferraro 's Super Sonic Scale studio near Paris , the day after her birthday . 
 Before working on the song 's individual elements , Ferraro converted the recording sessions from a generic digital audio workstation system to her programme of choice , Pro Tools . Following this , she decided that she would focus primarily on Rowland 's vocals . 
 " Frédéric had the right sounds on the drums and the keyboards , so I did not change very much . I just did some standard things , with EQ and compression and things like that . After that my obsession was to get the vocals to sound as good as possible . When I 'm mixing a track , I want something to happen , something that takes the listener somewhere . You want the right things in the right place , but it 's not a technical issue . It 's actually an artistic issue to have everything in the right place – the mixing has to be magic . It was not difficult in this case , because I knew the song would be a hit , but I did my best to make the vocal sound magical , like an angel singing , so that the hit quality of the song was immediately obvious . I wanted to make sure that the voice takes you from the beginning to the end and doesn 't lose you . " 
 Ferraro told Sound On Sound that she did add a bass drum sample , as she felt that the kick was missing something . " Rather than equalise it , I added a little bit of my sample to make the BD track sound bigger " . However she did alter the two piano elements of the song , using the Flex Studio Tool to widen the sound of the piano element without the delay . Additionally , Ferraro used a number of French plug @-@ in software to amplify many of the track 's instruments , including the violin , strings and guitar samples . She then moved on to Rowland 's vocals , which " were extensively processed " , including equalization and de @-@ <unk> . Then upon completion of her work on the song , Ferraro sent " When Love Takes Over " to her husband , Bruno Gruel , and his Elektra Mastering Suite which is located in the same building as the Super Sonic Scale Studio . Gruel received the song in a standard Pro Tools format , 24 @-@ bit / 44 @.@ 1 kHz . He used several pieces of software to realign all of the elements of the song , particularly the bass drums and low synths . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " When Love Takes Over " is a synthpop and " uplifting floor @-@ filler " produced by Guetta and his associate Frédéric Riesterer . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard magazine described it as a " pop number built around a lush piano loop and throbbing percussion " with trance elements . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song was written in the key of F Mixolydian with a time signature of common time and a tempo of 130 beats per minute . The chord progression is Cm / F – Gm / F – F4 – F. The final recording and mixing took place at Gum Prod Studios in Paris . Some elements of the song were compared to the riff and piano opener in the song " Clocks " by Coldplay . 
 After gaining Guetta 's approval to write vocals for the song , Rowland took the instrumental version to London , where she wrote the bulk of the lyrics with The Nervo Twins ( Miriam and Olivia Nervo ) before sending the song back to Guetta , who added his own contributions with Frédéric Riesterer . Rowland uses a vocal range of F3 to D5 . Guetta said that " Kelly [ ' s vocals ] had this Whitney Houston vibe and nailed it . " Critics agreed , noting that often her vocals were " powerful " and " grand " . Others called them " a diva masterclass " and " emotionally charged " . Fraser McAlpine from BBC Online compared Rowland 's vocals to those by Madonna in " Ray of Light " , for their " hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air pop song " qualities . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received critical acclaim from music critics for both Guetta 's catchy production and Rowland 's strong vocals . It was called the strongest and most commercial single choice from Guetta 's album , One Love . Critics noted that the song 's opening piano riff was similar to that from Coldplay 's hit single " Clocks " ( 2002 ) . David <unk> of Allmusic gave the song a thumbs up saying , calling " When Love Takes Over " one of the strongest songs from One Love and praising the " [ addition of ] the powerful voice of Kelly Rowland for one grand , uplifting floor @-@ filler . " Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly agreed calling the song the " most memorable from the album " and recalling " Clocks " by Coldplay to make " a showstopper starring Kelly Rowland . " Michael Hibbard of MusicOMH was impressed with both the production and vocal work on " When Love Takes Over " . He pointed out the rarity in the amount of promotion given to the song , referring to " When Love Takes Over " being given " its own poster on the Tube . " He also described the song as a " euphoric masterpiece " backed by " at least eight remixes " and the accompany vocals from " Destiny 's Child songbird Kelly Rowland on hand for a diva masterclass . " Also agreeing with these comments was Fraser McAlpine from BBC Online who awarded the song four out of five stars . " The genius ingredients include a thinly reworked go at the piano riff to ' Clocks ' by Coldplay and handclaps ... And the fairy dust is ... well ... it 's your standard dance @-@ pop production , actually . " However he noted that the production was " tastefully done to make sure that the good bits are not spoilt " . Other elements of the song such as the " bed of <unk> , a skippy beat , a breakdown , some riffing glassy electronics and a dramatic , cinematic bottom end drone " were praised . McAlpine also praised Rowland 's appearance on the track , commenting who she sounded " entirely unlike herself , so that even <unk> is all buffed up and shiny . " He described the marriage of Rowland 's vocals and Guetta 's production by stating that " [ Rowland 's ] got a spiralling , sky @-@ scraping melody to sing too . " 
 Erin Martin of PopMatters said that " When Love Takes Over " had euphoric properties . Martin said the song was " a classic , triumphant dance number , and Rowland 's powerhouse vocals ensure that this song has anthemic potential for years to come . This song just feels good to listen to " . She also noted that the song was central to the concept and " love @-@ spreading message [ that ] Guetta delivers on the album as a whole . " David Balls of Digital Spy agreed with the song 's anthem credentials . " [ It ] is further evidence that Rowland may no longer be resigned to living in Beyoncé [ Knowles ' ] shadow . Fusing classic dance beats with a heady , emotionally charged vocal , it 's a world away from the mid @-@ tempo R & B numbers with which she started her solo career . In fact , this packs a punch from the very first listen , meaning it could well become one of the summer anthems of 2009 . " However , Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times was less impressed than the other critics , simply noting the song as " a cheesy synthpop makeover of Coldplay 's ' Clocks ' . " Wood did however state that it was among Guetta 's best work and was an example of when the DJ is " most commercial " . 
 The song was nominated for the Best Dance Recording award at the 52nd Grammy Awards ceremony . It lost out to " Poker Face " by Lady Gaga . The song 's Electro Extended Remix was successful at the ceremony , winning Guetta his first Grammy Award for the Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical . In 2013 , Billboard named " When Love Takes Over " their number one dance @-@ pop collaboration of all time . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Guetta 's native France , " When Love Takes Over " debuted on the French Digital Chart at number 14 on 25 April 2009 before subsequently peaking at number three on 18 July 2009 . On the French Singles Chart , it debuted and peaked at number two . In August 2009 , Guetta had two simultaneous top 10 singles on the chart , the other being " Sexy Bitch " featuring Akon . Following is strong run on the charts the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) awarded the single a Gold certification for selling 150 @,@ 000 + copies . In Rowland 's native country of the United States the single was successful , topping both the Hot Dance Airplay and Hot Dance Club Songs charts , as well as reaching number 76 on the Billboard Hot 100 . This became Guetta 's highest Hot 100 chart position at the time . It was Rowland 's highest Hot 100 Chart entry since her feature of Trina 's 2005 single , " Here We Go " . " When Love Takes Over " ranked at number one on the Best of 2009 Dance Club Songs chart and number thirty @-@ three on the End of Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) Dance Club Songs Chart . 
 " When Love Takes Over " also achieved success in Europe , topping charts in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Slovakia , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . It also reached the top 10 in most other regions apart from Brasil Canada and the United States . By the end of 2009 it reached the top 30 on most year @-@ end charts , most notably reaching number two in <unk> , number five in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , and six on the European Hot 100 . It was certified Platinum in nine countries . 
 In the United Kingdom , Guetta and Rowland 's original version debuted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart , having sold 25 @,@ 000 copies . The following week Guetta 's version peaked at number one , beating his previous best chart peak of number three with 2006 's " Love Don 't Let Me Go " . It gave Rowland her second number one single in Britain , the first being " Dilemma " alongside Nelly in October 2002 . " When Love Takes Over " was awarded a Platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry in July 2013 for shipping over 650 @,@ 000 copies . On The Official Charts Company 's official countdown of the Top 100 British Downloads of all time , " When Love Takes Over " ranks at number 58 , marking Rowland 's only entry on the chart . However it is Guetta 's second entry on the chart , behind " Sexy Bitch " ( with Akon ) which charted at number 27 . In total , the single has sold over 5 @,@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video was filmed on 19 May 2009 at Venice Beach , Los Angeles , directed by Jonas Åkerlund . Guetta revealed that the video 's story and concept were designed to mimic the story behind the song 's creation . He said , " you see Kelly doing her thing and then me on the other side doing mine . Eventually we come together just like how we recorded the song . It 's all about sharing the love from this record and making a big party " . These reflections and more behind the scenes footage were revealed in the video clip " Making of When Love Takes Over " which was uploaded to Guetta 's official YouTube channel on 1 June 2009 . The music video itself premiered on 8 June 2009 on Guetta 's YouTube channel . The video premiered after the European and United States digital release but just before the single 's UK digital release on 10 June 2009 . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video focuses on Rowland walking through the streets of Venice Beach while Guetta gathers his DJ equipment and pushes it towards the beach . Through the video a number of street performers join the gathering crowd , including a motocross <unk> , a skateboarder , and a <unk> Cloud . The last scene , sees Rowland and Guetta unite on the beach for a late night party which sees the duo performing together . Capital FM described the video as " lots of shots of people having fun in the sun " . Melinda Newman from Hitfix praised Rowland 's role in the clip saying that 
 " [ Rowland ] is fierce throughout and it clearly experiencing a bit of a career resurgence after a dip . [ She ] gives her best Beyoncé @-@ type stares straight into the camera ( but we 're sure that 's just a coincidence ) ... Guetta , who is relegated to a supporting role in his own video , shows up pushing his gear on a cart , looking basically like any other homeless guy hanging out in Venice . " 
 Some criticism did follow the video . Capital FM radio station felt that Guetta 's appearance in the clip was slightly disappointing . " Guetta looks a bit like a binman pushing his gear round the streets in some of the earlier shots in the video " . Newman said that the video 's director , Jonas Åkerlund , had removed something from the song . " The video could have built on the great beat that builds within the song and the feeling of abandon that falling in love can bring you , but , instead , we get a telegenic couple making out who seem to drop in from nowhere . " 
 = = Performances and promotion = = 
 Guetta premiered the completed version of " When Love Takes Over " on 23 March 2009 at the Ultra Music Festival . Promotion of the single began in the UK with an acoustic performance of the single at the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge on 10 May 2009 and then again on UK daytime show , This Morning , on 18 June 2009 . They also appeared at the Miss Universe 2009 contest in the Bahamas , where the duo performed the song live for the " Evening Gown " competition . Another major part of the promotion included appearances at the Loop Live 2009 music festival in Sofia , Bulgaria and Rowland 's appeared at the <unk> Night Club in Las Vegas , where she hosted celebrations for " When Love Takes Over " reaching number one around the world . The duo returned to the UK to perform at Orange <unk> at London 's Royal Albert Hall in September 2009 , before performing at the 2009 MTV Latin America Music Video Awards on 15 October 2010 . It was by US TV channel , Bravo , during an internal advertising campaign . " When Love Takes Over " was still being promoted in 2010 when the pair performed at the French NRJ Music Awards on 24 January 2010 and at the 2010 World Music Awards on 5 June , one year after the song was released . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = Airi L version = = = 
 British dance music artist Airi L released a bootleg version of the song 9 May 2010 , several days before the Guetta and Rowland version was due to be released . EMI Music called Airi L 's version " inferior " and decided to combat her cover by releasing Guetta 's version on 11 June 2009 in the UK , earlier than originally planned . The cover debuted and peaked at number twenty @-@ two , selling 12 @,@ 000 copies whilst Guetta and Rowland 's version debuted at number seven with 25 @,@ 000 copies . According to Yahoo ! Music 's James Masterton , Rowland 's version would have debuted at a higher place had it not been for the " bootleg cover " . He said the single had to be rush released " when not one but two spoiler ( and indeed near @-@ identical ) cover versions started to race up the iTunes rankings and threatened to have a negatively impact on the ' official ' version . " The following week Guetta and Rowland 's version would debut at number one . 
 = = = Other cover versions = = = 
 British singer @-@ songwriter , Pixie Lott , covered the song for the re @-@ issue of her debut album , Turn It Up . Then in the second week of October 2010 , the song was covered twice by contestants on The X Factor . Matt Cardle performed his version on the opening show of the seventh series of the UK version , while Hayley Teal sang a version on the second series of the Australian version . Following Cardle 's performance , " When Love Takes Over " jumped twelve places on UK Dance Chart , to number seventeen . <unk> <unk> performed his version on the third live show of the eighth season of the Danish version of X Factor . 
 In 2016 , American gospel singer Yolanda Adams covered the song for the US version of the musical The Passion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rowland told MTV that " working with David is amazing . We have a great relationship , it 's so effortless . He 's such a talented individual . But most importantly he 's such a down to earth , nice guy and I really enjoy working with him . We have good musical chemistry together . " Guetta told Billboard that " the track with Kelly has made him experiment with a more American urban influence . Musically , it 's pure pop with a lot of detail . " Additionally British singer Cheryl Cole ( of Girls Aloud ) credited " When Love Takes Over " for inspiring her taste and preference in dance music , which in turn influenced her second solo single " 3 Words " ( featuring will.i.am ) . 
 Later in 2010 when recording her third album , Here I Am ( 2011 ) , Rowland credited both Guetta and the song for inspiring her to pursue a new sound . Rowland relates : " I spent about a year of my life in Europe really listening to a whole bunch of Europeans DJs and hearing dance music a lot on the radio and really loving it . ' When Love Takes Over ' it was my first introduction to dance music [ and ] it was a whole other monster . It 's really a culture and I love it . " In 2010 , following the success of " When Love Takes Over " and the duo 's musical chemistry , Guetta was asked to work on Rowland 's third studio album . He co @-@ produced a couple of the songs including the album 's first single , " Commander " . 
 Later in 2013 , Kerri Mason and Zel McCarthy compiled a list of the top @-@ ten dance @-@ pop collaborations of all time for Billboard magazine . In their article , the critics named " When Love Takes Over " at the top of the list , saying that the song " repositioned Kelly Rowland as a solo vocalist with chops on her own . " The duo also commented that subsequent collaborations between Guetta and Rowland were not as good as " When Love Takes Over " , also adding that Rowland 's vocal was firmly part of " dance music history " and were an indication of the growing electronic dance music ( EDM ) trend emerging in America at the time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Recording 
 The instrumental for " When Love Takes Over " was recorded in 2008 at Gum Prod Studios , Paris . 
 The vocals were added in 2009 and the final version was mixed as Super Sonic Scale Studios . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts and certificates = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Kepler @-@ 7 = 
 Kepler @-@ 7 is a star located in the constellation Lyra in the field of view of the Kepler Mission , a NASA operation in search of Earth @-@ like planets . It is home to the fourth of the first five planets that Kepler discovered ; this planet , a Jupiter @-@ size gas giant named Kepler @-@ 7b , is as light as styrofoam . The star itself is more massive than the Sun , and is nearly twice the Sun 's radius . It is also slightly metal @-@ rich , a major factor in the formation of planetary systems . Kepler @-@ 7 's planet was presented on January 4 , 2010 at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society . 
 = = Nomenclature and discovery = = 
 Kepler @-@ 7 received its name because it was the home to the seventh planetary system discovered by the NASA @-@ led Kepler Mission , a project aimed at detecting terrestrial planets that transit , or pass in front of , their host stars as seen from Earth . The planet orbiting Kepler @-@ 7 was the fourth planet to be discovered by the Kepler spacecraft ; the first three planets combed from Kepler 's data had been previously discovered , and were used to verify the accuracy of Kepler 's measurements . Kepler @-@ 7b was announced to the public on January 4 , 2010 at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington , D.C. along with Kepler @-@ 4b , Kepler @-@ 5b , Kepler @-@ 6b , and Kepler @-@ 8b . Kepler @-@ 7b was noted for its unusually and extremely low density . 
 The planet 's initial discovery by Kepler was verified by additional observations made at observatories in Hawaii , Texas , Arizona , California , and the Canary Islands . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 7 is a sunlike star that is 1 @.@ 347 Msun and 1 @.@ 843 Rsun . This means that the star is about 35 % more massive and 84 % wider than the Sun . The star is estimated to be 3 @.@ 5 ( ± 1 ) billion years old . It is also estimated to have a metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 11 ( ± 0 @.@ 03 ) , meaning that Kepler @-@ 7 is approximately 30 % more metal @-@ rich than the Sun ; metallicity plays a significant role in the formation of planetary systems , as metal @-@ rich stars tend to be more likely to have planets in orbit . The star 's effective temperature is <unk> ( ± 44 ) K. In comparison , the 4 @.@ 6 billion @-@ year @-@ old Sun releases less heat , with an effective temperature of 5778 K. 
 The star has an apparent magnitude of 13 @.@ 3 , meaning that it is extremely dim as seen from Earth . It cannot be seen with the naked eye . It is estimated to lie between 1000 and 1400 light years from the Solar System . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 Kepler @-@ 7b is the only planet that has been discovered in Kepler @-@ 7 's orbit . It is .433 MJ and 1 @.@ 478 RJ , meaning it is 43 % the mass of planet Jupiter , but is nearly three halves its size . With a density of <unk> grams / cc , the planet is approximately 17 % the density of water . This is comparable to styrofoam . At a distance of <unk> AU from its host star , Kepler @-@ 7b completes an orbit around Kepler @-@ 7 every 4 @.@ <unk> days . Planet Mercury , however , orbits the Sun at .3871 AU , and takes approximately 87 @.@ 97 days to complete one orbit . Kepler @-@ 7b 's eccentricity is assumed to be 0 , which would give Kepler @-@ 7b a circular orbit by definition . 
 = Church of Saint Oswald , King and Martyr , Oswaldkirk = 
 The Church of Saint Oswald , King and Martyr is a Church of England church serving the village and parish of Oswaldkirk , North Yorkshire , England . It is located along the main road passing through the village ( Oswaldkirk Main Street ) , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of Ampleforth Abbey . 
 Dedicated to the Christian saint Saint Oswald , it is over 900 years old and run by the Church of England . It is part of a four @-@ parish benefice , and is in the archdeaconry of Cleveland , and the diocese of York . Notably , the future Archbishop of Canterbury and chaplain to King Charles II , John Tillotson , preached his first sermon at the church in 1661 . Major restoration work was done to the church in 1886 , and a large amount of the Chancel woodwork dates from this period . The church has been a Grade II * listed building since 1955 , and is the oldest building in the village by more than six centuries . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " kirk " means church , so the village is literally called " Oswald 's church " , after the church , which is dedicated to Saint Oswald of Northumbria , a Christian king who spread Christianity throughout Northumbria in the 7th century AD . 
 = = History and architecture = = 
 Almost nothing of the original church — built on the site of a wooden Saxon church — remains , apart from unique examples of Celtic stonework , including a plait interweave and a bas @-@ relief of the Virgin and Child , which was carved around 1000 AD . The current building still has a quoin , which was probably a re @-@ cycled Anglo @-@ Saxon cross shaft . The stone southern entrance to the church still stands ; it was built in the 12th century and is a typical example of Norman stonework . The church was re @-@ consecrated in 1287 by the bishop of Candida Casa under the direction of John le Romeyn , Archbishop of York . The tall windows set in the church wall both north and south of the nave can be dated to approximately 1320 to 1330 , and in the top sections of two of the windows , small fragments of medieval glass can be found . A sideways orientated tombstone can be found under a low arch on the inside of the southern wall , generally believed to be that of Sir Richard Pickering ( d . 1441 ) , a member of the Pickering family who ruled the village of Oswaldkirk from the 14th century into the 16th century . 
 The church records include an unbroken list of rectors dating back to 1302 , during the reign of King Edward I. One notable rector was John Dee , who served from early 1568 until the year 1574 , although he was probably never a permanent resident . Dee , a noted mathematician , astrologer , alchemist and astronomer , was on friendly terms with the ruling monarch , Queen Elizabeth I , and had given her astrological advice for setting the date of her coronation . 
 The future Archbishop of Canterbury and chaplain to King Charles II , John Tillotson , preached his first sermon at the church of Saint Oswald in 1661 , because of his friendship with John Denton , who was rector of the church from 1658 until his expulsion in 1662 for non @-@ conformism . 
 Perhaps the most important event in the 17th century was the installation of two brand new bells , one bearing the inscription " Venite <unk> Domino " , or " Come , let us rejoice in the Lord " ( dated 1684 ) , and the other bearing the inscription " Gloria in <unk> Deo " , or " Glory to God in the highest " ( dated 1683 ) . These are still in use through bell @-@ ropes , which have been replaced several times in the intervening centuries and extend down to the floor next to the clock mechanism , which is dated 1898 and is wholly mechanical , powering a clock whose two faces can be seen on both the western and eastern sides of the bell tower . 
 There was major restoration work done to the church in 1886 , and a large amount of the Chancel woodwork dates from this period . During the restoration the east window was also replaced ; it now depicts the stylised form of Saint Oswald , flanked on either side by Saint Aidan , and Saint Cuthbert , both Christian saints of the same era , and who helped him in missionary work in the Kingdom of Northumbria . These windows are directly opposite the western window , above the font at the other end of the church , which depicts the queen at the time , Queen Victoria . Further modern additions to the church can be seen in the bell turret and organ chamber , as well as the south porch , which is currently the sole congregational entrance to the church . The church uses an electric organ during services . The church is a Grade II * listed building and has been so since 4 January 1955 . 
 = = Modern usage = = 
 St Oswald 's is part of a four @-@ church benefice , including the churches and parishes of Oswaldkirk , Ampleforth , Gilling , and <unk> . As of May 2012 , the vicar is the Reverend Susan Fraser Bond , who serves all four parishes , although services in the church occur weekly on Sunday and at other times during the week with the help of volunteers in the local community . There is also a " tea time club " , which is a club teaching Christian morals and biblical teachings to young people , as well as biblical role @-@ plays and " mini @-@ pilgrimages " . The church is host to a carol service each year on Christmas Eve , jointly undertaken by the Anglican congregation and that of Oswaldkirk 's Roman Catholic church , the church of Saint Aidan . The united churches of Oswaldkirk also have a harvest festival each year , hosted in the building of Saint Aidan 's church every other year , alternating with St Oswald 's church . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = F @-@ Zero ( video game ) = 
 F @-@ Zero is a futuristic racing video game developed by Nintendo EAD and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) . The game was released in Japan on November 21 , 1990 , in North America in August 1991 , and in Europe in 1992 . F @-@ Zero is the first game of the F @-@ Zero series and was one of the two launch titles for the SNES in Japan , but was accompanied by additional initial titles in North America and Europe . It was re @-@ released for the Virtual Console service on the Wii in late 2006 , the Wii U in early 2013 , and on the New Nintendo 3DS in early 2016 . 
 The game takes place in the year 2560 , where multi @-@ billionaires with lethargic lifestyles created a new form of entertainment based on the Formula One races called " F @-@ Zero " . The player can choose between one of four characters in the game , each with their respective <unk> . The player then can race against computer controlled characters in fifteen tracks divided into three leagues . 
 F @-@ Zero is acknowledged by critics to be the game that set a standard for the racing genre and the creation of the futuristic subgenre . Critics lauded F @-@ Zero for its fast and challenging gameplay , variety of tracks , and extensive use of the graphical mode called " Mode 7 " . This graphics @-@ rendering technique was an innovative technological achievement at the time that made racing games more realistic , the first of which was F @-@ Zero . As a result , IGN credited it for reinvigorating the genre and inspiring the future creation of numerous racing games . In retrospective reviews of the game critics agreed that it should have used a multiplayer mode . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 F @-@ Zero is a futuristic racing game where players compete in a high @-@ speed racing tournament called " F @-@ Zero " . There are four F @-@ Zero characters that have their own selectable <unk> along with its unique performance abilities . The objective of the game is to beat opponents to the finish line while avoiding hazards such as slip zones and magnets that pull the vehicle off @-@ center in an effort to make the player damage their vehicle or fall completely off the track . Each machine has a power meter , which serves as a measurement of the machine 's durability ; it decreases when the machine collides with land mines , the side of the track or another vehicle . Energy can be replenished by driving over pit areas placed along the home straight or nearby . 
 A race in F @-@ Zero consists of five laps around the track . The player must complete each lap in a successively higher place to avoid disqualification from the race . For each lap completed , the player is rewarded with an approximate four @-@ second speed boost called the " Super Jet " and a number of points determined by place . An on @-@ screen display will be shaded green to indicate that a boost can be used ; however , the player is limited to saving up to three at a time . If a certain amount of points are accumulated , an extra " spare machine " is acquired that gives the player another chance to retry the course . Tracks may feature two methods for temporarily boosting speeds ; jump plates launch vehicles into the air thus providing additional acceleration for those not at full speed and dash zones greatly increases the racer 's speed on the ground . F @-@ Zero includes two modes of play . In the Grand Prix mode , the player chooses a league and races against other vehicles through each track in that league while avoiding disqualification . The Practice mode allows the player to practice seven of the courses from the Grand Prix mode . 
 F @-@ Zero has a total of fifteen tracks divided into three leagues ordered by increasing difficulty : Knight , Queen , and King . Furthermore , each league has four selectable difficulty levels : beginner , standard , expert , and master . The multiple courses of Death Wind , Port Town , and Red Canyon have a pathway that is not accessible unless the player is on another iteration of those tracks , which then in turn closes the path previously available . Unlike most F @-@ Zero games , there are three iterations of Mute City that shows it in either a day , evening , or night setting . In BS F @-@ Zero 2 , Mute City IV continued the theme with an early morning setting . 
 = = Setting = = 
 F @-@ Zero is set in the year 2560 , when humanity 's multiple encounters with alien life forms had resulted in the expansion of Earth 's social framework . This led to commercial , technological and cultural interchanges between planets . The multi @-@ billionaires who earned their wealth through intergalactic trade were mainly satisfied with their lifestyles , although most coveted more entertainment in their lives . This resulted in a new entertainment based on the Formula One races to be founded with vehicles that could hover one foot above the track . These Grand Prix races were soon named " F @-@ Zero " after a rise in popularity of the races . The game introduced the first set of F @-@ Zero racers : Captain Falcon , Dr. Stewart , Pico , and Samurai <unk> . IGN claimed Captain Falcon " was thrust into the limelight " in this game since he was the " star character " . An eight @-@ page comic was included in its SNES manual that carried the reader through one of Captain Falcon 's bounty missions . 
 = = Development and releases = = 
 The game was released alongside the SNES in Japan on November 21 , 1990 , in North America in August 1991 , and in Europe in 1992 . Only it and Super Mario World were initially available for the Japanese launch . In North America , Super Mario World shipped with the console , and other initial titles included F @-@ Zero , Pilotwings , SimCity , and Gradius III . The game was produced by Shigeru Miyamoto . It was downloadable over the Nintendo Power peripheral in Japan and was also released as a demo onto the Nintendo Super System in 1991 . Takaya Imamura , one of the art designers for the game , was surprised to be able to so freely design F @-@ Zero 's characters and courses as he wanted since it was his first game . 
 Mode 7 is a form of texture mapping available on the SNES which allows a raster graphical plane to be rotated and scaled freely , simulating the appearance of 3D environments without processing any polygons . The Mode 7 rendering applied in F @-@ Zero consists of a single @-@ layer which is scaled and rotated around the vehicle . This pseudo @-@ 3D capability of the SNES was designed to be represented by the game . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish stated that F @-@ Zero and Pilotwings " existed almost entirely for the sake of showing [ the system 's pseudo @-@ 3D capabilities ] off " as they outclassed the competition . 
 An F @-@ Zero jazz album was released on March 25 , 1992 in Japan by Tokuma Japan Communications . It features twelve songs from the game on a single disc composed by Yumiko <unk> and Naoto Ishida , and arranged by Robert Hill and Michiko Hill . The album also features Marc Russo ( saxophones ) of the Yellowjackets and Robben Ford ( electric guitar ) . The game was re @-@ released for the Virtual Console service on the Wii in late 2006 , then on the Wii U in February 2013 , followed by its New Nintendo 3DS release in March 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 F @-@ Zero was widely lauded by game critics for its graphical realism , and has been called the fastest and most fluid pseudo @-@ 3D racing game of its time . This has been mostly credited to the development team 's pervasive use of the " Mode 7 " system . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell commented " this abundance of Mode 7 was unheard of " for the SNES . This graphics @-@ rendering technique was an innovative technological achievement at the time that made racing games more realistic , the first of which was F @-@ Zero . Jeremy Parish of Electronic Gaming Monthly wrote that the game 's use of Mode 7 created the " most convincing racetracks that had ever been seen on a home console " that gave " console gamers an experience even more visceral than could be found in the arcades . " 1UP.com editor Ravi <unk> agreed , arguing F @-@ Zero 's combination of fast @-@ paced racing and free @-@ range of motion were superior compared to that of previous home console games . IGN 's Peer Schneider assured readers F @-@ Zero was one of the few 16 @-@ bit era video games to " perfectly combine presentation and functionality to create a completely new gaming experience " . 
 The game was praised for its variety of tracks , and steady increase in difficulty . GameSpy 's Jason D 'Aprile thought the game " was something of a finesse racer . It took lots of practice , good memorization skills , and a rather fine sense of control . " Matt Taylor of The Virginian @-@ Pilot commented that the game is more about " reflexes than realism " , and it lacked the ability to save progress between races . F @-@ Zero 's soundtrack was lauded . 
 In GameSpot 's retrospective review by Greg Kasavin , he praised F @-@ Zero 's controls , longevity and track design . Kasavin felt the title offered exceptional gameplay , with " a perfect balance of pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play accessibility and sheer depth " . Retrospective reviews agreed that the game should have used a multiplayer mode . IGN 's Lucas Thomas criticized the lack of a substantial plot and mentioned F @-@ Zero " doesn 't have the same impact these days " suggesting " the sequels on GBA very much pick up where this title left off " . 
 IGN ranked F @-@ Zero as the 91st best game ever in 2003 , discussing its originality at time of release and as the 97th best game ever in 2005 , describing it as still " respected as one of the all @-@ time top racers " . ScrewAttack placed it as the 18th best SNES game . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 F @-@ Zero has been credited with being the game that set a standard for the racing genre and inventing the " futuristic racing " subgenre of video gaming . IGN credits the game for having inspired the future creation of numerous racing games inside and out of the futuristic subgenre , including the Wipeout series and Daytona USA . Amusement Vision 's President , Toshihiro Nagoshi , stated in 2002 that F @-@ Zero " actually taught me what a game should be " and that it served as an influence for him to create Daytona USA and other racing games . Amusement Vision collaborated with Nintendo to develop F @-@ Zero GX and AX , with Nagoshi serving as one of the co @-@ producers for these games . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Nintendo initially developed the sequel of the first F @-@ Zero game for the SNES , although it was broadcast in several versions on the St.GIGA subscription service for the Satellaview attachment of the Super Famicom instead . Using this add @-@ on , gamers could download titles via satellite and save it onto a flash ROM cartridge for temporary play . The sequel was released under the Japanese names of BS F @-@ Zero Grand Prix and BS F @-@ Zero Grand Prix 2 during the mid @-@ 1990s . There are tracks named as a follow @-@ on from F @-@ Zero — such as " Mute City IV " , since Mute City I @-@ III appeared in the original game . BS F @-@ Zero Grand Prix contained a new track along with the original 15 tracks from the SNES game and four different playable vehicles . According to Nintendo Power , the game was under consideration for a North American release via Game Pak . IGN states BS F @-@ Zero Grand Prix 2 features one new league containing five tracks , a Grand Prix and a Practice mode . 
 Although the F @-@ Zero franchise made the transition to 3D graphics on the Nintendo 64 with the release of F @-@ Zero X in 1998 , Mode 7 graphical effects continued to be used for the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) installments Maximum Velocity and GP Legend . The third sequel F @-@ Zero : Maximum Velocity was released for the GBA in 2001 . This installment was described by GameSpy as a hard overhaul of F @-@ Zero and featured improvements to its graphical effects . F @-@ Zero GX and AX , were released for the Nintendo GameCube and the Triforce arcade system board respectively in 2003 , was the first significant video game collaboration between Nintendo and Sega . GX is the first F @-@ Zero game to include a story mode , while AX was called by GameSpot as the first to get a " proper arcade release " . The most recent installment in the series , F @-@ Zero Climax , was released for the GBA in 2004 and is the first F @-@ Zero game to have a built @-@ in track editor without the need for an expansion or add @-@ on . 
 = Richard Hutton Davies = 
 Major General Richard Hutton Davies CB ( 14 August 1861 – 9 May 1918 ) was an officer of the New Zealand Military Forces during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , the first New Zealander to command an independent force overseas and one of the most senior New Zealand officers during the First World War . 
 Born in London , he emigrated to New Zealand after leaving school , where he worked as a surveyor . He joined a volunteer militia unit in 1893 , and went to South Africa as an officer with the first New Zealand contingent sent to the Boer War in 1899 . He later commanded the third , fourth and eighth contingents , becoming the first New Zealand officer to command an independent unit on active service overseas . Following his return to New Zealand , he became inspector @-@ general of the New Zealand Military Forces , and in 1909 was attached to a British Army brigade to gain staff experience . 
 This led to him being offered command of 6th Brigade , a regular infantry brigade of British troops , in 1910 ; he was the first colonial officer to hold such a position . In the summer of 1914 the brigade was mobilised with the British Expeditionary Force , and he commanded it at the Battle of Mons and the First Battle of the Aisne before being invalided back to England due to exhaustion . He was given command of the newly formed 20th ( Light ) Division , which he took to France in 1915 , but was relieved of command early in 1916 . After a period in command of a reserve centre in Staffordshire , he was sent to hospital suffering from both mental and physical ill health , and committed suicide in May 1918 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Davies was born in London , the son of a journalist , and was educated at Hurstpierpoint College . After leaving school , he emigrated to New Zealand , where he spent two years working for a relative before settling at Taranaki , setting up a farm and practising as a surveyor . He married Ida Mary Cornwall in February 1886 ; they had two sons and a daughter . One son , Henry Cornwall Davies , served with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force during the First World War , and , like his father , transferred to the British Army in 1915 , becoming a captain in the Royal Engineers . Ida died in pregnancy with their fourth child in December 1906 ; he remarried , to Ida 's sister Eileen Kathleen Cornwall , in May 1908 . 
