 Britain 's declaration of war against Nazi Germany in September 1939 included the Crown colonies and India but did not automatically commit the Dominions of Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Newfoundland and South Africa . All soon declared war on Germany , but the Irish Free State chose to remain legally neutral throughout the war . 
 After the German occupation of France in 1940 , Britain and the empire stood alone against Germany , until the entry of the Soviet Union to the war in 1941 . British Prime Minister Winston Churchill successfully lobbied President Franklin D. Roosevelt for military aid from the United States , but Roosevelt was not yet ready to ask Congress to commit the country to war . In August 1941 , Churchill and Roosevelt met and signed the Atlantic Charter , which included the statement that " the rights of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live " should be respected . This wording was ambiguous as to whether it referred to European countries invaded by Germany , or the peoples colonised by European nations , and would later be interpreted differently by the British , Americans , and nationalist movements . 
 In December 1941 , Japan launched , in quick succession , attacks on British Malaya , the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor , and Hong Kong . Churchill 's reaction to the entry of the United States into the war was that Britain was now assured of victory and the future of the empire was safe , but the manner in which British forces were rapidly defeated in the Far East irreversibly harmed Britain 's standing and prestige as an imperial power . Most damaging of all was the fall of Singapore , which had previously been hailed as an impregnable fortress and the eastern equivalent of Gibraltar . The realisation that Britain could not defend its entire empire pushed Australia and New Zealand , which now appeared threatened by Japanese forces , into closer ties with the United States . This resulted in the 1951 ANZUS Pact between Australia , New Zealand and the United States of America . 
 = = Decolonisation and decline ( 1945 – 1997 ) = = 
 Though Britain and the empire emerged victorious from the Second World War , the effects of the conflict were profound , both at home and abroad . Much of Europe , a continent that had dominated the world for several centuries , was in ruins , and host to the armies of the United States and the Soviet Union , who now held the balance of global power . Britain was left essentially bankrupt , with insolvency only averted in 1946 after the negotiation of a $ US 4 @.@ 33 billion loan ( US $ 56 billion in 2012 ) from the United States , the last instalment of which was repaid in 2006 . At the same time , anti @-@ colonial movements were on the rise in the colonies of European nations . The situation was complicated further by the increasing Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union . In principle , both nations were opposed to European colonialism . In practice , however , American anti @-@ communism prevailed over anti @-@ imperialism , and therefore the United States supported the continued existence of the British Empire to keep Communist expansion in check . The " wind of change " ultimately meant that the British Empire 's days were numbered , and on the whole , Britain adopted a policy of peaceful disengagement from its colonies once stable , non @-@ Communist governments were available to transfer power to . This was in contrast to other European powers such as France and Portugal , which waged costly and ultimately unsuccessful wars to keep their empires intact . Between 1945 and 1965 , the number of people under British rule outside the UK itself fell from 700 million to five million , three million of whom were in Hong Kong . 
 = = = Initial disengagement = = = 
 The pro @-@ decolonisation Labour government , elected at the 1945 general election and led by Clement Attlee , moved quickly to tackle the most pressing issue facing the empire : that of Indian independence . India 's two major political parties — the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League — had been campaigning for independence for decades , but disagreed as to how it should be implemented . Congress favoured a unified secular Indian state , whereas the League , fearing domination by the Hindu majority , desired a separate Islamic state for Muslim @-@ majority regions . Increasing civil unrest and the mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy during 1946 led Attlee to promise independence no later than 1948 . When the urgency of the situation and risk of civil war became apparent , the newly appointed ( and last ) Viceroy , Lord Mountbatten , hastily brought forward the date to 15 August 1947 . The borders drawn by the British to broadly partition India into Hindu and Muslim areas left tens of millions as minorities in the newly independent states of India and Pakistan . Millions of Muslims subsequently crossed from India to Pakistan and Hindus vice versa , and violence between the two communities cost hundreds of thousands of lives . Burma , which had been administered as part of the British Raj , and Sri Lanka gained their independence the following year in 1948 . India , Pakistan and Sri Lanka became members of the Commonwealth , while Burma chose not to join . 
 The British Mandatory Palestine , where an Arab majority lived alongside a Jewish minority , presented the British with a similar problem to that of India . The matter was complicated by large numbers of Jewish refugees seeking to be admitted to Palestine following the Holocaust , while Arabs were opposed to the creation of a Jewish state . Frustrated by the intractability of the problem , attacks by Jewish paramilitary organisations and the increasing cost of maintaining its military presence , Britain announced in 1947 that it would withdraw in 1948 and leave the matter to the United Nations to solve . The UN General Assembly subsequently voted for a plan to partition Palestine into a Jewish and an Arab state . 
 Following the defeat of Japan in the Second World War , anti @-@ Japanese resistance movements in Malaya turned their attention towards the British , who had moved to quickly retake control of the colony , valuing it as a source of rubber and tin . The fact that the guerrillas were primarily Malayan @-@ Chinese Communists meant that the British attempt to quell the uprising was supported by the Muslim Malay majority , on the understanding that once the insurgency had been quelled , independence would be granted . The Malayan Emergency , as it was called , began in 1948 and lasted until 1960 , but by 1957 , Britain felt confident enough to grant independence to the Federation of Malaya within the Commonwealth . In 1963 , the 11 states of the federation together with Singapore , Sarawak and North Borneo joined to form Malaysia , but in 1965 Chinese @-@ majority Singapore was expelled from the union following tensions between the Malay and Chinese populations . Brunei , which had been a British protectorate since 1888 , declined to join the union and maintained its status until independence in 1984 . 
 = = = Suez and its aftermath = = = 
 In 1951 , the Conservative Party returned to power in Britain , under the leadership of Winston Churchill . Churchill and the Conservatives believed that Britain 's position as a world power relied on the continued existence of the empire , with the base at the Suez Canal allowing Britain to maintain its pre @-@ eminent position in the Middle East in spite of the loss of India . However , Churchill could not ignore Gamal Abdul Nasser 's new revolutionary government of Egypt that had taken power in 1952 , and the following year it was agreed that British troops would withdraw from the Suez Canal zone and that Sudan would be granted self @-@ determination by 1955 , with independence to follow . Sudan was granted independence on 1 January 1956 . 
 In July 1956 , Nasser unilaterally nationalised the Suez Canal . The response of Anthony Eden , who had succeeded Churchill as Prime Minister , was to collude with France to engineer an Israeli attack on Egypt that would give Britain and France an excuse to intervene militarily and retake the canal . Eden infuriated US President Dwight D. Eisenhower , by his lack of consultation , and Eisenhower refused to back the invasion . Another of Eisenhower 's concerns was the possibility of a wider war with the Soviet Union after it threatened to intervene on the Egyptian side . Eisenhower applied financial leverage by threatening to sell US reserves of the British pound and thereby precipitate a collapse of the British currency . Though the invasion force was militarily successful in its objectives , UN intervention and US pressure forced Britain into a humiliating withdrawal of its forces , and Eden resigned . 
 The Suez Crisis very publicly exposed Britain 's limitations to the world and confirmed Britain 's decline on the world stage , demonstrating that henceforth it could no longer act without at least the acquiescence , if not the full support , of the United States . The events at Suez wounded British national pride , leading one MP to describe it as " Britain 's Waterloo " and another to suggest that the country had become an " American satellite " . Margaret Thatcher later described the mindset she believed had befallen Britain 's political leaders as " Suez syndrome " where they “ went from believing that Britain could do anything to an almost neurotic belief that Britain could do nothing ” , from which Britain did not recover until the successful recapture of the Falkland Islands from Argentina in 1982 . 
 While the Suez Crisis caused British power in the Middle East to weaken , it did not collapse . Britain again deployed its armed forces to the region , intervening in Oman ( 1957 ) , Jordan ( 1958 ) and Kuwait ( 1961 ) , though on these occasions with American approval , as the new Prime Minister Harold Macmillan 's foreign policy was to remain firmly aligned with the United States . Britain maintained a military presence in the Middle East for another decade . On 16 January 1968 , a few weeks after the devaluation of the pound , Prime Minister Harold Wilson and his Defence Secretary Denis Healey announced that British troops would be withdrawn from major military bases East of Suez , which included the ones in the Middle East , and primarily from Malaysia and Singapore by the end of 1971 , instead of 1975 as earlier planned . By that time over 50 @,@ 000 British military personnel were still stationed in the Far East , including 30 @,@ 000 in Singapore . The British withdrew from Aden in 1967 , Bahrain in 1971 , and Maldives in 1976 . 
 = = = Wind of change = = = 
 Macmillan gave a speech in Cape Town , South Africa in February 1960 where he spoke of " the wind of change blowing through this continent " . Macmillan wished to avoid the same kind of colonial war that France was fighting in Algeria , and under his premiership decolonisation proceeded rapidly . To the three colonies that had been granted independence in the 1950s — Sudan , the Gold Coast and Malaya — were added nearly ten times that number during the 1960s . 
 Britain 's remaining colonies in Africa , except for self @-@ governing Southern Rhodesia , were all granted independence by 1968 . British withdrawal from the southern and eastern parts of Africa was not a peaceful process . Kenyan independence was preceded by the eight @-@ year Mau Mau Uprising . In Rhodesia , the 1965 Unilateral Declaration of Independence by the white minority resulted in a civil war that lasted until the Lancaster House Agreement of 1979 , which set the terms for recognised independence in 1980 , as the new nation of Zimbabwe . 
 In the Mediterranean , a guerrilla war waged by Greek Cypriots ended in ( 1960 ) an independent Cyprus , with the UK retaining the military bases of Akrotiri and <unk> . The Mediterranean islands of Malta and Gozo were amicably granted independence from the UK in 1964 and became the country of Malta , though the idea had been raised in 1955 of integration with Britain . 
 Most of the UK 's Caribbean territories achieved independence after the departure in 1961 and 1962 of Jamaica and Trinidad from the West Indies Federation , established in 1958 in an attempt to unite the British Caribbean colonies under one government , but which collapsed following the loss of its two largest members . Barbados achieved independence in 1966 and the remainder of the eastern Caribbean islands in the 1970s and 1980s , but Anguilla and the Turks and Caicos Islands opted to revert to British rule after they had already started on the path to independence . The British Virgin Islands , Cayman Islands and Montserrat opted to retain ties with Britain , while Guyana achieved independence in 1966 . Britain 's last colony on the American mainland , British Honduras , became a self @-@ governing colony in 1964 and was renamed Belize in 1973 , achieving full independence in 1981 . A dispute with Guatemala over claims to Belize was left unresolved . 
 British territories in the Pacific acquired independence in the 1970s beginning with Fiji in 1970 and ending with Vanuatu in 1980 . Vanuatu 's independence was delayed because of political conflict between English and French @-@ speaking communities , as the islands had been jointly administered as a condominium with France . Fiji , Tuvalu , the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea chose to become Commonwealth realms . 
 = = = End of empire = = = 
 In 1980 , Rhodesia , Britain 's last African colony , became the independent nation of Zimbabwe . The New Hebrides achieved independence ( as Vanuatu ) in 1980 , with Belize following suit in 1981 . The passage of the British Nationality Act 1981 , which reclassified the remaining Crown colonies as " British Dependent Territories " ( renamed British Overseas Territories in 2002 ) meant that , aside from a scattering of islands and outposts the process of decolonisation that had begun after the Second World War was largely complete . In 1982 , Britain 's resolve in defending its remaining overseas territories was tested when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands , acting on a long @-@ standing claim that dated back to the Spanish Empire . Britain 's ultimately successful military response to retake the islands during the ensuing Falklands War was viewed by many to have contributed to reversing the downward trend in Britain 's status as a world power . The same year , the Canadian government severed its last legal link with Britain by <unk> the Canadian constitution from Britain . The 1982 Canada Act passed by the British parliament ended the need for British involvement in changes to the Canadian constitution . Similarly , the Constitution Act 1986 reformed the constitution of New Zealand to sever its constitutional link with Britain , and the Australia Act 1986 severed the constitutional link between Britain and the Australian states . In 1984 , Brunei , Britain 's last remaining Asian protectorate , gained its independence . 
 In September 1982 the Prime Minister , Margaret Thatcher , traveled to Beijing to negotiate with the Chinese government on the future of Britain 's last major and most populous overseas territory , Hong Kong . Under the terms of the 1842 Treaty of Nanking , Hong Kong Island itself had been ceded to Britain in perpetuity , but the vast majority of the colony was constituted by the New Territories , which had been acquired under a 99 @-@ year lease in 1898 , due to expire in 1997 . Thatcher , seeing parallels with the Falkland Islands , initially wished to hold Hong Kong and proposed British administration with Chinese sovereignty , though this was rejected by China . A deal was reached in 1984 — under the terms of the Sino @-@ British Joint Declaration , Hong Kong would become a special administrative region of the People 's Republic of China , maintaining its way of life for at least 50 years . The handover ceremony in 1997 marked for many , including Charles , Prince of Wales , who was in attendance , " the end of Empire " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Britain retains sovereignty over 14 territories outside the British Isles , which were renamed the British Overseas Territories in 2002 . Some are uninhabited except for transient military or scientific personnel ; the remainder are self @-@ governing to varying degrees and are reliant on the UK for foreign relations and defence . The British government has stated its willingness to assist any Overseas Territory that wishes to proceed to independence , where that is an option . British sovereignty of several of the overseas territories is disputed by their geographical neighbours : Gibraltar is claimed by Spain , the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands are claimed by Argentina , and the British Indian Ocean Territory is claimed by Mauritius and Seychelles . The British Antarctic Territory is subject to overlapping claims by Argentina and Chile , while many countries do not recognise any territorial claims in Antarctica . 
 Most former British colonies and protectorates are among the 53 member states of the Commonwealth of Nations , a non @-@ political , voluntary association of equal members , comprising a population of around 2 @.@ 2 billion people . Sixteen Commonwealth realms voluntarily continue to share the British monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , as their head of state . These sixteen nations are distinct and equal legal entities – the United Kingdom , Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Papua New Guinea , Antigua and Barbuda , The Bahamas , Barbados , Belize , Grenada , Jamaica , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Solomon Islands and Tuvalu . 
 Decades , and in some cases centuries , of British rule and emigration have left their mark on the independent nations that arose from the British Empire . The empire established the use of English in regions around the world . Today it is the primary language of up to 400 million people and is spoken by about one and a half billion as a first , second or foreign language . 
 The spread of English from the latter half of the 20th century has been helped in part by the cultural and economic influence of the United States , itself originally formed from British colonies . Except in Africa where nearly all the former colonies have adopted the presidential system , the English parliamentary system has served as the template for the governments for many former colonies , and English common law for legal systems . 
 The British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council still serves as the highest court of appeal for several former colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific . British Protestant missionaries who travelled around the globe often in advance of soldiers and civil servants spread the Anglican Communion to all continents . British colonial architecture , such as in churches , railway stations and government buildings , can be seen in many cities that were once part of the British Empire . 
 Individual and team sports developed in Britain — particularly football , cricket , rugby , netball , lawn bowls , lawn tennis and golf — were also exported . The British choice of system of measurement , the imperial system , continues to be used in some countries in various ways . The convention of driving on the left hand side of the road has been retained in much of the former empire . 
 Political boundaries drawn by the British did not always reflect homogeneous ethnicities or religions , contributing to conflicts in formerly colonised areas . The British Empire was also responsible for large migrations of peoples . Millions left the British Isles , with the founding settler populations of the United States , Canada , Australia and New Zealand coming mainly from Britain and Ireland . Tensions remain between the white settler populations of these countries and their indigenous minorities , and between white settler minorities and indigenous majorities in South Africa and Zimbabwe . Settlers in Ireland from Great Britain have left their mark in the form of divided nationalist and unionist communities in Northern Ireland . Millions of people moved to and from British colonies , with large numbers of Indians emigrating to other parts of the empire , such as Malaysia and Fiji , and Chinese people to Malaysia , Singapore and the Caribbean . The demographics of Britain itself was changed after the Second World War owing to immigration to Britain from its former colonies . 
 = The History of Sir Charles Grandison = 
 The History of Sir Charles Grandison , commonly called Sir Charles Grandison , is an epistolary novel by Samuel Richardson first published in February 1753 . The book was a response to Henry Fielding 's The History of Tom Jones , a Foundling , which parodied the morals presented in Richardson 's previous novels . The novel follows the story of Harriet Byron who is pursued by Sir Hargrave Pollexfen . After she rejects Pollexfen , he kidnaps her , and she is only freed when Sir Charles Grandison comes to her rescue . After his appearance , the novel focuses on his history and life , and he becomes its central figure . 
 The novel incorporates an epistolary format similar to Richardson 's previous novels , Clarissa and Pamela . Unlike those novels , Charles Grandison , the leading male character , is a morally good man and lacks the villainous intent that is manifested by the Lovelace or Mr. B ( characters of Clarissa and Pamela respectively ) . Richardson was motivated to create such a male figure because of the prompting of his many female friends who wanted a counterpart to the virtues exhibited by Richardson 's female characters . 
 = = Background = = 
 The exact relationship between Fielding 's The History of Tom Jones , a Foundling and Richardson 's The History of Sir Charles Grandison cannot be known , but the character Charles Grandison was designed as a morally " better " hero than the character Tom Jones . In 1749 , a friend asked Richardson " to give the world his idea of a good man and fine gentleman combined " . Richardson hesitated to begin such a project , and he did not work on it until he was prompted the next year ( June 1750 ) by Mrs. <unk> and Miss Sutton , who were " both very intimate with one Clarissa Harlowe : and both extremely earnest with him to give them a good man " . Near the end of 1751 , Richardson sent a draft of the novel to Mrs. Donnellan , and the novel was being finalised in the middle of 1752 . 
 While Thomas <unk> , a compositor , and Peter Bishop , a proofreader , were working for Richardson in his print shop during 1753 , Richardson discovered that printers in Dublin had copies of The History of Sir Charles Grandison and began printing the novel before the English edition was to be published . Richardson suspected that they were involved with the unauthorized distribution of the novel and promptly fired them . Immediately following the firing , Richardson wrote to Lady <unk> , 19 October 1753 : " the Want of the same Ornaments , or Initial Letters [ <unk> ] , in each <unk> will help to discover them [ if exported into England ] , although they should put the Booksellers Names that I have affixed . I have got some Friends to write down to Scotland , to endeavour to seize their Edition , if offered to be imported " . There were four Dublin presses used to make unauthorized copies the novel , but none of them were able to add the ornaments that could effectively mimic Richardson 's own . However , there were still worries about the unlicensed copies , and Richardson relied on seven additional printers to speed up the production of Grandison . 
 In November 1753 , Richardson ran an ad in the The Gentleman 's Magazine to announce the " History of Sir Charles Grandison : in a Series of Letters published from the Originals , — By the Editor of Pamela and Clarissa , London : Printed for S. Richardson , and sold by Dodsley in Pall Mall and others . " The first four volumes were published on 13 November 1753 and the next two volumes appeared in December . The final volume was published in March to complete a seven volume series while a six volume set was simultaneously published . Richardson held the sole copyright to Grandison , and , after his death , twenty @-@ fourth shares of Grandison were sold for 20 pounds each . Posthumous editions were published in 1762 ( including revisions by Richardson ) and 1810 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 As with his previous novels , Richardson prefaced the novel by claiming to be merely the editor , saying , " How such remarkable collections of private letters fell into the editor 's hand he hopes the reader will not think it very necessary to enquire " . However , Richardson did not keep his authorship secret and , on the prompting of his friends like Samuel Johnson , dropped this framing device from the second edition . 
 The novel begins with the character of Harriet Byron leaving the house of her uncle , George Selby , to visit Mr. and Mrs. Reeves , her cousins , in London . She is an orphan who was educated by her grandparents , and , though she lacks parents , she is heir to a fortune of fifteen thousand pounds , which causes many suitors to pursue her . In London , she is pursued by three suitors , Mr. Greville , Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Orme . This courtship is followed by more suitors : Mr. Fowler , Sir Rowland Meredith and Sir Hargrave Pollexfen . The final one , Pollexfen , pursues Byron vigorously , which causes her to criticise him over a lack of morals and decency of character . However , Pollexfen does not end his pursuits of Byron until she explains that she could never receive his visits again . 
 Pollexfen , unwilling to be without Byron , decides to kidnap her while she attended a masquerade at the Haymarket . She is then imprisoned at <unk> Grove with the support of a widow and two daughters . While he keeps her prisoner , Pollexfen makes it clear to her that she shall be his wife , and that anyone who challenges that will die by his hand . Byron attempts to escape from the house , but this fails . To prevent her from trying to escape again , Pollexfen transports Byron to his home at Windsor . However , he is stopped at Hounslow Heath , where Charles Grandison hears Byron 's pleas for help and immediately attacks Pollexfen . After this rescue , Grandison takes Byron to <unk> , the home of Grandison 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , the " Earl of L. " 
 After Pollexfen recovers from the attack , he sets out to duel Grandison . However , Grandison refuses on the grounds that dueling is harmful to society . After explaining why obedience to God and society are important , Grandison wins Pollexfen over and obtains his apology to Byron for his actions . She accepts his apology , and he follows with a proposal to marriage . She declines because she , as she admits , is in love with Grandison . However , a new suitor , the Earl of D , appears , and it emerges that Grandison promised himself to an Italian woman , Signorina Clementina della Porretta . As Grandison explains , he was in Italy years before and rescued the Barone della Porretta and a relationship developed between himself and Clementina , the baron 's only daughter . However , Grandison could not marry her , as she demanded that he , an Anglican Protestant , become a Catholic , and he was unwilling to do so . After he left , she grew ill out of despair , and the <unk> were willing to accept his religion , if he would return and make Clementina happy once more . Grandison , feeling obligated to do what he can to restore Clementina 's happiness , returns to Italy ; however , Clementina determines she can never marry a " heretic " , and so Grandison returns to England and Harriet who accepts him . They are married ; and everyone is accorded their just deserts . 
 In a " Concluding Note " to Grandison , Richardson writes : " It has been said , in behalf of many modern fictitious pieces , in which authors have given success ( and happiness , as it is called ) to their heroes of vicious if not profligate characters , that they have exhibited Human Nature as it is . Its corruption may , indeed , be exhibited in the faulty character ; but need pictures of this be held out in books ? Is not vice crowned with success , triumphant , and rewarded , and perhaps set off with wit and spirit , a dangerous representation ? " In particular , Richardson is referring to novels of Fielding , his literary rival . This note was published with the final volume of Grandison in March 1754 , a few months before Fielding left for Lisbon . Before Fielding died in Lisbon , he included a response to Richardson in his preface to Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The epistolary form unites The History of Sir Charles Grandison with Richardson 's Pamela and Clarissa , but Richardson uses the form in a different way for his final work . In Clarissa , the letters emphasise the plot 's drama , especially when Lovelace alters Clarissa 's letters . However , the dramatic mood is replaced in Grandison with a celebration of Grandison 's moral character . In addition to this lack of dramatic emphasis , the letters of Grandison do not serve to develop character , as the moral core of each character is already complete at the outset . 
 In Richardson 's previous novels , the letters operated as a way to express internal feelings and describe the private lives of characters ; however , the letters of Grandison serve a public function . The letters are not kept to individuals , but forwarded to others to inform a larger community of the novel 's action . In return , letters share the recipients ' responses to the events detailed within the letters . This sharing of personal feelings transforms the individual responders into a chorus that praises the actions of Grandison , Harriet , and Clementina . Furthermore , this chorus of characters emphasises the importance of the written word over the merely subjective , even saying that " Love declared on paper means far more than love declared orally " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 20th century literary critic Carol Flynn characterises Sir Charles Grandison as a " man of feeling who truly cannot be said to feel " . Flynn claims that Grandison is filled with sexual passions that never come to light , and he represents a perfect moral character in regards to respecting others . Unlike Richardson 's previous novel Clarissa , there is an emphasis on society and how moral characteristics are viewed by the public . As such , Grandison stresses characters acting in the socially accepted ways instead of following their emotional impulses . The psychological realism of Richardson 's earlier work gives way to the expression of exemplars . In essence , Grandison promises " spiritual health and happiness to all who follow the good man 's exemplary pattern " . This can be taken as a sort of " political model of the wise ruler " , especially with Charles 's somewhat pacifist methods of achieving his goals . 
 Although Flynn believes that Grandison represents a moral character , she finds Grandison 's " goodness " " repellent " . Richardson 's other characters , like Clarissa , also exhibit high moral characters , but they are capable of changing over time . However , Grandison is never challenged in the way that Clarissa is , and he is a static , passive character . Grandison , in all situations , obeys the dictates of society and religion , fulfilling obligations rather than expressing personality . However , a character like Harriet is able to express herself fully , and it is possible that Grandison is prohibited from doing likewise because of his epistolary audience , the public . 
 In terms of religious responsibility , Grandison , is unwilling to change his faith , and Clementina initially refuses to marry him over his religion . Grandison attempts to convince her to reconsider by claiming that " her faith would not be at risk " . Besides his dedication to his own religion , and his unwillingness to prevent Clementina from being dedicated to her own , he says that he is bound to helping the Porretta family . Although potentially controversial to the 18th century British public , Grandison and Clementina compromise by agreeing that their sons would be raised as Protestants and their daughters raised as Catholics . In addition to the religious aspects , the work gives " the portrait of how a good marriage should be created and sustained " . To complement the role of marriage , Grandison opposes " sexual deviance " in the 18th century . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Samuel Johnson was one of the first to respond to the novel , but he focused primarily on the preface : " If you were to require my opinion which part [ in the preface ] should be changed , I should be inclined to the <unk> of that part which seems to disclaim the composition . What is modesty , if it deserts from truth ? Of what use is the disguise by which nothing is concealed ? You must forgive this , because it is meant well . " Sarah Fielding , in her introduction to The Lives of Cleopatra and Octavia , claims that people have an " insatiable Curiosity for Novels or Romances " that tell of the " rural Innocence of a Joseph Andrews , or the inimitable Virtues of Sir Charles Grandison " . Andrew Murphy , in the Gray 's Inn Journal , emphasised the history of the production when he wrote : 
 Mr. Richardson , Author of the celebrated Pamela , and the justly admired Clarissa ... an ingenuous Mind must be shocked to find , that Copies of very near all this Work , from which the Public may reasonable expect both Entertainment and Instruction , have been clandestinely and fraudulently obtained by a Set of Booksellers in Dublin , who have printed of the same , and advertised it in the public Papers .... I am not inclined to cast national Reflections , but I must <unk> , that I looked up this to be a more flagrant and atrocious Proceeding than any I have heard of for a long Time . 
 Sir Walter Scott , who favoured the bildungsroman and open plots , wrote in his " <unk> Memoir to Richardson " to The Novels of Samuel Richardson ( 1824 ) : 
 In his two first novels , also , he shewed much attention to the plot ; and though diffuse and <unk> in narration , can never be said to be rambling or desultory . No characters are introduced , but for the purpose of advancing the plot ; and there are but few of those digressive dialogues and dissertations with which Sir Charles Grandison abounds . The story keeps the direct road , though it moves slowly . But in his last work , the author is much more excursive . There is indeed little in the plot to require attention ; the various events , which are successively narrated , being no otherwise connected together , than as they place the character of the hero in some new and peculiar point of view . The same may be said of the numerous and long conversations upon religious and moral topics , which compose so great a part of the work , that a venerable old lady , whom we well knew , when in advanced age , she became subject to drowsy fits , chose to hear Sir Charles Grandison read to her as she sat in her elbow @-@ chair , in preference to any other work , ' because , ' said she , ' should I drop asleep in course of the reading , I am sure , when I awake , I shall have lost none of the story , but shall find the party , where I left them , conversing in the cedar @-@ parlour . ' — It is probable , after all , that the prolixity of Richardson , which , to our giddy @-@ paced times , is the greatest fault of his writing , was not such an objective to his contemporaries . 
 Although Scott is antipathetic towards Richardson 's final novel , not everyone was of the same opinion ; Jane Austen was a devotee of the novel , which was part of her mental furniture to the point where she could claim to describe " all that was ever said or done in the cedar parlour " . She would for example casually compare a flower in a new cap she got to the white feather described by Harriet Byron as being in hers . Nevertheless , throughout her life she also subjected Grandison to much affectionate , even satirical mockery - adapting it into a dramatic lampoon ( not published until 1980 ) around 1800 . Her <unk> also included a heroine who guyed Harriet Byron 's frequent fainting , through being “ in such a hurry to have a succession of fainting fits , that she had scarcely patience enough to recover from one before she fell into another ” . As late as 1813 , she would respond to a long letter from her sister Cassandra by exclaiming “ Dear me ! ... Like Harriet Byron I ask , what am I to do with my Gratitude ” . 
 Later critics believed that it is possible that Richardson 's work failed because the story deals with a " good man " instead of a " rake " , which prompted Richardson 's biographers Thomas Eaves and Ben <unk> to claim , this " might account for the rather uneasy relationship between the story of the novel and the character of its hero , who is never credible in his double love – or in any love . " Flynn agrees that this possibility is an " attractive one " , and conditions it to say that " it is at least certain that the deadly weighted character of Sir Charles stifles the dramatic action of the book . " John Mullan suggests that the problem stems from Grandison 's role as a hero when he says , " his hero is able to display his virtue in action ; as a consequence , Sir Charles Grandison presents its protagonist without the minutely analyzed reflexes of emotion that brought his heroines to life . " 
 Some critics , like Mark Kinkead @-@ Weekes and Margaret Doody , like the novel and emphasise the importance of the moral themes that Richardson takes up . In a 1987 article , Kinkead @-@ Weekes admits that the " novel fails at the [ moral ] crisis " and " it must be doubtful whether it could hope for much life in the concluding volumes " . However , those like Jean <unk> believe that " Richardson 's last novel is considerably better than can be easily imagined by those who have only heard about it . But admittedly it represents a falling off after Clarissa " . Morris Golden simply claims that the novel is a book for old men . 
 = Perfectionist ( album ) = 
 Perfectionist is the debut studio album by English singer Natalia Kills . It was released on 1 April 2011 through will.i.am Music Group , Cherrytree Records , <unk> and Interscope . Despite having started out as an actress , Kills later became a rap artist and released a single in 2005 ; however , her label went bankrupt . Songwriting remained her principal activity until 2008 , when she was signed by will.i.am and started recording the album . 
 Kills worked with musicians including Fernando Garibay , Jeff Bhasker , and Martin Kierszenbaum , and created a concept album based on perfectionism . Its lyrical content contains references to love , sex , and money , complemented by a sonority rooted in synthpop and dance @-@ pop . Perfectionist received mixed reviews from music critics , who asserted that the singer 's visual projects were superior to her music . Obtaining top 50 positions in some European countries , the album performed moderately on international record charts . In the United Kingdom and United States , the set attained chiefly low positions ; in the latter , its sales as of September 2013 were of 14 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The album spawned three singles — " Mirrors " , " Wonderland " and " Free " — which were generally successful in Europe and were accompanied by music videos . " Mirrors " managed to peak within the top 5 of the US Hot Dance Club Songs . In association with Guillaume Doubet , Kills produced a web series titled Love , Kills xx in order to promote the album , based on her secret thoughts and desires . Comprising 10 episodes , it features Kills seeking revenge and hurting men . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kills was introduced to singing and dancing at the age of 3 , and until she was 12 , she studied in the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art . Kills initially pursued an acting career , appearing in some TV series including All About Me and The Archers ; however , in her hometown of Leeds , she developed an interest in hip hop music . She subsequently entered various rap battles , for which she started writing lyrics , and in 2003 , Kills won a BBC Radio 1 @-@ sponsored " MC Battle " . From there on , she began writing songs for artists and film soundtracks . Kills released her first single on 21 February 2005 , titled " Don 't Play Nice " , under the moniker <unk> and with label All Around the World ; it peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart . She was also recording for her debut studio album , then @-@ scheduled for an Easter 2006 release . However , the label entered bankruptcy , causing her record deal to be dissolved and the album shelved . Kills continued to work in the music industry , mainly as a songwriter with the alias of <unk> . In 2007 , she relocated to Los Angeles ; the next year , she lent guest vocals to French artist M. <unk> 's song " They Talk Shit About Me " , and changed her stage name to Natalia <unk> , under which she self @-@ released an extended play ( EP ) titled <unk> . 
 One of Kills ' demos , " Shopaholic " , was remixed by the Remix Artist Collective . After it was posted in American blogger Perez Hilton 's blog , Kills ' MySpace received a high amount of views , and she reached the top of the social network 's unsigned artists chart . While shopping , she was noticed by a man due to her clothing , and gave him her website address ; he subsequently introduced her to a DJ , who took Kills to the American musician will.i.am 's house . In November 2008 , she signed a contract with the latter 's record label , then an imprint of Interscope . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Kills started to prepare material for Perfectionist after establishing her record deal with will.i.am , who served as an executive producer for the album . During the recording sessions , Kills prominently worked with producers Jeff Bhasker , Fernando Garibay , the album 's second executive producer Martin Kierszenbaum , and Theron " The @-@ Ron " <unk> . Akon and Giorgio Tuinfort co @-@ produced " Mirrors " in collaboration with Kierszenbaum . Bhasker was responsible for the entire album 's songwriting and engineering , and mixed " Zombie " . <unk> and Tuinfort provided instrumentation , along with Zach <unk> , Carlos <unk> @-@ Fisher and Robert Horn . More artists including Robert Horn and Tony Ugyal were commissioned for engineering . 
 Most of Perfectionist 's songs were recorded at Cherrytree Recording Studios or Enormous Studios ; the latter served as the recording location for songs produced by Bhasker . " Break You Hard " and " Superficial " were produced at the American Dream , while " Wonderland " was produced at that studio and at The Hive . Kills recorded " Love Is a Suicide " and " Broke " at Paradise Studios , " Mirrors " at Chalice Recording Studios , and " If I Was God " at The Boom Boom Room . 
 Kills described working with will.i.am , " [ ... ] it 's almost difficult having a normal conversation with him because he 's firing out ideas all the time . [ ... ] His entire life revolves around creativity , and that 's something I could really relate to . " Kierszenbaum praised Kills ' work ethic during the recording sessions , stating that she would focus simultaneously on the melodic and lyrical structure of song , as well as its soundscape . He went on to say that she " influenced the timbre of the sound " and assisted the production as if " she 's making a movie . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Perfectionist is a concept album which focusses on how perfectionism influences Kills . " All the songs revolve around my ambition , celebrations , frustration and disappointments of being a perfectionist " , she stated . " I think we 're all perfectionists – we 're all looking for the best to fulfil our ideologies and dreams . " Kills was also inspired by " women 's obsession " with fashion in general . She described the album 's sound as " dark pop " due to its " opinionated " and " confrontational " lyrics which , according to her , differ from mainstream music . The lyrical content is occasionally comical and uses metaphors frequently . 
 Perfectionist is a dance @-@ pop and synthpop album , characterised by " driving rhythm sections and edgy minor @-@ key melodies " . Its opening track , " Perfection " , runs for thirty seconds and sees a " robotic @-@ sounding " therapist listing Kills ' flaws . " Wonderland " , which fantasises about romance and a relationship 's " perfect ending " , includes synthesizer arrangements and choir sections ; the line " Take me to wonderland " is repeated throughout the song . A track including a bassline , piano , club beats and synths , " Free " samples " Wuthering Heights " by Kate Bush . It was written by Kills when she worked as a waitress , and discusses " bailing on a budget " . " Break You Hard " is an industrial pop song with " hypnotic rhythms " , which talks about " breaking a lover " , while " Zombie " incorporates electronic organs and " mumbling bass " in an electronic R & B sound . 
 " Love Is a Suicide " follows , detailing the " self @-@ destruction " that comes with love , as Kills sings , " It 's so surgical , how you dissect every mistake I make , you ’ re like an animal , you bite me hard " . " Disco @-@ pop " track " Mirrors " references sadomasochist sexual practices , while portraying Kills with a dominatrix @-@ like persona ; it contains electric guitars , and a bassline which Robert Copsey from Digital Spy compared to that of Eurythmics ' " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " . The song 's chorus features Kills singing in a falsetto note . Writing for Consequence of Sound , Alex Young opined that the song discusses " the duplicity of identity , hubris , and objectification " . " Not In Love " is styled in electronica and influenced by acid house . AllMusic writer Jon O 'Brien wrote that it " provides a welcome respite from the album 's constant floor @-@ filling leanings " . 
 On " Acid Annie " , Kills plots a revenge on an ex @-@ boyfriend , while on the synthpop track " Superficial " , she confronts her " consumptive impulses " and appreciation of " finer things . " " Broke " sees Kills talking about money ; " Nothing Lasts Forever " is a duet with Bhasker , who performs under the alias of Billy Kraven . It was noted by O 'Connor for its prominent use of Auto @-@ Tune . Perfectionist closes with " If I Was God " , in which Kills asks her partner if he would love her if she was poor . For musicOMH , Blair Kelly likened its chorus ' melody to that of Bush 's " Running Up That Hill " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The cover art for Perfectionist , which depicts Kills sitting on an exam chair , with a red cross covering her eyes , was unveiled by Cherrytree on 11 March 2011 . In Austria , Germany and Switzerland , the album was released by Universal Music as a CD and digital download on the first day of April , while in Poland it was issued on 14 April . The American release proceeded on 16 August , as well as for Canada . That day , Kills performed songs from the album at the New York City @-@ based building Atlas , accompanied by a keyboardist . On 19 September , it was released in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Singles and music videos = = = 
 " Zombie " was selected as Perfectionist 's first promotional single , and was released on 21 December 2009 . Its music video , which features Kills being tortured in a laboratory , was released on 16 March of the following year . The song was used in the sixth episode of the first season of the Syfy reality television series Face Off , aired 2 March 2011 . Despite not having been included in the album , " Activate My Heart " was released as its second promotional single on 13 April 2010 , while an accompanying visual was uploaded on 17 December . 
 " Mirrors " was digitally released as the album 's lead single on 10 August 2010 , while a CD single was issued six months later in Germany . An accompanying music video was released on 1 December 2010 , featuring Kills being dragged into a mirror and subsequently exploring the concepts of vanity , control and sex . The song charted . " Wonderland " followed as the second single from Perfectionist , and was available for purchase on 25 April 2011 . It only charted in Austria and Germany , respectively at number 55 and 45 . Doubet was commissioned to direct its music video , which sees Kills being forced into a mansion , being fed a cooked heart and ultimately climbing up a table , leading to chaos and violence inside the house . 
 Selected as the album 's third single , a remix of " Free " with guest vocals from will.i.am , was released on 24 June 2011 , with an accompanying visual being released ten days later . It obtained top 20 positions in Germany and Austria . A video for " Kill My Boyfriend " was released on 10 January 2012 . It was filmed in France , and depicts Kills attempting to murder her boyfriend by drowning him in a tub of milk . Despite not having been released as a single , it peaked at number 19 on the Flanders Ultratip chart . 
 = = = Love , Kills xx = = = 
 To promote the album , a web series titled Love , Kills xx was written , produced and directed by Kills and Guillaume Doubet . The episodes feature the former as their protagonist ; Akon , Far East Movement and Colette Carr appear as guests . According to Kills , the series are mostly devoid of dialogue in order to center on " emotion and action " . She also said that the visuals were an " expression " of her secret thoughts , regrets and desires . Each episode contains an instrumental of a song from Perfectionist , and most videos contain narration from Kills . 
 The first episode starts with Kills furiously walking with a revolver in direction of a blonde man ; she later ties him up on a bed , as he screams and tries to resist . Kills calls a friend whose name is not revealed , and asks him for help . During the second episode , Kills assassinates another man and takes his photograph ; the next episode , she is arrested by a group — played by Far East Movement — who threaten her . She manages to strangle the leader of the group , and later leaves a message for her anonymous friend , warning him that her face is being distributed on wanted posters . 
 The fourth episode begins with Kills and a man involving in sexual activity . By the morning , the latter wakes up while Kills is asleep , and steals her passport and revolver . Kills is surprised to see that he has left and gets angry after realizing that she was robbed . During the 1970s exploitation film @-@ inspired fifth episode , a victim of Kills denounces her to a detective , revealing that she left him in a desert . In the following episode , Kills runs over the man who robbed her two episodes earlier , with her convertible , and retrieves her passport . As the seventh webisode begins , Kills argues with her new boyfriend , who slaps her . Kills meets with him a week later , telling him that she 's not angry , however she hits him with a baseball bat . 
 In the eighth episode , set in a hotel , Kills wins a checkers game between her and a man — played by Akon — who carries a black box ; she exits the hotel carrying the box . The box , which contains a list of men names , is opened by Kills during the penultimate episode . She takes the list and crosses the name " Jeremy " off it . The camera shifts to a field where Kills makes a man jump from a cliff , by playing a game of " cold , warm and hot " with him . The last episode sees Kills and a friend of hers — interpreted by Carr — burning the car of the latter 's boyfriend . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To further promote the album , Kills went on a 58 @-@ date promotional tour , starting from 24 June 2011 and concluding on 22 November 2011 . 
 = = = = Tour dates = = = = 
 A ^ Marked dates supporting The Black Eyed Peas on their The Beginning Massive Stadium Tour . 
 B ^ This concert was a part of the Glastonbury Festival 2011 . 
 C ^ This concert was a part of the Wireless Festival 2011 . 
 D ^ Marked dates supporting Ke $ ha on her Get Sleazy Tour . 
 E ^ Marked dates supporting Katy Perry on her California Dreams Tour . 
 F ^ Marked dates supporting The Sounds on their 2011 tour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Perfectionist received polarized reviews from music critics . Jon O 'Brien from AllMusic summarised it as " formulaic and gimmicky " , and observed that the music was secondary to Kills ' attempts of establishing a mature image . AltSounds staff member Jack Stevin deemed it " disappointing " and unfocused , writing that Kills was not in control of the album and that she had an " air of pretension around " her . Stevin additionally said that Kills was stronger as a " visual artist " . Darryl Sterdan of Canoe.ca rated Perfectionist with three out of five points . Comparing it to the music of Lady Gaga , Kesha and Robyn , he opined , " Guess that 's why it 's not called Innovator . " Writing for Consequence of Sound , Alex Young noted that Kills expressed herself better as a musician through music videos , and surmised that " not all the songs on Perfectionist hit their mark " . Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner described it as " finely tailored " and " exciting " , and gave it four stars out of <unk> musicOMH writer Blair Kelly characterised the album as imperfect , " uninspired , unoriginal and obvious " while negatively comparing it to the works of American artist Lady Gaga . 
 In Europe , the album achieved moderate chart success . On the chart issue dated 1 October 2011 , it entered the UK Albums Chart at number 129 . In Austria and Canada , the album respectively reached number 35 and 36 , while in the German and Swiss album charts , it peaked at number 50 and 94 . Perfectionist managed to top the US Heatseekers Albums and reach number 6 of the Dance / Electronic Albums , despite entering the main Billboard 200 chart at number 134 . By August 2013 , it had sold 14 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In Canada , the album reached number 36 . Kills credited the success of the album and its singles with changing her life , commenting , " I had nowhere to live , [ ... ] got on a plane to LA and then two years later I had sold over 800 @,@ 000 singles . I wrote 14 songs and that 's what happened ? [ ... ] I would never have thought this . I would have probably thought I was dead by now . " 
 Kills discussed Perfectionist during 2013 interviews . She revealed that after having lived a deplorable life in London , her ambitions and dreams influenced the album 's lyrics . " I was not as aware of ... how I was " , she stated . " I almost had a bit of fear where everybody wants to be loved , everybody wants to be understood in a way that 's not full of judgment or blame . So I put all of myself into the album and then [ kept ] bits out . " That year , Corner hailed Perfectionist as " one of the most underrated pop collections in recent memory " , and Idolator 's Sam Lansky opined that although it had " killer " choruses , the album suffered from excessive similarities to other artists . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Perfectionist . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Igbo Landing = 
 Igbo Landing ( alternatively written as Ibo Landing , Ebo Landing , or <unk> Landing ) is a historic site at Dunbar Creek on St. Simons Island , Glynn County , Georgia . It was the setting of a mass suicide in 1803 by captive Igbo people who had taken control of their slave ship and refused to submit to slavery in the United States . The event 's moral value as a story of resistance towards slavery has symbolic importance in African American folklore and literary history . 
 = = History = = 
 In May 1803 a shipload of captive West Africans , upon surviving the middle passage , were landed by <unk> captors in Savannah by slave ship , to be auctioned off at one of the local slave markets . The ship 's enslaved passengers included a number of Igbo people from what is now Nigeria . The Igbo were known by planters and slavers of the American South for being fiercely independent and resistant to chattel slavery . The group of 75 Igbo slaves were bought by agents of John Couper and Thomas Spalding for forced labor on their plantations in St. Simons Island for $ 100 each . 
 The chained slaves were packed under the deck of a small vessel named the The Schooner York to be shipped to the island ( other sources say the voyage took place aboard The <unk> ) . During this voyage the Igbo slaves rose up in rebellion , taking control of the ship and drowning their captors in the process causing the grounding of the <unk> in Dunbar Creek at the site now locally known as Ibo Landing . 
 The following sequence of events is unclear , as there are several versions concerning the revolt 's development , some of which are considered mythological . Apparently the Africans went ashore and subsequently , under the direction of a high Igbo chief among them , walked in unison into the creek singing in the Igbo language " The Water Spirit brought us , the Water Spirit will take us home " . They thereby accepted the protection of their god Chukwu and death over the alternative of slavery . Roswell King , a white overseer on the nearby Pierce Butler plantation , wrote one of the only contemporary accounts of the incident which states that as soon as the Igbo landed on St. Simons Island they took to the swamp , committing suicide by walking into Dunbar Creek . A 19th century account of the event written in identifies the captain by the surname Patterson , and names Roswell King as the person who recovered the bodies of the drowned . A letter describing the event written by Savannah slave dealer William Mein states that the Igbo walked into the marsh , where 10 to 12 drowned , while some were " salvaged " by bounty hunters who received $ 10 a head from Spalding and Couper . According to some sources , survivors of the Igbo rebellion were taken to Cannon 's Point on St. Simons Island and <unk> Island . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Igbo Landing was the final scene of events which in 1803 amounted to a " major act of resistance " by the Africans . These events have had enduring symbolic importance in African @-@ American folklore and literary history . The mutiny by the Igbo people has been referred to as the first " freedom march " in the history of America . Although for more than two centuries most authorities considered the accounts to be an Afro @-@ American folktale , research since 1980 has verified the factual basis of the legend and its historical content . The site was included as a historic resource in a 2009 county survey . 
 The site bears no official historical marker . A sewage disposal plant was built beside the historical site in the 1940s despite local opposition by African Americans . The site is still routinely visited by historians and tourists . The event has recently been incorporated into the history curriculum of coastal Georgia schools . 
 = = Mythology and folklore = = 
 The story of the Igbo slaves who chose death over a life of slavery is a recurring story that has taken deep roots in African American and Gullah folklore . As is typical of oral histories , the facts have evolved over time , in many cases taking on mythological aspects . 
 = = = Myth of the water @-@ walking Africans = = = 
 Floyd White , an elderly African American interviewed by the Federal Writers Project in the 1930s is recorded as saying : 
 Heard about the Ibo ’ s Landing ? That ’ s the place where they bring the <unk> over in a slave ship and when they get here , they ain ’ t like it and so they all start singing and they march right down in the river to march back to Africa , but they ain ’ t able to get there . They gets drown . 
 A typical Gullah telling of the events , incorporating many of the recurrent themes that are common to most myths related to the Igbo Landing , is recorded by Linda S. Watts : 
 The West Africans upon assessing their situation resolved to risk their lives by walking home over the water rather than submit to the living death that awaited them in American slavery . As the tale has it , the tribes people disembark from the ship , and as a group , turned around and walked along the water , traveling in the opposite direction from the arrival port . As they took this march together , the West Africans joined in song . They are reported to have sung a hymn in which the lyrics assert that the water spirits will take them home . While versions of this story vary in nuance , all attest to the courage in rebellion displayed by the enslaved Igbo . 
 = = = Myth of the flying Africans = = = 
 Another popular legend associated with Igbo Landing is known as the myth of the flying Africans . It was recorded from various oral sources in the 1930s by members of the Federal Writers Project . In these cases , the Africans are reputed to have grown wings or turned into vultures , before flying back home to freedom in Africa . Wallace Quarterman , an African American born in 1844 who was interviewed in 1930 , when asked if he had heard about the Igbo landing states : 
 Ain 't you heard about them ? Well , at that time Mr. Blue he was the overseer and . . . Mr. Blue he go down one morning with a long whip for to whip them good . . . . Anyway , he whipped them good and they got together and stuck that hoe in the field and then . . . rose up in the sky and turned themselves into buzzards and flew right back to Africa . . . . Everybody knows about them . 
 As Professor Terri L. Snyder notes : 
 The flying African folktale probably has its historical roots in an 1803 collective suicide by newly imported slaves . A group of Igbo ( variously , Ebo or Ibo ) captives who had survived the middle passage were sold near Savannah , Georgia , and reloaded onto a small ship bound for St. Simon 's Island . Off the coast of the island , the enslaved cargo , who had " suffered much by mismanagement , " " rose " from their confinement in the small vessel , and revolted against the crew , forcing them into the water where they drowned . After the ship ran aground , the Igbos " took to the marsh " and drowned themselves — an act that most scholars have understood as a deliberate , collective suicide . The site of their fatal immersion was named <unk> Landing . The fate of those Igbo in 1803 gave rise to a distinctive regional folklore and a place name . 
 = = = Reported haunting = = = 
 Local people claim that the Igbo Landing and surrounding marshes in Dunbar Creek are haunted by the souls of the dead Igbo slaves . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In September 2002 the St. Simon African @-@ American Heritage Coalition organized a two @-@ day commemoration with events related to Igbo history and a procession to the site . The 75 attendees came from other states , as well as Nigeria , and Belize and Haiti , where similar resistance had taken place . They gathered to designate the site as holy ground and give the souls rest . The account of the Igbo is now part of the curriculum for coastal Georgia schools . 
 = = = Representation in other media = = = 
 The historical events pertaining to the Igbo slave escape in Dunbar Creek , and the associated myth , have inspired and influenced a number of African @-@ American artists . 
 Examples include Nobel laureate Toni Morrison , who used the myth of the flying Africans in her novel , Song of Solomon , and Alex Haley , who retells the story in his book Roots . The Paule Marshall novel <unk> for the Widow also was inspired by these events . They are retold from the context of the Gullah descendants in the feature film Daughters of the Dust ( 1993 ) , directed by Julie Dash . Other contemporary artists that allude to , or have integrated the complete tale of the Flying Africans in their work include Joseph Zobel , Maryse Conde , Toni Cade Bambara and Jamaica Kincaid . Imagery from the " Love Drought " portion of Beyonce 's visual album Lemonade ( Beyoncé album ) are said to be inspired by Daughters of the Dust and the story of Igbo Landing . 
 = Samuel Merrill Woodbridge = 
 The Reverend Samuel Merrill Woodbridge , D.D. , LL.D. ( April 5 , 1819 – June 23 , 1905 ) was an American clergyman , theologian , author , and college professor . A graduate of New York University and the New Brunswick Theological Seminary , Woodbridge preached for sixteen years as a clergyman in the Reformed Church in America . After settling in New Brunswick , New Jersey , he taught for 44 years as professor of ecclesiastical history and church government at the New Brunswick Theological Seminary , and for seven years as professor of " metaphysics and philosophy of the human mind " at Rutgers College ( now Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey ) in New Brunswick . Woodbridge later led the New Brunswick seminary as Dean and President of the Faculty from 1883 to 1901 . He was the author of three books and several published sermons and addresses covering various aspects of Christian faith , theology , church history and government . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Samuel Merrill Woodbridge was born April 5 , 1819 in Greenfield , Massachusetts . He was the third of six children born to the Rev. Sylvester Woodbridge , D.D. ( 1790 – 1863 ) and Elizabeth Gould ( died in 1851 ) . According to a genealogical chart published in Munsey 's Magazine in 1907 , Woodbridge was in the eleventh generation of a family of clergymen dating back to the late 15th century . The earliest clergyman in this ancestral line , the Rev. John Woodbridge ( born in 1493 ) , was a follower of John Wycliffe . 
 Woodbridge attended New York University , receiving a Bachelor of Arts ( A.B. ) degree in 1838 . As an undergraduate student , Woodbridge was a member of the university 's secretive , all @-@ male Eucleian Society and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa . He was awarded a Master of Arts ( A.M. ) from the New Brunswick Theological Seminary in 1841 and was installed as a minister by the Reformed Church 's <unk> of New York , a governing body overseeing churches within the region . At this time , his alma mater , New York University , promoted his bachelor 's degree to a Master of Arts . After his graduation from seminary , he served as pastor at the South Reformed Dutch Church in South Brooklyn ( 1841 – 49 ) , at the Second Reformed Church in Coxsackie , New York ( 1849 – 52 ) , and at the Second Reformed Church in New Brunswick , New Jersey ( 1852 – 57 ) . 
 In December 1857 , Woodbridge was appointed to the faculty of two schools in New Brunswick , New Jersey . He would serve 44 years as a professor of ecclesiastical history and church government at New Brunswick Theological Seminary ( from 1857 to 1901 ) and for seven years as a professor of " Metaphysics and Philosophy of the Human Mind " at Rutgers College ( from 1857 to 1864 ) . Both schools were then affiliated with the Protestant Dutch Reformed faith . He was appointed by the Synod to a vacancy in both <unk> caused by the death of the Rev. John Ludlow , D.D. ( 1793 – 1857 ) , on September 8 , 1857 . During his tenure at the seminary , Woodbridge also provided instruction in the areas of pastoral , didactic and polemic theology — often when there were vacancies amongst the faculty . 
 In 1883 , the church 's General Synod decided that the " oldest professor in service in the Theological Seminary at New Brunswick be styled Dean of the Seminary , and to him shall be entrusted the discipline of the Institution , according to such regulations as may be agreed upon by the Faculty . " Woodbridge led the seminary as its first Dean of the Seminary , and subsequently as President of the Faculty until his retirement in 1901 . Both positions were predecessors to the present seminary president . During his career , Woodbridge received honorary degrees from Union College ( D.D. 1858 ) and from Rutgers College ( A.M. , 1841 ; D.D. , 1857 ; LL.D. 1883 ) . He retired from teaching in 1901 as an emeritus professor , at the age of 82 . 
 Woodbridge married twice . His first marriage was to Caroline Bergen ( who died in 1861 ) in February 1845 ; the couple had one daughter , Caroline Woodbridge ( born in 1845 ) . On December 20 , 1866 he married his second wife , Anna <unk> Dayton ( 1823 – 1920 ) , with whom he had two daughters , Anna Dayton Woodbridge ( born in 1869 ) and Mary Elizabeth Woodbridge ( born in 1872 ) . 
 Woodbridge died at the age of 86 on June 23 , 1905 in New Brunswick , New Jersey . He was interred in a family plot in the city 's Elmwood Cemetery . Church historian Charles Edward Corwin recorded that Woodbridge was described as having a strong personality that " made dry subjects to glow with life , " adding that he " was very firm in the faith but his loving heart made him kindly even toward those whose opinion he considered dangerous . " 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 1872 : Analysis of Systematic Theology ( 1st Edition ) 
 1883 : Analysis of Systematic Theology ( 2nd Edition ) 
 1895 : Manual of Church History 
 1896 : Synopsis of Church Government 
 = = = Sermons and discourses = = = 
 Various sermons , addresses , and discourses given in public by Rev. Woodbridge have been printed in newspapers and periodicals , as part of a collection of addresses in books , and as separately published pamphlets . These smaller works include : 
 1853 : " Principles of Our Government : A Thanksgiving Discourse " 
 1856 : " Sermon on Human Government " , printed in the New Brunswick Fredonian 
 1857 : " Inaugural Discourse as Professor of Ecclesiastical History " 
 1857 : " On the Family " , printed in The Christian Intelligencer 
 1865 : " Power of the Bible " , printed in The National Preacher and Village Pulpit 
 1867 : " Address " published in Richard Holloway Steele 's Historical Discourse delivered at the Celebration of the One Hundred and Fiftieth Anniversary of the First Reformed Dutch Church 
 1869 : " Address " included in Proceedings at the Centennial Anniversary of the Dedication of the North Dutch Church , May 25 , 1869 
 1871 : " Discourse on <unk> given before the General Synod at Albany " , printed in Christian Intelligencer 
 1875 : Faith : It 's True Position in the Life of Man : A Discourse , preached November 22d , 1874 , in the chapel of Rutgers College 
 1885 : " Historical Theology : An Address " , included in David Demarest 's Centennial of the Theological Seminary of the Reformed Church in America , formerly the Reformed Protestant Dutch Church , 1784 – 1884 
 1894 : " Characteristics of Dr. Campbell " , included in A Memorial of Rev. William Henry Campbell , D.D. , LL.D. , Late President of Rutgers College 
 1897 : " Address by Professor Woodbridge " , included in Fortieth Anniversary of the Inauguration of the Rev. S. M. Woodbridge , D.D. , LL.D. , as Professor in the Theological Seminary of the Reformed ( Dutch ) Church in America at New Brunswick , 1857 – 1897 
 = Katyn massacre = 
 The Katyn massacre ( Polish : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , " Katyń crime " ; Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , " Katyn shooting " ) was a series of mass executions of Polish nationals carried out by the NKVD ( " People 's Commissariat for Internal Affairs " , a Soviet secret police organisation ) in April and May 1940 . Though the killings took place at several different locations , the massacre is named after the Katyn Forest , where some of the mass graves were first discovered . 
 The massacre was prompted by NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria 's proposal to execute all captive members of the Polish officer corps , dated 5 March 1940 , approved by the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , including its leader , Joseph Stalin . The number of victims is estimated at about 22 @,@ 000 . The victims were executed in the Katyn Forest in Russia , the Kalinin and Kharkiv prisons , and elsewhere . Of the total killed , about 8 @,@ 000 were officers imprisoned during the 1939 Soviet invasion of Poland , another 6 @,@ 000 were police officers , and the rest were arrested Polish intelligentsia that the Soviets deemed to be " intelligence agents , gendarmes , landowners , saboteurs , factory owners , lawyers , officials , and priests " . 
 The government of Nazi Germany announced the discovery of mass graves in the Katyn Forest in 1943 . When the London @-@ based Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile asked for an investigation by the International Committee of the Red Cross , Stalin immediately severed diplomatic relations with it . The USSR claimed that the victims had been murdered by the Nazis in 1941 and continued to deny responsibility for the massacres until 1990 , when it officially acknowledged and condemned the perpetration of the killings by the NKVD , as well as the subsequent cover @-@ up by the Soviet government . 
 An investigation conducted by the office of the Prosecutors General of the Soviet Union ( 1990 – 1991 ) and the Russian Federation ( 1991 – 2004 ) confirmed Soviet responsibility for the massacres but refused to classify this action as a war crime or an act of genocide . The investigation was closed on the grounds that the perpetrators of the atrocity were already dead , and since the Russian government would not classify the dead as victims of the Great Purge , formal posthumous rehabilitation was deemed inapplicable . 
 In November 2010 , the Russian State Duma approved a declaration blaming Stalin and other Soviet officials for having personally ordered the massacre . 
 = = Background = = 
 At least 111 @,@ 091 people were executed during the Polish Operation of the NKVD ( 1937 – 38 ) . 
 On 1 September 1939 , the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany began . Consequently , Britain and France , obligated by the Anglo @-@ Polish military alliance and Franco @-@ Polish alliance to attack Germany in the case of such an invasion , demanded that Germany withdraw . On 3 September 1939 , after Germany failed to comply , Britain , France , and most countries of the British Empire declared war on Germany , but provided little military support to Poland . They took minimal military action during what became known as the Phoney War . 
 The Soviet invasion of Poland began on 17 September in accordance with the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . The Red Army advanced quickly and met little resistance , as Polish forces facing them were under orders not to engage the Soviets . About 250 @,@ 000 to 454 @,@ 700 Polish soldiers and policemen were captured and interned by the Soviet authorities . Some were freed or escaped quickly , but 125 @,@ 000 were imprisoned in camps run by the NKVD . Of these , 42 @,@ 400 soldiers , mostly of Ukrainian and Belarusian ethnicity serving in the Polish army , who lived in the territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union , were released in October . The 43 @,@ 000 soldiers born in western Poland , then under German control , were transferred to the Germans ; in turn , the Soviets received 13 @,@ 575 Polish prisoners from the Germans . 
 Soviet repressions of Polish citizens occurred as well over this period . Since Poland 's conscription system required every <unk> university graduate to become a military reserve officer , the NKVD was able to round up a significant portion of the Polish educated class . According to estimates by the Institute of National Remembrance ( IPN ) , roughly 320 @,@ 000 Polish citizens were deported to the Soviet Union ( this figure is questioned by some other historians , who hold to older estimates of about 700 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . IPN estimates the number of Polish citizens who died under Soviet rule during World War II at 150 @,@ 000 ( a revision of older estimates of up to 500 @,@ 000 ) . Of the group of 12 @,@ 000 Poles sent to <unk> camp ( near Kolyma ) in 1940 – 1941 , mostly POWs , only 583 men survived ; they were released in 1942 to join the Polish Armed Forces in the East . According to Tadeusz Piotrowski , " during the war and after 1944 , 570 @,@ 387 Polish citizens had been subjected to some form of Soviet political repression " . 
 As early as 19 September , the head of the NKVD , Lavrentiy Beria , ordered the secret police to create the Main Administration for Affairs of Prisoners of War and Internees to manage Polish prisoners . The NKVD took custody of Polish prisoners from the Red Army , and proceeded to organise a network of reception centers and transit camps , and to arrange rail transport to prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps in the western USSR . The largest camps were located at Kozelsk ( <unk> Monastery ) , Ostashkov ( <unk> Island on Lake Seliger near Ostashkov ) , and Starobelsk . Other camps were at <unk> ( rail station <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , rail station <unk> ( 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) from <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , Vologda ( rail station <unk> ) , and Gryazovets . 
 Kozelsk and Starobelsk were used mainly for military officers , while Ostashkov was used mainly for Polish Scouting , gendarmes , police officers , and prison officers . Some prisoners were members of other groups of Polish intelligentsia , such as priests , landowners , and law personnel . The approximate distribution of men throughout the camps was as follows : Kozelsk , 5000 ; Ostashkov , <unk> ; and Starobelsk , 4000 . They totaled 15 @,@ 570 men . 
 According to a report from 19 November 1939 , the NKVD had about 40 @,@ 000 Polish POWs : about 8 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 500 officers and warrant officers , 6 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 500 police officers , and 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and non @-@ commissioned officers who were still being held as POWs . In December , a wave of arrests resulted in the imprisonment of additional Polish officers . Ivan Serov reported to Lavrentiy Beria on 3 December that " in all , 1 @,@ 057 former officers of the Polish Army had been arrested " . The 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and non @-@ commissioned officers were assigned to forced labor ( road construction , heavy metallurgy ) . 
 Once at the camps , from October 1939 to February 1940 , the Poles were subjected to lengthy interrogations and constant political agitation by NKVD officers , such as Vasily <unk> . The prisoners assumed they would be released soon , but the interviews were in effect a selection process to determine who would live and who would die . According to NKVD reports , if the prisoners could not be induced to adopt a pro @-@ Soviet attitude , they were declared " hardened and uncompromising enemies of Soviet authority " . 
 On 5 March 1940 , pursuant to a note to Joseph Stalin from Beria , six members of the Soviet Politburo — Stalin , Vyacheslav Molotov , Lazar Kaganovich , Kliment Voroshilov , Anastas Mikoyan , and Mikhail Kalinin — signed an order to execute 25 @,@ 700 Polish " nationalists and counterrevolutionaries " kept at camps and prisons in occupied western Ukraine and Belarus . The reason for the massacre , according to historian Gerhard Weinberg , was that Stalin wanted to deprive a potential future Polish military of a large portion of its talent : 
 It has been suggested that the motive for this terrible step [ the Katyn massacre ] was to reassure the Germans as to the reality of Soviet anti @-@ Polish policy . This explanation is completely unconvincing in view of the care with which the Soviet regime kept the massacre secret from the very German government it was supposed to impress . ... A more likely explanation is that ... [ the massacre ] should be seen as looking forward to a future in which there might again be a Poland on the Soviet Union 's western border . Since he intended to keep the eastern portion of the country in any case , Stalin could be certain that any revived Poland would be unfriendly . Under those circumstances , depriving it of a large proportion of its military and technical elite would make it weaker . 
 The Soviet leadership , and Stalin in particular , viewed the Polish prisoners as a " problem " as they might resist being under Soviet rule . Therefore the decision was made that the prisoners inside the " special camps " were to be shot as " avowed enemies of Soviet authority " . 
 = = Executions = = 
 The number of victims is estimated at about 22 @,@ 000 , with a lower limit of confirmed dead of 21 @,@ 768 . According to Soviet documents declassified in 1990 , 21 @,@ 857 Polish internees and prisoners were executed after 3 April 1940 : 14 @,@ 552 prisoners of war ( most or all of them from the three camps ) and 7 @,@ 305 prisoners in western parts of the Byelorussian and Ukrainian SSRs . Of them 4 @,@ 421 were from Kozelsk , 3 @,@ 820 from Starobelsk , 6 @,@ 311 from Ostashkov , and 7 @,@ 305 from Byelorussian and Ukrainian prisons . The head of the NKVD POW department , Maj. General P. K. Soprunenko , organized " selections " of Polish officers to be massacred at Katyn and elsewhere . 
 Those who died at Katyn included soldiers ( an admiral , two generals , 24 colonels , 79 lieutenant colonels , 258 majors , 654 captains , 17 naval captains , 85 privates , 3 @,@ 420 non @-@ commissioned officers , and seven chaplains ) , 200 pilots , government representatives and royalty ( a prince , 43 officials ) , and civilians ( three landowners , 131 refugees , 20 university professors , 300 physicians ; several hundred lawyers , engineers , and teachers ; and more than 100 writers and journalists ) . In all , the NKVD executed almost half the Polish officer corps . Altogether , during the massacre , the NKVD executed 14 Polish generals : Leon Billewicz ( ret . ) , Bronisław <unk> ( ret . ) , <unk> <unk> ( admiral ) , Stanisław Haller ( ret . ) , Aleksander Kowalewski ( ret . ) , Henryk <unk> ( ret . ) , Kazimierz <unk> @-@ <unk> , Konstanty <unk> ( ret . ) , Rudolf <unk> ( murdered in Lviv ) , Franciszek Sikorski ( ret . ) , Leonard <unk> ( ret . ) , Piotr <unk> , Mieczysław <unk> , and Alojzy Wir @-@ <unk> ( promoted posthumously ) . Not all of the executed were ethnic Poles , because the Second Polish Republic was a multiethnic state , and its officer corps included Belarusians , Ukrainians , and Jews . It is estimated that about 8 % of the Katyn massacre victims were Polish Jews . 395 prisoners were spared from the slaughter , among them Stanisław <unk> and Józef Czapski . They were taken to the <unk> camp or <unk> Bor and then to Gryazovets . 
 Up to 99 % of the remaining prisoners were subsequently murdered . People from the Kozelsk camp were executed in Katyn Forest ; people from the Starobelsk camp were murdered in the inner NKVD prison of Kharkiv and the bodies were buried near the village of <unk> ; and police officers from the Ostashkov camp were murdered in the internal NKVD prison of Kalinin ( Tver ) and buried in Mednoye . 
 Detailed information on the executions in the Kalinin NKVD prison was provided during a hearing by Dmitry <unk> , former head of the Board of the District NKVD in Kalinin . According to <unk> , the shooting started in the evening and ended at dawn . The first transport , on 4 April 1940 , carried 390 people , and the executioners had difficulty killing so many people in one night . The following transports held no more than 250 people . The executions were usually performed with German @-@ made .25 ACP Walther Model 2 pistols supplied by Moscow , but Soviet @-@ made 7 @.@ 62 × <unk> Nagant <unk> revolvers were also used . The executioners used German weapons rather than the standard Soviet revolvers , as the latter were said to offer too much recoil , which made shooting painful after the first dozen executions . Vasily Mikhailovich <unk> , chief executioner for the NKVD — and quite possibly the most prolific executioner in history — is reported to have personally shot and killed 7 @,@ 000 of the condemned , some as young as 18 , from the Ostashkov camp at Kalinin prison , over a period of 28 days in April 1940 . 
 The killings were methodical . After the condemned individual 's personal information was checked and approved , he was handcuffed and led to a cell insulated with stacks of sandbags along the walls , and a heavy , felt @-@ lined door . The victim was told to kneel in the middle of the cell , and was then approached from behind by the executioner and immediately shot in the back of the head or neck . The body was carried out through the opposite door and laid in one of the five or six waiting trucks , whereupon the next condemned was taken inside and subjected to the same fate . In addition to muffling by the rough insulation in the execution cell , the pistol gunshots were also masked by the operation of loud machines ( perhaps fans ) throughout the night . Some post @-@ 1991 revelations suggest that prisoners were also executed in the same manner at the NKVD headquarters in Smolensk , though judging by the way that the corpses were stacked , some captives may have been shot while standing on the edge of the mass graves . This procedure went on every night , except for the public May Day holiday . 
 Some 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 Polish inmates of Ukrainian prisons and those from Belarus prisons were probably buried in <unk> and in <unk> respectively . Lieutenant Janina <unk> , daughter of Gen. Józef <unk> @-@ <unk> , was the only woman executed during the massacre at Katyn . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The question about the fate of the Polish prisoners was raised soon after Operation Barbarossa began in June 1941 . The Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile and the Soviet government signed the Sikorski – <unk> agreement , which announced the willingness of both to fight together against Nazi Germany and for a Polish army to be formed on Soviet territory . The Polish general Władysław Anders began organizing this army , and soon he requested information about the missing Polish officers . During a personal meeting , Stalin assured him and Władysław Sikorski , the Polish Prime Minister , that all the Poles were freed , and that not all could be accounted because the Soviets " lost track " of them in Manchuria . Józef Czapski investigated the fate of Polish officers between 1941 and 1942 . 
 In 1942 , with the territory around Smolensk under German occupation , captive Polish railroad workers heard from the locals about a mass grave of Polish soldiers at Kozelsk near Katyn ; finding one of the graves , they reported it to the Polish Underground State . The discovery was not seen as important , as nobody thought the discovered grave could contain so many victims . In early 1943 , Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff , a German officer serving as the intelligence liaison between the Wehrmacht 's Army Group Centre and Abwehr , received reports about mass graves of Polish military officers . These reports stated the graves were in the forest of Goat Hill near Katyn . He passed the reports to his superiors ( sources vary on when exactly the Germans became aware of the graves — from " late 1942 " to January – February 1943 , and when the German top decision makers in Berlin received those reports [ as early as 1 March or as late as 4 April ] ) . Joseph Goebbels saw this discovery as an excellent tool to drive a wedge between Poland , the Western Allies , and the Soviet Union , and reinforcement for the Nazi propaganda line about the horrors of Bolshevism , and American and British subservience to it . After extensive preparation , on 13 April , <unk> Berlin broadcast to the world that German military forces in the Katyn forest near Smolensk had uncovered a ditch that was " 28 metres long and 16 metres wide [ 92 ft by 52 ft ] , in which the bodies of 3 @,@ 000 Polish officers were piled up in 12 layers " . The broadcast went on to charge the Soviets with carrying out the massacre in 1940 . 
 The Germans brought in a European Red Cross committee called the Katyn Commission , comprising 12 forensic experts and their staff , from Belgium , Bulgaria , Croatia , Denmark , Finland , France , Hungary , Italy , the Netherlands , Romania , Sweden , and Slovakia . The Germans were so intent on proving that the Soviets were behind the massacre that they even included some Allied prisoners of war , among them writer Ferdynand <unk> , the Polish Home Army prisoner from Pawiak . After the war , <unk> escaped with a fake passport due to an arrest warrant issued against him . Jan Emil <unk> was a collaborator . Józef Mackiewicz has published several texts about the crime . Two of the 12 , the Bulgarian Marko Markov and the Czech František <unk> , with their countries becoming satellite states of the Soviet Union , were forced to recant their evidence , defending the Soviets and blaming the Germans . The Croatian pathologist Eduard <unk> managed to escape to the USA . 
 The Katyn massacre was beneficial to Nazi Germany , which used it to discredit the Soviet Union . On 14 April 1943 , Goebbels wrote in his diary : " We are now using the discovery of 12 @,@ 000 Polish officers , murdered by the GPU , for anti @-@ Bolshevik propaganda on a grand style . We sent neutral journalists and Polish intellectuals to the spot where they were found . Their reports now reaching us from ahead are gruesome . The Führer has also given permission for us to hand out a drastic news item to the German press . I gave instructions to make the widest possible use of the propaganda material . We shall be able to live on it for a couple of weeks " . The Germans won a major propaganda victory , portraying communism as a danger to " Western civilization " . 
 The Soviet government immediately denied the German charges . They claimed that the Polish prisoners of war had been engaged in construction work west of Smolensk , and consequently were captured and executed by invading German units in August 1941 . The Soviet response on 15 April to the initial German broadcast of 13 April , prepared by the Soviet Information Bureau , stated that " Polish prisoners @-@ of @-@ war who in 1941 were engaged in construction work west of Smolensk and who ... fell into the hands of the German @-@ Fascist hangmen " . 
 In April 1943 , the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile led by Sikorski insisted on bringing the matter to the negotiation table with the Soviets and on opening an investigation by the International Red Cross . Stalin , in response , accused the Polish government of collaborating with Nazi Germany and broke off diplomatic relations with it . The Soviet Union also started a campaign to get the Western Allies to recognize the pro @-@ Soviet government @-@ in @-@ exile of the Union of Polish Patriots led by Wanda Wasilewska . Sikorski died in an air crash in July — an event that was convenient for the Allied leaders . 
 = = = Soviet actions = = = 
 When , in September 1943 , Joseph Goebbels was informed that the German army had to withdraw from the Katyn area , he wrote a prediction in his diary . His entry for 29 September 1943 reads : " Unfortunately we have had to give up Katyn . The Bolsheviks undoubtedly will soon ' find ' that we shot 12 @,@ 000 Polish officers . That episode is one that is going to cause us quite a little trouble in the future . The Soviets are undoubtedly going to make it their business to discover as many mass graves as possible and then blame it on us " . 
 Having retaken the Katyn area almost immediately after the Red Army had recaptured Smolensk , around September – October 1943 , NKVD forces began a cover @-@ up operation . A cemetery the Germans had permitted the Polish Red Cross to build was destroyed and other evidence removed . Witnesses were " interviewed " and threatened with arrest for collaborating with the Nazis if their testimonies disagreed with the official line . As none of the documents found on the dead had dates later than April 1940 , the Soviet secret police planted false evidence to place the apparent time of the massacre in the summer of 1941 , when the German military had controlled the area . A preliminary report was issued by NKVD operatives Vsevolod <unk> and Sergei <unk> , dated 10 – 11 January 1944 , concluding that the Polish officers were shot by German soldiers . 
 In January 1944 , the Soviet Union sent another commission , the Extraordinary State Commission for ascertaining and investigating crimes perpetrated by the German @-@ Fascist invaders to the site ; the very name of the commission implied a predestined conclusion . It was headed by Nikolai Burdenko , the president of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences ( hence the commission is often known as the " Burdenko Commission " ) , who was appointed by Moscow to investigate the incident . Its members included prominent Soviet figures such as the writer Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy , but no foreign personnel were allowed to join the Commission . The Burdenko Commission exhumed the bodies , rejected the 1943 German findings that the Poles were shot by the Soviet army , assigned the guilt to the Nazis , and concluded that all the shootings were done by German occupation forces in autumn of 1941 . Despite a lack of evidence , it also blamed the Germans for shooting Russian prisoners of war used as labor to dig the pits . It is uncertain how many members of the commission were misled by the falsified reports and evidence , and how many actually suspected the truth . <unk> and <unk> note that the Commission had no choice but to issue findings in line with the <unk> @-@ <unk> report , and that Burdenko himself most likely was aware of the cover @-@ up . He reportedly admitted something like that to friends and family shortly before his death in 1946 . The Burdenko commission 's conclusions would be consistently cited by Soviet sources until the official admission of guilt by the Soviet government on 13 April 1990 . 
 In January 1944 , the Soviets also invited a group of more than a dozen mostly American and British journalists , accompanied by Kathleen Harriman , the daughter of the new American ambassador W. Averell Harriman , and John F. Melby , third secretary at the American embassy in Moscow , to Katyn . The inclusion of Melby and Harriman was regarded by some at the time as a Soviet attempt to lend official weight to their propaganda . Melby 's report noted the deficiencies in the Soviet case : problematic witnesses ; attempts to discourage questioning of the witnesses ; statements of the witnesses obviously being given as a result of rote memorization ; and that " the show was put on for the benefit of the correspondents " . Nevertheless , Melby , at the time , felt that on balance the Russian case was convincing . Harriman 's report reached the same conclusion and after the war both were asked to explain why their conclusions seemed to be at odds with their findings , with the suspicion that the conclusions were what the State Department wanted to hear . The journalists were less impressed and not totally convinced by the staged Soviet demonstration . 
 Some Western Communists propagated Soviet propaganda , e.g. , Alter Brody ( introduced by Corliss Lamont ) published a text Behind the Polish @-@ Soviet Break . 
 = = = Western response = = = 
 The growing Polish @-@ Soviet tension was beginning to strain Western @-@ Soviet relations at a time when the Poles ' importance to the Allies , significant in the first years of the war , was beginning to fade , due to the entry into the conflict of the military and industrial giants , the Soviet Union and the United States . In retrospective review of records , both British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt were increasingly torn between their commitments to their Polish ally and the demands by Stalin and his diplomats . 
 According to the Polish diplomat Edward Bernard Raczyński , Raczyński and General Sikorski met privately with Churchill and Alexander Cadogan on 15 April 1943 , and told them that the Poles had concrete proof that the Soviets were responsible for the massacre . Raczyński reports that Churchill , " without committing himself , showed by his manner that he had no doubt of it " . Churchill said that " The Bolsheviks can be very cruel " . However , at the same time , on 24 April 1943 , Churchill assured the Soviets : " We shall certainly oppose vigorously any ' investigation ' by the International Red Cross or any other body in any territory under German authority . Such investigation would be a fraud and its conclusions reached by terrorism " . Unofficial or classified UK documents concluded that Soviet guilt was a " near certainty " , but the alliance with the Soviets was deemed to be more important than moral issues ; thus the official version supported the Soviets , up to censoring any contradictory accounts . Churchill asked Owen O 'Malley to investigate the issue , but in a note to the Foreign Secretary he noted : " All this is merely to ascertain the facts , because we should none of us ever speak a word about it . " O 'Malley pointed out several inconsistencies and near impossibilities in the Soviet version . Later , Churchill sent a copy of the report to Roosevelt on 13 August 1943 . The report deconstructed the Soviet account of the massacre and alluded to the political consequences within a strongly moral framework but recognized there was no viable alternative to the existing policy . No comment by Roosevelt on the O 'Malley report has been found . Churchill 's own post @-@ war account of the Katyn affair gives little further insight . In his memoirs , he refers to the 1944 Soviet inquiry into the massacre , which found the Germans responsible , and adds , " belief seems an act of faith " . 
 At the beginning of 1944 , Ron Jeffery , an agent of British and Polish intelligence in occupied Poland , eluded the Abwehr and travelled to London with a report from Poland to the British government . His efforts were at first highly regarded , but subsequently ignored by the British , which a disillusioned Jeffery attributed to the treachery of Kim Philby and other high @-@ ranking communist agents entrenched in the British system . Jeffery tried to inform the British government about the Katyn massacre , but was as a result released from the Army . 
 In the United States a similar line was taken , notwithstanding two official intelligence reports into the Katyn massacre that contradicted the official position . In 1944 , Roosevelt assigned his special emissary to the Balkans , Navy Lieutenant Commander George Earle , to produce a report on Katyn . Earle concluded that the massacre was committed by the Soviet Union . Having consulted with Elmer Davis , director of the United States Office of War Information , Roosevelt rejected the conclusion ( officially ) , declared that he was convinced of Nazi Germany 's responsibility , and ordered that Earle 's report be suppressed . When Earle formally requested permission to publish his findings , the President issued a written order to desist . Earle was reassigned and spent the rest of the war in American Samoa . 
 A further report in 1945 , supporting the same conclusion , was produced and stifled . In 1943 , two U.S. POWs — Lt. Col. Donald B. Stewart and Col. John H. Van Vliet — had been taken by Germans to Katyn for an international news conference . Documents released by the National Archives and Records Administration in September 2012 revealed that Steward and Van Vliet sent coded messages to their American superiors indicating that they saw proof that implicated the Soviets . Three lines of evidence were cited . Firstly , the Polish corpses were in such an advanced state of decay that the Nazis could not have killed the Poles , as they had only taken over the area in 1941 . Secondly , none of the numerous Polish artifacts , such as letters , diaries , photographs and identification tags pulled from the graves , were dated later than the spring of 1940 . Most incriminating was the relatively good state of the men 's uniforms and boots , which showed that they had not lived long after being captured . Later , in 1945 , Van Vliet submitted a report concluding that the Soviets were responsible for the massacre . His superior , Major General Clayton Lawrence Bissell , General George Marshall 's assistant chief of staff for intelligence , destroyed the report . Washington kept the information secret , presumably to appease Stalin and not distract from the war against the Nazis . During the 1951 – 52 Congressional investigation into Katyn , Bissell defended his action before the United States Congress , arguing that it was not in the U.S. interest to antagonize an ally ( the USSR ) whose assistance was still needed against the Empire of Japan . In 1950 Van Vliet recreated his wartime report . In 2014 , a copy of Van Vliet 's 1945 deposition was discovered . 
 = = At the Nuremberg trials = = 
 From 28 December 1945 to 4 January 1946 , seven Wehrmacht servicemen were tried by a Soviet military court in Leningrad . One of them , Arno <unk> , who was charged with murdering numerous civilians using machine @-@ guns in Soviet villages , confessed to having taken part in burial ( though not the execution ) of 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 Polish POWs in Katyn . For this he was spared execution and was given 15 years of hard labor . His confession was full of absurdities , and thus he was not used as a Soviet prosecution witness during the Nuremberg trials . He later recanted his confession , claiming that he was forced to confess by the investigators . 
 At the London conference that drew up the indictments of German war crimes before the Nuremberg trials , the Soviet negotiators put forward the allegation , " In September 1941 , 925 Polish officers who were prisoners of war were killed in the Katyn Forest near Smolensk " . The U.S. negotiators agreed to include it , but were " embarrassed " by the inclusion ( noting that the allegation had been debated extensively in the press ) and concluded that it would be up to the Soviets to sustain it . At the trials in 1946 , Soviet General Roman <unk> raised the indictment , stating that " one of the most important criminal acts for which the major war criminals are responsible was the mass execution of Polish prisoners of war shot in the Katyn forest near Smolensk by the German fascist invaders " , but failed to make the case and the U.S. and British judges dismissed the charges . It was not the purpose of the court to determine whether Germany or the Soviet Union was responsible for the crime , but rather to attribute the crime to at least one of the defendants , which the court was unable to do . 
 = = Cold War views = = 
 In 1951 and 1952 , with the Korean War as a background , a congressional investigation chaired by Rep. Ray Madden and known as the Madden Committee investigated the Katyn massacre . It concluded that the Poles had been killed by the Soviet NKVD and recommended that the Soviets be tried before the International Court of Justice . However , the question of responsibility still remained controversial in the West as well as behind the Iron Curtain . In the United Kingdom in the late 1970s plans for a memorial to the victims bearing the date 1940 ( rather than 1941 ) were condemned as provocative in the political climate of the Cold War . It has also been alleged that the choice made in 1969 for the location of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic war memorial at the former Belarusian village named <unk> , the site of the 1943 <unk> massacre , was made to cause confusion with Katyn . The two names are similar or identical in many languages , and were often confused . 
 In Poland , the pro @-@ Soviet authorities covered up the matter in accordance with the official Soviet propaganda line , deliberately censoring any sources that might provide information about the crime . Katyn was a forbidden topic in postwar Poland . Censorship in the Polish People 's Republic was a massive undertaking and Katyn was specifically mentioned in the " Black Book of Censorship " used by the authorities to control the media and academia . Not only did government censorship suppress all references to it , but even mentioning the atrocity was dangerous . In the late 1970s , democracy groups like the Workers ' Defence Committee and the Flying University defied the censorship and discussed the massacre , in the face of arrests , beatings , detentions , and ostracism . In 1981 , Polish trade union Solidarity erected a memorial with the simple inscription " Katyn , 1940 " . It was confiscated by the police and replaced with an official monument with the inscription : " To the Polish soldiers — victims of <unk> fascism — reposing in the soil of Katyn " . Nevertheless , every year on the day of <unk> , similar memorial crosses were erected at Powązki Cemetery and numerous other places in Poland , only to be dismantled by the police . Katyn remained a political taboo in the Polish People 's Republic until the fall of the Eastern Bloc in 1989 . 
 In the Soviet Union during the 1950s , the head of KGB , Alexander Shelepin , proposed and carried out the destruction of many documents related to the Katyn massacre in order to minimize the chance that the truth would be revealed . His 3 March 1959 note to Nikita Khrushchev , with information about the execution of 21 @,@ 857 Poles and with the proposal to destroy their personal files , became one of the documents that were preserved and eventually made public . 
 = = Revelations = = 
 From the late 1980s on there was increasing pressure on both the Polish and Soviet governments to release documents related to the massacre . Polish academics tried to include Katyn in the agenda of the 1987 joint Polish @-@ Soviet commission to investigate censored episodes of the Polish @-@ Russian history . In 1989 , Soviet scholars revealed that Joseph Stalin had indeed ordered the massacre , and in 1990 Mikhail Gorbachev admitted that the NKVD had executed the Poles and confirmed two other burial sites similar to the site at Katyn : Mednoye and <unk> . 
 On 30 October 1989 , Gorbachev allowed a delegation of several hundred Poles , organized by the Polish association Families of Katyń Victims , to visit the Katyn memorial . This group included former U.S. national security advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski . A mass was held and banners hailing the Solidarity movement were laid . One mourner affixed a sign reading " NKVD " on the memorial , covering the word " Nazis " in the inscription such that it read " In memory of Polish officers murdered by the NKVD in 1941 . " Several visitors scaled the fence of a nearby KGB compound and left burning candles on the grounds . Brzezinski commented that : 
 It isn 't a personal pain which has brought me here , as is the case in the majority of these people , but rather recognition of the symbolic nature of Katyń . Russians and Poles , tortured to death , lie here together . It seems very important to me that the truth should be spoken about what took place , for only with the truth can the new Soviet leadership distance itself from the crimes of Stalin and the NKVD . Only the truth can serve as the basis of true friendship between the Soviet and the Polish peoples . The truth will make a path for itself . I am convinced of this by the very fact that I was able to travel here . 
 Brzezinski further stated that : 
 The fact that the Soviet government has enabled me to be here — and the Soviets know my views — is symbolic of the breach with Stalinism that perestroika represents . 
 His remarks were given extensive coverage on Soviet television . At the ceremony he placed a bouquet of red roses bearing a handwritten message penned in both Polish and English : " For the victims of Stalin and the NKVD . Zbigniew Brzezinski " . 
 On 13 April 1990 , the forty @-@ seventh anniversary of the discovery of the mass graves , the USSR formally expressed " profound regret " and admitted Soviet secret police responsibility . The day was declared a worldwide Katyn Memorial Day ( Polish : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Official investigations = = 
 In 1990 , Russian President Boris Yeltsin released the top @-@ secret documents from the sealed " Package № 1 . " and transferred them to the new Polish president Lech Wałęsa . Among the documents was a proposal by Lavrentiy Beria , dated 5 March 1940 , to execute 25 @,@ 700 Poles from Kozelsk , Ostashkov and Starobelsk camps , and from certain prisons of Western Ukraine and Belarus , signed by Stalin ( among others ) . Another document transferred to the Poles was Aleksandr Shelepin 's 3 March 1959 note to Nikita Khrushchev , with information about the execution of 21 @,@ 857 Poles , as well as a proposal to destroy their personal files to reduce the possibility that documents related to the massacre would be uncovered later . The revelations were also publicized in the Russian press , where they were interpreted as being one outcome of an ongoing power struggle between Yeltsin and Gorbachev . 
 In 1991 , the Chief Military Prosecutor for the Soviet Union began proceedings against P. K. Soprunenko for his role in the Katyn murders , but eventually declined to prosecute because Soprunenko was 83 , almost blind , and recovering from a cancer operation . During the interrogation , Soprunenko defended himself by denying his own signature . 
 During Kwaśniewski 's visit to Russia in September 2004 , Russian officials announced that they were willing to transfer all the information on the Katyn massacre to the Polish authorities as soon as it became declassified . In March 2005 the Prosecutor @-@ General ’ s Office of the Russian Federation concluded a decade @-@ long investigation of the massacre . Chief Military Prosecutor Alexander <unk> announced that the investigation was able to confirm the deaths of 1 @,@ 803 out of 14 @,@ 542 Polish citizens who had been sentenced to death while in three Soviet camps . He did not address the fate of about 7 @,@ 000 victims who had not been in POW camps , but in prisons . <unk> declared that the massacre was not a genocide , that Soviet officials who had been found guilty of the crime were dead and that , consequently , " there is absolutely no basis to talk about this in judicial terms " . 116 out of 183 volumes of files gathered during the Russian investigation were declared to contain state secrets and were classified . 
 On 22 March 2005 , the Polish Sejm unanimously passed an act requesting the Russian archives to be declassified . The Sejm also requested Russia to classify the Katyn massacre as a crime of genocide . The resolution stressed that the authorities of Russia " seek to diminish the burden of this crime by refusing to acknowledge it was genocide and refuse to give access to the records of the investigation into the issue , making it difficult to determine the whole truth about the murder and its perpetrators . " 
 In late 2007 and early 2008 , several Russian newspapers , including Rossiyskaya Gazeta , <unk> Pravda , and <unk> Gazeta printed stories that implicated the Nazis in the crime , spurring concern that this was done with the tacit approval of the Kremlin . As a result , the Polish Institute of National Remembrance decided to open its own investigation . 
 In 2008 , the Polish Foreign Ministry asked the government of Russia about alleged footage of the massacre filmed by the NKVD during the killings , something the Russians have denied exists . Polish officials believe that this footage , as well as further documents showing cooperation of Soviets with the Gestapo during the operations , are the reason for Russia 's decision to classify most of the documents about the massacre . 
 In the following years , 81 volumes of the case were declassified and transferred to the Polish government . As of 2012 , 35 out of 183 volumes of files remain classified . 
 = = Further court hearings = = 
 In June 2008 , Russian courts consented to hear a case about the declassification of documents about Katyn and the judicial rehabilitation of the victims . In an interview with a Polish newspaper , Vladimir Putin called Katyn a " political crime " . 
 On 21 April 2010 , the Russian Supreme Court ordered the Moscow City Court to hear an appeal in an ongoing Katyn legal case . A civil rights group , Memorial , said the ruling could lead to a court decision to open up secret documents providing details about the killings of thousands of Polish officers . On 8 May 2010 , Russia handed over to Poland 67 volumes of the " criminal case <unk> " , launched in the 1990s to investigate the Soviet @-@ era mass killings of Polish officers . The copies of 67 volumes , each having about 250 pages , were packed in six boxes . With each box weighing approximately 12 kg ( 26 @.@ 5 lb ) , the total weight of all the documents stood at about 70 kg ( 154 lb ) . Russian President Dmitry Medvedev handed one of the volumes to the acting Polish president , <unk> Komorowski . Medvedev and Komorowski agreed that the two states should continue their efforts in revealing the truth over the tragedy . The Russian president reiterated that Russia would continue declassifying documents on the Katyn massacre . The acting Polish president said that Russia 's move might lay a good foundation for improving bilateral relations . 
 In 2011 , the European Court of Human Rights declared admissible two complaints of relatives of the massacre victims against Russia concerning adequacy of the official investigation . In a ruling on 16 April 2012 , the court found that Russia had violated the rights of victims ' relatives by not providing them with sufficient information about the investigation and described the massacre as a " war crime " . However , it also refused to judge the effectiveness of the Soviet @-@ Russian investigation because the related events took place prior to Russia ratifying the Human Rights Convention in 1998 . The plaintiffs filed an appeal , however the 21 October 2013 ruling essentially reaffirmed the previous one , noting that Russian courts failed to adequately substantiate why some critical information remained classified . 
 = = Polish – Russian relations = = 
 Russia and Poland remained divided on the legal description of the Katyn crime . The Poles considered it a case of genocide and demanded further investigations , as well as complete disclosure of Soviet documents . 
 In June 1998 , Boris Yeltsin and Aleksander Kwaśniewski agreed to construct memorial complexes at Katyn and Mednoye , the two NKVD execution sites on Russian soil . In September of that year , the Russians also raised the issue of Soviet prisoner of war deaths in the camps for Russian prisoners and internees in Poland ( 1919 – 1924 ) . About 16 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 POWs died in those camps due to communicable diseases . Some Russian officials argued that it was " a genocide comparable to Katyn " . A similar claim was raised in 1994 ; such attempts are seen by some , particularly in Poland , as a highly provocative Russian attempt to create an " anti @-@ Katyn " and " balance the historical equation " . 
 On 4 February 2010 , the Prime Minister of Russia , Vladimir Putin , invited his Polish counterpart , Donald Tusk , to attend a Katyn memorial service in April . The visit took place on 7 April 2010 , when Tusk and Putin together commemorated the 70th anniversary of the massacre . Before the visit , the 2007 film Katyń was shown on Russian state television for the first time . The Moscow Times commented that the film 's premiere in Russia was likely a result of Putin 's intervention . 
 On 10 April 2010 , an aircraft carrying Polish President Lech Kaczyński with his wife and 87 other politicians and high @-@ ranking army officers crashed in Smolensk , killing all 96 aboard the aircraft . The passengers were to attend a ceremony marking the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre . The Polish nation was stunned ; Prime Minister Donald Tusk , who was not on the plane , referred to the crash as " the most tragic Polish event since the war . " In the aftermath , a number of conspiracy theories began to circulate . The catastrophe has also had major echoes in the international and particularly the Russian press , prompting a rebroadcast of Katyń on Russian television . The Polish President was to deliver a speech at the formal commemorations . The speech was to honour the victims , highlight the significance of the massacres in the context of post @-@ war communist political history , as well as stress the need for Polish – Russian relations to focus on reconciliation . Although the speech was never delivered , it has been published with a narration in the original Polish and a translation has also been made available in English . 
 In November 2010 , the State Duma ( lower house of the Russian parliament ) passed a resolution declaring that long @-@ classified documents " showed that the Katyn crime was carried out on direct orders of Stalin and other Soviet officials " . The declaration also called for the massacre to be investigated further in order to confirm the list of victims . Members of the Duma from the Communist Party denied that the Soviet Union had been to blame for the Katyn massacre and voted against the declaration . On 6 December 2010 , Russian President Dmitry Medvedev expressed commitment to uncovering the whole truth about the massacre , stating " Russia has recently taken a number of unprecedented steps towards clearing up the legacy of the past . We will continue in this direction " . 
 Still , the Communist Party of the Russian Federation , as well as a number of other pro @-@ Soviet Russian politicians and commentators , continue to deny all Soviet guilt , call the released documents fakes , insist that the original Soviet version — Polish prisoners were shot by Germans in August 1941 — is the correct one , and call on the Russian government to start a new investigation that would revise the findings of the one concluded in 2004 . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Many monuments and memorials that commemorate the massacre have been erected worldwide . 
 There are several Katyn memorials in the UK , the best known of which was unveiled on 18 September 1976 at Gunnersbury Cemetery in London , amid considerable controversy . During the period of the Cold War , successive British governments objected to plans by the UK 's Polish community to build a major monument to commemorate the massacre . The Soviet Union did not want Katyn to be remembered , and put pressure on Britain to prevent the creation of the monument . As a result , the construction of the monument was delayed for many years . After the local community had finally secured the right to build the monument , no official government representative was present at the opening ceremony ( although some politicians did attend the event unofficially ) . 
 Another memorial in the UK was erected three years later , in 1979 , in Cannock Chase , Staffordshire . A memorial tablet by Ronald Sims has also been installed in the Airmen ’ s Chapel within Southwell Minster in Nottinghamshire ( there is a large Polish community in the county and each year a service is held to remember the massacre ) . There is also a Katyn memorial in Manchester 's Southern Cemetery . 
 In 2000 , the memorial at the Katyn war cemetery was opened in Russia . Previously , the site featured a monument with a false dedication to the " victims of the <unk> " . 
 In Ukraine , a memorial complex was erected to honor the over 4300 officer victims of the Katyń massacre murdered in <unk> , 14 kilometres / 8 @.@ 7 miles north of Kharkiv in Ukraine ; the complex lies in a corner of a former resort home for NKVD officers . Children had discovered hundreds of Polish officer buttons whilst playing on the site . 
 In Canada , a large metal sculpture has been erected in the Polish community of <unk> in Toronto , to commemorate the killings . 
 In South Africa , a memorial in Johannesburg commemorates the victims of Katyn , as well as South African and Polish airmen who flew missions from southern Italy to Poland in order to drop supplies over Warsaw during the Warsaw Uprising . 
 In the United States , a golden statue known as the National Katyn Massacre Memorial is located in Baltimore , Maryland , on <unk> Street at Inner Harbor East . Polish @-@ Americans in Detroit erected a small white @-@ stone memorial in the form of a cross with a plaque at the St. Albertus Roman Catholic Church . A statue , the Katyń Memorial , commemorating the massacre has also been erected at Exchange Place on the Hudson River in Jersey City , New Jersey . Other memorial statues are located in Doylestown , Pennsylvania and Niles , Illinois . 
 Many cities in Poland now have memorials to the massacre in public spaces as well as within churches and cemeteries . For example , in Wrocław , a composition by Polish sculptor Tadeusz <unk> is dedicated to the Katyn victims . Unveiled in 2000 , it is located in a park east of the city 's centre , near the Racławice Panorama building . It shows the ' Matron of the Homeland ' despairing over a dead soldier , while on a higher plinth the angel of death looms over , leaning forward on a sword . 
 = = In art , entertainment , and media = = 
 The Katyn massacre is a major element in many works of film , the fine arts , literature , and music . 
 The 1999 Academy Honorary Award recipient , Polish film director Andrzej Wajda , whose father , Captain Jakub Wajda , was murdered in the NKVD prison of Kharkiv , made a film depicting the event , Katyn ( 1999 ) . It focuses on the fate of some of the mothers , wives and daughters of the Polish officers killed by the Soviets . Some of the Katyn Forest executions were re @-@ enacted . The screenplay is based on Andrzej <unk> 's book Post mortem — the Katyn story . The film was produced by <unk> Studio , and released in Poland on 21 September 2007 . It was nominated for an Academy Award in 2008 for the Best Foreign Language Film . 
 U.S. filmmaker Steven Fischer produced a public service announcement titled Silence of Falling Leaves ( 2000 ) honoring the fallen soldiers , consisting of images of falling autumn leaves with a sound track cutting to a narration in Polish by the Warsaw @-@ born artist <unk> <unk> . It was honored with an Emmy nomination . 
 The Polish composer Andrzej Panufnik wrote an orchestral score , called Katyn Epitaph ( 1967 ) , in memory of the massacre . The work received its premiere on 17 November 1968 . 
 Nancy Van de <unk> 's Katyń ( 1989 ) is a piece composed for chorus and large orchestra in 1989 . 
 Polish poet Jacek Kaczmarski has dedicated one of his sung poems to this event . 
 British historian Laurence Rees produced a six @-@ hour BBC / PBS television documentary series entitled World War II Behind Closed Doors : Stalin , the Nazis and the West ( 2008 ) . The Katyn massacre was a central theme of the series . 
 = The Chumscrubber = 
 The Chumscrubber is a 2005 American @-@ German comedy @-@ drama film , directed by Arie Posin , starring an ensemble cast led by Jamie Bell . The plot , written by Posin and Zac Stanford , focuses on the chain of events that follow the suicide of a teenage drug dealer in an idealistic but superficial town . Some of the themes addressed in the film are the lack of communication between teenagers and their parents and the inauthenticity of suburbia . The titular Chumscrubber is a character in a fictional video game that represents the town and its inhabitants . 
 Posin and Stanford had originally planned to shoot the film using their own funds , but they sent the script to producers Lawrence Bender and Bonnie Curtis who agreed to produce the film and help to raise the budget . Bell was cast in the lead role after an extensive auditioning process , and the film was shot in various California locations over 30 days in April 2004 . 
 The Chumscrubber premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 25 , 2005 and was released theatrically on August 26 , 2005 . An accompanying soundtrack , composed mostly by James Horner , was released on October 18 , 2005 . The film was both a critical and commercial failure , receiving mostly negative reviews and earning back only US $ 350 @,@ 000 of its $ 10 million budget . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Troy Johnson ( Josh Janowicz ) , the supplier of prescription drugs to fellow high school students in the fictional southern California town of Hillside , commits suicide . Troy 's best friend Dean Stiffle ( Jamie Bell ) , is prescribed more antidepressants by his psychiatrist father Bill ( William Fichtner ) after discovering the body . When Dean returns to school , he is antagonized by drug dealers Billy ( Justin Chatwin ) and Lee ( Lou Taylor Pucci ) , who were supplied by Troy . Their friend , Crystal Falls ( Camilla Belle ) , flirts with Dean , but he soon realizes that her true intentions are for Dean to retrieve the remaining drugs in Troy 's home and refuses to cooperate . To force Dean to procure the drugs , Billy and Lee plan to kidnap Dean 's brother , Charlie ( Rory Culkin ) , as a ransom , but they end up kidnapping another boy named Charlie Bratley ( Thomas Curtis ) instead . 
 The kidnappers hold Charlie Bratley – whose parents are unaware that he is missing – overnight at Crystal 's home . Dean eventually agrees to go to Troy 's house to find the drugs . Upon delivery , Billy discovers that the bag doesn 't contain the prescription drugs and starts a fight with Dean , leading to Dean 's arrest . While trying to explain everything to Officer Lou Bratley ( John Heard ) , Charlie 's father , Dean reveals that his brother Charlie replaced the drugs with a bag of the vitamins that their mother Allie ( Allison Janney ) sells . Neither Officer Bratley nor Dean 's father believes his story , but he is released , whereupon his father increases his dosage of antidepressants . Meanwhile , Charlie Stiffle crushes the real drugs and puts them into a casserole that his mother made for Troy 's memorial . 
 The next day is Troy 's memorial service and the wedding of Mayor Michael Ebbs ( Ralph Fiennes ) to Charlie Bratley 's mother Terri ( Rita Wilson ) . Lou finally realizes that his son actually has been kidnapped and heads out to look for him . Now at Lee 's house , Crystal asks Lee to help stop the kidnapping scheme , but he does not comply . Crystal goes to Dean 's house for help , where she finds him hallucinating about Troy 's death and finally expressing his grief . Meanwhile , a paranoid Lou , encouraged by Billy , tries to kill Charlie Bratley to avoid being caught , but Charlie fights back and slices the knife through Billy 's eye . Billy runs out into the street , screaming in pain , and is hit by Lou 's police car . 
 Dean attends Troy 's memorial , where all of the visitors are intoxicated by the drugs that are in his mother 's casserole . Troy 's mother , Carrie ( Glenn Close ) , discloses to Dean that she never knew her son . Dean tells her about Troy and acknowledges that they were best friends , and she thanks him . Billy is later sent to prison . Lee , who successfully changes the narrative of his involvement during the trial , is acquitted . A closing voice over explains that Dean and Crystal " escape together " , and they are shown kissing . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jamie Bell as Dean Stiffle , a teenage outsider and the film 's protagonist . He refuses to face his grief over his best friend 's suicide , instead choosing to numb his feelings with drugs . 
 Camilla Belle as Crystal Falls , Dean 's rebellious classmate . Unlike her friends , she feels sympathy for Dean and is reluctant to partake in the plans to kidnap his brother . 
 Justin Chatwin as Billy , a drug dealer at Dean 's high school who was formerly supplied by Troy . He dreams to join the air force after graduation , but his fight with Charlie Bratley leaves him with impaired vision . 
 Glenn Close as Carrie Johnson , Troy 's devastated mother . She tries to mask her grief with a cheerful persona , and continually guilts her neighbors by telling them bluntly that she does not blame them for Troy 's death . 
 Rory Culkin as Charlie Stiffle , Dean 's younger brother . He spends most of his time on the family couch playing video games . 
 Thomas Curtis as Charlie Bratley , the 13 @-@ year @-@ old son of Officer Lou Bratley and his ex @-@ wife Terri . Having been largely ignored by his negligent mother , at the end of the film he is sent to live with Lou . 
 William Fichtner as Bill Stiffle , Dean 's psychiatrist father who uses Dean as the subject of his books . Though he spends his life always looking for potential new material , his book sales turn out to be disappointing . 
 Ralph Fiennes as Michael Ebbs , the mayor of Hillside and Terri Bratley 's fiancé . After suffering a head injury and spilling paint in the shape of a dolphin , he becomes infatuated with dolphins and paints them all over his house ; at the end of the film , he resigns from politics and becomes an artist . 
 John Heard as Lou Bratley , a police officer and Charlie Bratley 's father . He cannot let go of his previous marriage with Terri , and finds satisfaction in giving her copious parking tickets . 
 Allison Janney as Allie Stiffle , Dean 's overworked mother . She initially struggles to sell her <unk> vitamins , but by the end of the film , she has found success and <unk> has become something of a cult . 
 Josh Janowicz as Troy Johnson , Dean 's best friend and the supplier of prescription drugs to the student body at his high school . After his suicide , he appears frequently in Dean 's hallucinations . 
 Carrie @-@ Anne Moss as Jerri Falls , Crystal 's laidback mother . She is obsessed with Terri Bratley 's interior design work , but cannot catch her attention until she tells Terri that her son was at Jerri 's house . 
 Lou Taylor Pucci as Lee Parker , Billy 's smart but timid friend who often succumbs to peer pressure . His parents pressure him about his schoolwork , hoping for him to get into a good college . 
 Rita Wilson as Terri Bratley , a successful interior designer and Charlie 's mother . She grows increasingly frustrated and demanding as her wedding to Michael approaches , and by the end of the film her design efforts have become less fruitful . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The title of the film refers to a video game character , " The Chumscrubber " , who helps his friends to survive in a superficial world by keeping things authentic , and is portrayed as a post @-@ apocalyptic hero , carrying his severed head in his hand as he fights the forces of evil . The Chumscrubber 's world was intended to be a reflection of the Hillside community , shown by the repetition of characters ' lines in the video game ; a voice in the game yells " Kill him ! Stab him ! Get him again ! " , the exact line said by Billy to Lee at the end of the film , urging him to stab Charlie Bratley . Producer Bonnie Curtis described the character as " this sub @-@ human monster the kids feel they are becoming " . Posin commented that " the Chumscrubber is everything that that community has suppressed or denied or tried to ignore , and [ ... ] the idea that the collective denial of the community as a whole finally gives birth to a character that will not be ignored " . 
 Posin stated that one theme of the film is that " the adults in this world tend to be immature or childish and the kids tend to be very mature and adult and sophisticated for their age " . He shot the teenage characters slightly below eye level to create the impression of looking up at an adult , and shot the adults slightly above eye level as if the viewer were looking down at a child . He said that hypocrisy was " at the top of the list " of the themes he wanted to explore in the story . While all of the adults in the film are attempting to live perfect lives , they cannot see that their children are driven to suicide , antidepressant addiction and kidnapping – for instance , Terri is so obsessed with her upcoming wedding that she does not realize her son is missing . 
 The film features dolphins as a recurring motif . Michael forms an obsession with dolphins and paints them all over his house , the street plan of Hillside is shown to form the shape of a dolphin at the end of the film . Nathan Baran of Hybrid Magazine was frustrated by the lack of explanation of the motif , saying : " Never are dolphins discussed by anyone else to have any meaning whatsoever . [ ... ] What is the significance of the dolphin as an image ? [ ... ] it is a completely arbitrary image awkwardly stuffed with forced meaning " . Posin saw Hillside 's formation of a dolphin shape as " beauty and order to the chaos " , illustrating Michael 's belief in deep beauty where everybody else finds chaos . 
 = = Production = = 
 While working at a Hollywood talent agency Arie Posin had been writing scripts for 10 years , " trying to break in [ to ] " the film industry , when he decided that he would rather be a director than a screenwriter . Posin asked writer Zac Stanford to write the screenplay for The Chumscrubber based on his idea . Because they collaborated on the story , Posin later described the film as " rooted somewhere between " his own memories of growing up in suburban Irvine , CA and Stanford 's upbringing in a small town in the Pacific Northwest . Posin and Stanford had originally planned to shoot the film with their own money . Posin 's girlfriend suggested that he send the script to five producers ; one , Lawrence Bender , responded and passed the script on to his partner Bonnie Curtis . Posin and the producers brought the project to around sixty uninterested production companies before sufficient funds for the US $ 10 million budget were raised and production began . 
 Posin considered numerous other actors for the lead role of Dean before he decided to cast Jamie Bell . Auditions for the role spanned over a year , and Posin said that he met " probably every young actor in Hollywood between a certain age " . For the role of Crystal , Posin sought a beautiful but fragile actress . He chose Camilla Belle after she auditioned , and according to him , " She just was the character " . Posin wanted an actor similar to Ralph Fiennes to play Michael , but was surprised when Fiennes himself agreed to be in the film . Justin Chatwin , a Billy Wilder fan , was drawn to the script after hearing that Posin had trained with Wilder . Ben Kingsley and Robin Williams were set to star in the film at different points in pre @-@ production . 
 Principal photography of The Chumscrubber began in April 2004 and lasted for 30 days . Filming locations included Los Angeles and Santa Clarita in California , as well as two soundstages . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Chumscrubber premiered on January 25 , 2005 at the Sundance Film Festival . It went on to be shown at the 27th Moscow International Film Festival in June 2005 , where it won the Audience Award . The film was released theatrically in the United States on August 5 , 2005 , playing in 28 theaters . It earned US $ 28 @,@ 548 on its opening weekend , ranking 59th at the box office . It closed after two weeks in release with a total domestic gross of $ 52 @,@ 597 . The film 's highest @-@ grossing overseas releases were in Australia with $ 96 @,@ 696 , Germany with $ 81 @,@ 323 , and Greece with $ 71 @,@ 100 . It earned only £ 36 from its single @-@ weekend release in the United Kingdom , meaning that only six people paid for a ticket to see the film . With a total foreign gross of $ 298 @,@ 804 , the film 's total worldwide gross was $ 351 @,@ 401 and was a box office bomb . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Chumscrubber received mostly negative reviews from critics and has a " rotten " score of 35 % on Rotten tomatoes based on 60 reviews with an average rating of 4 @.@ 9 out of 10 . The critical consensus states " This derivative poke at suburbia falls short of delivering a scathing indictment of upper middle @-@ class disconnect . " The film also has a score of 41 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 12 critics indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 1 star out of 5 , describing it as " an appallingly clumsy and stupid take on drugs , kidnapping and suicide in suburbia " . A. O. Scott expressed similar sentiments in The New York Times , calling the film " dreadful " and criticizing its unoriginality . Variety 's Scott Foundas also wrote that the film " doesn 't have an original bone in its body or a compelling thought in its head " and called it " insufferable " , " self @-@ conscious " and " smug " . Olly Richards of Empire gave the film 2 stars out of 5 and described it as " a tragic waste of acting talent , with nothing new to say . " The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps praised Posin 's technical direction and the cast 's acting skills , but found that the film still fell " flat on its face " . 
 The film was more warmly received by David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor , who described it as " dreamily surreal , acutely intelligent , and strikingly tough @-@ minded " and called it a " stunning directorial debut " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD in Region 1 on January 10 , 2006 . The special features included on the disc are an audio commentary from Arie Posin , a 12 @-@ minute " making @-@ of " featurette , and 10 deleted and extended scenes . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's original score was composed by James Horner . Though Horner 's previous work comprised mostly high @-@ budget studio films – including Titanic ( 1997 ) , Braveheart ( 1995 ) , The Mask of Zorro ( 1998 ) , and Apollo 13 ( 1995 ) – producer Bonnie Curtis approached him to score The Chumscrubber because " You never know until you ask . " Horner agreed after seeing an early cut of the film . He and Posin spent five days on a soundstage , experimenting with different musical arrangements . Posin described the final product as " dramatic with a wink and a smile to it " . 
 " Our House " – Phantom Planet 
 " Bridge to Nowhere " – The Like 
 " Run " – Snow Patrol 
 " Pure Morning " – Placebo 
 " Oblivion " – <unk> 
 " Spreading Happiness All Around " – James Horner 
 " Kidnapping the Wrong Charlie " – James Horner 
 " Dolphins " – James Horner 
 " Pot Casserole " – James Horner 
 " Digging Montage " – James Horner 
 " Parental Rift / The Chumscrubber " – James Horner 
 " Not Fun Anymore ... " – James Horner 
 " A Confluence of Families " – James Horner 
 " The End " – James Horner 
 = Conte di Cavour @-@ class battleship = 
 The Conte di Cavour – class battleships were a group of three dreadnoughts built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the 1910s . The ships were completed during World War I , but none saw action before the end of hostilities . Leonardo da Vinci was sunk by a magazine explosion in 1916 and sold for scrap in 1923 . The two surviving ships , Conte di Cavour and Giulio Cesare , supported operations during the Corfu Incident in 1923 . They were extensively reconstructed between 1933 and 1937 with more powerful guns , additional armor and considerably more speed than before . 
 Both ships participated in the Battle of Calabria in July 1940 , when Giulio Cesare was lightly damaged . They were both present when British torpedo bombers attacked the fleet at Taranto in November 1940 , and Conte di Cavour was torpedoed . She was grounded with most of her hull underwater and her repairs were not completed before the Italian surrender in September 1943 . Conte di Cavour was scrapped in 1946 . Giulio Cesare escorted several convoys , and participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento in late 1940 and the First Battle of Sirte in late 1941 . She was designated as a training ship in early 1942 , and escaped to Malta after Italy surrendered . The ship was transferred to the Soviet Union in 1949 and renamed Novorossiysk . The Soviets also used her for training until she was sunk when a mine exploded in 1955 . She was scrapped in 1957 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Conte di Cavour – class ships were designed by Rear Admiral Engineer Edoardo Masdea , Chief Constructor of the Regia Marina , and were ordered in response to French plans to build the Courbet @-@ class battleships . They were intended to be superior to the Courbets and to remedy Dante Alighieri 's perceived flaws of weak protection and armament . As upgrading a warship 's protection and armament on a similar displacement typically requires a loss in speed , the ships were not designed to reach the 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) of their predecessor . They were still given a 1 @.@ 5 to 2 knots ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 3 mph ) advantage over the 20 @-@ to @-@ 21 @-@ knot ( 37 to 39 km / h ; 23 to 24 mph ) standard of most foreign dreadnoughts . Foreign dreadnoughts were being designed with 340 @-@ millimeter ( 13 @.@ 5 in ) guns , but the Regia Marina was forced to use 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 in ) guns in the Conte di <unk> because Italy lacked the ability to build larger guns . An additional gun , making a total of 13 , was added to offset this deficiency . 
 Taking advantage of the lengthy building times of these ships , other countries were able to build dreadnoughts that were superior in protection and armament , with the exception of the French . Construction was delayed by late deliveries of the 305 @-@ millimeter guns and armor plates as well as shortages of labor . The Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 diverted workers at the shipyards for repairs and maintenance of the ships participating in the war . The Italians imported the raw nickel steel for their armor from America and Britain and processed it into their equivalent of Krupp cemented armor , called Terni cemented , but there were problems with this process and suitable plates took longer to produce than planned . 
 = = = Basic characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Conte di Cavour class were 168 @.@ 9 meters ( 554 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline , and 176 meters ( 577 ft 5 in ) overall . They had a beam of 28 meters ( 91 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 9 @.@ 3 meters ( 30 ft 6 in ) . They displaced 23 @,@ 088 long tons ( 23 @,@ 458 t ) at normal load , and 25 @,@ 086 long tons ( 25 @,@ 489 t ) at deep load . The Conte di Cavour class was provided with a complete double bottom and their hulls were subdivided by 23 longitudinal and transverse bulkheads . The ships had two rudders , both on the centerline . They had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The original machinery for all three ships consisted of three Parsons steam turbine sets , arranged in three engine rooms . The center engine room housed one set of turbines that drove the two inner propeller shafts . It was flanked by compartments on either side , each housing one turbine set which powered the outer shafts . Steam for the turbines was provided by 20 Blechynden water @-@ tube boilers in Conte di Cavour and Leonardo da Vinci , eight of which burned oil and twelve of which burned both oil and coal . Giulio Cesare used a dozen each oil @-@ fired and mixed @-@ firing Babcock & Wilcox boilers . Designed to reach a maximum speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) , none of the ships reached this goal on their sea trials , despite generally exceeding the rated power of their turbines . They only achieved speeds ranging from 21 @.@ 56 to 22 @.@ 2 knots ( 39 @.@ 93 to 41 @.@ 11 km / h ; 24 @.@ 81 to 25 @.@ 55 mph ) using 30 @,@ 700 to 32 @,@ 800 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 900 to 24 @,@ 500 kW ) . The ships could store a maximum of 1 @,@ 450 long tons ( 1 @,@ 470 t ) of coal and 850 long tons ( 860 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , and 1 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) at 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . Each ship was equipped with three turbo generators that provided a total of 150 kilowatts at 110 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 As built , the ships ' main armament comprised thirteen 46 @-@ caliber 305 @-@ millimeter guns , designed by Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers , in five gun turrets . The turrets were all on the centerline , with a twin @-@ gun turret superfiring over a triple @-@ gun turret in fore and aft pairs , and a third triple turret amidships , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' Q ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from bow to stern . This was only one fewer gun than the Brazilian Rio de Janeiro , then the most heavily armed battleship in the world ; Rio de Janeiro 's guns were mounted in seven twin @-@ gun turrets . The turrets had an elevation capability of − 5 ° to + 20 degrees and the ships could carry 100 rounds for each gun , although 70 was the normal load . Sources disagree regarding these guns ' performance , but naval historian Giorgio Giorgerini claims that they fired 452 @-@ kilogram ( 996 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles at the rate of one round per minute and that they had a muzzle velocity of 840 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) which gave a maximum range of 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) . The turrets had hydraulic training and elevation , with an auxiliary electric system . 
 The secondary armament on the first two ships consisted of eighteen 50 @-@ caliber 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns , also designed by Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull . These guns could depress to − 10 degrees and had a maximum elevation of + 15 degrees ; they had a rate of fire of six shots per minute . They could fire a 22 @.@ 1 @-@ kilogram ( 49 lb ) high @-@ explosive projectile with a muzzle velocity of 850 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 11 @,@ 000 meters ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) . The ships carried a total of 3 @,@ 600 rounds for them . For defense against torpedo boats , the ships carried fourteen 50 @-@ caliber 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns ; thirteen of these could be mounted on the turret tops , but they could be mounted in 30 different positions , including some on the forecastle and upper decks . These guns had the same range of elevation as the secondary guns , and their rate of fire was higher at 10 rounds per minute . They fired a 6 @-@ kilogram ( 13 lb ) AP projectile with a muzzle velocity of 815 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 670 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 9 @,@ 100 meters ( 10 @,@ 000 yd ) . The ships were also fitted with three submerged 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside and the third in the stern . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Conte di Cavour @-@ class ships had a complete waterline armor belt that was 2 @.@ 8 meters ( 9 ft 2 in ) high ; 1 @.@ 6 meters ( 5 ft 3 in ) of this was below the waterline and 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 3 ft 11 in ) above . It had a maximum thickness of 250 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) amidships , reducing to 130 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) towards the stern and 80 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow . The lower edge of this belt was a uniform 170 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) in thickness . Above the main belt was a strake of armor 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick that extended 2 @.@ 3 meters ( 7 ft 7 in ) up to the lower edge of the main deck . Above this strake was a thinner one , 130 millimeters thick , that extended 138 meters ( 452 ft 9 in ) from the bow to ' X ' turret . The upper strake of armor protected the casemates and was 110 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) thick . The ships had two armored decks : the main deck was 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) thick in two layers on the flat that increased to 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) on the slopes that connected it to the main belt . The second deck was 30 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , also in two layers . Fore and aft transverse bulkheads connected the armored belt to the decks . 
 The frontal armor of the gun turrets was 280 millimeters ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness with 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick sides , and an 85 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) roof and rear . Their barbettes also had 230 @-@ millimeter armor above the forecastle deck that reduced to 180 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) between the forecastle and upper decks and 130 millimeters below the upper deck . The forward conning tower had walls 280 millimeters thick ; those of the aft conning tower were 180 millimeters thick . The total weight of the protective armor was 5 @,@ 150 long tons ( 5 @,@ 230 t ) , just over 25 per cent of the ships ' designed displacement . The total weight of the entire protective system was 6 @,@ 122 long tons ( 6 @,@ 220 t ) , 30 @.@ 2 per cent of their intended displacement . 
 = = Modifications and reconstruction = = 
 Shortly after the end of World War I , the number of 50 @-@ caliber 76 mm guns was reduced to 13 , all mounted on the turret tops , and six new 40 @-@ caliber 76 @-@ millimeter anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were installed abreast the aft funnel . In addition two license @-@ built 2 @-@ pounder AA guns were mounted on the forecastle deck abreast ' B ' turret . In 1925 – 26 the foremast was replaced by a tetrapodal mast , which was moved forward of the funnels , the rangefinders were upgraded , and the ships were equipped to handle a Macchi M.18 seaplane mounted on the center turret . Around that same time , one or both of the ships was equipped with a fixed aircraft catapult on the port side of the forecastle . 
 The sisters began an extensive reconstruction program directed by Vice Admiral ( Generale del Genio navale ) Francesco <unk> in October 1933 . This lasted until June 1937 for Conte di Cavour and October 1937 for Giulio Cesare , and resulted in several changes . A new bow section was grafted over the existing bow which increased their length by 10 @.@ 31 meters ( 33 ft 10 in ) to 186 @.@ 4 meters ( 611 ft 7 in ) and their beam increased to 28 @.@ 6 meters ( 93 ft 10 in ) . Their draft at deep load increased to 10 @.@ 02 meters ( 32 ft 10 in ) for Conte di Cavour and 10 @.@ 42 meters ( 34 ft 2 in ) for Giulio Cesare . All of the changes made during their reconstruction increased their displacement to 26 @,@ 140 long tons ( 26 @,@ 560 t ) at standard load and 29 @,@ 100 long tons ( 29 @,@ 600 t ) at deep load . The ships ' crews increased to 1 @,@ 260 officers and enlisted men . Only 40 % of the original ship 's structure remained after the reconstruction was completed . Two of the propeller shafts were removed and the existing turbines were replaced by two Belluzzo geared steam turbines rated at 75 @,@ 000 shp ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) . The boilers were replaced by eight superheated Yarrow boilers with a working pressure of 22 atm ( 2 @,@ 229 kPa ; 323 psi ) . On her sea trials in December 1936 , before her reconstruction was fully completed , Giulio Cesare reached a speed of 28 @.@ 24 knots ( 52 @.@ 30 km / h ; 32 @.@ 50 mph ) from 93 @,@ 430 shp ( 69 @,@ 670 kW ) . In service their maximum speed was about 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . The ships now carried 2 @,@ 550 – 2 @,@ 605 long tons ( 2 @,@ 591 – 2 @,@ 647 t ) of fuel oil which provided them with a range of 6 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 900 km ; 7 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . 
 The center turret and the torpedo tubes were removed and all of the existing secondary armament and AA guns were replaced by a dozen 120 @-@ millimeter guns in six twin @-@ gun turrets and eight 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) AA guns in twin turrets . In addition the ships were fitted with a dozen 54 @-@ caliber Breda 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) light AA guns in six twin @-@ gun mounts and twelve 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) Breda M31 anti @-@ aircraft machine guns , also in twin mounts . The 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns were bored out to 320 millimeters ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) and their turrets were modified to use electric power , a fixed loading angle of + 12 degrees , and the guns could now elevate to + 27 degrees . The 320 mm AP shells weighed 525 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 157 lb ) and had a maximum range of 28 @,@ 600 meters ( 31 @,@ 300 yd ) with a muzzle velocity of 830 m / s ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . In 1940 the 13 @.@ 2 mm machine guns were replaced by 65 @-@ caliber 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) AA guns in twin mounts . Giulio Cesare received two more twin mounts as well as four additional 37 mm guns in twin mounts on the forecastle between the two turrets in 1941 . The tetrapodal mast was replaced with a new forward conning tower , protected with 260 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) thick armor . Atop the conning tower there was a director fitted with two rangefinders , with a base length of 7 @.@ 2 meters ( 23 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 The deck armor was increased during reconstruction to a total of 135 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) over the engine and boiler rooms and 166 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) over the magazines , although its distribution over three decks , each with multiple layers , meant that it was considerably less effective than a single plate of the same thickness . The armor protecting the barbettes was reinforced with 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) plates . All this armor weighed a total of 3 @,@ 227 long tons ( 3 @,@ 279 t ) . 
 The existing underwater protection was replaced by the Pugliese system that consisted of a large cylinder surrounded by fuel oil or water that was intended to absorb the blast of a torpedo warhead . It lacked enough depth to be fully effective against contemporary torpedoes . A major problem of the reconstruction was that the ships ' increased draft meant that their waterline armor belt was almost completely submerged with any significant load . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Conte di Cavour and Giulio Cesare served as flagships in the southern Adriatic Sea during World War I , but saw no action and spent little time at sea . Leonardo da Vinci was also little used and was sunk by an internal magazine explosion at Taranto harbor on the night of 2 / 3 August 1916 while loading ammunition . Casualties included 21 officers and 227 enlisted men killed . The Italians blamed Austro @-@ Hungarian saboteurs , but unstable propellant may well have been responsible . The ship was refloated , upside down , on 17 September 1919 and righted on 24 January 1921 . The Regia Marina planned to modernize her by replacing her center turret with six 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) AA guns , but lacked the funds to do so and sold her for scrap on 22 March 1923 . 
 In 1919 , Conte di Cavour sailed to North America and visited ports in the United States as well as Halifax , Canada . Giulio Cesare made port visits in the Levant in 1919 and 1920 . Conte di Cavour was mostly inactive in 1921 because of personnel shortages and was refitted at La Spezia from November to March 1922 . Both battleships supported Italian operations on Corfu in 1923 after an Italian general and his staff were murdered on the Greco @-@ Albanian border ; Benito Mussolini was not satisfied with the Greek Government 's response so he ordered Italian troops to occupy the island . Conte di Cavour bombarded the town with her 76 mm guns , killing 20 and wounding 32 civilians . 
 Conte di Cavour escorted King Victor Emmanuel III and his wife aboard Dante Alighieri , on a state visit to Spain in 1924 and was placed in reserve upon her return until 1926 , when she conveyed Mussolini on a voyage to Libya . The ship was again placed in reserve from 1927 until 1933 . Her sister became a gunnery training ship in 1928 , after having been in reserve since 1926 . Conte di Cavour was reconstructed at the CRDA Trieste Yard while Giulio Cesare was rebuilt at Cantieri del Tirreno , Genoa between 1933 and 1937 . Both ships participated in a naval review by Adolf Hitler in the Bay of Naples in May 1938 and covered the invasion of Albania in May 1939 . 
 Early in World War II , the sisters took part in the Battle of Calabria ( also known as the Battle of Punta Stilo ) on 9 July 1940 , as part of the 1st Battle Squadron , commanded by Admiral Inigo Campioni , during which they engaged major elements of the British Mediterranean Fleet . The British were escorting a convoy from Malta to Alexandria , while the Italians had finished escorting another from Naples to Benghazi , Libya . Admiral Andrew Cunningham , commander of the Mediterranean Fleet , attempted to interpose his ships between the Italians and their base at Taranto . Crew on the fleets spotted each other in the middle of the afternoon and the Italian battleships opened fire at 15 : 53 at a range of nearly 27 @,@ 000 meters ( 29 @,@ 000 yd ) . The two leading British battleships , HMS Warspite and Malaya , replied a minute later . Three minutes after she opened fire , shells from Giulio Cesare began to straddle Warspite which made a small turn and increased speed , to throw off the Italian ship 's aim , at 16 : 00 . At that same time , a shell from Warspite struck Giulio Cesare at a distance of about 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) . The shell pierced the rear funnel and detonated inside it , blowing out a hole nearly 6 @.@ 1 meters ( 20 ft ) across . Fragments started several fires and their smoke was drawn into the boiler rooms , forcing four boilers off @-@ line as their operators could not breathe . This reduced the ship 's speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Uncertain how severe the damage was , Campioni ordered his battleships to turn away in the face of superior British numbers and they successfully disengaged . Repairs to Giulio Cesare were completed by the end of August and both ships unsuccessfully attempted to intercept British convoys to Malta in August and September . 
 On the night of 11 November 1940 , Conte di Cavour and Giulio Cesare were at anchor in Taranto harbor when they were attacked by 21 Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers from the British aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious , along with several other warships . One torpedo exploded underneath ' B ' turret at 23 : 15 , and her captain requested tugboats to help ground the ship on a nearby 12 @-@ meter ( 39 ft ) sandbank . His admiral vetoed the request until it was too late and Conte di Cavour had to use a deeper , 17 @-@ meter ( 56 ft ) , sandbank at 04 : 30 on 12 November . In an effort to lighten the ship , her guns and parts of her superstructure were removed and Conte di Cavour was refloated on 9 June 1941 . Temporary repairs to enable the ship to reach Trieste for permanent repairs took until 22 December . Her guns were operable by September 1942 , but replacing her entire electrical system took longer and she was still under repair when Italy surrendered a year later . The Regia Marina made plans to replace her secondary and anti @-@ aircraft weapons with a dozen 135 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) dual @-@ purpose guns in twin mounts , twelve 64 @-@ caliber 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) , and twenty @-@ three 65 @-@ caliber 20 mm AA guns . Her hulk was damaged in an air raid and capsized on 23 February 1945 . Refloated shortly after the end of the war , Conte di Cavour was scrapped in 1946 . 
 Giulio Cesare participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November 1940 , but never got close enough to any British ships to fire at them . The ship was damaged in January 1941 by a near miss during an air raid on Naples ; repairs were completed in early February . She participated in the First Battle of Sirte on 17 December 1941 , providing distant cover for a convoy bound for Libya , again never firing her main armament . In early 1942 , Giulio Cesare was reduced to a training ship at Taranto and later Pola . She steamed to Malta in early September 1943 after the Italian surrender . The German submarine U @-@ 596 unsuccessfully attacked the ship in the Gulf of Taranto in early March 1944 . 
 After the war , Giulio Cesare was allocated to the Soviet Union as war reparations in 1949 , and renamed Novorossiysk , after the Soviet city on the Black Sea . The Soviets used her as a training ship when she was not undergoing one of her eight refits in their hands . In 1953 , all remaining Italian light AA guns were replaced by eighteen 37 mm 70 @-@ K AA guns in six twin mounts and six singles . They also replaced her fire @-@ control systems and added radars , although the exact changes are unknown . The Soviets intended to rearm her with their own 305 mm guns , but this was forestalled by her loss . While at anchor in Sevastopol on the night of 28 / 29 October 1955 , she detonated a large German mine left over from World War II . The explosion blew a hole completely through the ship , making a 4 @-@ by @-@ 14 @-@ meter ( 13 by 46 ft ) hole in the forecastle forward of ' A ' turret . The flooding could not be controlled and she later capsized with the loss of 608 men . Novorossiysk was stricken from the Navy List on 24 February 1956 , salvaged on 4 May 1957 , and subsequently scrapped . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Gudovac massacre = 
 The Gudovac massacre ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Pokolj u <unk> ; Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> у <unk> ) was the mass killing of around 190 Bjelovar Serbs by the Croatian nationalist Ustaše movement on 28 April 1941 , during World War II . The massacre occurred shortly after the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia and the establishment of the Ustaše @-@ led Axis puppet state known as the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) . It was the first act of mass murder committed by the Ustaše upon coming to power and presaged a wider Ustaše @-@ perpetrated campaign of genocide against Serbs in the NDH that lasted until the end of the war . 
 The Ustaše used the mysterious deaths of two of their local followers as a pretext for the killings . The victims were drawn from Gudovac and its surroundings on 28 April . Most were arrested under the guise that they were Serb rebels loyal to the ousted Yugoslav government . They were taken to a nearby field and collectively shot by a firing squad of up to 70 Ustaše guards . Five of the prisoners managed to survive the initial volley and crawled away to safety . The Ustaše forced Gudovac 's surviving inhabitants to dig a mass grave for the victims and pour quicklime on the bodies to speed up decomposition . The following day , relatives of one of the victims informed the Germans of what had transpired . The Germans ordered a partial exhumation of the mass grave and had forty suspected perpetrators arrested . Mladen Lorković , a senior Ustaše official , used his influence to have the detained men released and promised German ambassador Siegfried Kasche that the Croatian authorities would carry out a thorough investigation . No such investigation ever took place . 
 An ossuary and mausoleum were erected on the site of the massacre in 1955 , as was a monument by the sculptor Vojin Bakić . In 1991 , amid inter @-@ ethnic violence during the Croatian War of Independence , the monument and mausoleum were destroyed by Croatian nationalists , as was another one of Bakić 's works , Bjelovarac ( The Man From Bjelovar ) . The ruins of the ossuary were removed by the local authorities in 2002 . That same year , residents signed a petition to have the Bjelovarac monument erected once again . The restored monument was unveiled in December 2010 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 Gudovac is a village near Bjelovar , about 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) east of Zagreb . It was first settled during the Middle Ages , and had an ethnically mixed population through much of its history . In 1931 , Gudovac had 1 @,@ 073 inhabitants living in 330 households . Croats formed two @-@ thirds of the population , while the remaining inhabitants were ethnic Serbs . The Gudovac municipality had a population of 8 @,@ 000 , including 3 @,@ 000 Serbs . 
 Gudovac had been part of a common South Slav state since November 1918 , when the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes was proclaimed . At its creation , the Kingdom included six million Serbs , 3 @.@ 5 million Croats and one million Slovenes , among others . Being the largest ethnic group , the Serbs favoured a centralized state . Croats , Slovenes and Bosnian Muslims did not . The Vidovdan Constitution , approved on 28 June 1921 and based on the Serbian constitution of 1903 , established the Kingdom as a parliamentary monarchy under the Serbian Karađorđević dynasty . Belgrade was chosen as the capital of the new state , assuring Serb and Orthodox Christian political dominance . In 1928 , Croatian Peasant Party ( Hrvatska seljačka stranka , HSS ) leader Stjepan Radić was shot and mortally wounded on the floor of the country 's parliament by a Serb deputy . The following year , King Alexander proclaimed the 6 January Dictatorship and renamed his country the Kingdom of Yugoslavia to deemphasize its ethnic makeup . Yugoslavia was divided into nine administrative units called banovinas , six of which had ethnic Serb majorities . In 1931 , the king issued a decree which allowed the Yugoslav Parliament to reconvene on the condition that only pro @-@ Yugoslav parties were allowed to be represented in it . Marginalized , far @-@ right and far @-@ left parties thrived . The Ustaše , a Croatian fascist movement , emerged as the most extreme of these . The movement was driven by a deep hatred of Serbs . In 1932 , the Ustaše launched the so @-@ called Velebit uprising , attacking a police station in the village of <unk> in Lika . The police responded harshly to the attack and harassed the local population , leading to further animosity between Croats and Serbs . In 1934 , an Ustaše @-@ trained assassin killed Alexander while he was on a state visit to France . Alexander 's cousin , Prince Paul , became regent and took up the king 's responsibilities until Alexander 's son Peter turned eighteen . 
 Following the 1938 Anschluss ( union ) between Germany and Austria , Yugoslavia came to share a border with the Third Reich and fell under increasing pressure as her neighbours became aligned with the Axis powers . In April 1939 , Italy opened a second frontier with Yugoslavia when it invaded and occupied neighbouring Albania . At the outbreak of World War II , the Yugoslav government declared its neutrality . Between September and November 1940 , Hungary and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact and Italy invaded Greece . From that time , Yugoslavia was almost completely surrounded by the Axis powers and their satellites , and her neutral stance toward the war came under tremendous pressure . In late February 1941 , Bulgaria joined the Pact . The next day , German troops entered Bulgaria from Romania , closing the ring around Yugoslavia . Intending to secure his southern flank for the impending attack on the Soviet Union , Adolf Hitler began placing heavy pressure on Yugoslavia to join the Axis . On 25 March 1941 , after some delay , the Yugoslav government conditionally signed the Pact . Two days later , a group of pro @-@ Western , Serbian nationalist air force officers deposed Prince Paul in a bloodless coup d 'état . The conspirators declared the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Prince Peter of age and brought to power a " government of national unity " led by General Dušan Simović . The coup enraged Hitler . " Even if Yugoslavia at first should give declarations of loyalty , " he stated , " she must be considered ... a foe and ... destroyed as quickly as possible . " He then ordered the invasion of Yugoslavia , which commenced on 6 April 1941 . 
 = = = Fall of Bjelovar = = = 
 The Royal Yugoslav Army ( Vojska Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VKJ ) was quickly overwhelmed by the combined German , Italian and Hungarian assault . Much of its equipment was obsolete , its military strategy was outdated and its soldiers were ill @-@ disciplined and poorly trained . To make matters worse , many of the VKJ 's Croat personnel refused to fight against the Germans , whom they considered liberators from Serb oppression . This attitude was shared by many soldiers of the 40th Infantry Division Slavonska 's largely Croat 108th Regiment , which was stationed in the village of Veliki Grđevac . The regiment had been mobilised in Bjelovar , and on 7 April was marching towards Virovitica to take up positions , when its Croat members revolted and arrested the Serb officers and soldiers . Led by Captain Ivan Mrak , the regiment disarmed a Yugoslav gendarmerie post in Garešnica and began marching back to Bjelovar alongside a band of Ustaše rebels under <unk> Hans . The following morning , elements of the 108th Regiment entered Bjelovar and clashed with the local gendarmerie , sustaining losses of two killed and three wounded . At about noon , the regiment joined up with elements of the 42nd Infantry Regiment and other units of the 40th Infantry Division . At around the same time , Julije Makanec , the Croat mayor of Bjelovar , joined Ustaše official Ivan <unk> and HSS representative Franjo <unk> in demanding that the VKJ surrender the town to the rebels . When the 4th Army 's commander , General Petar Nedeljković , learned of the rebel approach , he ordered the local gendarmerie commander to maintain order , but was advised that this would not be possible as local Croat conscripts would not report for duty . Fourth Army headquarters reported the rebels ' presence to the headquarters of the 1st Army Group , which requested that HSS leader Vladko Maček intervene with the rebels . Maček agreed to send an emissary to the 108th Infantry Regiment urging them to obey their officers , to no avail . 
 Later in the day , two trucks of rebels arrived at 4th Army headquarters in Bjelovar with the intention of killing the staff . The headquarters guard force prevented this , but the operations staff immediately withdrew from Bjelovar to Popovača . After issuing several unanswered ultimatums , around 8 @,@ 000 rebels attacked Bjelovar , assisted by Croat fifth @-@ columnists within the town . Bjelovar surrendered , and many Yugoslav officers and soldiers were captured by the Germans and Ustaše rebels . Local Croats welcomed the revolt with great enthusiasm . When Nedeljković heard of Bjelovar 's capture , he called Makanec and threatened to bomb the city if VKJ prisoners were not immediately released . Detained officers from 4th Army headquarters and the 108th Infantry Regiment were then sent to Zagreb . At about 16 : 00 , Nedeljković informed the Ban of Croatia , Ivan Šubašić , of the revolt , but Šubašić was powerless to influence events . At about 18 : 00 , Makanec proclaimed that Bjelovar was part of an independent Croatian state . This was the only significant pro @-@ Ustaše revolt in Croatia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina prior to 10 April . Ustaše propaganda celebrated it as " an uprising of the Croatian people against the April War " and claimed that it proved Croats wholeheartedly supported the destruction of Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Creation of the NDH = = = 
 On 10 April , senior Ustaše commander Slavko Kvaternik proclaimed the establishment of the Independent State of Croatia ( Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) . The declaration came exactly one week before the VKJ 's unconditional surrender to the Axis powers . The leader of the Ustaše , Ante Pavelić , was in Rome at the time and made arrangements to travel to Karlovac , just west of Zagreb . He arrived in Karlovac on 13 April , accompanied by 250 – 400 of his followers . Pavelić reached Zagreb on 15 April , having granted territorial cessions to Italy at Croatia 's expense and promised the Germans he had no intention of pursuing a foreign policy independent of Berlin . That same day , Germany and Italy extended diplomatic recognition to the NDH . Pavelić was declared Poglavnik ( " leader " ) of the Ustaše @-@ led Croatian state , which combined the territory of much of present @-@ day Croatia , all of present @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of present @-@ day Serbia . 
 Pavelić and his followers intended to create an " ethnically pure " Croatia through the mass murder and deportation of Serbs , Jews and other non @-@ Croats . However , only about fifty percent of the NDH 's 6 @.@ 2 million inhabitants were Croat . Nearly two million Serbs , about one @-@ third of the NDH 's total population , now found themselves within the borders of the newly formed state . In addition , Serb @-@ majority areas covered between 60 and 70 percent of the NDH 's total landmass . " The Croatian state cannot exist if 1 @.@ 8 million Serbs are living in it and if we have a powerful Serbian state at our backs , " Croatia 's future Foreign Minister Mladen Lorković explained . " Therefore , we are trying to make the Serbs disappear from our regions . " In his memoirs , Slavko Kvaternik wrote : " Living abroad as émigrés for twelve years , during which time they lived only in the yearning for revenge , had turned [ the Ustaše ] into psychopaths , mentally deranged people with a desire to kill . " His son Dido Kvaternik , a senior Ustaše official , was entrusted with " cleansing " Bjelovar and its surroundings . The younger Kvaternik recalled : " When we triumphantly returned home from abroad and when Pavelić decided that I should take over the implementation of the measures against Serbs and Jews , I obeyed immediately and without hesitation because I knew that this question had to be resolved for the future of the Croatian people and state , and that someone had to make the sacrifice so that these odious but necessary measures could be carried out . " Pavelić 's orders for the extermination of non @-@ Croats in and around Bjelovar were likely delivered orally to ensure that no written evidence remained . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Immediately after seizing Bjelovar , the Ustaše set about strengthening their hold of the city . Josip Verhas , an ethnic German , was appointed the acting head of Bjelovar district , Đuro Vojnović was appointed Ustaše representative to the Bjelovar district , and Hans was named the Ustaše commissioner for Bjelovar county . <unk> <unk> was appointed chief of police . He immediately decreed that all of Bjelovar 's Serbs had to wear a red armband with the word " Serb " written in both Croatian and German . Ivan <unk> , a public notary , was appointed acting commander of the Bjelovar armoury and set about reorganizing local Ustaše formations . Mrak , who had distinguished himself as one of the leaders of the 108th Regiment 's revolt , was tasked with overseeing the city centre . 
 Between 9 and 14 April , groups of soldiers from the disbanded 108th Regiment roamed the Bjelovar countryside looking for a way home . Serb officers that had refused to surrender raided Croat homes , hoping to find food , money and civilian clothing that would make it easier for them to pass through German and Ustaše checkpoints . In some villages , Croat peasants disarmed defeated VKJ units and plundered their warehouses . Some of these peasants , especially those in Gudovac , entered local units known as " readiness battalions " . On 10 April , the Germans reached Bjelovar and set up a series of command posts but left the Ustaše in de facto control of the city . The Ustaše were wary of the possible danger that the Serb peasantry posed . Many male peasants had been in the VKJ at the time of the invasion and had simply discarded their military fatigues and taken their rifles home . <unk> <unk> , a local Ustaše commander , reported : " Bjelovar and its surroundings are besieged by Serbs , who are ... killing and looting homes in the villages of <unk> , Gudovac and the <unk> forest . " In mid @-@ April , <unk> reported that he had sent 35 gunmen to " quell violence " around Bjelovar . His superiors in Zagreb ordered him to " take any measures necessary to restore order " in the district . Local Ustaše searched dozens of Serb homes , hoping to find illegal weapons . This was followed by the arresting of " undesired elements " , mostly members of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( Komunistička partija Jugoslavije , KPJ ) . " The disarming of Serbs ... is vital to securing the future of the young Croatian state , " wrote Edmund Glaise @-@ Horstenau , the German Plenipotentiary General in the NDH . Julius <unk> , the local KPJ chairman , was arrested on 12 April . 
 On 16 April , Slavko Kvaternik announced that Serb peasants in the NDH had eight days to hand their weapons over to the Ustaše . Another influential communist , Milan Bakić , was arrested in Bjelovar on 20 April . On 22 April , the Ustaše arrested most of the town 's remaining KPJ members . Communist organisers such as Stevo <unk> , Franko Winter and Sándor Király were arrested on 24 April . By 25 April , several hundred known or suspected anti @-@ fascists were arrested by the local Ustaše . Some were spared death and given prison sentences , but most were executed without trial . That same day , an Ustaše patrol discovered 80 rifles and several machine guns in the home of a local KPJ member . Forty rifles and two machine guns were found in the home of another local communist . 
 Alarmed by the prospect of an armed rebellion in Bjelovar and the surrounding countryside , Kvaternik selected a broad area in and around the town where Serbs were to be " cleansed " . " For every Croat killed , " he said , " we must execute 100 Serbs . " The disarming and arresting of VKJ personnel by the Ustaše was accompanied by numerous incidents , in which about twenty armed VKJ troops and Serb civilians were killed . Kvaternik feared that these deaths would only increase the likelihood of an armed revolt , and became even more wary when he heard rumours that Bjelovar 's Serbs were planning an uprising to coincide with the feast day of St. George ( <unk> ) , on 6 May . Interior Minister Andrija <unk> arrived in Bjelovar after hearing such rumours . At a meeting with Verhas and his lieutenants , he stated that " serious action " would have to be undertaken to " send a message to the enemies of the Ustaše and the NDH " . On 26 April , Kvaternik and his closest assistant , Ivica Šarić , organised the mass arrest of 530 Serb villagers from Grubišno Polje . Thirty Ustaše took part in the arrests . The detainees were transported to the Danica camp , near Koprivnica , and from there taken to Ustaše camps at Gospić , Pag Island , Jasenovac and Stara Gradiška , where most were killed . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Arrests = = = 
 On 25 April , the Ustaše had arrested a Serb named Milan Radovanović when he stopped by the Bjelovar police station to hand over his rifle . He had fought with the VKJ at the time of the invasion and spent two weeks hiding in the forests before returning to his home in the village of <unk> . His relatively late return home had prevented him from handing over his rifle before the Ustaše deadline on 24 April . On the morning of 26 April , as Radovanović and another Serb peasant were being escorted from the county jail by two Ustaše guards , two unidentified gunmen opened fire on the detainees and guards . A skirmish ensued , and Radovanović and one of the guards were killed . The second guard was wounded . That afternoon , a Home Guard ( or <unk> ) was killed by a stray bullet in his yard while on leave . Kvaternik immediately blamed Serb " agitators " for the deaths . In their internal documents , the Ustaše blamed the deaths on " local Chetniks " , a claim that has never been proven . Some historians have proposed that the attack on the county jail and the death of the Home Guard were false flag attacks intended to rally Croats against local Serbs . This allegation has also never been proven . 
 Upon hearing news of the attack at the county jail , Kvaternik ordered the arrest of 200 Serb peasants from Gudovac and the neighbouring villages of Veliko and Malo <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Tuk , <unk> and <unk> . The arrests occurred in the early morning hours of 28 April . The action was personally supervised by Kvaternik and carried out by members of the local Croatian Peasant Guard , which had been turned into a " quasi @-@ military unit " under the command of Martin Čikoš , whom the journalist Slavko Goldstein describes as a " sworn pre @-@ war Ustaša " . Most of the more prominent or wealthy inhabitants of Gudovac were arrested , including teachers , businessmen and Serbian Orthodox priests . " Their sole crime , " Goldstein asserts , " was that they were of the Orthodox faith and perhaps a little more prosperous than their neighbours . " Shortly before the killings , Verhas , Čikoš and local Ustaše officials Rudolf <unk> , Nikola <unk> and Mirko Pavlešić held a meeting where it was decided that the prisoners would be executed en masse . 
 = = = Killings = = = 
 The prisoners were taken to the Gudovac municipal building and held there for a time . They were told that they would be taken to Bjelovar for interrogation . Instead , they were ordered to march in the opposite direction , towards a field beside the river <unk> where an open @-@ air market was held each week . The prisoners left Gudovac just before sunset , supervised by as many as 70 armed guards . Many of the prisoners sensed the fate that awaited them but were unable to escape . According to one post @-@ war testimony , Čikoš was " upset , uneasy ... and in no mood to talk " . As the arrested Serbs were being marched out of Gudovac , he pulled one of his Serb neighbours from the group and told him to " get lost " before ordering the remaining 200 detainees to line up against a wall . Kvaternik appeared before the group and asked if it contained any Croats . Four stepped forward and offered their identification papers . Three were permitted to return to their homes once their identities had been confirmed but the fourth was sent back among the Serbs because he was a communist . Kvaternik , Čikoš and several newly appointed Ustaše officers supervised the march . According to survivors , the guards hurtled insults at the prisoners , and forced them to sing Ustaše songs and chant " Long live Pavelić ! Long live Kvaternik ! " 
 The prisoners reached the field just after sunset and were ordered to line up in ranks and make a left face ; the guards then raised their rifles and opened fire . Some of the executioners hesitated before firing , and many of the victims were struck in the legs . Some of the wounded cursed the Ustaše and others cried in agony . Kvaternik observed the massacre from a distance of about 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , accompanied by Hans , Verhas and Pavlešić . Pavlešić was dissatisfied with the speed of the killings and shouted at Čikoš , telling him to " finish the job " . Čikoš 's men then went about looking for survivors and <unk> anyone that moved . Five prisoners escaped before Čikoš 's men could kill them and fled to a nearby forest . 
 The killings were the first act of mass murder committed by the Ustaše upon coming to power . Estimates of the number of people killed vary . Marko Attila Hoare , a historian specializing in the Balkans , puts the figure at 184 killed . The journalist Tim Judah writes that there were 187 fatalities . Historian Ivo Goldstein asserts that the Ustaše killed 196 people . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Kvaternik and the Ustaše never attempted to conceal the killings , which were deliberately carried out in a relatively public space so as to cause terror among the Serb population . Local Croats had full knowledge of the events . Following the massacre , the Ustaše forced Gudovac 's remaining inhabitants to dig a 150 m2 ( 1 @,@ 614 @.@ 59 sq ft ) mass grave and cover the remains of the victims with quicklime to speed up decomposition . Once the dead had been buried , the villagers were permitted to return to their homes . 
 News of the massacre spread through Bjelovar , and the following day the wife and daughter of a Serb named Nikola <unk> heard that their husband and father was among those killed . Deeply upset , Mrs. <unk> and her daughter hurried to a German command post , reported the massacre , then led two German officers to the mass grave . The officers informed their superiors that a massacre had taken place and complained that the " disorder " in their area of responsibility was beyond their control . Their superiors ordered a partial exhumation of the mass grave and requested that the exhumed corpses be photographed . They also requested an investigation , as well as the arrest and punishment of those responsible . On the orders of a local German commander , forty of those involved in the massacre were arrested on the evening of 29 April . Their weapons were seized and they were temporarily detained in the Bjelovar high school . That same evening , Lorković requested an urgent meeting with German ambassador Siegfried Kasche . According to Kasche , Lorković told him that eleven Croats had been killed by the Serbs and that a massacre of 192 men from Gudovac and its surroundings was carried out in retaliation for these deaths . According to Goldstein , the figure of eleven dead Croats was made up by Lorković in order to justify the massacre . The Croatian historian Željko <unk> contradicts Goldstein 's assertion , claiming the VKJ marched into several hamlets on 11 April and summarily executed eleven Croat villagers that had refused to report for mobilisation several days earlier . Goldstein posits that 25 of the 27 Croats whose deaths the Ustaše attributed to " Serb agitators " prior to the massacre had perished in combat operations during the rebellion of the 108th Regiment . Historian Michele F. Levy agrees that there was no mass killing of Croats . Lorković maintained that the Gudovac massacre was an " internal political issue under the jurisdiction of the Croatian government " , and requested that the detained Ustaše members be handed over to Croatian authorities . He promised Kasche that Zagreb would carry out a full investigation . Kasche accepted Lorković 's proposal , likely at the urging of his superiors . The Ustaše detained at the Bjelovar high school were released and had their weapons returned to them . The promised investigation never took place . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The National Archive in Bjelovar contains extensive documentation of the massacre , including a list of victims compiled by Ustaše officials in May 1941 which describes many prisoners as being " shot as Chetniks " . A statement describes the " fright " of the Serb population and the " distress " of local Croats . The HSS party leadership distanced itself from the massacre and condemned the actions of the Ustaše , as did the majority of local HSS activists , many who ended up <unk> the Partisans . According to some sources , even Makanec tried to distance himself from the killings , and allegedly protested to the " appropriate authorities " in Zagreb . He went on to become the Croatian Minister of Education in 1943 , and served in this capacity until May 1945 . Lorković was implicated in a conspiracy to overthrow the NDH government in mid @-@ 1944 , arrested , and executed in the last weeks of the war by Pavelić 's henchmen . Kvaternik survived the war and the destruction of the NDH , fled to Argentina with his family and was killed in a car accident in 1962 . Pavelić also fled to Argentina , survived an assassination attempt by Yugoslav government agents in Buenos Aires in 1957 , and died of his wounds in Madrid two years later , aged 70 . 
 Ustaše killings of Serbs continued throughout the war , and concentration camps were established to detain Serbs , Jews , Gypsies , anti @-@ fascist Croats and others opposed to Pavelić 's regime . Contemporary German accounts place the number of Serbs killed by the Ustaše at about 350 @,@ 000 . According to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum , between 320 @,@ 000 and 340 @,@ 000 Serbs were killed by the Ustaše over the course of the war . Most modern historians agree that the Ustaše killed over 300 @,@ 000 Serbs ( about 17 percent of all Serbs living in the NDH ) . At the Nuremberg trials , these killings were judged to have constituted genocide . 
 An ossuary and mausoleum were built on the site of the massacre in 1955 . A monument called Gudovac — Before the Firing Squad , by sculptor Vojin Bakić , was erected on the same spot . In 1991 , amid inter @-@ ethnic violence during the Croatian War of Independence , the monument and mausoleum were destroyed by Croatian nationalists . At the same time , one of Bakić 's most famous monuments , Bjelovarac , was destroyed because Bakić was a Serb and the monument had been dedicated to his brothers , who were killed by the Ustaše . What remained of the ossuary was removed by the local authorities in 2002 . That same year , several residents signed a petition to have a replica of Bjelovarac erected at the same spot . The local government promised to supply only half the amount needed to restore the monument . In 2005 , the Croatian Ministry of Culture told the petitioners to apply for the other half of the amount through a tender . The restored monument was unveiled in December 2010 . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Maritime fur trade = 
 The maritime fur trade was a ship @-@ based fur trade system that focused on acquiring furs of sea otters and other animals from the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast and natives of Alaska . The furs were mostly sold in China in exchange for tea , silks , porcelain , and other Chinese goods , which were then sold in Europe and the United States . The maritime fur trade was pioneered by Russians , working east from Kamchatka along the Aleutian Islands to the southern coast of Alaska . British and Americans entered during the 1780s , focusing on what is now the coast of British Columbia . The trade boomed around the beginning of the 19th century . A long period of decline began in the 1810s . As the sea otter population was depleted , the maritime fur trade diversified and transformed , tapping new markets and commodities , while continuing to focus on the Northwest Coast and China . It lasted until the middle to late 19th century . Russians controlled most of the coast of what is now Alaska during the entire era . The coast south of Alaska endured fierce competition between , and among , British and American trading vessels . The British were the first to operate in the southern sector , but were unable to compete against the Americans , who dominated from the 1790s to the 1830s . The British Hudson 's Bay Company entered the coast trade in the 1820s with the intention of driving the Americans away . This was accomplished by about 1840 . In its late period , the maritime fur trade was largely conducted by the British Hudson 's Bay Company and the Russian @-@ American Company . 
 The term " maritime fur trade " was coined by historians to distinguish the coastal , ship @-@ based fur trade from the continental , land @-@ based fur trade of , for example , the North West Company and American Fur Company . Historically , the maritime fur trade was not known by that name , rather it was usually called the " North West Coast trade " or " North West Trade " . The term " North West " was rarely spelled as the single word " Northwest " , as is common today . 
 The maritime fur trade brought the Pacific Northwest coast into a vast , new international trade network , centered on the north Pacific Ocean , global in scope , and based on capitalism , but not , for the most part , on colonialism . A triangular trade network emerged linking the Pacific Northwest coast , China , the Hawaiian Islands ( only recently discovered by the Western world ) , Britain , and the United States ( especially New England ) . The trade had a major effect on the indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest coast , especially the Aleut , <unk> , Tlingit , Haida , Nuu @-@ chah @-@ nulth , and Chinook peoples . A rapid increase of wealth occurred among the Northwest Coast natives , along with increased warfare , potlatching , slaving , and depopulation due to epidemic disease . However , the indigenous culture was not overwhelmed by rapid change , but actually flourished . For instance , the importance of totems and traditional nobility crests increased , and the Chinook Jargon , which remains a distinctive aspect of Pacific Northwest culture , was developed during this era . Native Hawaiian society was similarly affected by the sudden influx of Western wealth and technology , as well as epidemic diseases . The trade 's effect on China and Europe was minimal , but for New England , the maritime fur trade and the significant profits it made helped revitalize the region , contributing to its transformation from an agrarian to an industrial society . The wealth generated by the maritime fur trade was invested in industrial development , especially textile manufacturing . The New England textile industry in turn had a large effect on slavery in the United States , increasing the demand for cotton and helping make possible the rapid expansion of the cotton plantation system across the Deep South . 
 The most profitable furs were those of sea otters , especially the northern sea otter , Enhydra lutris <unk> , which inhabited the coastal waters between the Columbia River in the south to the Aleutian Islands in the north . The sea otter was the most hunted during the Maritime Fur Trade during the 17th and 18th centuries . Sea otters possess a thicker fur than any other mammal , and the sea otter 's habit of grooming their coat prevents molting . The reason for their exploitation was due to this ' dark [ thick ] and silver tipped fur ' . The <unk> and demand in fashion of sea otter pelts in China was one of the reasons why it was hunted to the point of disappearance . These mammals of the Pacific are currently ' listed as Threatened under the Canadian Species at Risk Act ' . Sea otter distribution extends from the north of Japan all the way to the vicinity of Cedros Island , Mexico . The species stayed approximately within the arc of the Northern Pacific until the pressure of the maritime trade forced them to move north . The start of their decline with the first Russian expeditions in this region . Aleut hunters were the providers of the skins to the Russians ; the former became ' the main purveyor of prime otter skins to Russian traders and American adventurers ' . Before the exploitation of these mammals , their population ranged from 150 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 . Sea otters are ' slow breeders , only one sometimes two pups [ are ] being born at a time ' which does not help the population when being pursued . The Chinese sought this mammal 's fur due to its great commercial value and its ' prime coat ' all year long . The pelt was used by the wealthy Chinese as clothing decoration ( robe trimming ) and the Russians used it as an ornamental piece . The other furs that were sent to Europe and America were changed to ' coat collars or hats ' . Due to this great demand and worth of the sea otters pelt , the Russian @-@ America Company ( RAC ) annual expenses was around 1000 @,@ 000 rubles each year and profited over 500 @,@ 000 rubles per year . The fur of the Californian southern sea otter , E. l. nereis , was less highly prized and thus less profitable . After the northern sea otter was hunted to local extinction , maritime fur traders shifted to California until the southern sea otter was likewise nearly extinct . The British and American maritime fur traders took their furs to the Chinese port of Guangzhou ( Canton ) , where they worked within the established Canton system . Furs from Russian America were mostly sold to China via the Mongolian trading town of Kyakhta , which had been opened to Russian trade by the 1727 Treaty of Kyakhta . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Pacific Northwest was one of the last significant nonpolar regions in the world to be explored by the Europeans . Centuries of reconnaissance and conquest had brought the rest of North America within the claims of imperial powers . During the late 18th and early 19th centuries , a number of empires and commercial systems converged upon the Northwest Coast , by sea as well as by land across the continent . The Russian and Spanish empires were extended into the region simultaneously , from opposite directions . Russian fur companies expanded into North America along the Aleutian Islands , reaching the Fox Islands and the Alaska Peninsula in the early 1760s . Kodiak Island was discovered in 1763 by Stepan <unk> <unk> . In 1768 , an expedition was carried out by the Russian Navy , under Pyotr <unk> and Mikhail <unk> . Two ships sailed from Kamchatka to the Alaska Peninsula for the purpose of assessing the existing Russian activity and the possibilities of future development . Reports about the voyage , meant to be kept secret , spread through Europe and caused alarm in Spain . The Spanish government , already concerned about Russian activity in Alaska , decided to colonize Alta California and sent exploratory voyages to Alaska to assess the threat and strengthen Spanish claims of sovereignty on coast north of Mexico . 
 The province of Alta California was established by José de Gálvez in 1769 , just as the <unk> @-@ <unk> expedition was concluding . Five separate expeditions were dispatched to Alta California in 1769 . By 1782 , presidios had been established at San Diego , Monterey , San Francisco and Santa Barbara , linked by a series of mission stations along the coast . Spanish exploration voyages to the far north were launched in 1774 , 1775 , and 1779 . In 1784 , the center of Russian activity shifted east to Kodiak Island and hunting operations were extended into Cook Inlet . The two empires seemed destined to clash , but before direct Russian @-@ Spanish contact was made new powers appeared on the Northwest Coast — Britain and the United States . When the clash came , at Nootka Sound in 1789 , it was not between Spain and Russia but between Spain and Britain . The British first reached the region by sea in 1778 , during James Cook 's third voyage , and by land in 1793 , when Alexander Mackenzie 's transcontinental explorations reached the Pacific . The first British maritime fur trader , James Hanna , arrived on the Northwest Coast in 1785 . The first American traders , Robert Gray and John Kendrick , arrived by sea in 1788 . The Lewis and Clark Expedition arrived overland in 1805 . 
 The early maritime fur traders were explorers , as well as traders . The Northwest Coast is very complex — a " labyrinth of waters " , according to George Simpson — with thousands of islands , numerous straits and fjords , and a mountainous , rocky , and often very steep shoreline . Navigational hazards included persistent rain , high winds , thick fogs , strong currents , and tides , and hidden rocks . Wind patterns were often contrary , variable , and baffling , especially within the coastal straits and archipelagoes , which makes sailing dangerous . Early explorations before the maritime fur trade era — by Juan Pérez , Bruno de Heceta , <unk> y Quadra , and James Cook — produced only rough surveys of the coast 's general features . Detailed surveys were undertaken in only a few relatively small areas , such as Nootka Sound , Bucareli Bay , and Cook Inlet . Russian exploration before 1785 had produced mainly rough surveys , largely restricted to the Aleutian Islands and mainland Alaska west of Cape Saint Elias . British and American maritime fur traders began visiting the Northwest Coast in 1785 , at which time it was mostly unexplored . Although noncommercial exploration voyages continued , especially by the Spanish Navy , the maritime fur traders made a number of significant discoveries . Notable examples include the Strait of Juan de Fuca , <unk> Sound , and Barkley Sound , all found by Charles William Barkley , Queen Charlotte Strait by James Strange , Fitz Hugh Sound by James Hanna , Grays Harbor and the Columbia River by Robert Gray . George Dixon explored the Dixon Entrance and was the first to realize that the Queen Charlotte Islands were not part of the mainland . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Russian maritime fur trading in the northern Pacific began after the exploration voyages of Vitus Bering and Aleksei Chirikov in 1741 and 1742 . Their voyages demonstrated that Asia and North America were not connected but that sea voyages were feasible , and that the region was rich in furs . Private fur traders , mostly promyshlenniki , launched fur trading expeditions from Kamchatka , at first focusing on nearby islands such as the Commander Islands . Unlike fur trading ventures in Siberia , these maritime expeditions required more capital than most promyshlenniki could obtain . Merchants from cities such as Irkutsk , Tobolsk , and others in European Russia , became the principal investors . 
 An early trader , Emilian Basov , traded at Bering Island in 1743 , collecting a large number of sea otter , fur seal , and blue Arctic fox furs . Basov made four trips to Bering Island and nearby <unk> Island and made a fortune , inspiring many other traders . From 1743 to the founding of the Russian @-@ American Company in 1799 , over 100 private fur @-@ trading and hunting voyages sailed from Kamchatka to North America . In total , these voyages garnered over eight million silver rubles . During the early part of this era , the ships would typically stop at the Commander Islands to slaughter and preserve the meat of Steller 's sea cows , a defenseless sea mammal whose range was limited to those islands . They were hunted not only for food , but also for their skins , used to make boats , and their subcutaneous fat , used for oil lamps . By 1768 , Steller 's sea cow was extinct . As furs were depleted on nearby islands , Russian traders sailed farther east along the Aleutian chain . By the 1760s , they were regularly sailing to Kodiak Island . Notable Russian traders in the early years of the trade include <unk> <unk> ( who financed and participated in 10 voyages between 1743 and 1768 ) , <unk> <unk> 'ev , Stepan <unk> , and Grigory Shelikhov . 
 As traders sailed farther east , the voyages became longer and more <unk> Smaller enterprises were merged into larger ones . During the 1780s , Grigory Shelikhov began to stand out as one of the most important traders through the Shelikhov @-@ Golikov Company . In 1784 , Shelikhov founded the first permanent Russian settlement in North America , at Three Saints Bay on Kodiak Island . Shelikhov envisioned a continual extension of the Russian maritime fur trade , with trading posts being set up farther and farther along the coast all the way to California . He sought exclusive control of the trade , and in 1788 Empress Catherine II decided to grant his company a monopoly only over the area it already occupied . Other traders were free to compete elsewhere . Catherine 's decision was issued as the imperial ukase ( proclamation ) of September 28 , 1788 . 
 By the time of Catherine 's ukase of 1788 , just as other nations were entering the maritime fur trade , the Russians had spent over 40 years establishing and expanding their maritime operations in North America . A number of colonies were being established over a large region stretching from the Aleutian Islands to Cook Inlet and Prince William Sound . Many ships sailed from Kamchatka to Alaska each year . The Russians not only had an early start , but they also controlled the habitats of the most valuable sea otters . The <unk> , Kamchatkan , and Aleutian sea otters ' fur was thicker , glossier , and blacker than those on the Northwest Coast and California . The four grades of fur were based on color , texture , and thickness . The most prized furs were those of <unk> and Kamchatkan sea otters , Aleutian furs were second grade , those of the Northwest Coast third , and the poorest grade was those of Californian sea otters . Russia also controlled the sources of sable furs , the most valuable fur @-@ bearing land mammal . 
 The Russian system differed from the British and American systems in its relationship with indigenous peoples . Using the same method they had used in Siberia , the Russians employed or <unk> Aleut and <unk> people , the latter being a subgroup of the Yupik Eskimo people . The Aleut and <unk> people were expert sea otter hunters , noted for their use of kayaks and <unk> . Russian ships were mainly used for transporting and assisting native hunting parties . This differed from the British and American system , where the natives hunted sea otters and prepared the furs on their own , and were essentially independent agents of the fur trade . The Russians did not trade freely with the native Alaskans ; rather , they imposed a fur tribute known as yasak . The yasak system , which was widely used in Siberia , essentially enslaved the natives . In 1788 , it was banned in Russian America , only to be replaced by compulsory labor . 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 The British entry into the maritime fur trade dates to 1778 and the third voyage of Captain James Cook . While sailing north to search for the fabled Northwest Passage , Cook discovered the Hawaiian Islands . On the Northwest Coast , he spent a month in Nootka Sound , during which he and his crew traded with the Nuu @-@ chah @-@ nulth from the village of <unk> . They ended up with over 300 furs , mostly sea otter , but thought them of no great value . Later , after Cook had been killed in Hawaii , the expedition visited Canton and were surprised by how much money the Chinese were willing to pay for the furs . A profit of 1 @,@ 800 % was made . James King , one of the commanders after Cook 's death , wrote , " the advantages that might be derived from a voyage to that part of the American coast , undertaken with commercial views , appear to me of a degree of importance sufficient to call for the attention of the public . " The crews of the two ships were so eager to return to Nootka Sound and acquire more furs , they were " not far short of mutiny " . Nevertheless , they sailed for England , arriving there in October 1780 . Accounts of Cook 's voyage and the sea otter trade were published in the 1780s , triggering a rush of entrepreneurial voyages to the Northwest Coast . 
 British interest in the maritime fur trade peaked between 1785 and 1794 , then declined as the French Revolutionary Wars diminished Britain 's available manpower and investment capital . The country also concentrated its foreign trade activities in India . British maritime fur traders were hindered by the East India Company ( EIC ) and South Sea Company ( SSC ) . Although the SSC was moribund by the late 18th century , it had been granted the exclusive right to British trade on the entire western coast of the Americas from Cape Horn to Bering Strait and for 300 leagues ( around 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) ) out into the Pacific Ocean . This , coupled with the EIC monopoly on British trade in China , meant sea otter skins were <unk> only in the preserve of one monopoly and disposable only in that of the other . To operate legally , British maritime fur traders had to obtain licenses from both companies , which was difficult and expensive . Some traders obtained a license from the EIC only , figuring the SSC was unable to enforce its monopoly . Others obtained only the SSC license and took their furs to England , where they were trans @-@ shipped to China . Some traders tried to evade the licenses by sailing their ships under foreign flags . The EIC 's primary focus in China was the tea trade , with never much interest within the company for the maritime fur trade . The EIC usually allowed British vessels to import furs into Canton , but required the furs to be sold via EIC agents , and the company took a percentage of the returns . Worse , the EIC did not allow the British fur traders to export Chinese goods to Great Britain . Thus , the last and most profitable leg of the maritime fur trade system — carrying Chinese goods to Europe and America — was denied to British traders . 
 The first trading vessel dispatched solely for the purpose of the fur trade was the British Sea Otter commanded by James Hanna in 1785 . In his brief visit to the coast , he obtained 560 pelts , which fetched a profit of $ 20 @,@ 000 in Canton . The promise of such profits encouraged other traders . George Dixon and Nathaniel Portlock , former members of Cook 's crew , became partners in the King George 's Sound Company , formed in 1785 for the purpose of developing the maritime fur trade . They sailed from England on the King George and Queen Charlotte and spent 1786 and 1787 exploring and trading on the North West Coast . They spent the winters in Hawaii , where they were among the first visitors after Cook . Charles William Barkley , another early British trader , sailed the Imperial Eagle from England to the North West Coast via Hawaii , 1786 – 1788 . He was accompanied by his wife , Frances Barkley , who became the first European woman to visit the Hawaiian Islands and the first woman to sail around the world without deception . Only two women are known to have sailed around the world before Frances : Jeanne <unk> , disguised as a man , and Rose de Freycinet , wife of Louis de Freycinet , as a stowaway . Barkley chose to sail under the flag of Austria to evade paying for EIC and SSC licences . During their stop in Hawaii , the Barkleys hired a native Hawaiian named <unk> as a maidservant . <unk> was the first native Hawaiian to visit the Pacific Northwest — the first of many <unk> . Barkley explored the coast south of Nootka Sound , discovering the Strait of Juan de Fuca in the process . He was the first trader to visit Neah Bay , a Makah settlement that later became an important port of call for maritime fur traders . 
 John Meares , who had also served under Cook , sailed to the North West Coast in 1786 . He spent the winter in Prince William Sound , his ship trapped by ice and his men dying of scurvy . He was rescued by the timely arrival of Dixon and Portlock . Meares organized a second expedition of two ships , the Felice <unk> and Iphigenia <unk> . Meares was captain of the Felice and William Douglas was captain of the Iphigenia . Meares decided not to license his ships with the EIC , instead trying to conceal the illegal activity by using the flag of Portugal . They arrived at Nootka Sound in May 1788 . Meares later claimed that Chief <unk> sold him some land and on it Meares had a building erected . These claims later became a point of dispute during the Nootka Crisis . Spain , which sought control of Nootka Sound , rejected both claims ; the true facts of the matter have never been fully established . There is no doubt , however , that Meares had the sloop North West America built in Nootka Sound , the first <unk> vessel built in the Pacific Northwest . 
 Meares and others organized another expedition the following year . A number of vessels sailed to Nootka Sound , including the Argonaut under James Colnett , the Princess Royal , under Thomas Hudson , and the Iphigenia <unk> and North West America . Colnett intended to establish a permanent fur @-@ trading post at Nootka Sound . However , Spain had also decided to permanently occupy Nootka Sound and assert sovereignty on the North West Coast . The decision was mostly due to Russian activity in Alaska and Russia 's threat to occupy Nootka Sound themselves . Spanish naval officer Esteban José Martínez arrived at Nootka in May 1789 and built Fort San Miguel . When the Argonaut arrived , a dispute arose between Colnett and Martínez , leading to the seizure of several British ships and the arrest of their crews . This incident led to the Nootka Crisis , an international crisis between Britain and Spain . War was averted with the first Nootka Convention of 1790 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 American traders were largely influenced by an unauthorized report published by John Ledyard in Hartford , Connecticut , in 1783 . By the 1790s American traders were outcompeting the British and soon came to dominate the maritime fur trade south of Russian America . The opening of the trade came at a good time for New England 's merchants . It provided a way to escape the depression that had followed the American Revolutionary War . It presented new trading opportunities that more than made up for the closure of British home and colonial ports to US imports . First Nations along the coast referred to American traders in the Chinook jargon as Boston or Boston @-@ men - after their main port in New England . 
 One of the first and most notable American maritime fur traders was Robert Gray . Gray made two trading voyages , the first from 1787 to 1790 and the second from 1790 to 1793 . The first voyage was conducted with John Kendrick and the vessels Columbia Rediviva and Lady Washington . After the 1789 fur trading season was over , Gray sailed the Columbia to China via Hawaii , then to Boston via the Cape of Good Hope . The arrival of the Columbia at Boston was celebrated for being the first American circumnavigation of the world . However , the venture was not a commercial success . The ship 's owners financed a second attempt and Gray sailed the Columbia from Boston only six weeks after arriving . Gray 's second voyage was notable in several ways . After spending the summer trading on the Northwest Coast , Gray wintered on the coast . In <unk> Sound , Gray 's crew built a house , dubbed Fort Defiance , and had the sloop Adventure built , the first American vessel built on the Northwest Coast . It was launched in March 1792 under the command of Robert Haswell . During the 1792 trading season , Gray concentrated on the southern part of the North West Coast , including the Columbia River . Although the mouth of the river had been spotted by the Spanish explorer Bruno de Heceta in 1775 , no other explorer or fur trader had been able to find it . Gray was the first to do so . He named the river after his ship . The event was later used by the United States in support of their claims to the Pacific Northwest . 
 Other notable American maritime fur traders include William F. Sturgis , Joseph Ingraham , Simon Metcalfe , and Daniel Cross , among others . One of the most successful American firms involved in the Northwest Trade was Perkins and Company . 
 = = Boom years = = 
 = = = American ascendancy = = = 
 The maritime fur trade was dominated by American traders from the 1790s to the 1820s . Between 1788 and 1826 , American merchant ships made at least 127 voyages between the United States and China , via the Northwest Coast . The returns were lucrative . During the late 1810s , the return on investment ranged from about 300 % to 500 % . Even higher profits were common in the first decade of the 19th century . Returns of 2 @,@ 200 % or higher were common , although when taking into account the cost of buying and outfitting vessels , the 2 @,@ 200 % return would be closer to 525 % . 
 The trade 's boom years ended around 1810 , after which a long decline was marked by increasing economic diversification . By 1810 , the supply of sea otter pelts had fallen due to overhunting . American trade declined during the War of 1812 , but after 1815 , Americans were able to resume and expand the maritime fur trade , and continued to dominate . 
 = = = Russian expansion = = = 
 The Russian entry to the Northwest Coast , beyond Prince William Sound , was slow because of a shortage of ships and sailors . Yakutat Bay was reached in 1794 and the settlement of <unk> , originally intended to be the colonial capital , was built there in 1795 . Reconnaissance of the coast as far as the Queen Charlotte Islands was carried out by James Shields , a British employee of the Golikov @-@ Shelikhov Company . In 1795 , Alexandr Baranov sailed into Sitka Sound , claiming it for Russia . Hunting parties arrived in the following years . By 1800 , three @-@ quarters of the Russian @-@ American Company 's sea otter skins came from the Sitka Sound area , amounting to several thousand per year . Sitka Sound was also where serious competition between the Russians , British , and Americans first arose . 
 In July 1799 , Baranov returned to Sitka Sound on the brig Oryol and established the settlement of Arkhangelsk , also known as Fort Archangel Gabriel . In June 1802 , Tlingit warriors attacked the settlement and killed or captured most of the 150 Russians and Aleuts living there . Baranov led an armed expedition to retake Sitka by force in June 1804 . The Russian warship Neva joined Baranov at Sitka . A new Russian fort was established while the Tlingit prepared to defend themselves with a well @-@ armed fort of their own . Tension rapidly escalated into skirmishes and negotiations broke down . In early October , the Russians attacked the Tlingit fort with cannon from the Neva and from a land party . The Tlingit responded with powerful gun and cannon fire of their own . The Battle of Sitka continued for several days until the Tlingit abandoned their fort and left the area . Tlingit accounts of the battle refuse to admit defeat or give the Russians credit for taking the Tlingit fort . The Russians destroyed the abandoned Tlingit fort and named the new Russian fort Novo @-@ Arkhangelsk ( New Archangel ) , also known as Fort Archangel Michael and Fort Saint Michael . The confrontations at Sitka in 1802 and 1804 played a significant role in subsequent Tlingit @-@ Russian relations for generations . 
 Novo @-@ Arkhangelsk soon became the primary settlement and colonial capital of Russian America . After the Alaska Purchase , it was renamed Sitka , and became the first capital of Alaska Territory . 
 The Russian @-@ American Company ( RAC ) was incorporated in 1799 , putting an end to the promyshlenniki period and beginning an era of centralized monopoly . Its charter was laid out in a 1799 ukase by the new Tsar Paul , which granted the company monopolistic control over trade in the Aleutian Islands and the North America mainland , south to 55 ° north latitude ( approximating the present border on coast between British Columbia and Alaska ) . The RAC was modeled on Britain 's East India Company ( EIC ) and Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) . Russian officials intended the company to operate both as a business enterprise and a state organization for extending imperial influence , similar to the EIC and HBC . It was also hoped that the company would be able to conduct maritime trade with China and Japan , although this goal was not realized . In 1818 the Russian government took control of the RAC from the merchants who held the charter . The explorer and naval officer Ferdinand Petrovich von Wrangel was the first president of the company during the government period . In 1867 , the Alaska Purchase transferred control of Alaska to the United States and the commercial interests of the Russian American Company were sold to Hutchinson , Kohl & Company of San Francisco , who then merged with several other groups to form the Alaska Commercial Company . 
 The Russian population in America never surpassed 1 @,@ 000 — the peak was 823 in 1839 . However , the RAC employed and fed thousands of natives . According to official census counts by the Russians , the population of Russian America peaked at 10 @,@ 313 in 1838 . An additional 12 @,@ 500 people were known local residents not included in the colonial register . An estimated 17 @,@ 000 more local residents were present but unknown to the Russians . Thus , the total population of Russian America was approximately 40 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Diversification and transformation = = 
 = = = Russian @-@ American Company = = = 
 Colony Ross , known as Fort Ross today , was built in California just north of San Francisco Bay . It was the RAC 's southernmost outpost and operated from 1812 to 1841 , and was established as an agricultural base for supplying the northern settlements with food as well as for conducting trade with Alta California . The Ross Colony included a number of settlements spread out over an area stretching from Point Arena to Tomales Bay . The administrative center was Port <unk> at Bodega Harbor , off Bodega Bay . An <unk> hunting camp was located on the Farallon Islands . Three ranches were established : the <unk> Ranch on the Russian River near the mouth of Willow Creek , the <unk> Ranch in the Salmon Creek valley about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the present day Bodega , and the Chernykh Ranch near present @-@ day Graton . Fort Ross employed native Alaskans to hunt seals and sea otters on the California coast . By 1840 California 's sea otter population had been severely depleted . 
 The Russian Emperor Alexander I issued the <unk> of 1821 which announced Russian hegemony over the Northwest Coast from 45 ° 50 ′ north latitude onwards in a northern direction . The only Russian attempt to enforce the ukase of 1821 was the seizure of the US brig Pearl by the Russian sloop Apollon , in 1822 . The Pearl , a maritime fur trading vessel , was sailing from Boston to Sitka . On a protest from the US government , the vessel was released and compensation paid . Britain and the United States protested and negotiations ultimately resulted in the Russo @-@ American Treaty of 1824 and the Anglo @-@ Russian Convention of 1825 . These treaties established 54 ° 40 ′ as the southern boundary of exclusively Russian territory . The Anglo @-@ Russian treaty delineated the boundary of Russian America fully . The border began on the coast at 54 ° 40 ′ , then ran north along the mountains near the coast until it reached 141 ° west longitude , after which the boundary ran north along that line of longitude to the Arctic Ocean . Aside from boundary adjustments to the Alaska Panhandle , stemming from the Alaska boundary dispute of the late 19th century , this is the current boundary of the state of Alaska . In 1839 the RAC @-@ HBC Agreement was signed , giving the Hudson 's Bay Company a lease of the southeastern sector of what is now the Alaska Panhandle , as far north as 56 ° 30 ' north latitude . 
 = = = American methods and strategies = = = 
 American traders developed the " Golden Round " trade route around the world . Ships sailed from Boston to the Pacific via Cape Horn , then to the North West Coast , arriving in the spring or early summer . They would spend the summer and early autumn fur trading on the coast , mainly between Sitka and the Columbia River . In late autumn they sailed to the Hawaiian Islands , where they typically spent the winter , then from Hawaii to Macau on the Pearl River Delta , arriving in autumn . Trading in Canton did not begin until November , when tea shipments were ready . The Americans had to hire pilots to take their ships up the Pearl River to Canton 's " <unk> " of Whampoa . Foreign ships were not allowed in Canton itself . Trading took weeks or months , after which the ships were loaded with Chinese goods such as teas , silks , porcelains , sugar , cassia , and curios . They left in the winter and used the northeasterly monsoon winds of the South China Sea to reach the Sunda Strait , then used the southeasterly trade winds to cross the Indian Ocean to the Cape of Good Hope . From there the ships sailed to Boston , where they traditionally docked at the India Wharf . Frederic William <unk> described this as the " golden round " , writing : The Americans had a perfect golden round of profits : first , the profit on the original cargo of trading goods when exchanged for furs ; second , the profit when the furs were transmuted into Chinese goods ; and , third , the profit on those goods when they reached America . In the later years of the North West Trade the pattern became more complex as additional markets and side voyages were incorporated . 
 As the North West trade developed it became riskier to depend solely upon acquiring sea otter furs through trade with the indigenous people of the coast . Diversification began in the first decade of the 19th century if not earlier , and increased over time . Maritime fur trading voyages were no longer solely about taking sea otter furs from the North West Coast to Canton . Other commodities and markets throughout the Pacific were added to the system . Sandalwood , mainly from Hawaii , became an important item of the China trade . Just as the sea otter trade was waning the sandalwood trade boomed , peaking in 1821 , then declined . Hawaiian sandalwood was depleted by 1830 . Fiji and the Marquesas Islands were the other principal sources of sandalwood . Most had been cut by 1820 . Fiji was also a source of bêche @-@ de @-@ mer , a gourmet delicacy in China . American traders began acquiring Fijian bêche @-@ de @-@ mer in 1804 and <unk> boomed there . Bêche @-@ de @-@ mer became Fiji 's leading export by 1830 . Depletion led to a decline and the end of the trade by 1850 . <unk> was also done from 1812 in Hawaii and from 1814 in the Marquesas . Other side trades included Chilean copper from Valparaíso , scrimshaw ( whale teeth ) , tortoise shells and meat from the Galápagos Islands , sugar from Manila , and , from Java , areca nuts ( so @-@ called betel nuts ) and coffee beans . Sealing boomed in the Juan Fernández Islands and the Juan Fernández fur seal was rapidly exploited to near @-@ extinction . The northern fur seal rookeries were controlled by Russia , so Americans acquired northern fur seal skins through trade rather than sealing . 
 Another side trade was smuggling along the Pacific coast of the Spanish Empire , where foreign trade was prohibited by Spanish law . This trade peaked in the 1810s , then faded in the 1820s . Traders concentrated on Alta California , which produced a surplus of grain , beef , tallow , and hides , but was chronically short of manufactured goods . American ships brought goods to the missions of Alta California in exchange for grain , beef , and Californian sea otter skins . The grain , beef , and other provisions were taken to Sitka , which was perennially short of foods supplies . After Mexico gained independence in 1821 the American trade with Alta California continued in a slightly modified form . American traders brought mostly clothing , cottons , silks , lace , cutlery , alcohol , and sugar , which were traded for hides and tallow at a profit generally between 200 % and 300 % . The California Hide Trade became a major industry in its own right . By the 1830s , however , the missions of Alta California had been secularized by Mexican authorities and deserted by Indian labourers . The trade slid into unprofitability . The decline of the American trade with Alta California left just one significant alternative to the ever @-@ dwindling sea otter trade — the provisioning of the settlements of Russian America , which lasted until the Americans abandoned the North West Coast altogether in the early 1840s . From the first decade of the 19th century until 1841 American ships visited Sitka regularly , trading provisions , textiles , and liquor for fur seal skins , timber , and fish . This trade was usually highly profitable for the Americans and the Russian settlements depended on it . Thus when Tsar Nicholas I issued the ukase of 1821 , banning foreign trade north of the 51st parallel , the Russian colonies in America were forced to ignore the ban and engage in smuggling . 
 On the Northwest Coast itself the fur trade was supplemented with slave trading . The pre @-@ existing indigenous slave trade was enlarged and expanded upon by fur traders , especially the American traders . While working the coast for furs , traders would purchase slaves around the mouth of the Columbia River and in the Strait of Juan de Fuca , then sell or trade them on the northern coast . Few traders admitted to slaving , although some wrote about it in detail . Further information comes from sources such as reports by HBC officers . <unk> Simpson of the Hudson 's Bay Company wrote in 1828 that American traders on coast trafficked in slaves , " purchasing them at a cheap rate from one tribe and disposing of them to others at a very high profit . " He concluded that the American traders made more money from selling slaves , rum , and gunpowder than they did from fur trading . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Large @-@ scale economic issues played a role in the decline of the maritime fur trade and the China trade in general . Before the 19th century , Chinese demand for Western raw materials or manufactured goods was small , but bullion ( also known as specie ) was accepted , resulting in a general drain of precious metals from the West to China . The situation reversed in the early 19th century for a variety of reasons . Western demand for Chinese goods declined relative to new options ( for example , coffee from the West Indies began to replace tea in the United States ) , while Chinese demand for Western items increased , such as for English manufactures , American cotton goods , and opium which was outlawed but smuggled into China on a large and increasing scale . Before long , China was being drained of specie and saturated with Western goods . At the same time , intense speculation in the China trade by American and British merchant companies began . By the 1820s , too many firms were competing for an overstocked market , resulting in bankruptcies and consolidation . The inevitable commercial crisis struck in 1826 – 27 , after the Panic of 1825 . Tea prices plummeted and the China trade 's volume collapsed by about a third . By this time , the old maritime fur trade on the Northwest Coast and the Old China Trade itself were dying . The final blow came with the depression of 1841 – 43 , following the Panic of 1837 . 
 Over time , the maritime fur traders concentrated on different parts of the North West Coast . In the 1790s , the west coast of Vancouver Island , especially Nootka Sound , was frequently visited . By the 1810s , the locus had shifted to the Queen Charlotte Islands and Alexander Archipelago , and in the 1820s , farther north to areas near Sitka Sound . After about 1830 , it shifted south to the area from Dixon Entrance to Queen Charlotte Sound . During the early years , ships tended to cruise the coast , seeking trading opportunities whenever they arose . Later , ships spent more time in specific harbors . As fur resources dwindled and prices rose , ship captains increasingly concentrated on a few key ports of call and stayed longer . Eventually , acquiring enough furs for the China trade in a single year was no longer possible . Some traders wintered in Hawaii , returning to the coast in the spring , but many wintered on the North West Coast , usually in one of the key trading harbors . These harbors included " <unk> " on Tongass Island , today called Port Tongass ; the several " <unk> " harbors on south Dall Island north of Cape <unk> ; " <unk> " on northern Vancouver Island ; and " Tongass " in Clarence Strait , today called <unk> Harbor , which was said to be the most popular wintering place for American ships in the 1830s . Many significant trading sites were on the Queen Charlotte Islands , including Cloak Bay , Masset , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Houston Stewart Channel , known as " <unk> 's Harbor " , after Chief <unk> . 
 As marine furs became depleted in the early 19th century , American ship captains began to accept increasing numbers of land furs such as beaver , which were brought from the interior to the coast via indigenous trade networks from New Caledonia — today the <unk> and <unk> districts of the Central Interior of British Columbia . During the 1820s , the British Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) , which considered the interior fur trade to be its domain , began to experience significant losses as a result of this diversion of furs to the coast . To protect its interests , the HBC entered the coast trade to drive away the American traders . This goal was achieved during the 1830s . By 1841 , the American traders had abandoned the North West Coast . For a time , the North West Coast trade was controlled by the HBC and the RAC . Following the 1846 resolution of the Oregon Territory controversy between the United States and England , and the American purchase of Alaska in 1867 , American hunters returned to hunting sea otters in the region , both from land and sea . Hunting throughout the Aleutian and Kuril Islands by American commercial outfits also contributed to the near @-@ extinction of the species by the late 1800s . 
 = = = Hudson 's Bay Company = = = 
 From 1779 to 1821 two British fur trading companies , the Montreal @-@ based North West Company ( NWC ) and the London @-@ based Hudson 's Bay Company , competed for control of the fur trade of what later became Western Canada . The struggle , which eventually reached the point of armed battles such as the 1816 Battle of Seven Oaks , was mostly over control of Rupert 's Land , east of the Continental Divide . Around the turn of the 19th century the NWC expanded its operations westward , across the Rocky Mountains into the mostly unexplored Pacific Northwest . By the 1810s the NWC had established new fur trading operations west of the Rockies , in New Caledonia and the Columbia District . Starting in 1811 the American Pacific Fur Company ( PFC ) challenged the NWC in the Pacific Northwest , but during the War of 1812 the PFC , at risk of being captured by the British Navy , sold its entire operation to the NWC . The PFC had build Fort Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River . Under the NWC it was renamed Fort George , and became the Columbia District 's Pacific seaport . The NWC sought to establish a profitable beaver fur trade with China . Due to the East India Company 's ( EIC ) control over British trading in Canton the NWC turned to American shipping companies . Starting in 1792 the NWC had beaver furs shipped to China by American firms . After the acquisition of Fort George ( Astoria ) in 1815 the NWC began to supply the Columbia District by sea through the Boston @-@ based firm of Perkins and Company . After arriving at Fort George the American ship took a cargo of NWC beaver furs to Canton , exchanged them for China goods and conveyed them to Boston for sale . Even though Perkins and Company took 25 % of the proceeds the arrangement was still about 50 % more profitable than using British ships and selling furs in Canton through the EIC for bills payable on London and returning from China with no cargo . 
 In 1821 , after tensions between the NWC and HBC had erupted into violence the NWC was forced to merge into the HBC . As a result , the HBC acquired the Columbia District and its trade with China . At first the system of shipping furs via the American Perkins and Company was continued , but in 1822 the United States Customs Service imposed a heavy ad valorem duty on the proceeds . The HBC stopped using American middlemen and instead tried selling furs through the EIC . In 1824 and 1825 the HBC sold 20 @,@ 000 beaver and 7 @,@ 000 land @-@ otter skins in China through the EIC , but the arrangement did not prove advantageous for either firm . 
 In the wake of the NWC 's forced merger into the HBC , George Simpson reorganized operations in New Caledonia and the Columbia Department . His efforts and keen fiscal sense , combined with a resurgence of American traders on the coast after the Russo @-@ American Treaty of 1824 , resulted in the HBC 's decision to enter the coast maritime fur trade and drive out the Americans . By the early 1820s American traders were taking 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 beaver skins , mostly from New Caledonia , to Canton every year . By the early 1830s the number had reached 10 @,@ 000 annually , which was as many as the HBC itself was acquiring from New Caledonia and half of the total output of the entire Columbia Department . In addition , the Americans were paying higher prices for the furs , which forced the HBC to do the same . The HBC effort to gain control of the coastal fur trade began in the late 1820s . It took some time for the HBC to acquire the necessary ships , skilled seamen , trade goods , and intelligence about the coast trade . Simpson decided that the " London ships " , which brought goods to Fort Vancouver and returned to England with furs , should arrive early enough to make a coasting voyage before departing . The first London ship to do this was the schooner <unk> , in 1827 . However , its voyage did not get beyond the Strait of Georgia and only 2 sea otter and 28 land otter and beaver skins were acquired . In 1828 the HBC decided to deploy three ships for the coast trade , but setbacks caused delays . The William and Ann was lost in 1829 , and the Isabella in 1830 , both at the Columbia Bar . The HBC 's shipping was inadequate for the coast trade until the middle 1830s . In 1835 two ships were added to the HBC 's coast fleet . One of them , the Beaver , was a steamship , and it proved extremely useful in the variable winds , strong currents , and long narrow inlets . 
 To strengthen its coast trade the Hudson 's Bay Company built a series of fortified trading posts , the first of which was Fort Langley , established in 1827 on the Fraser River about 50 km ( 31 mi ) from the river 's mouth . The next was Fort Simpson , founded in 1831 at the mouth of the Nass River , and moved in 1834 several miles to the present Port Simpson . In 1833 Fort McLoughlin was established on an island in Milbanke Sound and Fort Nisqually was built at the southern end of Puget Sound . An overland trail linked Fort Nisqually and Fort Vancouver , so HBC vessels trading along the northern coast could unload furs and take on trade goods without having to navigate the Columbia River and its hazardous bar . Later coastal posts included Fort Stikine ( 1840 ) , Fort Durham ( 1840 ) , and Fort Victoria ( 1843 ) . 
 = = = American disadvantage = = = 
 It was not easy for the HBC to drive the Americans away from the North West Coast . The Americans had decades of experience and knew the coast 's complex physical and human geography . It took until 1835 for the HBC to gain this level of experience , but the Americans still had several advantages . For a number of reasons they were willing and able to pay high prices for furs — much higher than the HBC could match without taking large financial losses . The American ventures were global in scope . They tapped multiple markets of which the North West Coast was but one . By the 1820s American ships routinely spent years in the Pacific , making several voyages between various places such as California , Hawaii , the Philippines , and Canton . American ships were usually stocked with a surplus of trade goods intended for trade on the North West Coast . It was always best to get rid of any extra trade goods on the North West Coast , " dumping " them at any price , before leaving . They would use up stowage space that could be used more profitably elsewhere . The HBC therefore faced a major challenge even after they became experienced with the coast 's geography and indigenous peoples . The American system not only raised the price of furs but also lowered the value of trade goods . Furthermore , the indigenous people knew that increased competition served their interests and gave them bargaining power . They had no desire to see the Americans abandon the coast trade . Therefore , the HBC had to not just match but exceed the prices paid by Americans if they hoped to drive the Americans away . Beaver fur prices on the coast could be many times what the HBC was paying in the interior . There was no hope of making a profit . In order to compete on the coast the HBC had to take large , long @-@ term financial losses . 
 The main advantage the HBC had over the Americans was that it could take such losses . As a vast corporation with a large amount of capital , the company was able to <unk> the Americans , taking a loss , for years on end . By the middle to late 1830s the HBC policy on the coast was to pay whatever price necessary to ensure that furs fell into their hands and not the Americans . American traders soon found the coast fur trade unprofitable — the HBC had captured the trade . But Americans still traded with the Russians at Sitka and , once on the coast were wont to seek a few furs . As long as this continued , the HBC continued to have to pay high prices for furs and take losses . Eventually the Sitka trade became financially risky . The American @-@ Russian agreement of 1824 , which allowed Americans to trade in the Alaska Panhandle , expired in 1834 and was not renewed . In 1839 the HBC made an agreement with the Russian American Company ( RAC ) , under which the HBC would supply the RAC with provisions and manufactures in exchange for a ten @-@ year lease for portions of the Alaska Panhandle . This proved to be the final blow for the American traders , who were finally driven out of the North West Coast maritime fur trade altogether . 
 The HBC drastically reduced the price paid for furs , by 50 % in many cases . By this time , however , the fur trade was in decline , both on the coast and the continent , due to a general depletion of fur @-@ bearing animals , along with a reduction in the demand for beaver pelts . A financial panic in 1837 resulted in a general slump in the fur and China trade , bringing an end to a half @-@ century boom . During the 1840s , the HBC closed most of their coastal trading posts , leaving the coast trade to just Fort Simpson and the Beaver , with the new depot at Fort Victoria anchoring the southern coast . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The half century or so of the maritime fur trade and the North West Coast trade enriched Boston shipowners , creating capital that helped New England 's transformation from an agrarian to an industrial society . The trade stimulated the culture of North West Coast natives , made Hawaii famous and nearly overwhelmed the native Hawaiians with foreign influences . It played a role in increased commercial pressure on China at Canton . Fur bearing animals were devastated , especially sea otters . By 1850 , sea otters were virtually extinct throughout the North West Coast and found only in the Aleutian Islands and California . 
 = = = Northwest Coast = = = 
 The maritime fur trade brought the natives of the Northwest Coast material prosperity , wealth , and technology . It enlarged and transformed intertribal relations , trade , and war , including the " <unk> " of inland natives . Many inland natives adopted potlatching and coastal descent systems . At first the trade caused a rise in the power of a few key chiefs such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Sitka Tlingit ) , Kow ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ; <unk> Haida ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( Haida ) . This was followed by a proliferation of chiefs and a general debasement of chieftainship , in part due to widespread wealth , giving individual hunters the means to challenge the traditional chiefs . There was an increase in the frequency of potlatching , which was used by the nouveau riche in challenging the traditional chiefs . In response the hereditary clan chiefs defended their traditional powers through an increased use of noble ancestry names , totems , and crests , all validated by <unk> . 
 The increase in trade , and new items had a significant impact on First Nations material cultures , seeing the rise of such traditions as fabric appliqué ( Button Blankets ) , metalwork ( Northwest Coast engraved silver jewelry originated around this time as native craftsmen learned to make jewelry from coins ) , and contributed to a cultural fluorescence with the advent of improved ( iron ) tools that saw the creative of more and larger carvings ( aka ' totem poles ' ) . New pigments available included vermilion , from China , that rapidly replaced earlier red pigments and can be seen on many artifacts from this era . 
 Negative effects of the coast trade on the native peoples of the Northwest included waves of epidemic disease , smallpox worst of all . Other health problems included the spread of alcoholism , tuberculosis , venereal diseases including syphilis , and sterility . The coast trade also promoted and enhanced the pre @-@ existing system of native slavery and native slave trading . The overall number of slaves increased , as did their distribution and exploitation . Despite these negative effects , the North West Coast natives were largely spared the additional effects that would have come had there been more permanent posts , political administration , missionizing , and colonization . The early traders were mostly seasonal visitors and the later HBC posts were few and small . <unk> and direct colonial rule over the coastal natives did not begin in earnest until the late 19th century . During the early 19th century , native culture not only survived but flourished . 
 The maritime trade also brought changes to the natives ' traditional seasonal migration patterns and settlement locations . The coastal people were " <unk> " , that is , they were incorporated into a global market economy . At first their main export was furs , later supplemented and replaced by salmon , lumber , and artwork . By the late 19th century the North West Coast was famous for its arts and crafts , especially large works like totem poles , causing a flourishing of indigenous art . The natives imported many western goods and soon became dependent on many , such as firearms and metal tools . Textiles became a vital trade item during the early maritime fur trade era . The value of furs caused a shift in native dress from furs to textiles , which was reinforced by the general depletion of fur animals . Firearms had both positive and negative effects . They made hunting much more efficient but also made warfare much more deadly . 
 = = = Russian America = = = 
 The Russians , unlike the British and Americans , endeavoured to convert the natives to Christianity . Many Aleuts joined the Russian Orthodox Church . Russian missionaries founded a number of churches for the natives , such as the Church of the Holy Ascension in Unalaska . A notable Russian missionary was Saint Innocent of Alaska . For his work as a missionary , bishop , and later archbishop in Alaska and the Russian Far East he was canonized . One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut . Other important Russian missionaries include Herman of Alaska and Joasaph <unk> . 
 = = = Hawaii = = = 
 The effect of the maritime fur trade on native Hawaiians was similar to that of the North West Coast natives , but more powerfully transformative . The Hawaiians were generally receptive to Western incursion and settlement . The rise of King Kamehameha I and the unification of the islands under his rule were made possible in part by the effects of the maritime fur trade and its larger Pacific scope . The influx of wealth and technology helped make the new Kingdom of Hawaii relatively strong , in political and economic terms . Many non @-@ native foodstuffs were introduced to the Hawaiian Islands during the early trading era , including plants such as beans , cabbage , onions , squash , pumpkins , melons , and oranges , as well as cash crops like tobacco , cotton , and sugar . Animals introduced included cattle , horses , sheep , and goats . Due to its high fertility Oahu became the most important of the islands . By the 1820s the population of Honolulu was over 10 @,@ 000 . The native Hawaiian population suffered waves of epidemic disease , including cholera . The availability of alcohol , especially grog and gin , led to widespread boozing and an increased use of traditional kava intoxication . These health issues , plus warfare related to the unification of the islands , droughts , and <unk> taking precedence over farming all contributed to an increase in famines and a general population decline . By 1850 the native population had dropped by perhaps 50 % . 
 = = = South China = = = 
 The effect of the maritime fur trade in Southern China by itself was probably not great . The Canton trade as a whole had limited effect on China , mostly limited to the tea growers of Fujian , the silk producers of Nanjing , the craftsmen of Canton , and various middlemen , and merchants . The ruling Manchus kept foreign trade by ship at bay . It was restricted to Canton , and even there was allowed only outside the city walls . China was generally self @-@ sufficient . The main effect of the Old China Trade was an increased import of opium and related outflow of specie , which resulted in China being incorporated into the capitalist world system after 1830 . However , the maritime fur trade played a minor role in this process . 
 = = = New England = = = 
 The maritime fur trade was , for the United States , a branch of the " East India " ( Asian ) trade based in Salem , Boston , Providence , New York City ( Fanning & Coles ) , Philadelphia , and Baltimore . The trade focused on Asian ports such as Canton , Kolkata ( Calcutta ) , Chennai ( Madras ) , Manila , Jakarta ( Batavia ) , and the islands of Mauritius and Sumatra . Goods exported included furs , rum , ammunition , ginseng , lumber , ice , salt , Spanish silver dollars , iron , tobacco , opium , and tar . Goods brought back from Asia included muslins , silks , <unk> , spices , cassia , <unk> ( porcelain ) , tea , sugar , and drugs . The maritime fur trade was just one part of the overall system . As a whole the Asian trade had a significant effect on the early United States , especially New England . The accumulation of large amounts of capital in short time contributed to American industrial and manufacturing development , which was compounded by rapid population growth and technological advancements . In New England the textile industry rose to dominance in early to middle 19th century . In light of the decline of the fur trade and a post @-@ Napoleonic depression in commerce , capital shifted " from wharf to waterfall " , that is , from shipping ventures to textile mills ( which were originally located where water power was available ) . The textile industry in turn had large effect on slavery in the United States , increasing the demand for cotton and helping make possible the rapid expansion of the cotton plantation system across the Deep South . 
 = = Books cited = = 
 Bancroft , Hubert Howe ; Alfred Bates ; Ivan Petroff ; William <unk> ( 1886 ) . History of Alaska : 1730 – 1885 . A. L. Bancroft & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 665 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. OCLC <unk> . 
 Bockstoce , John R. ( 2009 ) . Furs and Frontiers in the Far North : The Contest Among Native and Foreign Nations for the Bering Strait Fur Trade . Yale University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Bockstoce , John R. ( 2005 ) . The Opening of the Maritime Fur Trade at Bering Strait : Americans and Russians meet the Kan <unk> <unk> in Kotzebue Sound . Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , v. 95 , pt . 1 . American Philosophical Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 951 @-@ 0 . 
 Borneman , Walter R. ( 2004 ) . Alaska : Saga of a Bold Land . HarperCollins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Basil ; E. A. P. <unk> @-@ Vaughan ; Thomas Vaughan ( 1989 ) . The Russian American Colonies , 1798 – 1867 : A Documentary Record . Oregon Historical Society Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 150 @-@ 8 . 
 Dodge , Ernest Stanley ( 1976 ) . Islands and Empires : Western Impact on the Pacific and East Asia . University of Minnesota Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Farrow , Anne ; Joel Lang ; Jennifer Frank ( 2006 ) . Complicity : How the North Promoted , Prolonged , and <unk> from Slavery . Random House . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 345 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Frost , Alan ( 1999 ) . The Voyage of the Endeavour : Captain Cook and the Discovery of the Pacific . Allen & Unwin . ISBN 1 @-@ 86508 @-@ 200 @-@ 7 . 
 Fryer , Mary <unk> ( 1986 ) . Battlefields of Canada . Dundurn Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 007 @-@ 2 . 
 Gibson , James R. ( 1976 ) . Imperial Russia in Frontier America : The Changing Geography of Supply of Russian America , 1784 – 1867 . Oxford University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gibson , James R. ( 1992 ) . Otter Skins , Boston Ships , and China Goods : The Maritime Fur Trade of the Northwest Coast , 1785 – 1841 . McGill @-@ Queen 's University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2028 @-@ 7 . 
 Haycox , Stephen W. ( 2002 ) . Alaska : An American Colony . University of Washington Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 295 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Hayes , Derek ( 2007 ) . Historical Atlas of California . University of California Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Hayes , Derek ( 1999 ) . Historical Atlas of the Pacific Northwest : Maps of exploration and Discovery . Sasquatch Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 215 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Frederic William ; Robert Haswell ; John Box Hoskins ; John <unk> ( 1990 ) [ first published 1941 ] . Voyages of the " Columbia " to the Northwest coast , 1787 – 1790 and 1790 – 1793 . Oregon Historical Society Press in cooperation with the Massachusetts Historical Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 250 @-@ 5 . 
 Kan , Sergei ( 1999 ) . Memory Eternal : Tlingit Culture and Russian Orthodox Christianity through Two Centuries . University of Washington Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 295 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Lal , Brij V. ; Kate Fortune ( 2000 ) . The Pacific Islands : An Encyclopedia . University of Hawaii Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Laut , Agnes Christina ( 1915 ) . Pioneers of the Pacific Coast : a Chronicle of Sea Rovers and Fur Hunters , Volume 22 . Glasgow , Brook & Company . OCLC <unk> . 
 Mackie , Richard Somerset ( 1997 ) . Trading Beyond the Mountains : The British Fur Trade on the Pacific 1793 – 1843 . Vancouver : University of British Columbia ( UBC ) Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Malloy , Mary ( 1998 ) . Boston Men on the Northwest Coast : The American Maritime Fur Trade 1788 @-@ 1844 . The Limestone Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 18 @-@ 4 . 
 McDowell , Jim ( 1998 ) . José Narváez : The Forgotten Explorer . Spokane , Washington : The Arthur H. Clark Company . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 265 @-@ X. 
 McDougall , Walter A. ( 2004 ) . Let the Sea Make a Noise : A History of the North Pacific from Magellan to MacArthur . Harper Collins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Meinig , D.W. ( 1986 ) . The Shaping of America : A Geographical Perspective on 500 Years of History , Volume 1 : Atlantic America , 1492 – 1800 . Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Michael ( 1992 ) . Orthodox Alaska : A Theology of Mission . St Vladimir 's Seminary Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 092 @-@ 1 . 
 Pethick , Derek ( 1976 ) . First Approaches to the Northwest Coast . Vancouver : J.J. Douglas . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 056 @-@ 4 . 
 Pethick , Derek ( 1980 ) . The Nootka Connection : Europe and the Northwest Coast 1790 – 1795 . Vancouver : Douglas & McIntyre . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 279 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Fiona ( 2000 ) . Native Americans : The Indigenous Peoples of North America . Heinemann . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 435 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Freeman M. ( 2008 ) . At the Far Reaches of Empire : The Life of Juan Francisco De La Bodega Y Quadra . University of British Columbia Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1367 @-@ 9 . 
 Weber , David J. ( 1994 ) . The Spanish Frontier in North America . Yale University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = Ion Agârbiceanu = 
 Ion Agârbiceanu ( September 12 , 1882 – May 28 , 1963 ) was an Austro @-@ Hungarian @-@ born Romanian writer , journalist , politician , theologian and Greek @-@ Catholic priest . A native of Transylvania , he graduated from Budapest University , after which he was ordained . He was initially assigned to a parish in the Apuseni Mountains , which form the backdrop to much of his fiction . Before 1910 , Agârbiceanu had achieved literary fame in both Transylvania and the Kingdom of Romania ; his work was disputed between the rival schools of Sămănătorul and Poporanism . 
 Committed to social and cultural activism in Transylvania , Agârbiceanu spent the 1910s officiating near Sibiu , with a break during World War I that eventually took him deep into Ukraine . In 1919 , he moved to Cluj , where he lived for most of the remainder of his life . After the war , he involved himself in both the political and cultural life of Greater Romania . He was voted into the Romanian Academy and assumed the office of Senate vice president under the National Renaissance Front dictatorship . 
 Agârbiceanu spent his last decade and a half under a communist regime that outlawed his church , an act in which he refused to cooperate . Much of his work , with its transparent Christian moralizing , proved incompatible with the new ideology , and was banned by communist censors ; however , the regime found him useful for its image , and bestowed honors upon him . Agârbiceanu 's full contribution has been made available since the 1990s , but he endures as a largely forgotten author , with the possible exception of his Apuseni @-@ based novella , Fefeleaga . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Born in <unk> village in Transylvania 's Alba County ( at the time in <unk> @-@ Fehér County ) , Agârbiceanu was the second of eight children ; his parents were Nicolae and Ana ( née <unk> ) . His father and grandfather were both woodcutters , while he believed his great @-@ grandparents were cowherds , as indicated by the surname of his grandfather , Vasile <unk> , who originated in the Sibiu area . The name Agârbiceanu came from the family 's ancestral village , <unk> . According to the novelist 's own notes , his father was literate and subscribed to a number of Romanian @-@ language publications that appeared in Transylvania . His mother , although a great lover of stories and storytelling , was illiterate . 
 Agârbiceanu recalled an idyllic childhood , with summers spent tending to his father 's sheep and sleeping in a stick hut . An avid reader of stories by Petre <unk> , he attended school in his native village and in Blaj , graduating from the Superior Gymnasium in 1900 . Literary historians describe this as the period of his literary debut , which was a collaboration with Unirea newspaper . There , Agârbiceanu published a feuilleton ( signed as <unk> ) , poetry , and , in 1900 , the short story În <unk> <unk> ( " At Lent " ) . Agârbiceanu also served as secretary of the Blaj Literary Society , at the time the city 's only Romanian @-@ speaking literary body still tolerated by the Hungarian authorities . He soon became a correspondent of <unk> , a Cluj @-@ based newspaper , signing his first pieces there with the pen name <unk> , then as <unk> or <unk> ( " Horseshoe " ) . 
 The Blaj @-@ based Făgăraș and Alba Iulia Archdiocese arranged for Agârbiceanu to study at the theology faculty of Budapest University between 1900 and 1904 . Publishing more works in Tribuna and Familia , he soon became a regular contributor to Luceafărul . Returning to Blaj after graduation , he supervised the local boys ' boarding school , working there during the 1904 – 1905 academic year . Urged by friends and receiving a church scholarship , he returned to Budapest to study literature . He spent just one semester there , during which he also taught primary school catechism . In March 1906 , he married Maria <unk> Radu , the daughter of an archpriest from Ocna Mureș . 
 = = = Priesthood and World War I = = = 
 Also in 1906 , following an ordination ceremony held on Easter Sunday , Agârbiceanu was appointed parish priest in <unk> , in the Apuseni Mountains . For four years , he observed the difficult lives of the mountain dwellers and the problems encountered in the nearby gold mines . During this time , he wrote several notices in the magazine <unk> , later published as În <unk> ( " Into the Darkness " , 1910 ) , the novella Fefeleaga , and the novel <unk> ( " The Archangels " ) , all of them based on the mining experience . He also started writing frequently for literary magazines that included Luceafărul , Unirea and <unk> . His other literary works of the period include De la țară ( " From the Countryside " , 1906 ) , În <unk> <unk> ( " In the Cultured Class " , 1909 ) , <unk> <unk> ( " Two Loves " , 1910 ) , <unk> ( " The Abyss " , 1912 ) , and a collection of <unk> și <unk> ( " Sketches and Short Stories " , 1912 ) . 
 Agârbiceanu visited Bucharest , the Old Kingdom capital , in 1906 , and sent enthusiastic travel notes for Unirea . He became a regular contributor to the Bucharest nationalist review Sămănătorul , which gave De la țară a sonorous welcome , and later to Sămănătorul 's leftist rival , Viața Românească . From 1909 , he was also one of the regulars at <unk> Românesc . For his literary activity , he was elected a corresponding member of Astra in 1912 , and was promoted to full membership in 1925 . From 1910 to 1919 , he was parish priest at Orlat in Sibiu County . Agârbiceanu was also a member of Austria @-@ Hungary 's Romanian National Party ( PNR ) , and supported PNR youth leader Octavian Goga , his colleague at Luceafărul and Tribuna . In 1910 , he followed Goga as he parted from the PNR and launched his own independent faction . 
 By the time World War I broke out , Agârbiceanu had three sons and a daughter , including Ion , the future physicist . During 1914 , the first year of war , he finally published Arhanghelii , as well as the stories in De la sate ( " From the Villages " ) . These were followed , in 1916 , by a work of Christian theology , Din viața <unk> ( " From Priestly Life " ) . 
 In September 1916 , when the Romanian Army withdrew from the Orlat area during the Battle of Transylvania , he fled Austria @-@ Hungary with his family . Their first destination was Râmnicu Vâlcea in the Old Kingdom ; they then headed for Roman in Western Moldavia . Evacuated to Russia in August 1917 , they reached the vicinity of <unk> in Ukraine . While there and alongside other refugee Transylvanians , he took part in a choir organized by Nicolae Colan , a future bishop in the Romanian Orthodox Church . 
 In November of that year , Agârbiceanu and his family found shelter with a Transylvanian family in <unk> village , near <unk> in Bessarabia . The October Revolution soon broke out , and they made their way back to Moldavia , where he became a military chaplain for the Hârlău @-@ based Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia . He returned to Orlat in December 1918 . In March 1919 , following the union of Transylvania with Romania , he was named director of Patria newspaper , which was edited by the province 's Directing Council . 
 In October 1919 , the newspaper 's headquarters moved to Cluj , and Agârbiceanu followed . Thanks to his literary activity , he was part of the leadership of the Romanian Writers ' Society , and was elected corresponding member of the Romanian Academy in 1919 . He also began contributing to the reviews Gândirea of Cluj , and Flacăra and <unk> Românesc of Bucharest . In 1922 , he accompanied other Writers ' Society members on a celebratory tour of Transylvania . Like several of his colleagues , Agârbiceanu preserved a bitter memory of the war , and his articles of the time make a point of referring to the Hungarians as a " barbarian horde " . 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 While working on the Sibiu @-@ based Astra magazine Transilvania ( where he sometimes used the signature AG ) , Agârbiceanu remained the editor of Patria until 1927 , and also resumed his collaboration with Viața Românească . However , he was disappointed by the cultural and economic decline which came as a consequence of Transylvania 's incorporation : the local press , he noted , had largely lost its purpose and could not hope to survive competition . As noted by reviewers from Ilie Rad to Răzvan Voncu , some of Agârbiceanu 's more valuable work saw print in minor provincial reviews . 
 Despite such setbacks , Agârbiceanu published new works in quick succession : O <unk> <unk> ( " A Burning Tear " , 1918 ) , Popa Man ( " Father Man " , 1920 ) , <unk> din <unk> ale <unk> <unk> ( " Captain <unk> 's Latter Days " , 1921 ) , <unk> din Păresemi ( " The Little Meadow of Păresemi " , 1921 ) , <unk> <unk> ( " Our Sins " , 1921 ) , <unk> verde ( " Green <unk> " , 1921 ) , <unk> de <unk> ( " Wax Figures " , 1922 ) . These were followed by Stana ( 1924 ) , <unk> ( " Reveries " , 1925 ) , <unk> ( " Disappointment " , 1925 ) , <unk> ( " Loneliness " , 1926 ) , Legea trupului ( " The Law of the Flesh " , 1926 ) , Legea <unk> ( " The Law of the Mind " , 1927 ) , <unk> de <unk> ( " Evening Hours " , 1927 ) , <unk> ( " Spring " , 1928 ) , <unk> <unk> ( " A Soul 's Bondage " , 1928 ) , and <unk> ( " Victory " , 1931 ) . His other works of the period include various tracts on biblical topics , including homilies and discussions of theodicy : <unk> @-@ a <unk> ( " A Sower Went Out to Sow His Seed " , 1930 ) , <unk> Domnului ( " Lord 's Prayer " , 1930 ) , <unk> în <unk> ( " Evil in the World " , 1931 ) , <unk> ( " The Immaculate " , 1931 ) , <unk> <unk> ( " Paths toward Happiness " , 1931 ) . 
 A member of the PNR Executive Committee in 1919 , he was elected to the Assembly of Deputies that year , in the first election following the creation of Greater Romania . Elected again in 1922 , he served until 1926 . Initially joining the National Peasants ' Party into which the PNR merged in 1926 , the following year he defected to Alexandru Averescu 's People 's Party , of which Goga was also a member . 
 From 1927 to 1928 , Agârbiceanu , a recipient of the National Prize for Literature , headed the Cluj chapter of Astra and edited Transilvania . It was in this magazine that he wrote a number of articles in support of eugenics , calling on priests to promote the movement in their parishes . Given the secular values of the movement 's leaders in Romania , his participation was somewhat incongruous , but Agârbiceanu did not see a conflict between his religious creed and a current centered around supposedly objective natural laws . From 1930 , he participated in Astra 's literary section and headed its cultural congress , in which capacity he lectured on the organization 's role in Romanian cultural life . Additionally , he played a prominent role during its annual congresses and committed himself to social activism . He was involved in Astra 's literacy campaigns , inspecting and fundraising for village libraries in places such as <unk> . 
 = = = Maturity = = = 
 Also in 1930 , Agârbiceanu was elevated to the rank of archpriest for the Cluj district , and in 1931 , he became canon for the Cluj @-@ <unk> Diocese . In 1932 , following schisms in the People 's Party , he followed Goga into the new National Agrarian Party . In so doing , he lost control over Patria to Astra 's Ion <unk> . After 1934 , he was one of the noted contributors to the official literary magazine , Revista Fundațiilor Regale , put out in Bucharest by Paul Zarifopol . 
 In late 1938 , following the establishment of the National Renaissance Front ( <unk> ) , King Carol II appointed him to the Senate , of which he also served as vice president . From 1938 to 1940 , he edited a new edition of Tribuna in Cluj , as both the <unk> 's official paper and Transylvania 's only daily . Toward the end of the 1930s , he wrote in opposition to the revisionist policy of the Kingdom of Hungary , and in August 1940 , after the Second Vienna Award granted Northern Transylvania to Hungary , he fled Cluj for Sibiu . The new authorities called for his expulsion , but he received the order after he had departed Cluj . 
 With the downfall of the National Renaissance Front , Agârbiceanu withdrew from politics . However , in 1941 , he supported Romania 's war on the Eastern Front , including the occupation of Transnistria . In an official magazine that was itself named Transnistria , Agârbiceanu suggested that God had " even greater plans with us " . Agârbiceanu continued to write and publish literature throughout the Carol regime and much of World War II : <unk> ( " The <unk> " , 1938 ) , <unk> ... <unk> ( " Once upon a Time ... a Pupil " , 1939 ) , <unk> ( " The Recollections " , 1940 ) , <unk> Ana ( " Miss Ana " , 1942 ) , alongside more theological and moralizing essays such as Din <unk> Domnului ( " The Lord 's Parables " , 1939 ) , <unk> . <unk> de <unk> a <unk> ( " <unk> . On the Luminous Visage of Christianity " , 1941 ) , <unk> și familia <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> în <unk> românesc ( " The Priest and the Priestly Family . Their Ethnic Role within the Romanian Village " , 1942 ) . The novel <unk> ( " The Whirlpool " ) was serialized by Convorbiri Literare and came out as a volume in 1944 ; another novel , <unk> și <unk> ( " Times and People " ) , being critical of Nazism , was not given imprimatur by the Ion Antonescu regime . Many more works , including Sfântul ( " The Saint " ) , were completed but also remained unpublished . 
 = = = Under communism = = = 
 Following the fall of Antonescu 's regime and the campaign to recover Northern Transylvania , Agârbiceanu became a contributor to a new political weekly , <unk> . He remained in Sibiu until 1945 and then returned to Cluj . He also contributed , in 1947 , a religious tract on Familia <unk> ( " The Christian Family " ) . 
 In 1948 , when the new communist regime outlawed the Greek @-@ Catholic Church and forcibly merged it into the Orthodox Church , Agârbiceanu refused to join the latter denomination , thus setting himself up against the authorities . However , these found his reputation as a writer valuable for their own interests , and preferred to try and co @-@ opt him . In 1953 , after a five @-@ year marginalization for his refusal to turn Orthodox , Agârbiceanu joined the editorial board of Anatol E. <unk> 's semi @-@ official literary magazine , Steaua . He was granted the Order of Labor the following year , and promoted to titular member of the Academy in 1955 . On the occasion of his 80th birthday in 1962 , he was also awarded the Order of the Star of the Romanian People 's Republic , first class . 
 Agârbiceanu 's old and new writings came out in several editions : <unk> <unk> ( " Selected Works " , 1956 ) , Din <unk> și din <unk> ( " From Mountains and Plains " , 1957 ) , Din <unk> ( " Childhood Memories " , 1957 ) , File din <unk> <unk> ( " Pages from the Book of Nature " , 1959 ) , <unk> copiilor ( " Stories for Children " , 1961 ) and <unk> ( " The Pharaohs " , 1961 ) . Although formally congratulated by the regime , Agârbiceanu fell out with its censorship apparatus . According to various accounts , he allowed the censors to operate multiple changes , as long as the substance of his writing was not itself altered . Portions of his work were cut out during <unk> , and a novel , <unk> ( " The Downfall " ) , serialized in Gazeta Literară , was so crudely handled that seven of its pages were lost forever . 
 Expecting to die soon , Agârbiceanu worked on a definitive corpus of his writings , which began printing at the state @-@ run Editura pentru <unk> under the care of G. Pienescu and Mihai <unk> . When he was led to believe that many of his works would not be allowed for publishing , he retook possession of all the manuscripts he had sent in , including some previously unpublished writings . The volumes were already available by that time . The writer died in Cluj in 1963 , and was buried in the city 's <unk> Cemetery in a grave topped by a white marble cross . 
 = = Literary contribution = = 
 = = = Ideology and style = = = 
 Agârbiceanu entered literary life as a poet — according to his Sămănătorul patron , Nicolae Iorga , he was great as the author of ballades . Later in his career , he focused on vignettes ( often prose poems ) , short stories and novels , intended to represent daily life in the Apuseni Mountains . His favorite theme was the life of a Transylvanian country priest at the turn of the 20th century , but his " gallery " of protagonists also included shepherds , foresters , rafters , thieves , teachers , village doctors , Romani metalworkers , and the rich industrialists ( " Transylvanian <unk> " ) . A prolific writer , possibly the most productive one in Romania before 1930 , he completed some 65 volumes , by his own account , both long and short . 
 Ideologically , Agârbiceanu was most closely aligned with Sămănătorul 's ethnic traditionalism , and was always a marginal among the Viața Românească <unk> , who were rather more inspired by Marxism . However , Voncu believes , the similarities were only superficial : unlike the Sămănătorul school , Agârbiceanu was a professional of literary realism , who favored individual psychology over class identity , and would not condemn the city as a decomposed and decomposing environment . His stories , Voncu notes , had an " ethical , even philosophical , vision " , and " the dignity of grand literature . " His naturalness was even highlighted by Iorga , who praised Agârbiceanu as " the liveliest storyteller " of the early 20th century : " he doesn 't go looking for the folkish ingredient ; he just cannot separate himself from it , because he lives therein , heart and soul . " 
 According to Eugen Lovinescu , the modernist literary critic and cultural theorist , Agârbiceanu is the " essential exponent " of Transylvanian <unk> . His literature is one that " by the people and for the people " . As Lovinescu puts it , his work blends an " aggressive affirmation of nationhood " and " healthy ethics pushed to the limit of <unk> and didacticism " with a cultivation of dialectal speech patterns . In this immediate context , Agârbiceanu seems to have been inspired by Ion Pop <unk> and Ioan Slavici , the founders of Transylvanian realism . He himself inspired Liviu Rebreanu . 
 Traditionally , reviewers have been put off by Agârbiceanu 's plot devices and epic mannerisms , and in particular by his explanatory comments and notes , which they deem superfluous and distracting . As Lovinescu notes , Agârbiceanu and other Transylvanian realists will " accumulate in details " , but will remain " incapable of narrating on more than one level " : " for all their dynamism , his sketches are not exciting in the dramatic sense . " The moralizing aspect of Agârbiceanu 's fiction makes it hard to separate between it and his purely theological productions : as Lovinescu notes , whenever Agârbiceanu depicts village drunks , it is as if " for an anti @-@ saloon exhibition . " Dragomirescu argues that Agârbiceanu 's work amounts to a set of humanitarian " directives " , although , he concludes , its depiction of " the bleak and mystical recess of life " is a fine literary contribution , " rising above " his generation 's . He states : " Agârbiceanu is a socializing <unk> or Sămănătorist only when he is at his weakest " . 
 According to exegetes such as Iorga , Constantin Șăineanu and Voncu , the moral lesson of Agârbiceanu 's lay works is only hinted at , with much subtlety . Voncu sees in <unk> din Păresemi the " refinement and objectivity " of novels by Georges Bernanos . On the other hand , Voncu observes that the writer uses his artistic talents in theological works such as <unk> <unk> ( " About Miracles " ) and Din <unk> Domnului , ably narrating simple texts that can appeal either to their intended audience of rural believers or to a more cultivated set of readers . As Z. Ornea notes , Agârbiceanu 's least known works are particularly moralizing . This category includes two stories of moral redemption , the novel Sfântul and the short novella <unk> <unk> și <unk> <unk> Ilarion ( " <unk> the Hermit and Ilarion His Apprentice " ) , which are " entirely tactless " . 
 = = = Major works = = = 
 In Arhanghelii , the implicit Christian lesson is about the love of money and its devastation of an Apuseni get @-@ rich mining community . At the heart of the novel is a former notary , <unk> , whose gold claim appears to be endlessly productive and corrupting . As Șăineanu writes : " with emotion and mounting interest , we witness here the ephemeral joys and disasters that this modern @-@ day Moloch pours over this once @-@ peaceful village . " The novel , Lovinescu argues , is overall " awkward " , but still interesting as a social fresco , called a " frightening human torment " by Iorga . Șăineanu deplores its " prolixity " and arcane mining terminology . As argued by Dragomirescu , the climax , where <unk> runs from the card table to see his mine collapsing , " has remarkable qualities of literary vividness and vigor . " Nicolae Manolescu offers praise to the work , a " solidly realistic novel " that , although widely seen as a pastiche from Slavici , should still be taken into account for its " originality and newness " . He sees Agârbiceanu as an " unlucky " novelist , whose work was eclipsed by that of Rebreanu , Mihail Sadoveanu , and Gala Galaction , which it only resembles coincidentally . 
 In Legea trupului , a psychological novel about a young man torn between the love for a mature woman and her daughter , Agârbiceanu turned his attention to the sins of the flesh . The erotic dilemma is one of several narrative threads : Legea trupului is also a story of inter @-@ ethnic conflict ( Romanians versus Hungarians ) , and a probe into the regional politics in Transylvania ( a theme that also preoccupied him when writing În <unk> <unk> ) . Lovinescu sees Legea trupului as a " solid social and psychological study , for all its <unk> " , but still harmed by Agârbiceanu 's " lack of stylistic expressiveness and verbal insufficiency . " 
 The narrative structure is alluded to in Legea <unk> , which is about discovering one 's true calling . The plot follows its protagonist , a scholarly priest by the name of Andrei Pascu , as he finds himself in his work as a missionary of religion and cultural nationalism , despite being set back by poverty and revisited by his worldly past . Similar themes are developed elsewhere . In Popa Man , a lapsed priest and smuggler is suddenly confronted with the consequences of his actions , and destroys himself with drink . In Stana , named after its female protagonist , a war invalid is a passive witness to his wife 's moral decay . When he dies , his wooden leg serves as a haunting reminder of his virtues , driving Stana to despair . 
 According to Manolescu , these stories were largely outdated by the time of their publishing , when more experimental work was being put out by Hortensia <unk> @-@ <unk> and Camil Petrescu ; Agârbiceanu " could only strike the figure of a naive moralist , reeking of a parson 's mindset , in all ways incompatible with the emancipated Romanian society of the interwar . " The novella Fefeleaga , however , is largely seen as Agârbiceanu 's true masterpiece — either his best story or one of two , alongside the short story Luminița . At the center of the story is a woman who makes a meager living quarrying stones for gold panning , with her many children killed off by a respiratory disease . She was based on a real @-@ life <unk> , Sofia <unk> , with only some details changed . In the defining moment of the narrative , seen by Dragomirescu as symbolic for the plight of Romanian Transylvanians , Fefeleaga sells off her emaciated draft horse and only friend , to prepare for her daughter 's funeral . However , as Iorga notes , this is not a pessimistic outcome : " kindness is present , but hidden , in this world , but will reveal itself in the hours of pity and those of justice " . Luminița shows the final moments in a woman 's life , and her inability to grant herself one last wish , and , according to Dragomirescu , is a " universal " work , worthy of a Count Tolstoy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Under communism , Agârbiceanu 's lay work began to be fully recovered in the late 1960s . An important effort in this process was undertaken by literary historian Mircea <unk> , who had begun a critical re @-@ evaluation as early as 1955 , with a short monograph that took up George Călinescu 's observation whereby Agârbiceanu was not a <unk> but an artistic narrator of moral situations . <unk> went further , seeking to detach the Sămănătorist label and place him within the framework of ethical Transylvanian prose . His work , re @-@ edited and amplified in 1964 and 1972 , revived interest in the writer by precisely cataloguing his corpus and opening new directions for its critical analysis . The recovery was limited : according to Voncu , the arrival of national communism left critics unsure about whether to reintroduce Agârbiceanu 's " uncompromising vision of rural life " into the literary canon . 
 Not long thereafter , the film @-@ directing team of Dan <unk> and Mircea <unk> found that Agârbiceanu 's short stories supplied ideal material for their interest in formal experimentation , leading to two films , each based on a pair of his stories : <unk> de <unk> ( 1972 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1974 ) . In 1988 , Nicolae <unk> and Ion Brad also filmed their version of Arhanghelii , as Flames over Treasures . 
 It was not until 2004 , fifteen years after the fall of the regime , that the theological writings started being reprinted . These events also signified that the full corpus of his literature could see print : work on his complete writings was taken up by Mariana and Victor <unk> . <unk> and other manuscripts only saw print in and after 1997 . The project ended in 2002 and , Voncu notes , Agârbiceanu returned to a " discouraging anonymity " until 2014 , when Ilie Rad began work on a revised critical edition . This also included material never published in the Pienescu edition — adding as much as 75 % new content . As suggested by Manolescu in 2013 , Agârbiceanu once seemed " the most promising Transylvanian writer of the dawn of a new century , after Coșbuc and before Rebreanu . " However , and despite Fefeleaga being a constant feature of literature textbooks , Agârbiceanu became " two @-@ thirds forgotten " . According to Ornea , and to various others , Agârbiceanu mostly endures in cultural memory as a " second @-@ shelf writer " . 
 Ion I. Agârbiceanu ( 1907 – 1971 ) was the author of pioneering work in spectroscopy , famed for his invention of a gas laser . Another one of the writers ' sons was a surveyor . He and his family remained in possession of Agârbiceanu 's large villa in Cluj , which was later declared a historic monument . The writer 's grave was awarded the same status by Romania 's Culture Ministry in 2012 . Among the localities associated with Agârbiceanu 's work , <unk> is home to a Fefeleaga Memorial House , a modern reconstruction which used Romanian folk houses as a blueprint ; Sofia <unk> 's actual home burned down in summer 2014 . 
 = M @-@ 134 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 134 is a state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) of the US state of Michigan . It connects Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) north of St. Ignace with the communities of Hessel , Cedarville and De Tour Village along Lake Huron . East of De Tour , the highway crosses the De Tour Passage on a ferry to run south of the community of Drummond on Drummond Island . It is one of only three state trunklines in Michigan on islands ; the others are M @-@ 154 on Harsens Island and M @-@ 185 on Mackinac Island . M @-@ 134 is also one of only two highways to utilize a ferry in Michigan ; the other is US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) which crosses Lake Michigan from Manitowoc , Wisconsin , to Ludington . Most of the mainland portion of M @-@ 134 is also part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour , and since 2015 , it has been a Pure Michigan Byway under the name M @-@ 134 North Huron Byway . 
 A separate highway bore the M @-@ 134 designation in the Lower Peninsula from the late 1920s to the late 1930s . The current highway 's immediate predecessors were included in the original M @-@ 4 in the state . That designation was renumbered to the current M @-@ 134 moniker in 1939 . Since the trunkline number was finalized , it was extended eastward to end south of Goetzville in the 1950s , with a further extension to De Tour in the 1950s . The western section was moved closer to the lakeshore in the 1960s . The last change came when M @-@ 134 was extended to Drummond Island in 1989 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 134 starts at the interchange for exit 359 along I @-@ 75 north of St. Ignace in rural Mackinac County near the St. Martin Bay of Lake Huron . As the highway runs eastward , it carries the Lake Huron Circle Tour over the Pine River on Huron Shore Drive . The trunkline turns to the southeast and follows the shoreline along the bay and runs inland at the bases of the peninsulas that form the Search Bay . Returning to a shoreline routing at <unk> Bay , M @-@ 134 runs through the wooded rural areas into Hessel . There Huron Shore Drive continues eastward to Cedarville where the highway meets the south end of M @-@ 129 north of Marquette Island . Farther east , M @-@ 134 runs along the north side of the many small bays and channels that separate the Les <unk> Islands from the mainland . About 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) west of Cedarville , M @-@ 134 crosses into Chippewa County for about a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 5 km ) ; the highway passes back into a sliver of Mackinac County that extends along the Lake Huron shoreline for another 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) before finally crossing back into Chippewa County . 
 Near Albany Harbor , M @-@ 134 follows Scenic Road to an intersection with M @-@ 48 . The main route of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour turns north on M @-@ 48 while a locally designed loop route continues east on M @-@ 134 along Lake Huron . The highway continues past De Tour State Park and St. Vital Point before heading northeasterly to De Tour Village . In the middle of the village , M @-@ 134 runs north on Ontario Street and turns east along Elizabeth Street to connect to the ferry docks ; the loop tour continues north out of town on county roads . The highway uses the ferry , run by the regional public transportation agency , to cross the De Tour Passage . Once on Drummond Island , M @-@ 134 follows Channel Road northward along the passage before turning eastward . The trunkline cuts across to run along Sturgeon Bay on the north shore of the island . On the east side of the bay , M @-@ 134 turns inland and runs east to the Four Corners , south of the unincorporated community of Drummond . The trunkline terminates at that intersection south of the Drummond Island Airport where Channel , Townline , <unk> , and Shore roads ( west , north , east and south respectively ) come together . M @-@ 134 is one of three state highways in Michigan located on an island ; the two other state highways located on islands are M @-@ 185 on Mackinac Island and M @-@ 154 on Harsens Island . 
 No part of M @-@ 134 is listed on the National Highway System , a system of roadways important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2009 , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) conducted a survey to determine the traffic volume along the highway , reported using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . The department determined that the highest count was the 3 @,@ 595 vehicles a day that used the highway west of the M @-@ 129 junction in Cedarville ; the lowest counts were 608 vehicles daily between the M @-@ 48 junction and the De Tour village limits . On the island , 667 vehicles use M @-@ 134 daily . According to tourism officials in the area , over 100 @,@ 000 vehicles per year are transported round trip on the ferry with almost twice as many additional passengers . 
 = = Ferry = = 
 The Eastern Upper Peninsula Transportation Authority ( <unk> ) operates the Drummond Island Ferry across the De Tour Passage in addition to two other ferries and the regional rural bus system for Luce and Chippewa counties . As part of the service between De Tour and Drummond Island , <unk> operates up to three different vessels : the SS Drummond Islander , SS Drummond Islander III and the SS Drummond Islander IV . As of 2011 , fares start at $ 12 per car and increase based on the size of the vehicle transported , including a fuel surcharge . Passenger fares are $ 2 for adults and $ 1 for seniors or students ; the vehicle driver 's fare is included in the vehicle charge . Ferries leave Drummond Island at 10 minutes after the hour , from De Tour at 20 minutes to the hour , and run most of the day ; some crossing times are only operated seasonally . M @-@ 134 is one of two highways in Michigan to use a ferry connection ; the other is US 10 between Ludington , Michigan , and Manitowoc , Wisconsin . 
 = = History = = 
 Starting in late 1928 or early 1929 , the first route designated as M @-@ 134 was a road in Missaukee County from M @-@ 66 three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of McBain east to Falmouth in the northern Lower Peninsula . In 1938 , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) returned the road to local control . 
 When the rest of the state highway system was first designated , by July 1 , 1919 , the first state highway in the area of today 's M @-@ 134 was a section of M @-@ 12 . That highway segment was used for US 2 in 1926 . A rerouting of US 2 was completed in 1933 between Rogers Park and Sault Ste . Marie . The new routing followed Mackinac Trail instead of turning east to Cedarville and north to Sault Ste . Marie . The former routing was given the M @-@ 121 designation , and later M @-@ 4 . 
 The current designation appeared in the Upper Peninsula in 1939 , soon after being removed from Missaukee County . It replaced the former M @-@ 4 route designation . At the time , M @-@ 134 was routed farther inland between US 2 and a point north of Hessel . The highway ended at the Mackinac – Chippewa county line , but an extension farther east was shown on maps of the time as under construction . This segment of roadway was completed in the latter half of 1940 , extending M @-@ 134 to terminate at M @-@ 48 about 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of DeTour . In 1950 , a new roadway section was added to the state highway system , bypassing the former routing of M @-@ 48 west of DeTour ; in the process the MSHD extended M @-@ 134 on this new highway and truncated M @-@ 48 to the junction south of Goetzville . 
 In 1958 , the highway west of Hessel was shifted to follow an alignment closer to Lake Huron ; the MSHD transferred the former routing of M @-@ 134 to local control at that time . In October 1963 , the final section of I @-@ 75 / US 2 freeway opened in the UP ; M @-@ 134 's western terminus was truncated slightly to end at the new freeway instead of the former routing of US 2 along Mackinac Trail . In 1989 , MDOT extended the trunkline to add a segment on Drummond Island ; in the process , the Drummond Island Ferry across the DeTour Passage was added to the route . The entire length of the highway was dedicated as a Pure Michigan Byway on October 16 , 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tropical Storm Fern ( 1996 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Fern was a damaging storm that struck Yap in the 1996 Pacific typhoon season . A tropical depression formed on December 21 , when a low @-@ level circulation center began to produce deep convection . The depression strengthened into a tropical storm the next day , and was given the name Fern by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . The storm slowly intensified into a Category 1 typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , according to JTWC . Fern peaked north of Yap on December 26 , with JTWC assessing winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , while the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) assessed peak winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , just below typhoon strength . The storm soon became sheared and weakened slowly . Fern continued to weaken to a tropical depression on December 30 . Both agencies stopped advisories later on the same day . 
 Fern made a direct hit at Yap on Christmas Day . A cargo ship was abandoned after it was damaged by high winds offshore . On the island , Fern caused $ 3 million ( 1996 USD ) of damage . Roads and bridges were significantly damaged , and other public facilities were destroyed . Crops and private properties also received damage . A state of emergency was declared in Yap State two weeks later , and became a disaster area two months later . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In the middle of December , twin monsoon troughs were established in the extreme western Pacific Ocean , which will later spawn storms Greg , and Fern itself in the northern hemisphere . The trough in the southern hemisphere spawned cyclones Ophelia , Phil , and Fergus . Around that time , convection began to increase near the equator , and was associated with a westerly wind burst . A low level circulation center was noted by JTWC on December 19 at 0600 UTC . Two days later , convection consolidated near the circulation center , and JMA began tracking it at 0000 UTC as a tropical depression . JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert at 1500 UTC , as sea level pressure began to deepen , and signs of upper level divergence were found in the system . The first advisory for Tropical Depression <unk> followed three hours later , on December 17 at 1200 UTC . JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm on December 22 at 0000 UTC as it traveled westerly , and was given the name Fern . According to JTWC , the wind speeds meandered at minimal tropical storm strength . JMA proceeded to upgrade the depression into a tropical storm at 1800 UTC , with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , and a pressure reading of 996 hectopascals ( 996 mbar ) . On Christmas Eve , Fern slowly traveled toward Yap . The storm passed over Yap the next day , strengthening to 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) at 0000 UTC , according to JTWC . JMA assessed Fern had winds of 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) at the same time . Fern also began its recurvature that day , beginning its turn north . 
 Eighteen hours later on Christmas Day , JTWC upgraded Fern to a typhoon , with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . JMA continued to keep it as a severe tropical storm at that time . On December 26 at 1200 UTC , Fern reached its peak at 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) north of Yap after its recurvature , according to JTWC . JMA assessed that Fern reached its peak of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , with a pressure reading of 975 hPa ( 975 mb ) twelve hours later . On December 28 , Fern began to weaken when it encountered a shear line . On the next day , JTWC downgraded Fern back to tropical storm strength , with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . At the same time according to JMA , the storm had weakened to 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) , with a pressure reading of 985 hPa ( 985 mbar ) . Both warning centers downgraded Fern into a tropical depression by December 30 , as it continued to travel along a shear line . JTWC issued the final warning at 0600 UTC , while JMA stopped tracking the depression at 1200 UTC . JTWC continued to track the low until December 31 , where it stalled north of Guam . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 At sea , a cargo ship en route from Guam to Yap was abandoned after it was damaged by high winds . The passengers entered a life raft , and were later found by a Navy search and rescue airplane . They were soon rescued by a Maltese tanker . No one was injured when the accident occurred . 
 Yap was directly hit by Fern on Christmas Day , causing about $ 3 million ( 1996 USD ) of damage . The Weather Service Office received a peak wind gust of 116 km / h ( 72 mph ) , and a pressure reading of 983 hPa ( 983 mbar ) . The island received gusts around 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) for several hours . One person was injured on the island , and no deaths were attributed to the storm . Roads and bridges were severely damaged , accounting for half of the damage . Homes and other private properties were also significantly damaged . Most crops on the island , such as coconuts , bananas , papayas , and breadfruit , were destroyed by the storm . Public facilities , like schools and hospitals , suffered widespread destruction . 
 On January 3 , 1997 , a state of emergency was declared for Yap by Acting President Jacob Nena , stating that Fern caused " an imminent threat to health , safety and welfare of the people of the affected areas . " Two months later , on March 20 , United States President Bill Clinton declared Yap State a disaster area , allowing the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) to start the damage assessment of the area . The FEMA funding was only for public facilities , and did not include private properties . The request for individual assistance was not approved by FEMA , as damage to private properties were not much , and assistance from the national government and Yap State were sufficient . 
 = Paul Robinson ( Neighbours ) = 
 Paul Stewart Robinson is a fictional character from the Australian television soap opera Neighbours , a long @-@ running serial drama about social life in the fictional Melbourne suburb of Erinsborough . He is played by Stefan Dennis . Paul was created by producer Reg Watson as one of Neighbours ' original characters . He debuted in the first episode of the show broadcast on 18 March 1985 and is currently the sole remaining original cast member . Paul appeared on a regular basis until 1992 when Dennis quit Neighbours to pursue work elsewhere . He agreed to reprise the role for a guest appearance in 1993 . Dennis returned to the show full @-@ time in 2004 and has since remained in the role . Dennis views his decision to leave Neighbours as a mistake . 
 Early character development during 1980s episodes changed Paul into a powerful , arrogant and sometimes villainous business man . Paul has an evil persona which has long been admired by Dennis for the entertainment value it creates . But in 2007 Paul 's evil ways were mellowed through a brain tumour story which brought the character inline with producer 's vision of reinventing the show . The character has been used to play various stories ranging from money laundering , a leg amputation to being held hostage and incarceration for crimes . He is often portrayed concocting scams against fellow characters . As a prominent character Neighbours writers designed their 6000th episode around Paul . The story was dubbed " Who Pushed P.R. ? " and Paul was pushed from a mezzanine by an unseen assailant . The character 's attack created a long @-@ running whodunit mystery . Paul has had five marriages and countless affairs , which has gained him notoriety as a womaniser . Paul 's evil character and womanising have been well received by critics of the genre who were entertained . The actor has garnered various award nominations for his portrayal of Paul . 
 = = Casting = = 
 In 1984 , Stefan Dennis received a phone call from his agent who told him about an audition for a new soap called Neighbours . Dennis said " I wasn 't that keen because I was more interested in a feature film I had auditioned for and felt sure I was going to get " . Dennis originally auditioned for the roles of Shane Ramsay and Des Clarke ( the roles were later given to Peter O 'Brien and Paul Keane respectively ) , but was cast as Paul Robinson instead . Neighbours was cancelled by Seven Network seven months after its debut . However , it was revived by Network Ten and Dennis reprised his role as Paul from January 1986 onwards . He is the only current cast member who appeared in the first episode on 18 March 1985 . 
 In 1992 , Dennis quit the role because he no longer felt challenged as an actor , he stated : " I was literally walking through it , I thought ' this is not good for acting , this doesn 't keep me fresh at all , time to move on ' . " Dennis has said that one of his favourite moments was being asked to come back and celebrate Neighbours ' 2000th episode . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Paul was originally the quiet member of his family and had worked as an air steward . Paul 's failed marriage to Terry Inglis ( Maxine <unk> ) altered his personality and he became self @-@ centred . Network Ten publicity assessed that it turned him " bitter and cynical " . He worked to become a powerful businessman managing the <unk> complex and developed many overpowering traits which left him viewed by others as a money @-@ grabbing control freak . But the character was not left without kindness and shared his more generous moments with his grandmother Helen Daniels ( Anne Haddy ) . He has been described as having the ability to notice talent in others , employing those who shared his ambition and nous . 
 Portrayed for most of his tenure as a deceiving villain , Paul can often be viewed participating in unpredictable stories . This arbitrary nature lead Dennis to proclaim " he 's a character you never get bored with . Even during times when storylines aren 't centred on my character , the writers still come up with little twists for him all the time . " Network Ten branded Paul a high flying business man who enjoyed womanising until he met Gail Lewis ( Fiona Corke ) . Other labels the character has are " lothario " and " serial cheat " because of his ill @-@ treatment of the opposite sex . Upon his 2004 return he was portrayed stuck in his old ways . The writer added Paul was committing dodgy deals and deceiving his neighbours in a bid for revenge . The character despises pity , has a damaged personality and can never be faithful to a romantic partner . Dennis branded Paul as " Mr. Evil " because of Paul 's harsh treatment of women , observing that his character treated them like toys , throwing them away when he was bored . 
 When producers realised that Paul 's behaviour had gone too far , they considered killing him off . Dennis commented " As an actor , I had the best time because this character just got more evil and more sneaky , more of a cad and a womaniser and it just escalated where it got to the point where it just got silly . It was ridiculous for the supposed reality of the show . " The actor also said that he accepted the producers decision to kill his character off when they explained that they did not know where to take him . However , the show 's then executive producer Ric Pellizzeri decided to save the character and redeem him by giving him a brain tumour . Following the removal of the brain tumour , Paul mellowed in his evil ways . Of Paul 's dramatic change to his personality , post brain tumour , Dennis compared the differences stating : " He 's changed back to where he was 18 odd years ago . What he has become is the same Paul he was back then when he was a very ambitious young entrepreneur with Lassiters and Robinson Corporation . But the difference now is that he is older and wiser and therefore a lot more shrewd and a lot more careful . Post brain tumor , he is no longer evil , more ruthless than evil . Ruthless with a conscience and emotion . " 
 Although Paul changed his ways to an extent , he still shows signs of being evil . Dennis has stated that he and fellow cast member , Alan Fletcher ( Karl Kennedy ) purposely portray hints of his former self . Of this Dennis stated : " I like to keep that boiling under the surface so that the audience will always think ' what is he up to next ? ' . You never quite know if he will burst out into Mr. Evil or stay as the character he is at the moment . Alan Fletcher keeps it alive as well , by always looking out the corner of his eye and thinking ' I just don 't trust you ! ' " Dennis later defended his character to the Birmingham Post after he was branded an evil character , describing him in his early years : " Paul started out as a university student , which people have forgotten , he was studying engineering then , much to his father 's disgust , left to join an airline and became a trolley dolly . He later became a bit of a cad but I wouldn 't call him a villain . I 'd describe him as a bad boy with a conscience " . Dennis has also stated that he loves playing Paul as a " baddie " , because in his opinion he is so colourful , not just an average bad guy , adding : " He 's not just a black and white bad guy , he 's a sneaky bastard . He 's the smiling baddie " . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Paul enjoyed a relationship with Terri , he believed he really loved her . She tried to defraud him and later kill him . These events have a knock on effect which plagues his relationship with Gail raising many trust issues . He has been described as " unlucky in love " during his early years in the serial . 
 During an interview with entertainment website Digital Spy Dennis discussed Paul 's later relationships in depth . Paul 's relationship with Lyn Scully ( Janet Andrewartha ) was short lived , he mistreated her but ultimately in a twist for the character , he did the right thing . Dennis describes this as : " The Lyn story was quite sincere , but he had the good sense on the day of the wedding to tell her that he was no good . So he obviously cared about Lyn , but then she came back and haunted him . " His relationship with Rebecca Napier ( Jane Hall ) at times can be fiery , of this Dennis said : " I want to see Paul and Rebecca be like Angie and Dirty Den . I think Rebecca is capable of that . She plays a fiery character and is a very strong . Paul needs somebody who is absolutely there for him and adores him , but will take no shit from him and stand up and fight as hard as she does . " 
 Paul 's relationship with his children is often non @-@ conventional , however he has a close bond with his daughter Elle Robinson ( Pippa Black ) , Dennis describes this , adding : " ( She 's ' a chip off the old block ' ) and even though Elle annoys Paul sometimes , they are always there for each other . Paul adores his daughter and I think it works both ways . " 
 = = = Return = = = 
 Following an eleven year hiatus producers asked Dennis to return to Neighbours for the 20th anniversary episodes . But their talks resulted in Dennis agreeing to return full @-@ time . Alan Dale who played his on @-@ screen father , Jim Robinson helped Dennis to make the decision to return . Dennis has since admitted that he made a mistake quitting Neighbours in 1992 . He explained " I was stupid . I thought I was going to go to Hollywood and conquer the world , and I didn 't . " Dennis ' return made Paul the only original character still appearing on Neighbours . The actor continued to publicise his commitment to staying on the show long @-@ term . 
 The character was reintroduced during the 2004 series finale . The episode focused on a fire at the Lassiter 's complex which destroys the local pub , hotel , doctor 's surgery and coffee shop . Paul 's arrival coincidences with the fire which makes him a suspect . His return forms the end of season cliff @-@ hanger and Australian viewers had to wait months before Paul 's return continued on @-@ screen . Dennis told Jason Herbison from Inside Soap that " judging from his first appearance he certainly does look guilty . " He teased that Paul is " very enigmatic " and his motives for committing the crime remain unclear . Dennis professed his love for his character 's mysterious agenda but noted that Paul had " grown and matured " during his absence . Producer Peter Dodds believed that Paul 's return gave his writers numerous stories . He detailed that it allowed the return of other past characters and " kick @-@ started a whole new web of deceit and lies " within the show . He concluded that it made Neighbours more dramatic ever since . 
 = = = Izzy Hoyland = = = 
 The character was paired with fellow resident Izzy Hoyland ( Natalie Bassingthwaighte ) who shared a deceptive personality with him . This created many stories for both characters as they plotted against their neighbours . Dennis stated " the Paul and Izzy relationship was fantastic , it was very popular . Izzy was an interesting character because she was very emotional and insecure . That 's what drove her evil ways . She had a bit of a soulmate in Paul . " Dennis believed that the pair could not have worked long @-@ term because they would have destroyed each other . 
 Izzy was in a relationship with Karl when writers began working on material for the new duo . Karl had been played as the arch @-@ enemy of Paul , as they previously feuded . Izzy faces a problems in her relationship and turns to Paul for romance . Karl spends time away from Izzy leaving her free to conduct her affair . He returns to fight for his partner but nearly catches Izzy in bed with Paul . He leaves an expensive watch behind which Karl finds . Izzy pretends that she has purchased it for Karl and he lauds the accessory over Paul . Fletcher told Herbison ( Inside Soap ) that Karl is jealous of Paul and relishes the opportunity to show off his gift and boast about Izzy . He was keen for his character to discover Izzy 's infidelity so Karl and Paul could have a confrontation . Izzy goes into business with Paul and Karl tries to warn her that Paul is untrustworthy . He is unsuspecting and does not believe Izzy would be attracted to Paul . The story provides insight to Izzy who needs stability from Karl and excitement which Paul provides her . 
 = = = Leg amputation = = = 
 One of Paul 's main storylines culminated in him having his leg amputated after an accident . The storyline has received some criticism as Paul was shown on different occasions not limping with his false leg . Dennis explained during an interview how the production team helped ensure to make his limp appear more effectively , stating " They made me a splint which actually makes me sort of limp , but keeps my foot rigid so it looks like I actually do have a non @-@ moving piece . One time I did change my leg , as in I swapped it over and limped on the other one to see if anyone noticed . " Dennis revealed in May 2011 , that he wears a brace on his leg as remembering which leg to limp on was becoming a " little distracting . " 
 = = = Robert 's revenge campaign = = = 
 Paul had been uninvolved in the upbringing of all his children . This provided producers with scope to introduce estranged family members . In 2006 , writers devised a long @-@ running storyline in @-@ which Paul 's son Robert ( Adam Hunter ) plans a revenge campaign against his father . Robert 's motives for his vendetta stem from Paul not being around while he grew up . Paul was happy that he had triplet children Elle , Robert and Cameron Robinson ( also played by Hunter ) back in his life . He tries to make amends with Robert and attempts to bond with him unaware that he is being plotted against . Writers decided to mark the show 's <unk> episode with the story and Robert takes Paul hostage down a mineshaft . Dennis filmed the scenes in a filthy studio set surrounded by cameras , lighting and crew . He told Herbison ( Inside Soap ) that he found it difficult to pretend he was trapped underground . 
 Dennis explained that his character is oblivious to Robert 's intentions and believes Robert is taking him on a family camping holiday . When Robert has Paul alone he drugs him and take him to the mineshaft . Robert admits to causing the plane crash which killed the Bishop family , intending Paul , Elle and Izzy to die . Dennis explained that Robert " really goes to town telling Paul what a terrible father he 's been and how he 's going to pay for it now . " Robert gloats about his successful scheming and seals the entrance to the mine leaving Paul for dead . But Katya Kinski ( Dichen Lachman ) begins to suspect that Robert is mentally ill and it is up to her to convince other residents and save Paul from death . Paul escapes but Katya is next to be kidnapped by Robert because he is infatuated with her . She decides to humour Robert in the hope he will return her to Erinsborough . But Robert discovers that Paul plans to marry his mother Gail . He is unaware that it is a ruse set @-@ up by authorities to arrest him . Katya convinces Robert that they should not leave together because he has a final chance to kill Paul at the wedding . 
 The sham wedding was originally suggested by Izzy in jest and she is shocked that Paul and Gail organise the nuptials . Dennis explained that Robert 's " ultimate goal is to destroy Paul " . By giving him a time and place to target Paul they plan to trap him . The pair exchange wedding vows which are not binding . But Robert does not surface which angers Paul . He begins to shout and orders Robert to show up and confront him . Robert is <unk> by Paul 's goading and he approaches his father . Dennis said that the pair have a " massive showdown " and the psychotic character pulls a gun and shoots Paul . Following his latest crimes Robert surrenders and is arrested . The fake wedding provided Paul writers with the chance to explore Paul and Gail 's relationship which had served their characters during 1980s episodes of Neighbours . Dennis said that the chemistry that existed in 1987 was still present between the pair . On @-@ screen his relationship with Izzy begins to suffer but the wedding makes Paul remember his past shared with Gail . The actor recalled filming the wedding made him question whether Paul and Gail were still in love . In the episode various character 's notice their feelings which angers Izzy . The story ends in tragedy and loss for Paul . Katya accepts a lift from Cameron and their neighbour Max Hoyland ( Stephen <unk> ) spots Katya in the car . Max mistakes Cameron for Robert and believes Katya is in danger . In an attempt to rescue her Max knocks Cameron over and kills him . Lachman warned that it was the start of a new story in which Paul wants revenge on Max and issues him with a " chilling threat " . 
 = = = Who Pushed P.R. ? = = = 
 In July 2010 , it was revealed that Paul would be central to the serial 's 6000th episode . Executive producer Susan Bower had hinted previously that the milestone would involve Paul and Alan Fletcher teased audiences with the revelation that something horrible would happen to an iconic character . Of Paul 's involvement and the reasoning behind it Bower explained : " As Stefan Dennis – Paul Robinson – was in the first episode 25 years ago , it was decided that his character play a most important role in this very special event [ ... ] Paul Robinson , or P.R as we like to call him , has been up to his usual tricks over the past few weeks and everyone on Ramsay Street is becoming really sick of him . What will they do about it ? " It was then announced the plot would be a whodunnit style arc , in which Paul is left fighting for his life after being pushed from the mezzanine level of Lassiter 's Hotel . 
 The episodes were structured with a five episode build up prior to the 6000th episode , a new suspect being revealed in each . UK broadcaster Channel 5 posted an official statement : " With so many enemies , it will be hard to narrow down who had the motive to harm him . Who pushed P.R ? " . Jane Badler who plays Diana Marshall in the serial compared the storyline to that of the Who shot J.R. ? storyline from American soap opera Dallas . On @-@ screen the storyline progresses as new character Mark Brennan ( Scott McGregor ) , tries to solve the mystery . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = 1985 – 93 = = = 
 Paul is the oldest child of Jim Robinson ( Alan Dale ) and his wife Anne . His half sister Julie ( Vikki Blanche ; Julie Mullins ) was born the year afterward followed by brother Scott ( Darius Perkins ; Jason Donovan ) , half brother Glen ( Richard Huggett ) and finally his youngest sister Lucy ( Kylie <unk> ; Sasha Close ; Melissa Bell ) . Anne died giving birth to Lucy , when Paul was only twelve and Paul 's grandmother , Helen moved into the Robinson house to help Jim with the children . Paul was her self @-@ confessed favourite . 
 Paul marries Terry Inglis after a whirlwind relationship . However , Terry shoots Paul when he finds out she killed her ex @-@ boyfriend and she goes on the run . Terry is eventually arrested and later commits suicide in prison . Paul meets Gail Lewis for the second time , having worked with her previously , when she applies for a job at the Daniels Corporation . They both agree to enter into a marriage of convenience in order to secure a business agreement , but soon develop genuine feelings for each other and they renew their vows . That same year Paul learns that he has fathered a child , Amy ( Nicolette Minster ; Sheridan <unk> ) , with Nina Williams ( Leigh Morgan ) . 
 Gail becomes convinced that Paul will lose interest in IVF treatment or adoption , but Paul becomes more committed to having children with her . After IVF treatment , Gail becomes pregnant with triplets , however , Paul starts working hard and becomes detached from Gail . After the death of her father Rob Lewis ( Ernie Bourne ) , Gail decides to leave him and immigrate to Tasmania where she gives birth to Elle ( Pippa Black ) , Robert and Cameron . The couple later divorce . Paul faces financial troubles when Hilary Robinson ( Anne Scott @-@ Pendlebury ) withdraws her funding of the Daniels Corporation . 
 Paul leases his house to twin sisters Christina ( Gayle Blakeney ) and Caroline Alessi ( Gillian Blakeney ) . Christina falls in love with Paul and after a short romance and a quick engagement , the couple marry . Shortly after , Christina becomes pregnant and gives birth to a son , Andrew ( Shannon Holmes ) . Paul suffers a nervous breakdown and cheats on Christina with Caroline . The couple eventually reunite and they leave to manage a branch of Lassiter 's in Hawaii . Paul later returns to the street where he gets his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Philip Martin ( Ian Rawlings ) , involved in a fraud scandal . Paul then flees to Brazil and asks Christina to join him . He returns for Helen 's birthday , but the celebration is ruined when he is forced to flee the country on fraud charges . Paul returns to Australia after the death of Helen and is sentenced to seven years ' imprisonment , of which he serves three . 
 = = = 2004 – = = = 
 Paul returns to Erinsborough and sets fire to the Lassiter 's complex . He also kills Gus Cleary ( Ben Barrack ) , when Gus catches him . Paul helps rebuild the complex and reclaims Lassiter 's for himself . Paul has affairs with both Izzy Hoyland ( Natalie Bassingthwaighte ) and Liljana Bishop ( Marcella Russo ) . He later frames Liljana 's husband , David ( Kevin Harrington ) for fraud . Paul strikes a deal with <unk> to build on Ramsay Street and he gets his protégé Dylan Timmins ( Damien Bodie ) to pollute the local wetlands . When Paul wants to pull out of the deal , he is taken to the bush and beaten up . Paul escapes and falls down a cliff , badly breaking his leg . While Paul recovers in hospital , his leg becomes infected and is amputated . Paul 's sister , Lucy , encourages him to make a proper home for himself in Erinsborough and he moves into Number 22 . Paul begins a relationship with Izzy and his estranged daughter Elle moves in . To celebrate the Lassiter 's Hotel 20th anniversary , Paul and several of his neighbours go on a joy flight to Tasmania . During the flight , a bomb explodes causing the plane to crash into the sea . Paul , Izzy and Elle survive . 
 Paul 's son , Robert , arrives in the guise of his twin , Cameron . Robert alienates Paul from everyone , before drugging and trapping him in an old mineshaft . Robert confesses to planting the bomb on the plane and sending a poisoned letter to Paul . Robert collapses the entrance to the mine and leaves Paul to die . Paul is eventually rescued and he is grows closer to Gail when she returns to town . Paul and Gail hold a fake wedding to lure Robert out of hiding and he shoots Paul , who survives due to a bullet proof vest . Paul goes on a downward spiral and flirts with several women , attempts to blackmail Carmella Cammeniti ( Natalie Blair ) and betrays Lyn Scully ( Janet Andrewartha ) . When Max accidentally kills Cameron , Paul decides to shoot Max in revenge , but he is talked out of it . Paul begins a relationship with Lyn and they become engaged . However , after kissing Rosetta Cammeniti ( Natalie <unk> ) in the lead up to the wedding , Paul admits to Lyn that he cannot be faithful to her just minutes after they marry . Having sold half of Lassiter 's , keeping a 49 % share for himself , Paul decides to regain full control . Knowing Oliver Barnes ( David Hoflin ) owns shares in Lassiter 's , Paul tries to break up with relationship with Carmella and get him to date Elle . 
 Elle manages to convince Paul to sign over his share of Lassiter 's to her and she leaves him with nothing . Paul has a brain tumour removed and he loses his memory . He later apologises to his neighbours for all the bad things he did . Paul begins a relationship with Oliver 's mother , Rebecca Napier , and she and her youngest son , Declan ( James Sorensen ) , move in with him . Remembering that he murdered Gus , Paul confesses all to the police and Gus 's sister Laura ( Jodi Flockhart ) . The police inform Paul that they will not be pursuing the case , while Laura and her boyfriend Nick Thompson ( Marty Grimwood ) try to blackmail Paul by kidnapping Declan . Paul has an affair with Kirsten Gannon ( Nikola Dubois ) and Rebecca ends their relationship . Paul regains his assets from Elle and he buys the Erinsborough News . Paul briefly dates Cassandra Freedman ( Tottie Goldsmith ) , but he and Rebecca soon reconcile . Paul is initially blamed for his half @-@ sister Jill Ramsay 's ( Perri Cummings ) death . He goes on the run , but his name is cleared by Jill 's daughter Sophie ( Kaiya Jones ) . When Paul and Rebecca get engaged , Lyn interrupts their wedding to announce she and Paul are still married . After divorcing Lyn , Paul marries Rebecca . 
 Paul 's youngest son , Andrew ( now played by Jordan Smith ) , comes to stay with his father . Paul suffers financial difficulties and embezzles money from Lassiter 's . He also frames Declan for an accident at a building site , that he himself caused . Diana Marshall ( Jane Badler ) comes to Erinsborough to find evidence of Paul 's embezzlement . Paul asks her to take over Lassiter 's with him and they have sex . Rebecca gives Paul an ultimatum ; leave Lassiter 's or leave the family . He then hands over management of the hotel to Declan for six months . Paul discovers Diana is working with Declan to remove him from the company and he contacts Rosemary Daniels ( Joy Chambers ) , who fires Diana . Meanwhile , Paul threatens Declan . When Rebecca finds out about Paul 's affair and threats towards Declan , she pushes him from the Lassiter 's mezzanine . Paul survives and blackmails Rebecca into staying with him , causing their marriage to deteriorate . Rebecca later convinces Paul to sign an affidavit , which states that his fall was an accident , and she leaves him and the country . Paul falls out with local councillor Ajay Kapoor ( Sachin Joab ) and plots to ruin Ajay 's career , after the local police station is closed down and merged with another . 
 Paul makes sure a house party in Ramsay Street is gatecrashed and then writes an article about how the police were late to the scene because of the merger . Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) learns Paul sent the gatecrashers to the party and tells the press . Paul is forced to step down as editor . He then hires public relations consultant Zoe Alexander ( <unk> Jade Mackinnon ) to improve his image . Paul and Zoe briefly date and Paul unsuccessfully tries to get the editor 's job back from Susan . Paul 's nieces Sophie and Kate ( Ashleigh Brewer ) move in with him . Paul and Andrew purchase Charlie 's bar together and Paul beings an affair with Ajay 's wife , Priya ( Menik <unk> ) . After Andrew collapses , he tells Paul that he has epilepsy . Paul tries to take Charlie 's away from him , but soon relents . Priya ends the affair and Ajay finds out about it . Paul sells the Erinsborough News to fund his plan of turning the top two floors of Lassiter 's into apartments . Paul grieves for Priya when she dies after an explosion at a wedding reception on Lassiter 's grounds . Ajay files a civil action against Paul and a preliminary police report indicates negligence on Paul 's part , but a gas bottle is found to have come from faulty stock . 
 Paul uses Rhiannon Bates ( <unk> Liane ) to help him bribe councillor Allan Hewitt ( Mick Preston ) and Rhiannon reports them to the police . Lucy tells Paul that she has been promoted to head of Lassiter 's Worldwide and gets his apartment plans approved . She also hires Terese Willis ( Rebekah Elmaloglou ) as the new manager of Lassiter 's Hotel . Paul is accused of sexual harassment by Caroline Perkins ( <unk> <unk> ) , but Terese manages to get Caroline to drop the lawsuit by giving her a settlement . Mason Turner ( Taylor Glockner ) asks for Paul 's help when Robbo Slade ( Aaron <unk> ) starts blackmailing him . Paul hires Marty <unk> ( Darius Perkins ) to take care of Robbo , who is later hit by a car . Paul pays Marty off for services rendered . Jack Lassiter ( Alan Hopgood ) returns to Erinsborough and warns Paul about putting business before family . Jack confesses to Paul that he is giving his fortune away because he is dying . Paul and Mason believe Marty killed Robbo , but he denies it and then threatens to implicate Paul . 
 Paul offers to manage Georgia Brooks ' ( Saskia Hampele ) singing career and gets her to sign over the rights to her song . Paul then gives the song to Amali Ward , but she decides against recording it . Paul attempts to sue Georgia , but drops the case when he learns Jack has died . He then asks for his fraud conviction to be removed from his criminal record , so he can run for mayor . Karl unsuccessfully runs against him . Paul seeks to separate the hotel from the Lassiter 's chain to enable him to sack Terese . However , Terese quits her job and Paul threatens to sue her . Lucy persuades Paul to re @-@ hire Terese and he keeps the hotel within the Lassiter 's chain . Paul learns Rebecca works for a civic project called Twin Cities and forges Karl 's signature on a cover letter to get Rebecca to return . Paul tells Rebecca that he became mayor for her because he still loves her . Paul asks Rebecca to move back to Erinsborough , but she refuses . Paul disapproves when Kate gets back together with Mark Brennan . They reconcile just before she is fatally shot . Paul blames Mark for Kate 's death . 
 Paul 's nephew , Daniel ( Tim Phillipps ) , arrives in town and agrees to stay with him . Paul re @-@ opens Charlie 's and announces that it has been renamed The Waterhole , a name chosen by Kate before she died . After purchasing a painting from Naomi Canning ( Morgana O 'Reilly ) , Paul learns from the police that its ownership is disputed . He asks Naomi for his money back , but she tells him she has spent it . Paul then asks Naomi to have sex with him , in exchange for him not pressing charges against her . Naomi blackmails Paul into dropping the charges . Paul and Mark join forces to find Kate 's killer . Matt Turner ( Josef Brown ) informs Paul that Victor Cleary ( Richard Sutherland ) , Gus 's younger brother , has become a suspect in Kate 's murder . Paul realises that he may be responsible for Kate 's death . He buys a gun and meets with Victor who taunts Paul about killing Kate , before Matt and Mark arrive . Mark tackles Paul and Matt arrests Victor . Paul develops depression , knowing that his actions were responsible for Kate 's death , and Terese tries to help him . After a public meltdown , Paul is suspended as mayor . He begins volunteering at Sonya 's ( Eve Morey ) garden nursery , while Lucy also helps him overcome his grief . 
 Sheila Canning ( Colette Mann ) encourages Paul to start dating again , and he has a number of casual relationships using a dating app . He falls out with Daniel when he puts his romance with Amber Turner ( Jenna Rosenow ) before work . After they argue , Daniel and Amber go out into a tornado that hits Erinsborough . Paul goes after them and his car is hit by a dislodged skip . Daniel and Amber rescue him . He suffers broken ribs and a cracked prosthetic . Paul decides he is ready to be mayor again and organises a media gathering at Sonya 's Nursery , but it has to be postponed when the nursery is vandalised . Paul discovers Jayden Warley ( Khan Oxenham ) was behind the vandalism , and he blackmails Jayden 's mother Sue Parker ( Kate Gorman ) into stepping down as interim mayor . Dakota Davies ( Sheree Murphy ) , a fling from Paul 's time in Brazil , arrives in Erinsborough and tells Paul that he abandoned her without explanation to return to Australia in 2004 . Paul 's memories of this are unclear due to his brain tumour , but he agrees to help her set up a bar . Paul falls in love with Dakota , but he soon learn that she is involved in diamond smuggling . She leaves after asking him for money . 
 When Terese goes through a rough patch in her marriage to Brad ( Kip Gamblin ) , Paul arranges her former boss , Ezra Hanley ( Steve Nation ) , to come to Erinsborough , with the intention of breaking up the Willis ' marriage . However , Ezra tries to force himself on Terese and is fired from Lassiter 's . When he tries to sue Paul and Terese , Paul pays Gary Canning ( Damien Richardson ) to attack Ezra . When Gary confesses to the police , Paul gives him more money to keep quiet about their arrangement . Paul hires Naomi to organise the Erinsborough Festival , two weeks of events celebrating the suburb . Hilary Robinson returns and convinces Paul to reinstate some of the community services . Paul tries to stop Daniel and Amber 's wedding by sending Amber away on a photography trip and planning for her flight to be cancelled , so she will not make the wedding . He also asks Des Clarke ( Paul Keane ) to talk to Daniel about the dangers of marrying the wrong person . Imogen Willis ( Ariel Kaplan ) forces Paul to bring Amber back , but he realises Imogen loves Daniel and tells Amber . Daniel fails to appear for the wedding after he goes looking for Imogen . Paul realises Nina Tucker ( Delta Goodrem ) is in town and with help from Lou and Karl , he convinces her to sing at the festival 's closing concert . 
 Nick Petrides ( Damien <unk> ) informs Paul that he has leukaemia and he starts him on a course of chemotherapy . Paul hires Naomi as his assistant and she helps to keep his diagnosis a secret . When Paul collapses , he calls Karl for help and tells him about his diagnosis . Nick tells Paul that his body has stopped responding to the chemotherapy . Paul wants Karl to succeed him as mayor and he asks Naomi to find his daughter Amy . While Naomi is encouraging Paul to be more positive , she kisses him . She apologises , but they both develop feelings for each other . Paul asks Naomi to shave his head when his hair starts falling out , and he sells Lassiter 's to the Quill Group . Paul collapses from pneumonia and is hospitalised . Nick tells Paul that his cancer is in remission , but Georgia claims that Paul never had cancer and Nick is found to have doctored Paul 's patient files . He is arrested soon after . Paul tries to forget about his feelings for Naomi , by pushing her and Brennan back together . However , Naomi discovers their plan and breaks up with Brennan . The Quill Group sell Lassiter 's back to Paul and he and Naomi kiss . Amy ( Zoe Cramond ) turns up at the penthouse and is angered when Paul does not immediately recognise her , she later leaves town . 
 Daniel persuades Amy to return and she introduces Paul to her son Jimmy ( Darcy <unk> ) . Paul and Jimmy bond , but when he buys Jimmy expensive presents , Amy returns them . Paul fires Kyle from the council 's beautification project after he fails to reprimand a handyman for sexually harassing Amy . She convinces him to give Kyle his job back . Paul learns that Sheila had a crush on him , after Jimmy blackmails her . They later clear the air . Paul gives Amy a job as his executive assistant , but she quits after making a mistake which costs Lassiter 's money . Paul proposes to Naomi and she accepts , but she soon has doubts . After an argument , she has a one @-@ night stand with Josh Willis ( Harley Bonner ) . Paul forgives Naomi and they agree to call off their engagement . He then decides to get revenge on Josh by getting his good behaviour bond revoked by paying someone to plant illegal peptides in his bag . Naomi breaks up with Paul and leaves for a job overseas . Paul pays Jimmy 's father to leave town , resulting in Jimmy not wanting to spend time with him . Paul plans to close Erinsborough High and sell the land to Eden Hills Grammar , so he can push through a luxury housing development . Paul is blackmailed and his personal emails are sent to the media , resulting in him receiving death threats . He hires Aaron Brennan ( Matt Wilson ) to be his bodyguard . Amy finds a petition to save the school in Paul 's penthouse and he confesses to stealing it from Susan 's office on the day of the fire . He is later fired as mayor and the bank calls in his loans , leaving him in financial difficulty . 
 Paul receives a dead rat sent in a box , which he later learns was intended for Aaron . Paul asks Aaron to help him with his scheme to gaslight Stephanie Scully ( Carla Bonner ) . He explains that he wants her to leave Erinsborough as he does not want her near Jimmy . Paul swaps Steph 's medication for psychotropic drugs , which triggers a relapse . He offers to drive her to her doctor in Bendigo , but he swerves to avoid another car and crashes into a tree . When Paul regains consciousness , he sees that Steph has found the drugs in his pocket and forces him to tell her his plan . She later blackmails him into giving her a job and money in exchange for not reporting him to the police . Paul is forced to liquidate his assets to pay off his debts . The bank sells Lassiter 's to the Quill Group and Paul is escorted from the penthouse by the police . Paul lives in the Men 's Shed until Terese invites him to live at her house . Paul plans to start a new business , making gazebos , in partnership with Amy . He needs to borrow money to get started and Dimato offers to lend to him , but after learning about Paul 's scheme to gaslight Steph , Amy refuses to go ahead with the gazebo project with Paul . Dimato tells Paul he is considering buying a rundown motel and renovating it , and offers to make Paul the manager . However Paul later discovers Dimato is attempting to frame Paige Smith ( Olympia Valance ) for burglary , and blackmails Dimato into leaving town . Terese kisses Paul and invites him to her bedroom , but does not take things further and tells Paul that she just wants to be friends . Paul remains interested in the rundown motel and tries to convince Steph and Doug Willis ( Terence Donovan ) to become investors , so he can buy the business . He organises a Citizen of the Year event at the motel , but it is stolen by Lassiter 's after Steph accidentally costs the motel their liquor licence . Paul asks Cecilia Saint ( Candice Alley ) to sabotage the event , but is horrified when the hotel boiler explodes , injuring Daniel and killing Josh and Doug . While supporting a grieving Terese , admitting to her that he loves her , Paul secretly worries that Cecilia caused the explosion . Paul persuades Nene to lie to the police to support his false alibi . Paul is arrested after he is found to have deleted CCTV footage of him in the boiler room . Steph visits Paul in prison , where he maintains his innocence . They put up the motel for Paul 's bail and he is released . Terese is angry when he comes to Josh 's funeral and later says she hates him . Paul investigates alternative suspects , but Mark tells him to stop . After Julie Quill ( Gail Easdale ) accuses Paul of harassment , his bail conditions are reviewed and he is required to wear an ankle monitor . Aaron becomes Paul 's PR adviser . Paul does an interview with Piper which is put online . Paul 's position becomes worse when Cecilia tells the police that Paul confessed . Aaron then advises Paul to take part in a voluntary clean @-@ up , which is criticised by Nate . Paul is hit by a car and taken to hospital . After being discharged , Paul decides to run away and he steals $ 3000 from the motel . Paul meets Jacka in the bush and seeks his help in getting a passport . He then calls Steph asking her to bring him money , but she refuses . After hearing a conversation between Steph and Amy , Jimmy finds Paul in the bush . Jimmy has an allergic reaction to a bee sting and Paul takes him to hospital , resulting in him being arrested and remanded in custody . Toadie agrees to represent Paul , but only if he pleads guilty . Paul pleads not guilty and Steph persuades Toadie to defend him . At the end of the trial Terese admits to having bribed Cecilia to commit perjury . Despite this , Paul is found guilty and sentenced to eighteen years jail with a non @-@ parole period of fourteen years . Paul decides not to appeal and urges Steph , Amy and Jimmy not to visit him in jail . Another prisoner warns Paul that he is in danger of being assaulted in jail . Paul asks Gary Canning to protect him , however Gary is then granted parole . Paul is assaulted and taken to hospital . He is later released from prison after Julie Quill confesses to blowing up the hotel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dennis has earned various award nominations for his role as Paul . At the 2007 Inside Soap Awards , Dennis was nominated for Best Actor and Best Bad Boy . The following year , Dennis was again nominated for Best Actor and Best Bad Boy . 2009 saw Dennis nominated for Best Actor and Best Bad Boy once again . In 2010 , Dennis was nominated for the very first Best Daytime Star award . He received a nomination in the same category in 2015 . At the first Digital Spy Soap Awards ceremony , Dennis was nominated for Villain of the Year . 
 A reporter from Virgin Media branded the character a " retro soap hunk . " They branded him a " bad boy " who is " motivated by greed and lust , Paul manipulated his way into business and into the ladies ' beds ( even with a dodgy earring ) . Watch out ladies ... " Virgin Media also ran a feature profiling their twenty @-@ five most memorable television comebacks , amongst them was Paul 's 2004 return and they said " ruthless ' workaholic ' businessman Paul Robinson fled Australia in 1993 to escape fraud charges only to return more sinister than ever in 2005 to burn down the Lassiter 's hotel complex . " 
 Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture commented on Paul stating : " He 's always been a bit of a ladies ' man and has had an eye for a business deal and has always struggled with whether to be good Paul or bad Paul . Ramsay Street 's most prolific marry @-@ er and father @-@ er . " She also criticises the fact Paul 's false leg is never shown on @-@ screen adding : " Paul has a wooden leg , which sometimes causes him to limp , when he remembers about it . " Holy Soap have said that Paul starting the Lassiter 's fire and killing Gus during his 2004 return , was one of soap opera 's greatest comebacks . They also branded him a " legendary figure " of Neighbours . Josephine Monroe in her book Neighbours : The first 10 years , names Paul one of soap opera 's most enduring characters . An Inside Soap writer opined that " slimy seducer " Paul remained the same " eighties smooth operator " , observing " he 's certainly not short of a slick chat @-@ up line or two . He 's as skilled a lothario now as he always was . " 
 In 2010 , to celebrate Neighbours ' 25th anniversary , British satellite broadcasting company , Sky , profiled twenty @-@ five characters of which they believed were the most memorable in the series history . Paul is in the list and joke about his many wives stating : " How many of Paul 's five wives can you name ? No points for current wife Rebecca , ten for naming Lynn , Gail , or Christina Alessi , and 1 @,@ 400 points for remembering first wife , plumber Terry [ ... ] Yes , Paul 's been around the block . " They also branded him as the reason Neighbours , in their opinion was good viewing in the 2000s adding : " It 's his cackling soap villain role that we love to hate him for : his return in 2004 , torching Lassiter 's and befriending Dylan , marked the start of Neighbours getting awesome in the mid @-@ noughties . Although it 's probably safe to say that period was over by the time he suffered amnesia of everything after 1989 . " He has also been branded as a " legend character " . Entertainment reporting website Last Broadcast praised Paul 's development , stating : " As the kind of shady character who 'd do anything to make a fast buck , he even planned to bulldoze Ramsay Street to make way for a new supermarket development . And that 's not all : fraud , blackmail , murder ; there is no level to which Paul wouldn 't have sunk . Yet , the infamous bad boy of Erinsborough , has , thankfully , turned over a new leaf . " 
 In her 2007 book , It 's Not My Fault They Print Them , Catherine Deveny slates Paul and Dennis ' acting ability stating : " Stefan Dennis as the mustache @-@ twirling panto villain Paul Robinson , is a genius . I just wanted to yell out ' He 's behind you , he 's behind you ! ' It takes sheer brilliance to be able to act that badly " . Andrew Mercado , author of Super Aussie Soaps , describes Paul as being very similar to fictional character J. R. Ewing . Paul is referred to in Emily Barr 's fictitious novel " Out of My Depth " , in which character Amanda is watching Neighbours , with scenes featuring Paul and Gail receiving disapproval from Harold , Amanda opines that she believes the couple are in love . Jaci Stephen writing for the Daily Mail commented on Paul 's obsession with Rebecca stating : " You can 't help feeling that nothing short of a stake through the heart is going to keep Paul out of Rebecca 's life . " Stephen later said " Taking advice from Paul is like asking Charlie Sheen to be your spirit guide . " Paul Kalina of The Age said Dennis as Paul lightens things up and he prances about like " a pantomime villain minus the moustache and cape . " Kalina added " Erinsborough just would not be the same without him . " A TVTimes columnist stated " He 's no Brad Pitt and he 's a devious beggar at the best of times , but Paul Robinson doesn 't half get the ladies . " 
 = Climax ( Usher song ) = 
 " Climax " is a song by American recording artist Usher , released on February 22 , 2012 , by RCA Records . It was released as the lead single for his 2012 studio album Looking 4 Myself . It was written by Usher , Ariel Rechtshaid , Redd <unk> , and Diplo , who also produced the song . Usher and Diplo worked on the song for two months as part of their collaboration for the former 's album . The song is a quiet storm slow jam with electronic influences , and lyrics about the turning point of a relationship . According to Usher , the song is primarily about the complications of a relationship , despite the lyrics ' sexual overtones . 
 As a single , " Climax " debuted at number 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 , with 31 @,@ 000 digital units sold in its first week . It peaked at number 17 and charted for 20 weeks , and also reached number one on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , becoming Usher 's 12th number @-@ one single on the chart . " Climax " was well received by music critics , who commended its musical direction , Usher 's singing , and Diplo 's production . Rolling Stone and Entertainment Weekly named it one of the best singles of 2012 . In 2013 , " Climax " won Usher a Grammy Award for Best R & B Performance . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Climax " was written by Usher , Redd <unk> , Ariel Rechtshaid , and Diplo , who also produced the song . Diplo introduced the song 's concept to Usher , who was working with him on a new album . Usher wanted to expand his music 's style and depth by working with Diplo . Diplo recounted the experience in an interview for The Guardian , saying that " I had explained to him about a moment I had with a girl where I felt like I could die with her and be content , but I didn 't and life moved on , and that point in my life was over . It was a sad feeling but it was beautiful . He was relating with me about the idea and how many times you think things are perfect and feel that way but they can pass . " They discussed the concept throughout the song 's development and how it relates to Usher 's life , as Diplo " tried to help realise these lyrics and feelings . " After conceiving some melody lines , they wrote the song in about an hour . 
 Usher and Diplo worked on the song 's production for two months , recording in studios in Los Angeles , New York , and Atlanta . Diplo originally pursued a house music sound based on a chord progression he wrote , but changed his direction after working in the recording studio alone on what he called a " wildfire " beat . He later said of his direction for the song , " the idea of pushing cut @-@ off on a synth used so much in progressive house music but pulling back . I was making something like a minimal techno record with Atlanta strip clubs in mind . " According to Diplo , Usher proposed the idea of " tak [ ing ] the strip club to the stadium " with the song 's production . Classical music composer Nico Muhly contributed with the song 's string arrangement . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Climax " is set in common time . Diplo called the style " Radiohead <unk> " , and both Spin and Rolling Stone agreed that the song was a mix of quiet storm style and electronic music . It is written in the key of C minor , and Usher 's voice ranges from B ♭ 3 to G5 . The music is built around a haunting riff , complemented by sparse drum machine and some musical accompaniment . Its varying soundscape incorporates electronic effects such as clicks , hisses , whooshes , and low @-@ frequency synths , as well as subtle strings and scattered piano notes . Music writers have noted Diplo 's production as uncharacteristically reserved and understated . 
 The song 's musical structure is characterized by intervals in which the music builds to a potential break , but softly decrescendos instead . As each verse concludes , the song 's snapping , electronic rhythm track gradually softens and rippling synth chords repeat throughout the song . Marc Hogan of Spin writes that Diplo " teases us with the sort of <unk> @-@ <unk> subwoofer noises that have become inescapable in the past year or so of pop radio . But he never actually gives in with the full dubstep drop ... the song keeps swelling to one big wave after another , without ever really reaching a single , song @-@ stopping crescendo . " Hogan cites the bridge at around the three @-@ minute mark as " the closest thing to a climax " on the song , " when the track gets as quiet as it ever has before becoming as lush as it ever gets . " Pitchfork Media 's Carrie Battan calls the song " an exercise in the power of restraint " , commenting that " Diplo shows uncharacteristic subtlety behind Usher 's sentiment , with a beat that seems to hang suspended in midair . " 
 The song is a breakup lament dealing with the theme of commitment . Its title refers to the turning point of a relationship . The lyrics address a relationship in a state of tension and uncertainty : " We 've reached the climax / We 're together / Now we 're undone / Won 't commit so we choose to run away / Do we separate ? " Usher sings in a pleading falsetto and a plaintive tone on the song , alternating restrained vocals and anguished howls . In an interview for V @-@ 103 , Usher stressed that " Climax " focuses more on the complication of relationships rather than sex , saying that " it 's really about the ultimate experience or lack thereof . Or the finale of an experience of love and life . When you 're in a relationship and it has kinda reached the climax of where it can go , you gotta let it go if you are not going to commit . " He viewed that his falsetto vocals and the song 's tone give the song a sexual feel with music that works as a " double entendre " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The song was first released onto the internet on Valentine 's Day 2012 through SoundCloud . Upon its release , Diplo commented on Twitter : " Seriously the best record I 've been part of ... I 'm pretty sure in 9 months there are gonna be a lot of new babies that this song is responsible for " . It was released as the lead single for Usher 's 2012 album Looking for Myself . 
 " Climax " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 81 , with 31 @,@ 000 digital units sold in the week of March 10 , 2012 . It peaked at number 17 and spent 20 weeks on the chart . The song also reached number one on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , on which it charted for 33 weeks , and became Usher 's 12th number @-@ one single on the chart . It peaked at number three on the Dance / Club Play Songs , on which it charted for 13 weeks . In the United Kingdom , " Climax " debuted and peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart , selling 41 @,@ 617 units . It charted for seven weeks and peaked at number 29 in Australia . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone gave the song four out of five stars and stated , " Quiet storm gets a freaky sci @-@ fi makeover " . Pitchfork Media 's Carrie Battan commended Usher 's collaboration with Diplo as " a doubly satisfying departure from their respective strains of club @-@ ready fare . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard called the song " an ode to the bewildering thoughts and feelings of relationship purgatory " and wrote that it is " a sound that Usher should explore more often . " Marc Hogan of Spin felt that the song is " as vividly communicative as it is decoratively beautiful " and praised its articulation , calling it " a tour de force of pacing and dynamics , giving listeners more and more , but then always easing up just enough to keep us begging for one more verse . " 
 Priya Elan of NME cited " Climax " as Usher 's " best song in absolutely years " and stated , " Goodbye cringe factor , hello Diplo , subtle electronic nuances and an expectation @-@ defying vocal performance which is more Prince falsetto than depth @-@ free showman . The results are jaw dropping . " He also compared it to the work of The Weeknd and commended its " lack of smut " in the lyrics , stating " it 's just Usher playing it fast and loose in falsetto . The result is as subtle as it is unbelievable . " Eric Arredondo of Beats Per Minute viewed the song as an improvement over Usher 's 2010 album Raymond v. Raymond and addressed the comparisons to The Weeknd , writing that , " though it still doesn 't hold much of the innovations and risks of something like The Weeknd 's House of Balloons , ' Climax ' can do something that most songs on that album can 't do without losing most of their fun : be played on the radio . " 
 Rolling Stone ranked " Climax " number 15 on their year @-@ end best songs list for 2012 . Entertainment Weekly ranked it number 14 on their year @-@ end list of best singles . It was voted as the third best single of 2012 by The Village Voice 's 40th annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll and the official best single of 2012 by Time magazine . At the 2013 Grammy Awards , " Climax " won Usher a Grammy Award for Best R & B Performance . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Climax " was directed by Sam Pilling , filmed in Atlanta , and released on March 9 , 2012 . Director of photography was Adam Frisch . After filming , the video was given to the studio Surround for post @-@ production , including editing its structure , title animation , and effects . The video shows Usher sitting in a car contemplating on whether to go inside his ex @-@ girlfriend 's home and rekindle their once @-@ passionate love affair or leave and never return again . It shows different scenarios played out in Usher 's mind , including him confronting his ex @-@ girlfriend 's new boyfriend with a gun . 
 In the video , Usher sits in a car outside a house where his ex @-@ girlfriend is being intimate with another man . He pulls a gun out of his glove compartment and agonizes over whether or not to enter the house . After ruminating over the different scenarios , Usher drives off at the end of the video . Jason Lipshut of Billboard found the " narrative arc " for the video to be " a bit perplexing " . Jeff Lapointe of MTV News viewed that it " depicts the darker side of human nature as Usher drives up to his girlfriend / ex @-@ girlfriends house to discover another vehicle , another man , another side of his love . In the realization of fury and anger , images distort Usher 's reality with thoughts of taking his gun and shooting the intruder . Thoughts of running away with the girl . Thoughts of driving off to never be seen . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Usher first performed the song on the show " Off @-@ Broadway 's ' Fuerza Bruta ' " . In the show , he entered from the dark in a white suit and black tie , and walked across a conveyor belt in beat to " Climax " . As the song 's tempo increased , he clutched his stomach as a gunshot fired and blood spread across his torso . Usher appeared on Saturday Night Live on May 12 , 2012 , to perform " Scream " and " Climax " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes for Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . 
 Manny Marroquin – mixing engineer 
 Chris Galland – assistant mixing engineer 
 Delbert Bowers – assistant engineer 
 Nico Muhly – piano , strings , string arrangements 
 Diplo – vocal production 
 Natural – arrangements 
 Mark " Exit " Goodchild – engineer 
 Jacob Dennis – assistant engineer 
 Jorge Velasco – assistant engineer 
 Kory Aaron – assistant engineer 
 Ramon Rivas – assistant engineer 
 Ariel Rechtshaid – keyboards , synthesizer 
 Usher – vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = International Association of Business Communicators = 
 The International Association of Business Communicators ( IABC ) is a global network of communications professionals . 
 Each summer , IABC hosts World Conference , a three @-@ day event with professional development seminars and activities , as well as talks by industry leaders . 
 Decisions within the organization are made by a two @-@ thirds vote of the executive board , which is elected by members . IABC members agree to follow a professional code of ethics , which encourages members to do what is legal , ethical and in good taste . 
 = = History = = 
 IABC 's predecessor was the American Association of Industrial Editors ( <unk> ) , which was founded in 1938 . <unk> became a member of the International Council of Industrial Editors ( <unk> ) in 1941 . It withdrew from <unk> in 1946 over policy differences , but formed IABC when it merged again in 1970 . In IABC 's first year of operation , the association had 2 @,@ 280 members and was focused on internal communications . IABC 's research showed its members were moving into positions with broader public relations responsibilities and the association expanded its scope . In 1974 it merged with Corporate Communicators Canada . 
 In 1982 the association formed the IABC Research Foundation , which funded a study of 323 organizations in the 1980s to determine what made some public relations teams more effective than others . The study found that executive involvement in communications was the best predictor of effectiveness . The Research Foundation also looked into the status and pay of women in the public relations field , in a pioneering study called The Velvet Ghetto . 
 IABC had financial troubles in 2000 after losing $ 1 million in an e @-@ business initiative called <unk> . In 2001 a grass @-@ roots initiative was started within IABC 's membership that eventually developed into the Gift of Communication program , whereby members donated their professional services to local charities . Membership grew 7 – 9 percent each year in the 2000s due to an increasing number of practitioners in the field of internal communications . IABC hosted its first annual world conference in 2005 and grew to more than 16 @,@ 000 members by 2008 . That same year , IABC accredited Chinese citizens for the first time in the Accredited Business Communicator ( ABC ) program . 
 In 2009 the IABC Research Foundation conducted a survey that found 79 percent of respondents frequently use social media to communicate with employees . It also co @-@ authored a study the following year that found email and intranet were the most common internal communications tools among respondents . 
 For 40 years , the association offered an accreditation program called Accreditation for Business Communications ( ABC ) . By the time the program ended in 2013 , a total of 1 @,@ 003 people had earned ABC status . Though the program stopped accepting new applicants in September 2012 , ABCs will be recognized as long as they maintain their membership in IABC . A new professional certification program to replace accreditation with a more affordable , computer @-@ based process was proposed in January 2013 . The goal is to set an international standard for all communications professionals that will be recognized by an organization such as <unk> . The autonomous international group to oversee the creation of the new certification program — the Global Communication Certification Council — was appointed in February 2014 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 IABC offers professional , corporate , student and retired memberships . Representatives from different chapters and regions , as well as professional members , vote at the Annual General Meeting to elect members to the international executive board . The board can change dues , establish new chapters , create <unk> and remove members with a two @-@ thirds vote . IABC also has various committees focused on ethics , research , finance , auditing and others . All positions within IABC are filled by volunteers . 
 IABC has more than 100 chapters worldwide in North America , Africa , Asia Pacific , and Europe . 
 = = Services = = 
