 = = = Main game = = = 
 The core game is based on Hangman . Each round has a category and a blank word puzzle , with each blank representing a letter in the answer . The titular Wheel of Fortune is a roulette @-@ style wheel mechanism with 24 spaces , most of which are labeled with dollar amounts ranging from $ 500 to $ 900 , plus a top dollar value : $ 2 @,@ 500 in Round 1 , $ 3 @,@ 500 in Rounds 2 and 3 , and $ 5 @,@ 000 for Round 4 and any subsequent rounds . The wheel also features two Bankrupt wedges and one Lose a Turn , both of which forfeit the contestant 's turn , with the former also eliminating any cash or prizes the contestant has accumulated within the round . Each game features three contestants , or occasionally , three two @-@ contestant teams ; each contestant / team is positioned behind a single scoreboard with its own flipper . The left scoreboard from the viewer 's perspective is colored red , the center yellow , and the right blue ; which contestant / team occupies which position is determined by a random selection . 
 A contestant spins the wheel to determine a dollar value and guess a consonant . Calling a correct letter earns the value before the corresponding flipper , multiplied by the number of times that the letter appears in the puzzle . A contestant with at least $ 250 may buy a vowel for a flat rate of that amount , until all the vowels in the puzzle have been revealed . Calling a correct letter keeps the wheel in the contestant 's control . Control passes to the next contestant clockwise from the viewer 's perspective if the wheel lands on Lose a Turn or Bankrupt , or if the contestant calls a letter that is not in the puzzle , calls a letter that has already been called in that round , fails to call a letter within five seconds of the wheel stopping , or gives an incorrect answer . The only exception is the Free Play wedge , on which the contestant may call a consonant for $ 500 per occurrence , call a free vowel , or solve the puzzle , with no penalty for an incorrect letter or answer . 
 In Rounds 1 – 3 , the wheel contains a Wild Card and a Gift Tag , while two ½ Car tags are present in Rounds 2 and 3 only . The ½ Car tags are not used on weeks with two @-@ contestant teams , unless the teams are married couples . The Wild Card may be used to call an additional consonant after any turn ( for the amount that the contestant has just spun ) or taken to the bonus round to call an extra consonant there . The Gift Tag offers either a $ 1 @,@ 000 credit toward purchases from , or $ 1 @,@ 000 in cash courtesy of , the sponsoring company , and the ½ Car tags award a car if the contestant wins the round ( s ) in which he or she claims both . Unlike the other tags , the ½ Car tags are replaced in subsequent rounds unless the car is won . A special wedge in the first two rounds awards a prize which is described by the announcer if won . All of the tags and the prize wedge are located over the $ 500 wedges , so calling a letter that appears in the puzzle when landed upon awards both the tag / wedge and $ 500 per every occurrence of that letter in the puzzle . The first three rounds also contain a special wedge which , if won and taken to the bonus round , offers an opportunity to play that round for $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . A contestant must solve the puzzle in order to keep any cash , prizes , or extras accumulated during that round , with the exception of the Wild Card ; once this is picked up , it is kept until the contestant either loses it to Bankrupt or uses it . Bankrupt does not affect score from previous rounds , but it does take away the Wild Card , individual ½ Car tags , and / or million dollar wedge if any was claimed in a previous round . Contestants who solve a round for less than $ 1 @,@ 000 in cash and prizes ( $ 2 @,@ 000 on weeks with two @-@ contestant teams ) have their scores increased to that amount . 
 Each game also features three toss @-@ up puzzles , which reveal the puzzle one random letter at a time , and award cash to whoever rings in with the right answer . The first determines who is interviewed first by the host , the second determines who starts Round 1 , and the third determines who starts Round 4 ; respectively , these are valued at $ 1 @,@ 000 , $ 2 @,@ 000 , and $ 3 @,@ 000 . In addition to these , each game has a minimum of four rounds . Rounds 2 and 3 are respectively started by the next two contestants clockwise from the contestant who began Round 1 . 
 Round 2 features two " mystery wedges " . Calling a correct letter after landing upon this wedge offers the contestant the chance to accept its face value of $ 1 @,@ 000 per letter , or forfeit that amount to flip over the wedge and see whether its reverse side contains a $ 10 @,@ 000 cash prize or Bankrupt . Once either mystery wedge is flipped over , the other becomes a standard $ 1 @,@ 000 space and cannot be flipped . Round 3 is a prize puzzle , which offers a prize ( usually a trip ) to the contestant who solves it . Starting with Season 31 , an " Express " wedge is also placed on the wheel in Round 3 . A contestant who lands on this space and calls a consonant that appears in the puzzle receives $ 1 @,@ 000 per appearance . The contestant can then either " pass " and continue the round normally , or " play " and keep calling consonants for $ 1 @,@ 000 each ( without spinning ) and buying vowels for $ 250 . The Express play ends when the contestant either calls an incorrect letter ( which has the same effect as landing on a Bankrupt wedge ) or solves the puzzle . 
 The final round is always played at least in part in a " speed @-@ up " format , in which the host spins the wheel to determine the value of each consonant , with $ 1 @,@ 000 being added to the value on which the wheel stops before the red contestant 's arrow . Vowels do no add or deduct money from the contestants ' scores in the speed @-@ up round . The contestant in control calls one letter ; if it appears in the puzzle , the contestant is given three seconds to attempt to solve . Play proceeds from the viewer 's left to right , starting with the contestant who was in control at the time of the final spin , until the puzzle is solved . The three @-@ second timer does not begin until the hostess has revealed all instances of a called letter and moved aside from the puzzle board , and the contestant may offer multiple guesses on his / her turn . After the speed @-@ up round , the total winnings of the three contestants are compared ; the contestant with the highest total winnings wins the game and advances to the bonus round . Contestants who fail to earn any cash or prizes in the game are awarded a consolation prize of $ 1 @,@ 000 ( or $ 2 @,@ 000 on weeks with two @-@ contestant teams ) . 
 If two or all three contestants are tied for first place at the end of the speed @-@ up round , an additional toss @-@ up puzzle is played between the tied contestants . The contestant who solves the toss @-@ up puzzle wins $ 1 @,@ 000 and advances to the bonus round . 
 = = = Bonus round = = = 
 In the bonus round , the winning contestant spins a smaller wheel with 24 envelopes to determine the prize . He or she is given a category , and a puzzle for which every instance of R , S , T , L , N , and E is revealed . The contestant provides three more consonants ( four if he / she is holding the Wild Card ) and one more vowel , then has 10 seconds to solve the puzzle after his or her other letters ( if any ) are revealed . The contestant may make as many guesses as necessary , so long as the correct answer is given before time expires . Whether or not the contestant solves the puzzle , the host only opens the envelope at the end of the round to reveal the prize at stake . Prizes in the bonus round include cash amounts ranging from $ 33 @,@ 000 ( commemorating the syndicated version 's 33rd anniversary ) to $ 50 @,@ 000 ; a vehicle ( or two vehicles during weeks with two @-@ contestant teams ) ; and a top prize of $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 If the contestant has the Million Dollar Wedge , the $ 100 @,@ 000 envelope is removed and replaced with a $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 envelope . The $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 prize has been awarded three times : to Michelle Loewenstein on the episode that aired October 14 , 2008 , to Autumn Erhard on the episode that aired May 30 , 2013 , and to Sarah Manchester on the episode that aired on September 17 , 2014 . Contestants who win the $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 may receive it in installments over 20 years , or in a lump sum of that amount 's present value . 
 = = = Previous rules = = = 
 Originally , after winning a round , contestants spent their winnings on prizes that were presented onstage . At any time during a shopping round , most often if the contestant did not have enough left to buy another prize , a contestant could choose to put his or her winnings on a gift certificate ; alternatively , he or she could put the winnings " on account " for use in a later shopping round , but at the risk of losing any " on account " money to a Bankrupt . The shopping element was eliminated from the syndicated version on the episode that aired October 5 , 1987 , both to speed up gameplay and to alleviate the taxes paid by contestants . However , the network version continued to use the shopping element until the end of its first NBC run on June 30 , 1989 . 
 Before the introduction of toss @-@ up puzzles at the start of the 18th syndicated season , the contestant at the red arrow always started Round 1 , with the next contestant clockwise starting each subsequent round . In addition , if a tie for first place occurred , an additional speed @-@ up round was played between the tied contestants for the right to go to the bonus round . The wheel formerly featured a Free Spin wedge , which automatically awarded a token that the contestant could turn in after a lost turn to keep control of the wheel . It was replaced in 1989 with a single Free Spin token placed over a selected cash wedge . Free Spin was retired , and Free Play introduced , at the start of the 27th syndicated season in 2009 . Between September 16 , 1996 and the end of Season 30 , the show featured a progressive jackpot wedge , which had been in several different rounds in its history . This wedge started at $ 5 @,@ 000 and had the value of every spin within the round added to it ; to claim the jackpot , a contestant had to land on the wedge , call a correct letter , and solve the puzzle all in the same turn . In later years , it also offered $ 500 per correct letter and $ 500 to the jackpot , regardless of whether or not it was won . 
 The network version allowed champions to appear for up to three days ( originally five ) . The syndicated version , which originally retired contestants after one episode , adopted the three @-@ day champion rule at the start of the seventh season . In later years , the top three winners from the week 's first four shows would return to compete in the " Friday Finals " ; when the jackpot wedge was introduced , its value was affected as well , beginning at $ 10 @,@ 000 instead of $ 5 @,@ 000 . The rules allowing champions to return after their initial appearances were eliminated permanently beginning with the syndicated episode aired September 21 , 1998 ; as was the case before Season 7 , winners are once again retired after one episode . 
 Before December 1981 , the show did not feature a bonus round . Under the bonus round 's original rules , no letters were provided automatically ; the contestant was asked for five consonants and a vowel , and had fifteen seconds to attempt solving the puzzle . Also , bonus prizes were selected by the contestant at the start of the round . The current time limit and rules for letter selection were introduced on October 3 , 1988 . Starting on September 4 , 1989 , the first episode of the seventh syndicated season , bonus prizes were selected by the contestant choosing from one of five envelopes labeled W , H , E , E , and L. One prize was always $ 25 @,@ 000 in cash , and the rest were changed weekly ; any prize that was won was taken out of rotation for the rest of the week . These envelopes were replaced with the Bonus Wheel on October 22 , 2001 . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 Merv Griffin conceived Wheel of Fortune just as the original version of Jeopardy ! , another show he had created , was ending its 11 @-@ year run on NBC with Art Fleming as its host . Griffin decided to create a Hangman @-@ style game after recalling long car trips as a child , on which he and his sister would play Hangman . After he discussed the idea with Merv Griffin Enterprises ' staff , they thought that the idea would work as a game show if it had a " hook " . He decided to add a roulette @-@ style wheel because he was always " drawn to " such wheels when he saw them in casinos . He and <unk> 's then @-@ president Murray Schwartz consulted an executive of Caesars Palace to find out how to build such a wheel . 
 When Griffin pitched the idea for the show to Lin Bolen , then the head of NBC 's daytime programming division , she approved , but wanted the show to have more glamour to attract the female audience ; she suggested that Griffin incorporate a shopping element into the gameplay , and so , in 1973 , he created a pilot episode titled Shopper 's Bazaar , with Chuck Woolery as host and Mike Lawrence as announcer . The pilot started with the three contestants being introduced individually , with Lawrence describing the prizes that they chose to play for . The main game was played to four rounds , with the values on the wheel wedges increasing after the second round . Unlike the show it evolved into , Shopper 's Bazaar had a vertically mounted wheel , which was spun by Woolery rather than by the contestants ; this wheel lacked the Bankrupt wedge and featured a wedge where a contestant could call a vowel for free , as well as a " Your Own Clue " wedge that allowed contestants to pick up a rotary telephone and hear a private clue about the puzzle . At the end of the game , the highest @-@ scoring contestant would play a bonus round called the " Shopper 's Special " where all the vowels in the puzzle were already there , and the contestant had 30 seconds to call out consonants in the puzzle . 
 Edd Byrnes , an actor from 77 Sunset Strip , served as host for the second and third pilots , both titled Wheel of Fortune . These pilots were directed by Marty <unk> , who gave the show a " Vegas " feel that more closely resembled the look and feel that the actual show ended up having , a wheel that was now spun by the contestants themselves , and a lighted mechanical puzzle board with letters that were now manually turnable . Showcase prizes on these pilots were located behind the puzzle board , and during shopping segments a list of prizes and their price values scrolled on the right of the screen . By the time production began in December 1974 , Woolery was selected to host , the choice being made by Griffin after he reportedly heard Byrnes reciting " A @-@ E @-@ I @-@ O @-@ U " to himself in an effort to remember the vowels . Susan Stafford turned the letters on Byrnes ' pilot episodes , a role that she also held when the show was picked up as a series . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Hosts and hostesses = = = 
 The original host of Wheel of Fortune was Chuck Woolery , who hosted the series from its 1975 premiere until December 25 , 1981 , save for one week in August 1980 when Alex Trebek hosted in his place . Woolery 's departure came over a salary dispute with show creator Merv Griffin , and his contract was not renewed . On December 28 , 1981 , Pat Sajak made his debut as the host of Wheel . Griffin said that he chose Sajak for his " odd " sense of humor . NBC president and CEO Fred Silverman objected as he felt Sajak , who at the time of his hiring was the weatherman for KNBC @-@ TV , was " too local " for a national audience . Griffin countered by telling Silverman he would stop production if Sajak was not allowed to become host , and Silverman acquiesced . 
 Sajak hosted the daytime series until January 9 , 1989 , when he left to host a late @-@ night talk show for CBS . Rolf Benirschke , a former placekicker in the National Football League , was chosen as his replacement and hosted for a little more than five months . Benirschke 's term as host came to an end due to NBC 's cancellation of the daytime Wheel after fourteen years , with its final episode airing on June 30 , 1989 . When the newly formatted daytime series returned on CBS on July 17 , 1989 , Bob Goen became its host . The program continued for a year and a half on CBS , then returned to NBC on January 14 , 1991 and continued until September 20 , 1991 when it was cancelled for a second and final time . 
 Susan Stafford was the original hostess , serving in that role from the premiere until October 1982 . Stafford was absent for two extended periods , once in 1977 after fracturing two vertebrae in her back and once in 1979 after an automobile accident . During these two extended absences , former Miss USA Summer Bartholomew was Stafford 's most frequent substitute , with model Cynthia Washington and comedian Arte Johnson also filling in for Stafford . 
 After Stafford left to become a humanitarian worker , over two hundred applicants signed up for a nationwide search to be her replacement . Griffin eventually narrowed the list to three finalists , which consisted of Summer Bartholomew , former Playboy centerfold Vicki McCarty , and Vanna White . Griffin gave each of the three women an opportunity to win the job by putting them in a rotation for several weeks after Stafford 's departure . In December 1982 , Griffin named White as Stafford 's successor , saying that he felt she was capable of activating the puzzle board letters ( which is the primary role of the Wheel hostess ) better than anyone else who had auditioned . White became highly popular among the young female demographic , and also gained a fanbase of adults interested in her daily wardrobe , in a phenomenon that has been referred to as " <unk> " . White remained on the daytime series for the rest of the time it was on the air . 
 Sajak and White have starred on the syndicated version continuously as host and hostess , respectively , since it began , except for very limited occasions . During two weeks in January 1991 , Tricia Gist , the girlfriend and future wife of Griffin 's son Tony , filled in for White when she and her new husband , restaurateur George San Pietro , were honeymooning . Gist returned for the week of episodes airing March 11 through 15 , 1991 , because White had a cold at the time of taping . On an episode in November 1996 , when Sajak proved unable to host the bonus round segment because of laryngitis , he and White traded places for that segment . On the March 4 , 1997 episode , Rosie O 'Donnell co @-@ hosted the third round with White after O 'Donnell 's name was used in a puzzle . 
 On April 1 , 1997 , Sajak and Alex Trebek traded jobs for the day . Sajak hosted that day 's edition of Jeopardy ! in place of Trebek , who presided over a special two @-@ contestant Wheel celebrity match between Sajak and White , who were playing for the Boy Scouts of America and the American Cancer Society , respectively ; Lesly Sajak , Pat 's wife , was the guest hostess for the day . In January and February 2011 , the show held a " Vanna for a Day " contest in which home viewers submitted video auditions to take White 's place for one episode , with the winner determined by a poll on the show 's website ; the winner of this contest , Katie Cantrell of Wooster , Ohio ( a student at the Savannah College of Art and Design ) , took White 's place for the second and third rounds on the episode that aired March 24 , 2011 . 
 = = = Announcers = = = 
 Charlie O 'Donnell was the program 's first and longest tenured announcer . In 1980 , NBC was discussing cancelling Wheel and O 'Donnell agreed to take the position as announcer on The Toni Tennille Show . The network decided against the cancellation but O 'Donnell decided to honor his commitment and left the series . His replacement was Jack Clark , who added the syndicated series to his responsibilities when it premiered in 1983 and announced for both series until his death in July 1988 . Los Angeles radio personality M. G. Kelly was Clark 's replacement , starting on the daytime series in August 1988 and on the syndicated series when its new season launched a month later . Kelly held these positions until O 'Donnell was able to return to the announcer position , doing so after his duties with Barris Industries came to an end at the end of the 1988 – 89 television season . O 'Donnell remained with the series until shortly before his death in November 2010 . Don Pardo , Don Morrow , and Johnny Gilbert have occasionally served as substitute announcers . 
 After O 'Donnell 's death , the producers sought a permanent replacement , and a series of substitutes filled out the rest of the season , including Gilbert , John Cramer , Joe Cipriano , former The Price Is Right announcer Rich Fields , voice actress Lora Cain , and Jim Thornton , a KNX news anchor . For the show 's twenty @-@ ninth season , Thornton was chosen to be the new announcer for Wheel , and he has been with the show ever since . 
 = = = Production staff = = = 
 Wheel of Fortune typically employs a total of 100 in @-@ house production personnel , with 60 to 100 local staff joining them for those episodes that are taped on location . Griffin was the executive producer of the network version throughout its entire run , and served as the syndicated version 's executive producer until his retirement in 2000 . Since 1999 , the title of executive producer has been held by Harry Friedman , who had shared his title with Griffin for his first year , and had earlier served as a producer starting in 1995 . 
 John Rhinehart was the program 's first producer , but departed in August 1976 to become NBC 's West Coast Daytime Program Development Director . Afterwards , his co @-@ producer , Nancy Jones , was promoted to sole producer , and served as such until 1995 , when Friedman succeeded her . In the 15th syndicated season , Karen Griffith and Steve Schwartz joined Friedman as producers ; they were later promoted to supervising producers , with Amanda Stern occupying Griffith and Schwartz 's old post . 
 The show 's original director was Jeff Goldstein , who was succeeded by Dick Carson in 1978 . Mark Corwin , who had served as associate director under Carson , took over for him upon his retirement at the end of the 1998 – 99 season , and served as such until he himself died in July 2013 ( although episodes already taped before his death continued airing until late 2013 ) . Jeopardy ! director Kevin McCarthy , Corwin 's associate director Bob Cisneros , and Wheel and Jeopardy ! technical director Robert Ennis filled in at various points until Cisneros became full @-@ time director in November 2013 . Ennis returned as guest director for the weeks airing October 13 through 17 and November 17 through 21 , 2014 , as Cisneros was recovering from neck surgery at the time of taping . With the start of the 33rd season on September 14 , 2015 , Ennis was promoted to full @-@ time director . 
 = = Production = = 
 Wheel of Fortune is owned by Sony Pictures Television ( previously known as Columbia TriStar Television ; the successor company to original producer Merv Griffin Enterprises ) . The production company and copyright holder of all episodes to date is <unk> Productions , Inc . , which like SPT has Sony Pictures Entertainment for its active registered agent , and whose name comes from a New Jersey town where Griffin once owned a farm . The rights to distribute the show on American television are owned by CBS Television Distribution , into which original distributor King World Productions was folded in 2007 . 
 The show was originally taped in Studio 4 at NBC Studios in Burbank . Upon NBC 's 1989 cancellation of the network series , production moved to Studio 33 at CBS Television City in Los Angeles , where it remained until 1995 . Since then , the show has occupied Stage 11 at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City . Some episodes are also recorded on location , a tradition which began with two weeks of episodes taped at Radio City Music Hall in late 1988 . Recording sessions usually last for five or six episodes in one day . 
 = = = Set = = = 
 Various changes have been made to the basic set since the syndicated version 's premiere in 1983 . In 1996 , a large video display was added center stage , which was then upgraded in 2003 as the show began the transition into high @-@ definition broadcasting . In the mid @-@ 1990s , the show began a long @-@ standing tradition of nearly every week coming with its own unique theme ; as a result , in addition to its generic design , the set also uses many alternate designs , which are unique to specific weekly sets of themed programs . The most recent set design was conceived by production designer Renee Hoss @-@ Johnson , with later modifications by Jody Vaclav . Previous set designers included Ed Flesh and Dick Stiles . 
 The first pilot used a vertically mounted wheel which was often difficult to see on @-@ screen . Flesh , who also designed the sets for The $ 25 @,@ 000 Pyramid and Jeopardy ! , designed the wheel mechanism . Originally made mostly of paint and cardboard , the modern wheel mechanism is framed on a steel tube surrounded with Plexiglas and more than 200 lighting instruments , and is held by a stainless steel shaft with roller bearings . Altogether , the wheel weighs approximately 2 @,@ 400 pounds ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) . 
 The show 's original puzzle board had three rows of 13 manually operated trilons , for a total of 39 spaces . On December 21 , 1981 , a larger board with 48 trilons in four rows ( 11 , 13 , 13 and 11 trilons ) was adopted . This board was surrounded by a double @-@ arched border of lights which flashed at the beginning and end of the round . Each <unk> had three sides : a green side to represent spaces not used by the puzzle , a blank side to indicate a letter that had not been revealed , and a side with a letter on it . With these older boards , in segments where more than one puzzle was present , while the viewer saw a seamless transition to the next puzzle , what actually happened was a stop @-@ down of the taping ; during the old stop @-@ downs , the board would be wheeled offstage and the new puzzle loaded in by hand out of sight of the contestants . On February 24 , 1997 , the show introduced a computerized puzzle board composed of 52 touch @-@ activated monitors in four rows ( 12 on the top and bottom rows , 14 in the middle two ) . To illuminate a letter during regular gameplay , the hostess touches the right edge of the monitor to reveal it . The computerized board obviated the stop @-@ downs , allowing tapings to finish quicker at a lower cost to the production company . The former board was subsequently sent to the Smithsonian Institution for storage . 
 Although not typically seen by viewers , the set also includes a used letter board that shows contestants which letters are remaining in play , a scoreboard that is visible from the contestants ' perspective , and a countdown clock . The used letter board is also used during the bonus round , and in at least one case , helped the contestant to see unused letters to solve a difficult puzzle . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Alan Thicke composed the show 's original theme , which was titled " Big Wheels " . In 1983 , it was replaced by Griffin 's own composition , " Changing Keys " , to allow him to derive royalties from that composition 's use on both the network and syndicated versions . Steve Kaplan became music director starting with the premiere of the 15th syndicated season in 1997 , and continued to serve as such until he was killed when the Cessna <unk> Golden Eagle he was piloting crashed into a home in Claremont , California , in December 2003 ; his initial theme was a remix of " Changing Keys " , but by the 18th syndicated season , he had replaced it with a composition of his own , which was titled " Happy Wheels " . Since 2006 , music direction has been handled by Frankie Blue and John Hoke ; themes they have written for the show include a remix of " Happy Wheels " and an original rock @-@ based composition . 
 In addition to " Changing Keys " , Griffin also composed various incidental music cues for the syndicated version which were used for announcements of prizes in the show 's early years . Among them were " Frisco Disco " ( earlier the closing theme for a revival of Jeopardy ! which aired in 1978 and 1979 ) , " A Time for Tony " ( whose basic melody evolved into " Think ! " , the longtime theme song for Jeopardy ! ) , " <unk> " ( later used as the theme for Merv Griffin 's <unk> ) , " <unk> " , " Struttin ' on Sunset " , and an untitled vacation cue . 
 = = = Audition process = = = 
 Anyone at least 18 years old has the potential to become a contestant through Wheel of Fortune 's audition process . Exceptions include employees and immediate family members of CBS Corporation , Sony Pictures Entertainment , or any of their respective affiliates or subsidiaries ; any firm involved in supplying prizes for the show ; and television stations that broadcast Wheel and / or Jeopardy ! , their sister radio stations , and those advertising agencies that are affiliated with them . Also ineligible to apply as contestants are individuals who have appeared on a different game show within the previous year , three other game shows within the past ten years , or on any version of Wheel of Fortune itself . 
 Throughout the year , the show uses a custom @-@ designed Winnebago recreational vehicle called the " <unk> " to travel across the United States , holding open auditions at various public venues . Contestants are provided with entry forms which are then drawn randomly . Individuals whose names are drawn appear on stage , five at a time , and are interviewed by traveling host Marty Lublin . The group of five then plays a mock version of the speed @-@ up round , and five more names are selected after a puzzle is solved . Everyone who is called onstage receives a themed prize , usually determined by the spin of a miniature wheel . Auditions typically last two days , with three one @-@ hour segments per day . After each <unk> event , the " most promising candidates " are invited back to the city in which the first audition was held , to participate in a second audition . Contestants not appearing on stage have their applications retained and get drawn at random to fill second @-@ level audition vacancies . At the second audition , potential contestants play more mock games featuring a miniature wheel and puzzle board , followed by a 16 @-@ puzzle test with some letters revealed . The contestants have five minutes to solve as many puzzles as they can by writing in the correct letters . The people who pass continue the audition , playing more mock games which are followed by interviews . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Wheel of Fortune premiered on January 6 , 1975 , at 10 : 30 am ( 9 : 30 Central ) on NBC . Lin Bolen , then the head of daytime programming , purchased the show from Griffin to compensate him for canceling the original Jeopardy ! series , which had one year remaining on its contract ; Jeopardy ! aired its final episode on the Friday before Wheel 's premiere . The original Wheel aired on NBC , in varying time slots between 10 : 30 am and noon , until June 30 , 1989 . Throughout that version 's run , episodes were generally 30 minutes in length , except for six weeks of shows aired between December 1975 and January 1976 which were 60 minutes in length . NBC announced the cancellation of the show in August 1980 , but it stayed on the air following a decision to cut the duration of The David Letterman Show from 90 to 60 minutes . The network Wheel moved to CBS on July 17 , 1989 , and remained there until January 14 , 1991 . After that , it briefly returned to NBC , replacing Let 's Make a Deal , but was canceled permanently on September 20 of that year . 
 The daily syndicated version of Wheel premiered on September 19 , 1983 , preceded by a series of episodes taped on location at the Ohio State Fair and aired on <unk> @-@ TV in Columbus , Ohio . From its debut , the syndicated version offered a larger prize budget than its network counterpart . The show came from humble beginnings : King World chairmen Roger , Michael , and Robert King could initially find only 50 stations that were willing to carry the show , and since they could not find affiliates for the syndicated Wheel in New York , Los Angeles , or Chicago , Philadelphia was the largest market in which the show could succeed in its early days . Only nine stations carried the show from its beginning , but by midseason it was airing on all 50 of the stations that were initially willing to carry it , and by the beginning of 1984 the show was available to 99 percent of television households . Before long , Wheel succeeded Family Feud as the highest @-@ rated syndicated show , and at the beginning of the 1984 – 85 season , Griffin followed up on the show 's success by launching a syndicated revival of Jeopardy ! , hosted by Alex Trebek . The syndicated success of Wheel and Jeopardy ! siphoned ratings from the period 's three longest @-@ running and most popular game shows , Tic @-@ Tac @-@ Dough , The Joker 's Wild , and Family Feud , to the point that all three series came to an end by the fall of 1986 . At this point , Wheel had the highest ratings of any syndicated television series in history , and at the peak of the show 's popularity , over 40 million people were watching five nights per week . The series , along with companion series Jeopardy ! , remained the most @-@ watched syndicated program in the United States until dethroned by Judge Judy in 2011 . The program has become America 's longest @-@ running syndicated game show and its second @-@ longest in either network or syndication , second to the version of The Price Is Right which began airing in 1972 . The syndicated Wheel has become part of the consciousness of over 90 million Americans , and awarded a total of over $ 200 million in cash and prizes to contestants . 
 The popularity of Wheel of Fortune has led it to become a worldwide franchise , with over forty known adaptations in international markets outside the United States . Versions of the show have existed in such countries as Australia , Denmark , France , Germany , Italy , Malaysia , New Zealand , the Philippines , Poland , Russia , Spain , and the United Kingdom . The American version of Wheel has honored its international variants with an occasional theme of special weeks known as " Wheel Around the World " , the inaugural episode of which aired when the 23rd syndicated season premiered on September 12 , 2005 . 
 Between September 1997 and January 1998 , CBS and Game Show Network concurrently aired a special children 's version of the show titled Wheel 2000 . It was hosted by David <unk> , with Tanika Ray providing voice and motion capture for a virtual reality hostess named " Cyber Lucy " . Created by Scott Sternberg , the spin @-@ off featured special gameplay in which numerous rules were changed ; for example , the show 's child contestants competed for points and prizes instead of cash , with the eventual winner playing for a grand prize in the bonus round . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wheel of Fortune has long been one of the highest @-@ rated programs on U.S. syndicated television . It was the highest @-@ rated show in all of syndication before it was dethroned by Two and a Half Men in the 28th season ( 2010 – 11 ) . The syndicated Wheel shared the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Game / Audience Participation Show with Jeopardy ! in 2011 , and Sajak won three Daytime Emmys for Outstanding Game Show Host — in 1993 , 1997 , and 1998 . In a 2001 issue , TV Guide ranked Wheel number 25 among the 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time , and in 2013 , the magazine ranked it number 2 in its list of the 60 greatest game shows ever , second only to Jeopardy ! In August 2006 , the show was ranked number 6 on GSN 's list of the 50 Greatest Game Shows . 
 Wheel was the subject of many nominations in GSN 's Game Show Awards special , which aired on June 6 , 2009 . The show was nominated for Best Game Show , but lost to Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? ; Sajak and White were nominated for Best Game Show Host , but lost to Deal or No Deal 's Howie Mandel ; and O 'Donnell was considered for Best Announcer but lost to Rich Fields from The Price Is Right . One of the catchphrases uttered by contestants , " I 'd like to buy a vowel " , was considered for Favorite Game Show Catch Phrase , but lost to " Come on down ! " , the announcer 's catchphrase welcoming new contestants to Price . The sound effect heard at the start of a new regular gameplay round won the award for Favorite Game Show Sound Effect ; the sound heard when the wheel lands on Bankrupt was also nominated . Despite having been retired from the show for nearly a decade by that point , " Changing Keys " was nominated for Best Game Show Theme Song ; however , it lost to its fellow Griffin composition , " Think ! " from Jeopardy ! 
 A hall of fame honoring Wheel of Fortune is part of the Sony Pictures Studios tour , and was introduced on the episode aired May 10 , 2010 . Located in the same stage as the show 's taping facility , this hall of fame features memorabilia related to Wheel 's syndicated history , including retired props , classic merchandise , photographs , videos , and a special case dedicated to White 's wardrobe . Two years later , in 2012 , the show was honored with a Ride of Fame on a double decker tour bus in New York City . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Numerous board games based on Wheel of Fortune have been released by different toy companies . The games are all similar , incorporating a wheel , puzzle display board , play money and various accessories like Free Spin tokens . Milton Bradley released the first board game in 1975 . In addition to all the supplies mentioned above , the game included 20 prize cards ( to simulate the " shopping " prizes of the show ; the prizes ranged in value from $ 100 to $ 3 @,@ 000 ) . Two editions were released , with the only differences being the box art and the included books of puzzles . Other home versions were released by Pressman Toy Corporation , Tyco / Mattel , Parker Brothers , Endless Games , and Irwin Toys . 
 Additionally , several video games based on the show have been released for personal computers , the Internet , and various gaming consoles spanning multiple hardware generations . Most games released in the 20th century were published by <unk> , which produced a dozen Wheel games on various platforms , starting with a Nintendo Entertainment System game released in 1987 and continuing until the company closed in 1998 after filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . Subsequent games were published by Hasbro Interactive and its <unk> Infogrames / Atari , Sony Online Entertainment , and THQ . 
 Wheel has also been licensed to International Game Technology for use in its slot machines . The games are all loosely based on the show , with contestants given the chance to spin the wheel to win a jackpot prize . Since 1996 , over 200 slot games based on the show have been created , both for real @-@ world casinos and those on the Internet . With over 1 @,@ 000 wins awarded in excess of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and over $ 3 billion in <unk> delivered , Wheel has been regarded as the most successful slots brand of all time . 
 = Live Free or Die Hard = 
 Live Free or Die Hard ( also known as Die Hard 4 and released as Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 outside North America ) is a 2007 American action film , and the fourth installment in the Die Hard film series . The film was directed by Len Wiseman and stars Bruce Willis as John McClane . The film 's name was adapted from New Hampshire 's state motto , " Live Free or Die " . 
 McClane is attempting to stop cyber terrorists who hack into government and commercial computers across the United States with the goal to start a " fire sale " of financial assets . The film was based on the 1997 article " A Farewell to Arms " written for Wired magazine by John Carlin . The film 's North American release date was June 27 , 2007 . 
 The project was initially stalled due to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , and when production eventually began , the film 's title was changed several times . A variety of visual effects were used for action sequences , even though Wiseman and Willis stated that they wanted to limit the amount of CGI in the film . In separate incidents during filming , both Willis and his stunt double were injured . 
 Unlike the prior three films in the series , the U.S. rating was PG @-@ 13 rather than R. An unrated version contained more strong profanity and violence not shown in the theatrical version , and was included in the DVD release . 
 Reviews were positive with an 82 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes and a 69 / 100 score from Metacritic . The film earned total international box office gross receipts of $ 383 @.@ 4 million , making it the highest @-@ grossing film in the Die Hard series . It debuted at # 2 at the U.S. box office . 
 For the DVD release , 20th Century Fox pioneered a new kind of DRM , Digital Copy protection that tries to weaken the incentives for consumers to learn how to rip discs by offering them a downloadable version with studio @-@ imposed restrictions . The score for the film was released on July 2 , 2007 . The fifth film in the series , titled A Good Day to Die Hard , was released on February 14 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The FBI responds to a brief computer outage at their Cyber @-@ Security Division by tracking down top computer hackers , finding several of them have been killed . Taking others into protective custody , the FBI asks New York City Police Department detective John McClane ( Bruce Willis ) to bring in Matthew " Matt " Farrell ( Justin Long ) , one of the targeted hackers . McClane finally arrives just in time to prevent Farrell from being killed by assassins working for Mai Linh ( Maggie Q ) , a mysterious cyber @-@ terrorist who works for her boss and love interest , Thomas Gabriel ( Timothy Olyphant ) . 
 En route to Washington , D.C. with McClane , Farrell reveals that he received a large sum of money from Mai to write an algorithm that can crack a security system . As McClane and Farrell arrive in Washington , Gabriel orders his own crew of hackers to take control of the transportation grids and stock market , while nationally broadcasting a message threatening the United States . Farrell recognizes this as the start of a " fire sale " , an attack designed to target the nation 's reliance on computer controls , such that " everything must go " . McClane and Farrell are taken by police escort to the secure FBI headquarters , but Mai reroutes the convoy into the path of an assault helicopter . McClane takes down the helicopter by launching a police car over a damaged toll booth into it . 
 As McClane and Farrell finally recover , Gabriel initiates a second broadcast by showing a simulated explosion of the U.S. Capitol building , sending the public into panic . Farrell recognizes that his next target of the " fire sale " is likely the power grid , and the two drive to a utility superstation in West Virginia . When they arrive , a team led by Mai is breaking in and taking over the station 's controls . McClane kills all of them , and sends Mai to her death in a vehicle at the bottom of an elevator shaft . He obtains video footage of Gabriel which he relays to the FBI . Enraged over Mai 's death , Gabriel takes remote control of the natural gas distribution system and redirects all of the gas into the station . McClane and Farrell manage to escape before the station explodes , leaving much of the eastern seaboard of United States and Canada without power . 
 Farrell connects McClane with a fellow hacker , Frederick " Warlock " <unk> ( Kevin Smith ) , in Baltimore . Running his computer systems from several generators , Warlock identifies the piece of code Farrell wrote as a means to access data at a master Social Security Administration building at Woodlawn , Maryland . They realize the building is actually a cover @-@ up NSA facility , designed by Gabriel when he worked for the NSA as a backup facility for the nation 's entire personal and financial records to be used in the event of a cyber attack similar to the one Gabriel has created . Warlock tells McClane and Matt that Gabriel is an extremely talented programmer who was a top security expert for the U.S. Department of Defense . Gabriel tried to alert the politicians and military leadership to critical weaknesses that left America 's network infrastructure open to cyberwarfare , but his methods led to his dismissal . Warlock runs a <unk> and attempts to identify Gabriel 's location , but Gabriel detects the intrusion . 
 Gabriel taps into their connection and speaks with Warlock , Farrell , and McClane . Gabriel reveals that he had successfully located McClane 's estranged daughter , Lucy ( Mary Elizabeth Winstead ) , and intends to kidnap her . McClane and Farrell race to the Woodlawn facility , where Farrell soon discovers that Gabriel is downloading all the information onto his portable computer system in order to blackmail the U.S government , and he manages to encrypt the data before all of Gabriel 's henchmen can access it . However , Gabriel kidnaps Farrell as he tries to escape the facility . McClane pursues Gabriel , hijacking his semi and enlists Warlock to trace Gabriel 's vehicle . With McClane in pursuit , Gabriel accesses the communication system of a U.S. Marine Corps F @-@ 35B Lightning II . 
 Pretending to be an air traffic controller , Gabriel orders the pilot to attack the truck McClane is driving . McClane manages to escape the assault when debris from the damaged truck falls into the jet intake of the aircraft from a highway exit ramp . McClane makes his way to a nearby warehouse where Warlock has successfully tracked Gabriel and is installing the remaining files , holding Lucy . Although McClane kills most of Gabriel 's remaining henchmen , Emerson ( Edoardo Costa ) shoots him in the right shoulder , injuring him . 
 While Gabriel tries to hold McClane from behind , McClane manages to gain control of Gabriel 's weapon and fatally shoots him through his own shoulder , killing Gabriel ; McClane survives his injury . Farrell then kills Emerson in the ensuing confusion . As the FBI finally arrives to tend to his wounds and clean up the scene , recovering the stolen files in the process , McClane pretends to be displeased with the romantic feelings developing between Farrell and Lucy as he sits with her in the ambulance . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Bruce Willis as Detective John McClane 
 Justin Long as Matthew " Matt " Farrell , a computer hacker from Camden , New Jersey 
 Timothy Olyphant as Thomas Gabriel , a former U.S. Defense Department analyst who leads a group of cyber @-@ terrorists systematically shutting down the entire U.S. infrastructure . Olyphant filmed his role within three weeks . 
 Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Lucy <unk> @-@ McClane , McClane 's estranged daughter who , along with Farrell , is kidnapped by Thomas Gabriel and his henchmen . The inclusion of McClane 's daughter was previously considered for the third film , and she was in the video game Die Hard : Vendetta . It was speculated that Willis ' real life daughter Rumer , who was born the same year that Die Hard was released , was a prime candidate for the part of McClane 's daughter . Jessica Simpson , Britney Spears , and Taylor Fry , who played McClane 's daughter in Die Hard , had all previously auditioned for the role . 
 Maggie Q as Mai Linh , Gabriel 's primary accomplice and love interest 
 Kevin Smith as Frederick " Warlock " <unk> , Farrell 's hacker friend . Smith , a noted screenwriter and film director , did uncredited rewrites to the scenes in which he appears , as Willis and Wiseman thought the dialogue and exposition " didn 't make sense " . 
 Cliff Curtis as Miguel Bowman , Deputy Director of the F.B.I. ' s Cyber Crime Division 
 Jonathan Sadowski as Trey , Gabriel 's main hacker 
 Edoardo Costa as Emerson , Gabriel 's main henchman 
 Cyril Raffaelli as Rand , Gabriel 's henchman 
 Yorgo Constantine as Russo , Gabriel 's henchman 
 Chris Palermo as Del , Gabriel 's henchman 
 Andrew Friedman as Casper , a computer hacker who is working with Gabriel 
 Željko Ivanek as Agent Molina , Bowman 's assistant 
 Christina Chang as Taylor , an F.B.I. agent working for Bowman 
 Sung Kang as Raj , an F.B.I. agent 
 Allen Maldonado as <unk> 
 Tim Russ as Agent Summer 
 Matt McColm as Gabriel 's henchman ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script and title = = = 
 The film 's plot is based on an earlier script entitled <unk> by David Marconi , screenwriter of the 1998 film Enemy of the State . Using John Carlin 's Wired magazine article entitled " A Farewell to Arms " , Marconi crafted a screenplay about a cyber @-@ terrorist attack on the United States . The attack procedure is known as a " fire sale " , depicting a three @-@ stage coordinated attack on a country 's transportation , telecommunications , financial , and utilities infrastructure systems . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the project was stalled , only to be resurrected several years later and rewritten into Live Free or Die Hard by Doug Richardson and eventually by Mark Bomback . 
 Willis said in 2005 that the film would be called Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 , as it revolves around computers and cyber @-@ terrorism . IGN later reported the film was to be called Die Hard : Reset instead . 20th Century Fox later announced the title as Live Free or Die Hard and set a release date of June 29 , 2007 with filming to begin in September 2006 . The title is based on New Hampshire 's state motto , " Live Free or Die " , which is attributed to a quote from General John Stark . International trailers use the Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 title , as the film was released outside North America with that title . Early into the film 's DVD commentary , both Wiseman and Willis note a preference for Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 , and subtly mock the Live Free or Die Hard title . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 For the visual effects used throughout the film , actor Bruce Willis and director Len Wiseman stated that they wanted to use a limited amount of CGI . One VFX producer said that " Len was insisting on the fact that , because we ’ ve got Transformers and other big CG movies coming out , this one has to feel more real . It has to be embedded in some kind of practical reality in order to give it that edge of being a Die Hard . " Companies such as Digital Dimension , The Orphanage , R ! ot , Pixel Magic , and Amalgamated Pixels assisted in the film 's visual effects . 
 Digital Dimension worked on 200 visual effects shots in the film , including the sequence that shows characters John McClane and Matt Farrell crouching between two cars as another car lands on top of the other cars . To achieve this effect , a crane yanked the car and threw it in the air onto the two cars that were also being pulled by cables . The shot was completed when the two characters were integrated into the footage of the car stunt after the lighting was adjusted and CGI glass and debris were added . In the same sequence , John McClane destroys a helicopter that several of Gabriel 's henchman are riding in by ramming it with a car . This was accomplished by first filming one take where one of Gabriel 's henchman , Rand , jumps from the helicopter , and in the next take the car is propelled into the stationary helicopter as it is hoisted by wires . The final view of the shot overlays the two takes , with added CGI for the debris and moving rotor blades . The company also assisted in adding cars for traffic collisions and masses of people for evacuations from several government buildings . 
 The Orphanage developed a multi @-@ level freeway interchange for use in one of the film 's final scenes by creating a digital environment and a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) long spiral ramp that was built in front of a bluescreen . When a F @-@ 35 jet is chasing McClane on the freeway , a miniature model and a full @-@ size prop were both built to assist in digitally adding the jet into the scene . The nine @-@ foot model was constructed from November 2006 through February 2007 . When the jet is shown hovering near the freeway , editors used the software 3D graphics program Maya to blur the background and create a heat ripple effect . 
 = = = Filming and injuries = = = 
 Filming for Live Free or Die Hard started in downtown Baltimore , Maryland on September 23 , 2006 . Eight different sets were built on a large soundstage for filming many scenes throughout the film . When recording the sound for the semi trailer used in one of the film 's final scenes , 18 microphones were used to record the engine , tires , and damage to the vehicle . Post @-@ production for the film only took 16 weeks , when it was more common for similar films to use 26 weeks . 
 In order to prevent possible injuries and be in peak condition for the film , Willis worked out almost daily for several months prior to filming . Willis was injured January 24 , 2007 during a fight scene , when he was kicked above his right eye by a stunt double for actress Maggie Q who was wearing stiletto heels . Willis described the event as " no big deal " but when Len Wiseman inspected his injury , he noticed that the situation was much more serious than previously thought — in the DVD commentary , Wiseman indicates in inspecting the wound that he could see bone . Willis was hospitalized and received seven stitches which ran through his right eyebrow and down into the corner of his eye . Due to the film 's non @-@ linear production schedule , these stitches can accidentally be seen in the scene where McClane first delivers Farrell to Bowman . 
 Throughout filming , between 200 and 250 stunt people were used . Bruce Willis ' stunt double , Larry Rippenkroeger , was knocked unconscious when he fell 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) from a fire escape to the pavement . Rippenkroeger suffered broken bones in his face , several broken ribs , a punctured lung , and fractures in both wrists . Due to his injuries , production was temporarily shut down . Willis personally paid the hotel bills for Rippenkroeger 's parents and visited him a number of times at the hospital . 
 Kevin Smith recalls rewriting scenes on the set of Live Free or Die Hard in his spoken word film Sold Out : A <unk> with Kevin Smith . 
 = = Rating = = 
 In the United States , the first three films in the Die Hard series were rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America . Live Free or Die Hard , however , was edited to obtain a PG @-@ 13 rating . In some cases , alternate profanity @-@ free dialogue was shot and used or swearing was cut out in post @-@ production to reduce profanity . Director Len Wiseman commented on the rating , saying " It was about three months into it [ production ] , and I hadn 't even heard that it was PG @-@ 13 ... But in the end , it was just trying to make the best Die Hard movie , not really thinking so much about what the rating would be . " Bruce Willis was upset with the studio 's decision , stating , " I really wanted this one to live up to the promise of the first one , which I always thought was the only really good one . That 's a studio decision that is becoming more and more common , because they ’ re trying to reach a broader audience . It seems almost a courageous move to give a picture an R rating these days . But we still made a pretty hardcore , <unk> film . " Willis said he thought that viewers unaware that it was not an R @-@ rated film would not suspect so due to the level and intensity of the action as well as the usage of some profanity , although he admitted these elements were less intense than in the previous films . He also said that this film was the best of the four : " It 's unbelievable . I just saw it last week . I personally think , it 's better than the first one . " 
 In the United Kingdom , the British Board of Film Classification awarded the film a 15 rating ( including the unrated version , released later ) , the same as Die Hard with a Vengeance and Die Hard 2 , albeit both were cut for both theatrical and video release , ( the first film in the series originally received an 18 certificate ) . All films have been re @-@ rated 15 uncut . Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 was released with no cuts made and the cinema version ( i.e. US PG @-@ 13 version ) consumer advice read that it " contains frequent action violence and one use of strong language " . The unrated version was released on DVD as the " Ultimate Action Edition " with the consumer advice " contains strong language and violence " . 
 In Australia , Die Hard 4 @.@ 0 was released with the PG @-@ 13 cut with an M rating , the same as the others in the series ( The Australian Classification Board is less strict with regards to language and to a lesser extent , violence ) . The unrated version was later released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray also with an M rating . The film notably was never released in home media with its theatrical cut , and has only been released in Australia as the extended edition . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Live Free or Die Hard debuted at # 2 at the box office and made $ 9 @.@ 1 million in its first day of release in 3 @,@ 172 theaters , the best opening day take of any film in the Die Hard series ( not taking inflation into account ) . On its opening weekend Live Free or Die Hard made $ 33 @.@ 3 million ( $ 48 @.@ 3 million counting Wednesday and Thursday ) . The film made $ 134 @.@ 5 million domestically , and $ 249 @.@ 0 million overseas for a total of $ 383 @.@ 5 million , making it the twelfth highest @-@ grossing film of 2007 . To date , it is the most successful film in the series . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received an 82 % approval rating based on 206 reviews and an average rating of 6 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Live Free or Die Hard may be preposterous , but it 's an efficient , action @-@ packed summer popcorn flick with thrilling stunts and a commanding performance by Bruce Willis . Fans of the previous Die Hard films will not be disappointed " . On Metacritic , the film has a score of 69 out of 100 , based on 34 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . A review on IGN stated " Like the recent Rocky Balboa , this new Die Hard works as both its own story about an over @-@ the @-@ hill but still vital hero and as a nostalgia trip for those who grew up with the original films . " On the television show Ebert & Roeper , film critic Richard Roeper and guest critic Katherine <unk> both gave the film " two thumbs up " , with Roeper stating that the film is " not the best or most exciting Die Hard , but it is a lot of fun " and that it is his favorite among the Die Hard sequels . Roeper also remarked , " Willis is in top form in his career @-@ defining role . " Michael Medved gave the film three and a half out of four stars , opining , " a smart script and spectacular special effects make this the best Die Hard of ' em all . " 
 Conversely , Lawrence Toppman of The Charlotte Observer stated : " I can safely say I 've never seen anything as ridiculous as Live Free or Die Hard . " Toppman also wrote that the film had a lack of memorable villains and referred to John McClane as " just a bald Terminator with better one @-@ liners " . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The score for Live Free or Die Hard , written by Marco Beltrami , was released on July 2 , 2007 by Varèse Sarabande ( which also released the soundtracks for the first two Die Hard films ) , several days after the United States release of the film . This was the first film not to be scored by Michael Kamen , due to his death in 2003 ; Beltrami incorporates Kamen 's thematic material into his score , but Kamen is not credited on the film or the album . Other songs in the film include " Rock & Roll Queen " by The Subways , " Fortunate Son " by Creedence Clearwater Revival and " I 'm So Sick " by Flyleaf . Eric <unk> , reviewing from Soundtrack.net , said of the score 's action cues " the entire orchestra seems percussive , flow well together . " 
 " Out of Bullets " ( 1 : 08 ) 
 " Shootout " ( 3 : 41 ) 
 " Leaving the Apartment " ( 2 : 08 ) 
 " Dead Hackers " ( 1 : 31 ) 
 " Traffic Jam " ( 4 : 13 ) 
 " It 's a Fire Sale " ( 2 : 57 ) 
 " The Break @-@ In " ( 2 : 28 ) 
 " Farrell to D.C. " ( 4 : 36 ) 
 " Copter Chase " ( 4 : 41 ) 
 " Blackout " ( 2 : 03 ) 
 " Illegal Broadcast " ( 3 : 48 ) 
 " Hurry Up ! " ( 1 : 23 ) 
 " The Power Plant " ( 2 : 01 ) 
 " Landing " ( 2 : 28 ) 
 " Cold Cuts " ( 2 : 00 ) 
 " Break a Neck " ( 2 : 47 ) 
 " Farrell Is In " ( 4 : 22 ) 
 " The F @-@ 35 " ( 4 : 13 ) 
 " Aftermath " ( 3 : 12 ) 
 " Live Free or Die Hard " ( 2 : 56 ) 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The Blu @-@ ray and DVD were released on October 29 , 2007 , in the United Kingdom , on October 31 in Hungary , November 20 in the United States , and December 12 in Australia . The DVD topped rental and sales charts in its opening week of release in the U.S. and Canada . There is an unrated version , which retains much of the original ' R @-@ rated ' dialogue , and a theatrical version of the film . However , the unrated version has a branching error resulted in one of the unrated changes to be omitted . The film briefly switches to the PG @-@ 13 version in the airbag scene ; McClane 's strong language is missing from this sequence ( although international DVD releases of the unrated version are unaffected ) . The Blu @-@ ray release features the PG @-@ 13 theatrical cut which runs at 128 minutes , while the Collector 's Edition DVD includes both the unrated and theatrical versions . Time magazine 's Richard Corliss named it one of the Top 10 DVDs of 2007 , ranking it at # 10 . The German Blu @-@ ray release of the " Die Hard Legacy Collection " features the unrated version for the first time in HD , and the disc is region @-@ free . 
 The DVD for the film was the first to include a Digital Copy of the film which could be played on a PC or Mac computer and could also be imported into several models of portable video players . Mike Dunn , a president for 20th Century Fox , stated " The industry has sold nearly 12 billion DVDs to date , and the release of Live Free or Die Hard is the first one that allows consumers to move their content to other devices . " 
 = USS Wyoming ( BB @-@ 32 ) = 
 USS Wyoming ( BB @-@ 32 ) was the lead ship of her class of dreadnought battleships and was the third ship of the United States Navy named Wyoming , although she was only the second named in honor of the 44th state . Wyoming was laid down at the William Cramp and Sons in Philadelphia in February 1910 , was launched in May 1911 , and was completed in September 1912 . She was armed with a main battery of twelve 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and capable of a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 During the First World War , she was part of the Battleship Division Nine , which was attached to the British Grand Fleet as the 6th Battle Squadron . During the war , she was primarily tasked with patrolling in the North Sea and escorting convoys to Norway . She served in both the Atlantic and Pacific Fleets throughout the 1920s , and in 1931 – 1932 , she was converted into a training ship according to the terms of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 . 
 Wyoming served as a training ship throughout the 1930s , and in November 1941 , she became a gunnery ship . She operated primarily in the Chesapeake Bay area , which earned her the nickname " Chesapeake Raider " . In this capacity , she trained some 35 @,@ 000 gunners for the hugely expanded US Navy during World War II . She continued in this duty until 1947 , when she was decommissioned on 1 August and subsequently sold for scrap ; she was broken up in New York starting in December 1947 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Wyoming was 562 ft ( 171 m ) long overall and had a beam of 93 ft 3 in ( 28 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 6 in ( 9 m ) . She displaced 26 @,@ 000 long tons ( 26 @,@ 417 t ) as designed and up to 27 @,@ 243 long tons ( 27 @,@ 680 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) , generating a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 8 @,@ 000 nmi ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 12 @-@ inch / 50 caliber Mark 7 guns in six Mark 9 twin gun turrets on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward . The other four turrets were placed aft of the superstructure in two superfiring pairs . The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ one 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 caliber guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull . The main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick , while the gun turrets had 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick faces . The conning tower had 11 @.@ 5 in ( 292 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 In 1925 , Wyoming was modernized in the Philadelphia Navy Yard . Her displacement increased significantly , to 26 @,@ 066 long tons ( 26 @,@ 484 t ) standard and 30 @,@ 610 long tons ( 31 @,@ 100 t ) full load . Her beam was widened to 106 ft ( 32 m ) , primarily from the installation of anti @-@ torpedo bulges , and draft increased to 29 ft 11 @.@ 75 in ( 9 m ) . Her twelve coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with four White @-@ Forster oil @-@ fired boilers that had been intended for the ships cancelled under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty ; performance remained the same as the older boilers . The ship 's deck armor was strengthened by the addition of 3 @.@ 5 in ( 89 mm ) of armor to the second deck between the end barbettes , plus 1 @.@ 75 in ( 44 mm ) of armor on the third deck on the bow and stern . The deck armor over the engines and boilers was increased by 0 @.@ 75 in ( 19 mm ) and 1 @.@ 25 in ( 32 mm ) , respectively . Five of the 5 @-@ inch guns were removed and eight 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed . The mainmast was removed to provide space for an aircraft catapult mounted on the Number 3 turret amidships . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Wyoming was laid down at the William Cramp and Sons shipyard in Philadelphia on 9 February 1910 , and was launched on 25 May 1911 . She was completed a year and four months later , on 25 September 1912 . After her commissioning , the final fitting @-@ out work was completed at the New York Navy Yard over the next three months . She then proceeded to join the rest of the fleet at Hampton Roads on 30 December , where she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Charles J. Badger , the commander of the Atlantic Fleet . Wyoming left Hampton Roads on 6 January 1913 , bound for the Caribbean . She visited the Panama Canal , which was nearing completion , and then participated in fleet exercises off Cuba . The ship was back in port in Chesapeake Bay on 4 March . 
 Wyoming then took part in gunnery drills off the Virginia Capes , and on 18 April , entered drydock at the New York Navy Yard for some repairs , which lasted until 7 May . She joined the rest of the fleet for maneuvers off Block Island that lasted from 7 – 24 May . During the maneuvers , the ship 's machinery proved troublesome , which necessitated repairs at Newport from 9 – 19 May . At the end of the month , she was in New York harbor , to participate in the ceremonies for the dedication of the monument to the armored cruiser Maine , which had been destroyed in Havana harbor on 15 February 1898 . On 4 June , Wyoming steamed to Annapolis , where she took on a crew of naval cadets from the Naval Academy for a summer midshipman cruise . 
 After returning the cadets to Annapolis on 24 – 25 August , Wyoming took part in gunnery and torpedo training over the next few weeks . On 16 September , she returned to New York for repairs , which lasted until 2 October . She then ran full – power sea trials before proceeding to the Virginia Capes , where she participated in another round of fleet maneuvers . Next , she departed for a European goodwill cruise on 26 October . She toured the Mediterranean Sea , stopping in Valletta , Malta , Naples , Italy , and Villefranche , France . She departed France on 30 November , and arrived in New York on 15 December . There , she went into dock at the New York Navy Yard for periodic repairs , which lasted until January 1914 . On the 6th , Wyoming left for Hampton Roads , where she took on coal in preparation for the annual fleet maneuvers in the Caribbean . 
 The exercises lasted from 26 January to 15 March , and the fleet was based out of Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba . Wyoming and the rest of the fleet then proceeded to Tangier Sound for additional training , including gunnery drills . On 3 April , Wyoming left the fleet for an overhaul in New York , which lasted until 9 May . She then returned to Hampton Roads , where she took on a contingent of troops and ferried them to Veracruz , arriving on 18 May . The US had intervened in the Mexican Revolution and occupied Veracruz to safeguard American citizens there . Wyoming cruised off Veracruz into the Autumn of 1914 , at which point she returned to the Virginia Capes for exercises . On 6 October , she entered New York for repairs ; this work lasted until 17 January 1915 . 
 Wyoming then proceeded to Hampton Roads , and then to Cuba , where she joined the fleet for the annual maneuvers off Cuba . These lasted until April , when she returned to the US . She participated in more exercises off Block Island over the next several months , and on 20 December , she returned to New York for another overhaul . On 6 January 1916 , she emerged from dry dock , and then proceeded to the Caribbean . On 16 January , she reached Culebra , Puerto Rico , then visited Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti on 27 January . She entered port at Guantanamo the next day , and took part in fleet maneuvers until 10 April , after which she returned to New York . Another round of dockyard work took place from 16 April to 26 June . After returning to service , Wyoming took part in more maneuvers off the Virginia Capes for the remainder of the year . She left New York on 9 January 1917 , bound for Cuban waters for exercises that lasted through mid @-@ March . She left Cuba on 27 March , and was cruising off Yorktown , Virginia when the US declared war on Germany on 6 April , formally entering World War I. 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Wyoming operated out of the Chesapeake Bay area for the next seven months , training engine @-@ room personnel for the expanding American fleet . On 25 November , Battleship Division 9 ( BatDiv 9 ) , which at that time comprised Wyoming , New York , Delaware , and Florida , departed the US , bound for Britain . BatDiv 9 was to reinforce the British Grand Fleet at its base in Scapa Flow . The American ships reached Scapa on 7 December , where they became the 6th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet . The American ships drilled with their British counterparts from December 1917 to February 1918 . 
 On 6 February , Wyoming and the other American battleships undertook their first wartime operation , to escort a convoy to Stavanger , Norway , in company with eight British destroyers . On 7 February , lookouts on several ships , including Wyoming , thought they spotted German U @-@ boats attacking the ships with torpedoes , though these proved to be incorrect reports . The convoy successfully reached Norway two days later ; the return trip to Scapa Flow took another two days . Wyoming patrolled in the North Sea for the next several months , watching for a sortie by the German High Seas Fleet . On 30 June , Wyoming and the rest of the 6th Battle Squadron covered a minelaying operation in the North Sea ; the operation lasted until 2 July . During the operation , jumpy crewmen again incorrect reported U @-@ boat sightings , and Wyoming opened fire on the supposed targets . On the return voyage , the 6th Battle Squadron joined up with Convoy <unk> , which was returning from Norway . 
 On 14 October , New York collided with a U @-@ boat and sank it . The collision nevertheless damaged her screws , which forced Rodman to transfer his flag from New York to Wyoming while the former was in dock for repair . On 21 November , after the Armistice with Germany ended the war , Wyoming and an Allied fleet of some 370 warships met the High Seas Fleet in the North Sea and escorted it into internment in Scapa Flow . On 12 December , Wyoming , now the flagship of Rear Admiral William Sims , the new BatDiv 9 commander , left Britain for France . There , she rendezvoused off Brest , France with George Washington , which was carrying President Woodrow Wilson to the peace negotiations in Paris . Wyoming then returned to Britain two days later before departing for the US , arriving in New York on 25 December . She remained there through the new year , and on 18 January 1919 , she became the flagship of BatDiv 7 , flying the flag of Rear Admiral Robert <unk> . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 On 1 February , Wyoming steamed out of New York to join the annual fleet maneuvers off Cuba , before returning to New York on 14 April . On 12 May , she left port to help guide a group of Navy Curtiss NC flying boats as they made the first aerial transatlantic crossing . The battleship was back in port by 31 May . She then took on a crew of midshipmen for a training cruise off the Chesapeake Bay and Virginia Capes . After finishing the cruise , Wyoming entered dry dock at the Norfolk Navy Yard on 1 July for a modernization for service in the Pacific . Her secondary battery was reduced to sixteen 5 @-@ inch guns . After emerging from the shipyard , she became the flagship of BatDiv 6 of the newly designated Pacific Fleet . On 19 July , Wyoming and the rest of the Pacific Fleet departed the east coast , bound for the Pacific . The ships transited the Panama Canal later that month , and reached San Diego , California on 6 August . 
 On 9 August , Wyoming moved to San Pedro , where she was based for the next month . She went to the Puget Sound Navy Yard for an overhaul that lasted until 19 April 1920 . On 4 May , she was back in San Pedro and resumed her normal routine of fleet maneuvers off the California coast . On 30 August , Wyoming left California for Hawaii , where she participated in more training exercises through September . She then returned to San Diego on 8 October for more maneuvers off the west coast . The ship left San Francisco on 5 January 1921 for a cruise to Central and South American waters ; the trip culminated in Valparaíso , Chile , where she was reviewed by the President of Chile Arturo Alessandri Palma on 8 February . Wyoming then returned north , arriving in Puget Sound for repairs on 18 March . 
 On 2 August , Wyoming was in Balboa in the Canal Zone , where she picked up Rear Admiral Rodman and a commission traveling from Peru back to New York . She arrived in New York on 19 August and rejoined the Atlantic Fleet . There , she became the flagship of Admiral Hilary P. Jones , the commander of the Atlantic Fleet . Wyoming spent the next three and a half years on the normal routine of winter fleet exercises off Cuba , followed by summer maneuvers off the east coast of the US . Throughout the period , she served as the flagship of Vice Admirals John McDonald , Newton McCully , and Josiah McKean in the Scouting Fleet . In the summer of 1924 , she conducted a midshipman training cruise to Europe , and stopped in Torbay , Great Britain , Rotterdam in the Netherlands , Gibraltar , and the Azores . In January and February 1924 , the Navy conducted Fleet Problem II , III , and IV concurrently . During the FP III maneuvers , Wyoming , her sister Arkansas , and the two Florida @-@ class battleships stood in for the new Colorado @-@ class battleships . During the FP IV portion of the maneuvers , Wyoming served in the " Blue " force , which represented the US Navy . She was attacked by " Black " aircraft , but the umpires judged Wyoming 's anti @-@ aircraft fire and the escort fighters provided by Langley to have effectively defended the fleet . 
 On 14 February 1925 , Wyoming again passed through the Panama Canal to return to the Pacific . There , she joined fleet exercises off California . She then proceeded to Hawaii , where she remained from late April to early June . She visited San Diego on 18 – 22 June , and then returned to the east coast via the Panama Canal , arriving in New York on 17 July . A cruise to Cuba and Haiti followed , after which Wyoming returned to the New York Navy Yard for an overhaul that lasted from 23 November to 26 January 1926 . During this period , then @-@ Commander William F. Halsey , Jr. came aboard as the ship 's executive officer ; he served on Wyoming until 4 January 1927 . 
 Wyoming then returned to the routine of winter maneuvers in the Caribbean and training cruises in the summer . In late August , the ship went to Philadelphia for an extensive modernization . Her old coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with new oil @-@ fired models and anti @-@ torpedo bulges were added to improve her resistance to underwater damage . The work was completed by 2 November , after which Wyoming conducted a shakedown cruise to Cuba and the Virgin Islands . She was back in Philadelphia on 7 December , and two days later , she returned to her post as the flagship of the Scouting Fleet , flying the flag of Vice Admiral Ashley Robertson . 
 Wyoming spent the next three years in the Scouting Fleet . She conducted training cruises with Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps ( NROTC ) cadets from various universities , including Yale , Harvard , Georgia Tech , and Northwestern . These cruises went throughout the Atlantic , including to the Gulf of Mexico , to the Azores , and to Nova Scotia . While on one of these cruises in November 1928 , Wyoming picked up eight survivors from the wrecked steamship SS Vestris ; she took them to Norfolk on 16 November . On 19 September 1930 , Wyoming was transferred from the Scouting Force to BatDiv 2 , where she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Wat T. Cluverius . She served here until 4 November , when she was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and became the flagship of the Training Squadron , flying the flag of Rear Admiral Harley H. Christy . Thereafter , she conducted a training cruise to the Gulf of Mexico . 
 After returning to Philadelphia on 1 January 1931 , Wyoming was placed on reduced commission . Under the terms of the London Naval Treaty signed the previous year , Wyoming was to be demilitarized . During the demilitarization process , her anti @-@ torpedo bulges , side armor , and half of her main battery guns were removed . She was back in service by May , and on the 29th , she took on a crew of midshipmen from Annapolis for a training cruise to Europe , which began on 5 June . While en route on 15 June , Wyoming rescued the disabled submarine O @-@ 12 and took it under tow to Queenstown , Northern Ireland . While in Europe , she stopped in Copenhagen , Denmark , Greenock , Scotland , Cadiz , Spain , and Gibraltar . The ship was back in Hampton Roads on 13 August ; while on the cruise , Wyoming was reclassified as " AG @-@ 17 " , to reflect her new role as a training ship . 
 Wyoming spent the next four years conducting training cruises for midshipmen and NROTC cadets to various destinations , including European ports , the Caribbean , and the Gulf of Mexico . On 18 January 1935 , she carried the 2nd Battalion , 4th Marine Regiment , from Norfolk to Puerto Rico for amphibious assault exercises . On 5 January 1937 , the ship left Norfolk and steamed to the Pacific via the Panama Canal . She took part in more amphibious assault exercises and gunnery drills at San Clemente Island . On 18 February , during the exercises , a 5 @-@ inch shrapnel shell exploded as it was being loaded into one of her guns . The blast killed six Marines and wounded another eleven . Wyoming immediately steamed to San Pedro and transferred the wounded Marines to the hospital ship Relief . 
 On 3 March , Wyoming left Los Angeles , bound for the Atlantic . She reached Norfolk on 23 March , where she served as the temporary flagship for Rear Admiral Wilson Brown , the commander of the Training Squadron , from 15 April to 3 June . On 4 June , she left port to conduct a goodwill cruise to Kiel , Germany , arriving on 21 June . There , she visited Admiral Graf Spee . She left Germany on 29 June , stopping in Torbay , Britain , and Funchal , Madeira , and arrived in Norfolk on 3 August . Wyoming resumed her training ship duties for Naval and Merchant Marine Reserve units . She returned to Norfolk Navy Yard for an overhaul that lasted from 16 October to 14 January 1938 . 
 Wyoming performed her typical routine of training cruises in the Atlantic through 1941 . The cruises included another European trip in 1938 ; she took the midshipmen to Le Havre , France , Copenhagen , and Portsmouth . After the outbreak of World War II in Europe in September 1939 , Wyoming was assigned to a naval reserve force in the Atlantic , alongside the battleships New York , Arkansas , and Texas and the aircraft carrier Ranger . Wyoming became the flagship of Rear Admiral Randall Jacobs , the commander of the Training , Patrol Force on 2 January 1941 . In November , Wyoming became a gunnery training ship . Her first cruise in this new role began on 25 November ; she was cruising off Platt 's Bank when she received word of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Following the United States ' entrance into World War II , Wyoming performed her normal duties as a gunnery training ship with the Operational Training Command , United States Atlantic Fleet starting in February 1942 . She operated primarily in the Chesapeake Bay area , and frequent sightings of the ship steaming around the bay earned her the nickname " Chesapeake Raider " . Wyoming was very busy , training thousands of anti @-@ aircraft gunners on weapons ranging from light .50 caliber ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) guns to medium @-@ caliber 5 @-@ inch guns for the rapidly expanding American fleet . Early in the war , the Navy briefly considered converting Wyoming back to her battleship configuration , but decided against the plan . 
 These duties continued throughout the rest of the war . Wyoming was modernized at Norfolk Navy Yard from 12 January to 3 April 1944 ; the reconstruction removed the last of her three 12 @-@ inch gun turrets , and replaced them with four twin and two single enclosed mounts for 5 @-@ inch / 38 caliber guns . New fire control radars were also installed ; these modifications allowed Wyoming to train anti @-@ aircraft gunners with the most modern equipment they would use while in combat with the fleet . She was back in service in the Chesapeake Bay by 10 April . Over the course of the war , Wyoming trained an estimated 35 @,@ 000 gunners on seven different types of guns : 5 @-@ inch , 3 @-@ inch , 1 @.@ 1 @-@ inch , 40 @-@ millimeter , and 20 @-@ millimeter weapons . Due to her extensive use as a gunnery training ship , she claimed the distinction of firing more ammunition than any other ship in the fleet during the war . 
 Wyoming finished her gunnery training duties in the Chesapeake area on 30 June 1945 , when she left Norfolk for the New York Navy Yard , for further modifications . Work was completed by 13 July , after which she left for Casco Bay . There , she joined Composite Task Force 69 ( CTF 69 ) , under command of Vice Admiral Willis A. Lee . Wyoming was tasked with developing tactics to more effectively engage the Japanese kamikaze suicide aircraft . The gunners conducted experimental gunnery drills with towed sleeves , drone aircraft , and radio @-@ controlled targets . On 31 August , CTF 69 was renamed Operational Development Force , United States Fleet . 
 Wyoming continued in this unit through the end of the war , and began to be used to test new fire control equipment . In the summer of 1946 , then @-@ Ensign Jimmy Carter , the future President of the United States , came aboard as part of the final crew of the old battleship . On 11 July 1947 , Wyoming put into Norfolk and was decommissioned there on 1 August . Her crew was transferred to the ex @-@ battleship Mississippi ( AG @-@ 128 ) , which was also serving in the gunnery training unit . Wyoming was stricken from the Naval Vessel Registry on 16 September , and she was sold for scrapping on 30 October . She arrived on 5 December in New York , where she was dismantled by Lipsett , Incorporated . 
 = Montpelier Hill = 
 Montpelier Hill ( Irish : Cnoc Montpelier ) is a 383 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 257 @-@ foot ) hill in County Dublin , Ireland . It is commonly referred to as the Hell Fire Club ( Irish : Club Thine <unk> ) , the popular name given to the ruined building at the summit . This building – a hunting lodge built around 1725 by William Conolly – was originally called Mount Pelier and since its construction the hill has also gone by the same name . The original Irish name of the hill is no longer known although the historian and archaeologist Patrick Healy has suggested that the hill is the place known as <unk> Uí <unk> or <unk> Celi in the Crede <unk> , the twelfth century diocesan register book of the Archbishops of Dublin . 
 Montpelier is the closest to Dublin city of the group of mountains – along with Killakee , <unk> Bog , <unk> , <unk> , Corrig , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> – that form the ridge that bounds the <unk> valley . On the slopes is a forestry plantation , known as Hell Fire Wood , which consists of Sitka spruce , larch and beech . 
 Originally there was a cairn with a prehistoric passage grave on the summit . Stones from the cairn were taken and used in the construction of Mount Pelier lodge . Shortly after completion , a storm blew the roof off . Local superstition attributed this incident to the work of the Devil , a punishment for interfering with the cairn . Montpelier Hill has since become associated with numerous paranormal events . 
 Members of the Irish Hell Fire Club , which was active in the years 1735 to 1741 , used Mount Pelier lodge as a meeting place . Stories of wild behaviour and debauchery and occult practices and demonic manifestations have become part of the local lore over the years . The original name of the lodge has been displaced and the building is generally known as the Hell Fire Club . When the lodge was damaged by fire , the members of the Hell Fire Club relocated down the hill to the nearby Stewards House for a brief period . This building also has a reputation for being haunted , most notably by a massive black cat . 
 Adjacent to the <unk> House is the remains of Killakee Estate . A large Victorian house was built here in the early nineteenth century by Luke White . White 's son , Samuel , oversaw the development of extensive formal gardens on the estate , including the construction of several glasshouses by Richard Turner . The estate passed to the Massy family through inheritance in 1880 and John Thomas Massy , the 6th Baron made extensive use of the house and ground to host shooting parties and society gatherings . The fortunes of the Massy family declined in the early twentieth century and Hamon Massy , the 8th Baron , was evicted from Killakee House in 1924 . He became known as the " Penniless Peer " . Following the eviction , Killakee House was demolished and the gardens fell into ruin . 
 Today Montpelier Hill and much of the surrounding lands , including Killakee Estate ( now called Lord Massy 's Estate ) are owned by the State forestry company Coillte and are open to the public . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Hell Fire Club = = = 
 The building now known as the Hell Fire Club was built around 1725 as a hunting lodge by William Conolly , the Speaker of the Irish House of Commons . It was named Mount Pelier by Conolly but over the years has also been known as " The Haunted House " , " The Shooting Lodge " , " The Kennel " , and " Conolly 's Folly " , . It was one of several exclusive establishments using the name Hellfire Club that existed in Britain and Ireland in the 18th century . 
 While the building has a rough appearance today , the architecture is of a Palladian design . The upper floor consists of a hall and two reception rooms . On the eastern side , there was a third , timber @-@ floored , level where the sleeping quarters were located . On the ground floor is a kitchen , servants ' quarters and stairs to the upper floors . The entrance , which is on the upper floor , was reached by a long flight of stairs which is now missing . At each side of the building is a room with a lean @-@ to roof which may have been used to stable horses . A stone mounting block to assist people onto their horses can be seen on the eastern side . To the front there was a semi @-@ circular courtyard , enclosed by a low stone wall and entered by a gate . The house faces to the north , looking over Dublin and the plains of Meath and Kildare , including Conolly 's primary residence at Castletown House in <unk> . The grounds around the lodge consisted of a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ; 1 @.@ 6 sq mi ) deer park . The identity of the architect is unknown : the author Michael Fewer has suggested it may have been Edward Lovett Pearce ( 1699 – 1733 ) who was employed by Conolly to carry out works at Castletown in 1724 . 
 There was a prehistoric burial site at the summit of Montpelier Hill and stones from it were used in the construction of the lodge . A nearby standing stone was also used for the lintel over the fireplace . Shortly after its completion , a great storm blew the original slate roof off . Local superstition held that this was the work of the Devil , an act of revenge for disturbing the ancient cairn . Conolly had the roof replaced with an arched stone roof constructed in a similar fashion to that of a bridge . This roof has remained intact to the present day , even though the building has been abandoned for over two centuries and despite the roof being set alight with tar barrels during the visit of Queen Victoria to Ireland in 1849 . 
 There is little evidence that the lodge was put to much use . Conolly himself died in 1729 . The only known record of its occupation is an announcement of the death at Mount Pelier of a Mr Charles Cobbe , son of the Archbishop of Dublin , in July 1751 . This is erroneous , however . In fact , Cobbe died of a fever in Montpellier , France , early in 1751 . 
 However , it was the period in the years following Conolly 's death that Mount Pelier 's association with the Hell Fire Club began . The Irish Hell Fire Club was founded around 1737 by Richard Parsons , 1st Earl of Rosse , and James <unk> . Lord Rosse was probably the president of the club . Evidence of the identities of other members comes from a painting by <unk> entitled The Hell Fire Club , Dublin , now held by the National Gallery of Ireland , which shows five members of the club seated around a table . The five men are Henry , 4th Baron Barry of <unk> ( who was tried and convicted for murder in 1739 ) ; Simon Luttrell , Lord Irnham ; Colonel Henry Ponsonby ; Colonel Richard St George and Colonel Clements . Most of their meetings occurred in Dublin city centre at the Eagle Tavern on Cork Hill , near Dublin Castle . Accounts of the club 's meetings claim that members drank " <unk> " , a mixture of whiskey and hot butter , and that they left a chair vacant at each gathering for the Devil . The club 's mascot was a black cat . 
 Mount Pelier was let to the club by the Conolly family . Coincidentally , William Conolly had purchased <unk> Hill from Philip , Duke of Wharton , founder of the first Hell Fire Club in 1719 . It is not clear to what extent , if any , the Hell Fire Club made use of the building . The author Michael Fewer has suggested that the remoteness of Mount Pelier 's location is why there are almost no verifiable accounts of the activities that went on there . However , numerous ( and very doubtful ) stories surrounding the building have become part of local folklore , some of which have spread to a wider audience through publication in the nineteenth century in books such as Robert Chambers ' Book of Days ( 1864 ) and in The Gentleman 's Magazine ( 1731 – 1922 ) . 
 One of the best known of these tells of a stranger who arrived at the club on a stormy night . Invited in , he joined the members in a card game . One player dropped his card on the floor and when he bent under the table to retrieve it noticed that the stranger had a cloven hoof . At this point the visitor disappeared in a ball of flame . This is a very similar story to one associated with Loftus Hall , County Wexford . The Loftus family owned a hunting lodge – known as Dolly Mount – which was also to be found on Montpelier Hill . 
 Another story tells of a priest who came to the house one night and found the members engaged in the sacrifice of a black cat . The priest grabbed the cat and uttered an exorcism upon which a demon was released from the corpse of the cat . 
 One tale centres on club member Simon Luttrell , Lord Irnham , later Earl of Carhampton , one time Sheriff of Dublin . Luttrell is believed to have been the subject of The <unk> , a 1777 poem dedicated to " the worst man in England " . According to the story , Luttrell made a pact with the Devil to give up his soul within seven years in return for settling his debts but , when the Devil came to Mount Pelier lodge to claim his prize , Luttrell distracted the Devil and fled . 
 Other tales recount numerous drinking sessions and black masses at which animal sacrifices , and on one occasion the sacrifice of a dwarf , took place . 
 At some point during this period , the building was damaged by fire . There are several stories connected with this incident . One holds that the club set fire to the building when William Conolly 's son refused to renew the lease on the lodge . An alternative story claims the club members did it to give the building a hellish appearance . Another story recounts that , following a black mass , a footman spilled a drink on " Burn @-@ Chapel " Whaley 's coat . Whaley retaliated by pouring brandy over the man and setting him alight . The fire spread around the building and killed many members . Following the fire , the club relocated further down the hill to Killakee Stewards House . However , the club 's activities declined after this incident . 
 The Irish Hell Fire Club was revived in 1771 and was active for a further 30 years . Its most notorious member was Thomas " Buck " Whaley , son of Richard Chappell Whaley . This new incarnation was known as " The Holy Fathers " . Meetings once again took place at Mount Pelier lodge and , according to one story , the members kidnapped , murdered and ate a farmer 's daughter . Whaley eventually repented and , when he died in 1800 , the Irish Hell Fire Club disbanded with his death . 
 The antiquarian Austin Cooper visited the house in 1779 and found it in a state of disrepair . Joseph Holt , a general of the Society of the United Irishmen recorded in his memoirs that he spent a night in the ruin of Mount Pelier while on the run following the 1798 Rebellion . Holt wrote of his experience , " I lay down in the arched room of that remarkable building . I felt confident of the protection of the Almighty that the name of enchantment and the idle stories that were told of the place had but a slight hold of my mind . " The <unk> sold the lands to Luke White in 1800 . They passed through inheritance to the Massy family of <unk> , County Limerick . When the Massy family became bankrupt , the lands were acquired by the State . Today , the building is maintained by Coillte , who manage the forestry plantations on Montpelier 's slopes , who have installed concrete stairs and iron safety rails across the upper windows . 
 = = = Prehistoric monuments = = = 
 The remains of the prehistoric monument that originally stood at the summit can be seen to the rear of the Hell Fire Club building . Austin Cooper , on his visit in 1779 , described it thus : " behind the house are still the remains of the cairn , the limits of which were composed of large stones set <unk> which made a sort of wall or boundary about 18 inches ( 46 centimetres ) high and <unk> these were the small stones heaped up . It is 34 yards ( 31 metres ) diameter or 102 yards ( 93 metres ) in circumference . In the very centre is a large stone 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 metres ) long and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 metres ) broad and about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 metres ) thick not raised upon large stones but lying low with the stones cleared away from about it . There are several other large stones lying upon the heap . " It appears from this description that the central chamber of the monument – which was a passage grave – survived intact even after Mount Pelier was constructed . The historian Peter J. O 'Keefe has suggested that many of the stones were taken away and used in the construction of the Military Road at the start of the nineteenth century . Today , all that remains is a circular mound 15 metres ( 49 feet ) in diameter and up to 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 feet ) high with a dip at the centre where the chamber was located . The four large stones at the edge are all that survive of the kerbstones that formed the boundary of the monument . In close proximity is a second mound , 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) high , on which an Ordnance Survey trig pillar stands . Close to the monument is a fallen standing stone , a pointed rock 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) high . 
 = = = The Stewards House = = = 
 Further down the hill , along the Military Road , is a two @-@ story house , known as The Stewards House or as Killakee House ( not to be confused with the now @-@ demolished Killakee House that served as the residence of the Massy family who owned the adjacent Killakee Estate ) . It was built around 1765 by the Conolly family as a hunting lodge . Over the years , it has served as a dower house and as a residence for the agent who managed the Killakee Estate . To the rear is a belfry ; this was once a common feature of large farmhouses and was used to call the workers for meals . The Hell Fire Club held meetings here for a time following the fire that damaged Mount Pelier lodge . The house has a reputation for being haunted , particularly by a large black cat . Stories regarding the origin of this spectre either connect it with the account of the priest who exorcised a cat at the Hell Fire Club or with a cat that was doused in whiskey and set alight by members of the Hell Fire Club before escaping across the mountains with its fur aflame . 
 The best documented account of these hauntings occurred between 1968 and 1970 . The Evening Herald and Evening Press newspapers carried a number of reports regarding a Mrs Margaret O 'Brien and her husband Nicholas , a retired Garda superintendent , who were converting the house into an arts centre . The redevelopment had been a troubled affair with tradesmen employed on the work leaving complaining of ghosts . One night , a friend of the O 'Brien 's , artist Tom <unk> , and two workmen were confronted by a spectral figure and a black cat with glowing red eyes . <unk> painted a portrait of the cat which hung in the house for several years after . Although locals were sceptical of the reports , further apparitions were reported , most notably of an Indian gentleman and of two nuns called Blessed Margaret and Holy Mary who had taken part in black masses on <unk> Hill . There were also reports of ringing bells and poltergeist activity . In 1970 an RTÉ television crew recorded a documentary at the house . In the documentary a clairvoyant called Sheila St. Clair communicated with the spirits of the house through automatic writing . In 1971 , a plumber working in the house discovered a grave with a skeleton of a small figure , most likely that of a child or , perhaps , the body of the dwarf alleged to have been sacrificed by the members of the Hell Fire Club . The house operated as a restaurant in the 1990s before closing in 2001 ; it is now a private residence . 
 = = = Killakee ( Lord Massy 's ) Estate = = = 
 On the other side of the Military Road to Hell Fire Wood and the Stewards House is the remains of Killakee Estate ( Irish : Coill an <unk> , meaning " Blind Man 's Wood " ) , now known as Lord Massy 's Estate . These lands were first granted to Walter de <unk> after the Norman invasion and later given to Sir Thomas Luttrell , an ancestor of Hell Fire Club member Simon Luttrell , by Henry VIII . The Luttrell family held onto the estate until the seventeenth century when it was relinquished to Dudley Loftus and then passed to William Conolly . In 1800 , the Conolly family sold the estate to Luke White . 
 The White family built Killakee House on the estate in the early nineteenth century . This was a two @-@ storey , thirty @-@ six roomed stucco @-@ faced house . It had a Tuscan @-@ columned entrance and large three @-@ windowed bows on the back and sides . Luke White 's second son , Colonel Samuel White , inherited the estate on his father 's death in 1824 and invested considerable effort in developing its gardens . In 1838 , he engaged the services of Sir Ninian Niven , former director of the Botanic Gardens in Dublin . Niven laid out two Victorian formal gardens of gravel walks , terraces and exotic trees decorated with statues of Greek and Roman gods . Adjacent to the house was a terraced rose garden with a statue of Neptune . A second walled garden in a vale in the woods below the house contained more fountains and a range of glasshouses designed by Richard Turner . William Robinson , writing in The Gardener 's Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette on 10 December 1864 , said of the gardens , " I know of no better example of the advantage of extensively planting and draining a barren and elevated district than is afforded by this demesne of 500 acres . " 
 When Samuel White 's widow , Anne , died in 1880 , she bequeathed the estate to her late husband 's nephew , John Thomas , 6th Baron Massy . The Massys were a Protestant Ascendancy family who had come to Ireland in 1641 and owned extensive lands in Counties Limerick , Leitrim and Tipperary . Massy used Killakee House to entertain guests while shooting game on nearby <unk> and <unk> mountains . He also used the house to host parties during major events on the Dublin social calendar such as the Dublin Horse Show , the <unk> Races and the Dublin Castle Season . During these events long lines of guests ' carriages could be seen stretched along the road leading to the house . However , as a result of declining rental income and poor investment decisions , John Thomas Massy was in considerable debt when he died in 1915 . By the time John Massy 's grandson , Hugh Hamon Charles , 8th Baron Massy , inherited the estate , the family 's finances were in an irreversible decline and in 1924 he was declared bankrupt and evicted from Killakee House . The Massys initially moved into the Stewards House before taking up residence in Beehive Cottage , the estate 's gate lodge , by agreement with the bank . Hamon Massy , unable to find a job on account of his alcoholism became dependent on his wife , Margaret , whose modest salary from a job with the Irish Hospitals ' <unk> was the family 's only income . In the years up to his death in 1958 , Hamon Massy , who became known as the " Penniless Peer " , could be seen collecting firewood in the woods of his former family estate . 
 Following the eviction , Killakee House was briefly used as an operations base by the Detective Unit of the Garda Síochána in 1931 while they hunted IRA subversives who were hiding explosives at Killakee . When the bank was unable to find a buyer for the estate , it was acquired by a builder who stripped the house and then demolished it in 1941 . The lands were eventually acquired by the State and opened to the public . In the late 1930s , the Director of Forestry , a German called Otto <unk> , laid out the area as an <unk> forest . The trees have reclaimed most of the land once occupied by the formal gardens : all that remains is the brickwork at the rear of the Turner glasshouses and the system of irrigation canals and ponds for the exotic plants contained within . 
 In 1978 , the archaeologist and historian Patrick Healy discovered the remains of a prehistoric wedge tomb in the woods . All the survives is the skeletal outline of the main chamber and the outer double walls . Most of the stones were removed to build the low stone wall that runs across the front of the tomb . 
 = = = Carthy 's Castle = = = 
 On the northern slopes is another ruined building , known as Carthy 's or McCarthy 's Castle . This is all that remains of Dolly Mount – also known as the " Long House " and " Mount Pelier House " – a large hunting residence built by Henry Loftus , Earl of Ely towards the end of the eighteenth century . The building was originally two stories high with bow windows each side of the hall door , above which was the Ely coat of arms . At each side of the house was an arched gate from which extended a range of ancillary buildings , terminating in a three @-@ storied tower with an embattled top and pointed windows . The interiors were noted for their marble chimney pieces and stuccoed ceilings . The earl 's first wife , Frances Monroe , was the aunt of Dolores " Dolly " Monroe who was a celebrated beauty and in whose honour the house was named Dolly Mount . The Ely 's subsequently abandoned the residence and the building soon fell into ruin , mainly at the hands of a tenant called Jack Kelly who wrecked the house to ensure his tenancy would not be disturbed . All , except for the tower at the western end , which is now known as Carthy 's Castle , was demolished in 1950 . 
 = = = Orlagh House = = = 
 In the land adjacent to Carthy 's Castle is Orlagh House which has been owned by the Augustinian Order since the mid @-@ nineteenth century and is a retreat and conference centre run by the friars . It was built in 1790 by Mr Lundy Foot , a wealthy snuff merchant , who named the house <unk> . He was also a magistrate and was instrumental in condemning three members of the Kearney family to death for the murder of John <unk> , the gamekeeper at <unk> , near Bohernabreena , in 1816 . Foot was subsequently murdered in 1835 , an act that was attributed to relatives of the <unk> . In fact , Foot was killed by James Murphy , the son of an evicted tenant farmer whose land Foot had bought following the eviction . 
 In a field opposite Orlagh House is a holy well associated with Saint Colmcille . A statue of the saint , designed by Joseph Tierney , was erected at the site in 1917 . Pilgrims either drink the water or apply it to sore ears . 
 = = Access and recreation = = 
 Montpelier Hill is accessed from the Hell Fire Wood car park along the R115 road between Rathfarnham and Glencullen . The woods offer around 4 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 8 miles ) of forest roads and tracks as well as a permanent orienteering course . Lord Massy 's Estate is also accessed from the R115 , close to the Hell Fire Wood car park . The woods offer a nature trail and a permanent orienteering course . Lord Massy 's Estate and Montpelier Hill are also traversed by the Dublin Mountains Way hiking trail that runs between Shankill and Tallaght . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Hell Fire Club at Dublin Mountains Partnership 
 Orienteering at the Hell Fire Club 
 Massy 's Estate at Dublin Mountains Partnership 
 Orienteering at Massy 's Estate 
 = = = The Hell Fire Club = = = 
 The Dublin Hellfire Club – The Facts 
 The Hellfire Club at <unk> 
 The Hellfire Club at Abandoned Ireland 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Orlagh Retreat Centre 
 St Colmcille 's Well at <unk> 
 = Greatest Hits : My Prerogative = 
 Greatest Hits : My Prerogative is the first greatest hits album by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was released on November 3 , 2004 , by Jive Records and Zomba Recording . The compilation was released in two different formats : a standard edition and a limited edition containing a bonus disc with remixes . A compilation DVD of the same name featuring 20 of the singer 's music videos was released to accompany the audio versions . The album includes three new tracks : a cover of Bobby Brown 's " My Prerogative " , " Do Somethin ' " and " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " , which was previously included on the international editions of Spears ' fifth video release , Britney Spears : In the Zone ( 2004 ) . 
 Critics gave Greatest Hits : My Prerogative mixed reviews . Some felt that it was an accurate portrayal of Spears as the defining figure of American pop culture , while others stated that she did not have enough material for a compilation and also deemed it as premature . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative debuted at the top of the charts in Ireland and Japan , and the top ten in other fourteen countries , including Australia , Canada , Norway , Sweden , the United Kingdom and the United States . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative has sold five million copies worldwide . The title track was released as the first single from the album . It went on to peak at number one in Ireland , Italy , Finland and Norway , and reached the top ten in another fourteen countries . " Do Somethin ' " was released as the second single from the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 On August 13 , 2004 , Spears announced through Jive Records the release of her first greatest hits compilation titled Greatest Hits : My Prerogative , due on November 16 , 2004 . The title was chosen after the album 's lead single , Spears 's cover version of Bobby Brown 's 1988 single " My Prerogative " . The cover was produced by Swedish production team Bloodshy & Avant . A DVD of the same name was also released the same day , containing Spears 's music videos . Spears had recorded a song titled " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " originally for her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was first included as a bonus track in the European version of the In the Zone DVD . In the United States , the track was a free download in the Wal @-@ Mart edition of In the Zone , due to an exclusive deal with Wal @-@ Mart and Sony Connect . When the deal ended in mid @-@ 2004 , Jive Records decided to release it in iTunes Store on August 17 , 2004 . " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " peaked at number seven on the iTunes chart while it was speculated to be in the tracklist of Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . The tracklist was officially revealed on September 13 , 2004 . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative included three new tracks : " My Prerogative " , " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " and " Do Somethin ' " , all of them produced by Bloodshy & Avant . A limited edition of the album was also released , which included a bonus disc with remixes of Spears 's songs by different recording artists , as well as a megamix of Spears 's hits . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Greatest Hits : My Prerogative received mixed reviews from music critics . Mary <unk> of the Sarasota Herald @-@ Tribune selected " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " as the best of the new tracks , and added that " The rest of the album is a romp down memory lane of when Spears was the ' It ' girl of popular culture , ruling the pop charts as a multi @-@ million dollar entertainment should . [ ... ] In all honesty , no one can deny Spears has recorded some great dance songs , and this album is the best way to get all the songs in one swoop " . <unk> Anwar <unk> of the New Straits Times said , " rest assured , fans will surely grab this one " and selected " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " and " Overprotected " as the best tracks . Annabel Leathes of BBC Online deemed it " calorific as the KFC burgers dished up at her chav @-@ style wedding ; twenty finger lickin ' tracks that mirror her trajectory from pretty pop puff to lusty strumpet " . Christy Lemire of the Associated Press stated that it was premature for Spears to release a greatest hits album compilation after only five years , but highlighted " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , " Toxic " and " Everytime " . Andy Petch @-@ Jex of MusicOMH highlighted the first four tracks and commented " true some of the tunes are complete pony <unk> , but beneath the occasional reek there beats a solid gold pop heart " . 
 Spence D. of IGN said , " If Britney Spears ' Greatest Hits : My Prerogative illuminates anything it 's that Spears is a fairly proficient sonic chameleon , able to mimic and adopt the stylings of those who have come before her with enough panache and verve to convince younger generations that she 's a bona fide pop revelation . [ ... ] This is the kind of kitschy album that you can get away with having because Spears is such a prevalent component of pop culture . " James <unk> of The Gazette said that " As a time capsule , My Prerogative does its job well , " but " Added together , the pop hits on this album are somewhat less than the sum of their parts " . He explained , " Even if it isn ’ t as great a listen as a cohesive album , My Prerogative does work as a portrait of the time when Britney Spears was the defining figure of American pop culture " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic agreed with <unk> , but added " if you compare it to The Immaculate Collection , which captured the time when Madonna was the defining figure of American pop culture and does work as an album , it 's clear that a cultural artifact isn 't necessarily the same thing as great music " . 
 Ann Powers of Blender said , " The hits collected on My Prerogative are as sticky as soda and almost as easy to rinse out . Spears will go down in history books , but not for anything she ’ s created , besides a world @-@ class stir " . She named " ... Baby One More Time " " the song that defined her legacy " and also added , " In less than five minutes , it contains an emotional storm that is both widely public and deeply personal . If only she had continued to prove worthy of that heroic task . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said that " Listening to her hits all at once , you may be struck by the seductive severity of Ms. Spears 's music : the beats are sharp as tines , the lyrics are filled with evocations of fear and control , the voice projects nothing you might mistake for warmth " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 , with sales exceeding 255 @,@ 000 copies . It has spent a total of 32 weeks overall on the chart . It became her first album not to debut at number one . In December 2004 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of a million copies of the album . As of March 2015 , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative has sold over 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States . In Canada , the album debuted at number three selling 20 @,@ 400 copies and was certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipments of 50 @,@ 000 units . In Australia and New Zealand , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative debuted at number four and seventeen on the official charts , respectively . The album was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) indicating shipments of 140 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the United Kingdom , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative debuted at number two behind Eminem 's Encore , with first @-@ week sales of 115 @,@ 341 units . The album debuted at number three on the European Top 100 Albums . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative also debuted at number two in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Finland and Denmark , number four in Austria and Norway , and inside the top ten in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Czech Republic , Italy , Portugal and the Netherlands . It also charted in Sweden and Spain . In Japan , Spears ' compilation became her first album to top the Oricon charts selling 173 @,@ 145 copies , and finished as the 38th best @-@ selling album of 2004 and the 40th of 2005 . To date , it has sold 710 @,@ 124 copies in the country and remains her highest @-@ selling album there . Global sales for Greatest Hits : My Prerogative stand at over five million units . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " My Prerogative " was released as the first single from the compilation . The song was set to premiere on radio stations on September 14 , 2004 , however , it leaked in the Real <unk> Inc . ' s mixtape The Future of R & B on September 10 , 2004 . The cover was musically different from Bobby Brown 's original song , and was noted for aptly referring to Spears 's relationship with the media at the time . It received mixed to negative reviews from critics , but went on to achieve worldwide success , topping the charts in countries like in Finland , Ireland , Italy and Norway , and reaching the top ten in another fourteen countries . In the United States , " My Prerogative " charted in Billboard 's Top 40 Tracks and Top 40 Mainstream at number twenty @-@ two and thirty @-@ four , respectively . 
 Although no more singles were planned , Spears wanted to shoot a music video for " Do Somethin ' " and pushed for it to be released . The song was released as a single worldwide except North America on February 14 , 2005 . " Do Somethin ' " received positive reviews , and reached top ten positions in countries such as Australia , Denmark , Sweden and the United Kingdom . Although the song was not released in the United States , it charted on many of Billboard 's component charts due to digital downloads and reached number one @-@ hundred on the Billboard Hot 100 . The accompanying music video was co @-@ directed by Billie Woodruff and Spears , who appeared credited as her alter ego " Mona Lisa " . She was also the stylist and choreographer of the video . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies a remixer 
 ^ c signifies a vocal producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = K @-@ 43 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 43 is a 20 @.@ 718 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 33 @.@ 342 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Kansas . The highway runs from K @-@ 4 in Hope north to Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) and U.S. Route 40 ( US @-@ 40 ) north of Detroit . The entire highway is located within Dickinson County . K @-@ 43 is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) , and is a relatively minor highway . K @-@ 43 is not part of the National Highway System . The highway was established around 1932 , with the northern terminus being the now decommissioned US @-@ 40S . In 1962 , the route was extended north a bit to a new diamond interchange with I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 K @-@ 43 begins at an intersection with K @-@ 4 at the northern city limit of Hope . The highway heads north for about seven miles ( 11 km ) before turning west and entering the small community of Navarre . The route crosses the BNSF Railway and turns to the north , continuing through flat farmland . The highway crosses the railway again before entering the city of Enterprise . In Enterprise , K @-@ 43 turns east along 5th Street , then north onto Factory Street . The highway curves northwest and crosses the BNSF Railway a third time before crossing the Smoky Hill River on a 160 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 49 m ) truss bridge constructed in 1924 . 
 Upon crossing this bridge , K @-@ 43 leaves Enterprise . The route bends to the north and crosses the BNSF Railway a fourth and final time . Continuing north through level plains , K @-@ 43 meets a railroad operated by Union Pacific and comes to an intersection with its former northern terminus at an old alignment of US @-@ 40 . At this intersection , the route turns to the northeast and travels through the community of Detroit before turning back to the north . North of here , K @-@ 43 meets its northern terminus at a diamond interchange with I @-@ 70 and US @-@ 40 . 
 K @-@ 43 is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) . The traffic numbers on the route in 2012 , measured in annual average daily traffic , were relatively low compared to other state highways . Between 185 and 1900 vehicles traveled the highway each day , including between 30 and 95 trucks . The most traffic was present in the segment of the highway between Enterprise and Detroit . No segment of K @-@ 43 is included in the National Highway System , a system of highways considered to be important to the nation 's defense , economy , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 K @-@ 43 first appears on the 1932 state highway map . At that time it followed largely the same alignment it does today , running from K @-@ 4 in Hope to an intersection with what was then US @-@ 40S . Most of the road was dirt , but it was paved with gravel from Enterprise north to its northern terminus . By 1936 , the whole route had been upgraded to gravel pavement . In 1945 , the portion north of Enterprise was paved . The entire highway had been paved by 1956 . In 1962 , the highway was extended slightly to the north , moving its northern terminus from US @-@ 40 to an interchange with the newly constructed I @-@ 70 . The route has not changed significantly since 1962 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Dickinson County . 
 = Ebbw Valley Railway = 
 The Ebbw Valley Railway ( Welsh : Rheilffordd Cwm <unk> ) is a branch line of the Great Western Main Line in South Wales . Arriva Trains Wales provides an hourly passenger service each way , between Ebbw Vale Town and Cardiff Central . 
 The line was opened by the Monmouthshire Railway and Canal Company and the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) operated a passenger service from the 1850s between Newport and Ebbw Vale . The line became part of British Railways Western Region in 1948 , following the nationalisation of the railways . Passenger services were withdrawn in 1962 . However , the route continued to be used to carry freight to and from the Corus steelworks in Ebbw Vale , until its closure in 2002 . Proposals to re @-@ open the existing freight railway line to passenger services were first mooted in 1998 . The Welsh Assembly Government announced their commitment to the project in 2002 , as part of a package of measures to help the former steel communities . 
 Passenger services were restored to the line in February 2008 , after a gap of 46 years , using Class 150 diesel multiple units . Predominantly single track north of Newport , the Ebbw Valley Railway runs 19 miles ( 31 km ) along the Ebbw River valley from Ebbw Vale , before joining the South Wales Main Line at a triangular group of junctions in Newport – the line splitting at Park Junction with the eastbound section joining at Gaer Junction and the westbound section joining at Ebbw Junction . The line 's stations and services are managed by Arriva Trains Wales . 
 = = Current service = = 
 The Ebbw Valley Railway provides an hourly ( two hourly Sundays ) passenger service between Ebbw Vale Town and Cardiff Central . Journey duration between Ebbw Vale Town and Cardiff Central is 60 minutes . Intermediate stations ( their approximate journey times from Ebbw Vale Town are shown in brackets ) are Ebbw Vale Parkway ( 3 minutes ) , Llanhilleth ( 11 ) , Newbridge ( 17 ) , Crosskeys ( 25 ) , Risca and Pontymister ( 32 ) , Rogerstone ( 34 ) and Pye Corner ( 38 ) . A dedicated feeder bus services link the line to Abertillery town centre from Llanhilleth . 
 Actual passenger numbers greatly exceed forecasts . In 2002 , passenger journeys were forecast at 22 @,@ 000 per month . Whereas by 2008 , 44 @,@ 000 journeys had been made on the service each month ; also exceeding the monthly target of 33 @,@ 000 set for 2012 . In August 2008 Trish Law , Assembly Member for Blaenau Gwent , said she had received " many complaints of standing @-@ room only and grossly overcrowded trains " . Arriva Trains Wales provide extra carriages at busy times , Saturdays and holidays , to cope with the demand . Passenger journeys had exceeded 55 @,@ 000 per month by May 2009 , and by October 2009 , over one million passenger journeys had been made on the line in the 20 months since its opening , comfortably exceeding the fourth @-@ year target of 453 @,@ 000 . 
 Network Rail own and manage the track and signalling ; stations and services are operated by the existing train operating company , Arriva Trains Wales ; and the local authorities each own and operate the station car parks in their area . Each station has at least one Passenger Help Point and all stations and car parks have CCTV . All stations on the branch are unstaffed , and at first lacked any ticket issuing facilities ; but in late 2009 a Scheidt & Bachmann Ticket XPress self @-@ service ticket machine was installed at each station . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The line has its origins in the tramways and waggonways constructed to serve the various iron works in the upper Ebbw Valley to enable them to receive raw materials and dispatch products . Developments included : 
 Rassa Railroad : a tramway built in 1794 to connect the Sirhowy Ironworks to the Beaufort Ironworks , and connected them to several limestone quarries at <unk> . 
 <unk> Tramroad : from Crumlin ( low level ) north to Ebbw Vale . 
 Sirhowy Tramroad : a 4 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 27 m ) plateway which opened in 1805 and ran from ironworks at Tredegar and Sirhowy to the Monmouthshire Canal . By 1805 , a 24 @-@ mile ( 39 km ) stretch of tramline had been laid to transport coal and iron ore to Newport Docks , laid jointly by Tredegar Iron and Coal Company and the Monmouthshire Canal Company . Initially the trains were pulled by teams of horses ; however , in 1829 Chief Engineer Thomas Ellis was authorised to purchase a steam locomotive from the Stephenson Company . Built at Tredegar Works , it made its maiden trip on 17 December 1829 . Due to its success , conversion to standard gauge was delayed until 1860 but , after reopening in 1865 , it found that the traffic had been lost to its competitors . The line was worked by the London and North Western Railway from 1 July 1875 and taken over by the railway company the following year . 
 Blaenavon Tramroad : a 3 @-@ foot @-@ 4 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 02 m ) edge @-@ railway opened in 1795 @-@ 6 which linked the Blaenavon Ironworks with the Monmouthshire Canal at <unk> . It was rebuilt in 1829 as a 4 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 27 m ) gauge plateway . 
 The Monmouthshire Railway and Canal Company was incorporated on 31 July 1845 and , having acquired the Blaenavon Tramroad in the same year , it rebuilt and extended the line , which re @-@ opened from Pontypool to Blaenavon ( North ) on 2 October 1854 . Two short and steep branches to <unk> and <unk> were opened in 1870 , with a third to <unk> and <unk> in 1879 . A 99 @-@ year lease of the line was granted to the Great Western Railway from 1 August 1875 and the railway company acquired the line on 1 August 1880 . 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 The first passenger service on the line began on 21 December 1850 , between Newport <unk> and <unk> . The line was extended south to Newport Dock Street on 4 April 1852 , and the northern extension from Aberbeeg to Ebbw Vale opened on 19 April 1852 . Journeys between Ebbw Vale and Newport normally required passengers to change at Aberbeeg , although some services were direct . It was a branch line of the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , until the nationalisation of the railways under the Transport Act 1947 , when the line became part of the Western Region of British Railways on 1 January 1948 . The line closed to passenger traffic on 30 April 1962 , prior to the Beeching Axe , with the mineral branches following on 7 April 1969 and the <unk> branch on 3 May 1980 . 
 Freight services to and from the steelworks at Ebbw Vale continued until the site closed on 5 July 2002 . The final freight service to run from the Corus steelworks in Ebbw Vale in 2003 removed scrap metal from site . 
 = = Revival = = 
 = = = Proposals = = = 
 Peter Law , the former Assembly Member ( AM ) for Blaenau Gwent , had been calling for passenger services between Ebbw Vale and Newport to resume on the line since the 1980s , while he was still a councillor . An initial feasibility study of the proposal was carried out for Blaenau Gwent council by infrastructure project management company Capita Symonds in 1998 . Stations at Ebbw Vale , Cwm , Aberbeeg , <unk> , Risca and <unk> were suggested , and the plans included running some trains to Cardiff Central via a new station at Celtic Lakes on the South Wales Main Line . Law made fighting for the line 's re @-@ opening one of his major election promises during the National Assembly for Wales election campaign in 1999 . A plaque at Ebbw Vale Parkway commemorates Law , who died in 2006 , and his work to re @-@ open the line . It was unveiled by Jocelyn Davies AM on 10 December 2007 , four days before the Ebbw Valley Railway 's planned official re @-@ opening . 
 In February 2001 the Rail Development Society Wales , a passengers ' campaign group now campaigning as <unk> Cymru / Wales , called for the rail link between Ebbw Vale and Newport to be reopened to help with the regeneration of what it called " already a socially deprived area " . The plea followed Corus Group 's announcement that it would close its Ebbw Vale steelworks operation . British Steel Corporation had employed 14 @,@ 500 people at their main steel mills in Ebbw Vale in the 1960s . The mills closed completely during the 1980s . Only a finishing plant employing 780 people remained on the site in 2001 . First Minister Rhodri Morgan announced to the Welsh Assembly on 30 January 2002 that the rail link between Ebbw Vale and Cardiff would be reopened . Morgan said it would be part of a " package of measures to offset hundreds of steel job losses at the Corus plant " . At the time , the Assembly Government 's financial commitment was estimated at £ 7 million over two years , the project cost was estimated at £ 15 million and the line forecast to open in 2004 . 
 Proposals for the Ebbw Valley line , forecast to cost £ 27 @.@ 2 million , were unveiled to the public in January 2003 . The scheme was to provide an hourly service to Cardiff beginning in 2005 , followed by an hourly service to Newport beginning in 2009 . The display included artists ' impressions of the six new stations , envisaged to be built at Ebbw Vale Parkway Victoria , Llanhilleth , Newbridge , Crosskeys , Risca and Rogerstone . Proposed stations at Crumlin and Ebbw Vale Centre were shown in the Rail Atlas Great Britain and Ireland 11th edition , published 2007 . The project was forecast to cost £ 28 @,@ 583 @,@ 544 in October 2003 . 
 Electrification by 2019 was announced in the Department for Transport 's High Level Output Specification of 2012 . 
 = = = Revival works programme = = = 
 Work to restore the passenger service to the line took place between 2006 and 2008 . The scheme was part of the response to the closure of Corus ' Ebbw Vale steelworks in 2002 , and the resulting economic downturn in one of Wales ' most deprived areas . The project was led by Blaenau Gwent County Borough Council and supported by Caerphilly County Borough Council , Newport City Council , the Welsh Assembly Government and Network Rail . Capita Symonds project managed the scheme and the project contractor was Amey Rail , a subsidiary of Amey plc . 
 A start of main works event was held in Crumlin on 28 September 2006 and was attended by Welsh Assembly Members Andrew Davies ( then Welsh Assembly Minister for Enterprise , Innovation and Networks ) , Irene James and Trish Law , the leaders of Blaenau Gwent and Caerphilly County Borough Councils , local councillors , officers and project stakeholders . The event marked the start of major works on the scheme with a demonstration of a new rail ballast cleaner . The works upgraded the existing track to passenger standard , and included new colour light signalling , level crossing renewal and the reinstatement of 3 miles ( 5 km ) of double track , providing a point where trains could pass each other . Six new stations and eight new 97 metres ( 318 ft ) long platforms were constructed . Services were originally expected to begin in the summer of 2007 . 
 A report to Blaenau Gwent council in March 2008 showed that on completion , the project was more than £ 8 @.@ 4 million over the original budget . Funding came from three sources . The European Regional Development Fund 's Objective One structural funds provided £ 7 @.@ 5 million through the Welsh European Funding Office , Corus Steelworks Regeneration Fund £ 7 million and the Welsh Assembly Government provided the balance . By January 2010 , the total project cost , including the line extension to Ebbw Vale Town , had risen to an estimated £ 32 @.@ 6 million . 
 The restoration scheme was named Welsh Project of the Year by the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors in 2009 . The railway had been shortlisted in the community benefit category , along with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds ' Newport Wetlands Reserve and Swansea 's <unk> <unk> Centre . 
 = = = Restoration of passenger service = = = 
 Passenger train services , using Class 150 diesel multiple units , were restored to the line after a gap of 46 years , on 6 February 2008 ; between a new station at Ebbw Vale Parkway ( close to the site of the original Victoria station ) and Cardiff Central . The first train of the restored service left Cardiff Central for Ebbw Vale Parkway at 06 : 35 on Wednesday 6 February 2008 . The first train to run in the opposite direction left five minutes later , packed with dignitaries for the official opening . Deputy First Minister Ieuan Wyn Jones opened the line along with Blaenau Gwent County Borough Council 's former Labour leader Hedley McCarthy . The first train from Ebbw Vale Parkway was waved off by local residents , who welcomed the link as a positive contribution to the valley 's long term regeneration . 
 Celebrations had been due to take place on 14 December 2007 to mark the line 's official opening . Arrangements included school choirs , brass bands , and plaques unveiled at each station by officials and dignitaries travelling the route between Rogerstone to Ebbw Vale . The ceremonies were cancelled two days before the scheduled reopening , as the project had not been finished on time due to " safety and engineering issues " . Network Rail had confirmed in November that the new track had been tested successfully . After a final inspection on 16 December 2007 confirmed outstanding issues had been resolved , the track was handed over to Network Rail by Blaenau Gwent council . Network Rail and Arriva Trains Wales then arranged route familiarisation training for train drivers before the new service could be introduced . Driver training began on 18 December 2007 . 
 Environmental issues delayed construction of two of the line 's new stations . Colonies of slow worms , which has protected species status in the United Kingdom , were discovered near the tracks at the sites of Llanhilleth and Crosskeys stations . The lizards had to be moved to a safer place . Llanhilleth and Crosskeys stations opened on 27 April 2008 and 7 June 2008 respectively . Built at a cost of £ 3.5m , Pye Corner station opened on 14 December 2014 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Ebbw Valley Railway is a branch line of the Great Western Main Line . Predominantly single track , the line runs 19 miles ( 31 km ) between Ebbw Vale Town station ( where southbound journeys to Cardiff Central begin , and northbound journeys end ) , in the northeast of the mountainous South Wales valleys , and the South Wales Main Line . The track runs mainly south and southeast , following the deep @-@ sided Ebbw River valley . The line is heavily curved along most of its route and has gradients of up to 1 in 65 . Before the project to restore passenger services began , these conditions caused a maximum line speed on the line for freight services of 35 miles per hour ( 56 km / h ) . Extensive track re @-@ canting has enabled the maximum line speed to be increased to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . 
 The station at Ebbw Vale Town was opened on 17 May 2015 , and became the new northern terminus of the line . Prior to this , the town was served by the Parkway station to the South . 
 Ebbw Vale Parkway station is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Ebbw Vale town centre and provides car parking and cycle storage . Buses pick up and set down in the station car park . From Ebbw Vale Parkway the line is single track , facing south – southeast for the 5 miles ( 8 km ) to the next stop at Llanhilleth . It runs past the villages of Cwm , where a new station is proposed , and Aberbeeg , which had proposals for a station included in an early plan . Proposals to reconstruct the spur running from Aberbeeg to Abertillery are being considered . 
 The line winds south from Llanhilleth for 2 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) , past the village of Crumlin , to the next station at Newbridge , at the eastern end of Newbridge town centre . Newbridge station provides Park and Ride car park and bus interchange facilities . To enable the additional service between Ebbw Vale and Newport to begin dual track would need to be laid and second platforms constructed at Llanhilleth and Newbridge stations , allowing trains to pass each other . 
 The line to Crosskeys , 3 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km ) south of Newbridge , passes the village of <unk> , another site that had proposals for a station included in an early plan . At Crosskeys the line changes direction from south to southeast for its remaining 7 miles ( 11 km ) to the South Wales Main Line , continuing to follow the Ebbw Valley , past the confluence of the Ebbw River and the Sirhowy River . Crosskeys station has two platforms , one for northbound services and one for southbound . It is the only station on the Ebbw Valley Railway with no car parking facility , although public car parking is available nearby . The track is doubled from Crosskeys to Risca , providing a passing loop for 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 Risca and Pontymister station , 2 miles ( 3 km ) southeast of Crosskeys , is in central Risca ; the village of Pontymister is immediately to its southeast . It has two platforms , cycle lockers , a pick up / set down area near the northbound platform and a 94 @-@ space car park . 
 Rogerstone station is 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2 km ) southeast of Risca and Pontymister station , and 3 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 6 km ) northwest of the South Wales Main Line . The station has one platform : the line reverts to single track after having passed Risca . Near the platform is a pick up / set down lay @-@ by . Rogerstone station 's car park has 64 spaces . 
 Pye Corner is the last southbound halt on the Ebbw Valley Railway . It is a single platform station , about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 1 ⁄ 2 km ) southeast of Rogerstone station . Parking is provided for 62 cars and includes electric charging points . 
 The Ebbw Valley Railway meets the Great Western 's South Wales Main Line branch , which runs on the coastal plain between the cities of Cardiff and Newport , at a triangular junction about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of Newport station . The line splits at Park Junction in the west ; one section passes through Gaer Tunnel to form a north @-@ facing connection with the main line at Gaer Junction , allowing trains to travel to Newport . The other section meets the main line at the south @-@ facing Ebbw Junction and allows trains to reach Cardiff Central station , 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the southwest . 
 = = Proposed additional services = = 
 A second hourly service to Newport is proposed for the line . A South East Wales Transport Alliance ( <unk> ) report in 2006 noted that additional infrastructure work would be required to enable the service to become half @-@ hourly ( one train running to Cardiff and another to Newport ) . An additional seven miles ( 11 km ) of double track would be needed between Aberbeeg Junction and Crosskeys and additional platforms at Newbridge and Llanhilleth stations would be required . According to Network Rail , the points system at Gaer junction would need to be replaced before the line could be linked from Rogerstone station to Newport station . Major resignalling works would also need to be carried out . Passenger trains travel faster than freight trains , so the signals need to be further apart . The Welsh Assembly Government announced in July 2009 that the relevant works to enable direct trains between Ebbw Vale and Newport would be complete by 2011 . Work on the track at Gaer Junction , Newport – connecting the Ebbw Valley Railway to Newport – had been scheduled for completion by October 2010 , but no decision on the link will now be made before March 2011 . 
 Rebuilding the branch to Abertillery , to replace the shuttle bus service , has been planned . The proposal for a new station and track ( which would need to be re @-@ laid for 1 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 3 km ) between Aberbeeg and Abertillery ) , is not included in the Welsh Assembly Government 's National Transport Plan . 
 A feasibility study and further design work for a new station at Ebbw Vale Town was commissioned by the Welsh Assembly Government . The station on the former Corus steelworks site , which closed in 2002 , is a mile north of the line 's initial terminus , Ebbw Vale Parkway , and was forecast to cost £ 6 @.@ 5 million . It was opened on 17 May 2015 . Network Rail will be carrying out further track improvement work in 2016 @-@ 7 ( to double the line between Aberbeeg & Crosskeys , as mentioned above and raise the line speed ) and hopes to complete the project in 2018 . This will allow the introduction of a regular service to Newport and Abergavenny in addition to the current one to and from Cardiff . 
 = = Passenger volume = = 
 = White Lies ( band ) = 
 White Lies are an English post @-@ punk band from Ealing , London . Formerly known as Fear of Flying , the core band members are Harry McVeigh ( lead vocals , guitar ) , Charles Cave ( bass guitar and backing vocals ) , and Jack Lawrence @-@ Brown ( drums ) . The band perform live as a five @-@ piece , when sidemen Tommy Bowen and Rob Lee join the line up . White Lies ' musical style has been described as dark yet uplifting by the media , drawing comparisons to Joy Division , Editors , The Killers and Interpol . 
 White Lies formed in October 2007 , after writing songs that they felt didn 't suit their original band . After delaying their first performance for five months to build up media hype , they earned a recording contract with Fiction Records days after their debut . The release of singles " Unfinished Business " and " Death " led to tours and festival appearances in the United Kingdom and North America , including a headline performance at BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend and a place on the 2009 NME Awards Tour . At the beginning of 2009 , White Lies featured in multiple " ones to watch " polls for the coming year , including the BBC 's Sound of 2009 poll and the BRITs Critics ' Choice Award . 
 White Lies ' debut album To Lose My Life ... , released in January 2009 , hit number one on the UK Albums Chart . Their second album Ritual was recorded in 2010 , and released on 17 January 2011 . Big TV , their third studio album , was released on 12 August 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Charles Cave and Jack Lawrence @-@ Brown were both from <unk> Village in North Ealing , and first played together in a school show at North Ealing Primary School . Harry McVeigh ( from Shepherd 's Bush ) joined them two years later , and they began playing under the name Fear of Flying at the age of fifteen . Cave described the band as a " weekend project " , and one of many groups which they were involved in while at school . Fear of Flying completed one UK tour as a support act , as well as further slots with The Maccabees , Jamie T and Laura Marling . They released two double A @-@ side vinyl singles on independent record label Young and Lost Club , " Routemaster / Round Three " on 7 August 2006 and " Three 's a Crowd / Forget @-@ Me @-@ Nots " on 6 December 2006 . Both vinyls were produced by former Blur and The Smiths collaborator , Stephen Street , whom they met through a friend at school . They went on to play the inaugural Underage Festival in Victoria Park , England on 10 August 2007 . 
 Two weeks prior to the group starting university , they decided that they would take a second gap year , and perform new material which the band felt did not suit their current outfit . Cave stated that " I felt as though I couldn 't write about anything personal , so I would make up semi @-@ comical stories that weren 't really important to anyone , not even me . " Fear of Flying disbanded in October 2007 with a MySpace bulletin stating " Fear of Flying is DEAD ... White Lies is alive ! " , before introducing a darker sound and a new name that reflected their maturity . Cave stated that the band deleted their MySpace account " without any token farewell gigs " . McVeigh said that the current musical climate had an effect on the split , stating that " Maybe a few years ago , we would have signed a deal and had a chance to make three albums [ ... ] . In the current climate ... we ’ d have been dropped " . When asked about the name change in an interview with a radio station in San Francisco , Jack Brown said that " We just thought that we should perform these songs as a different band . We had songs that we felt weren 't suitable for the band that we were in and we thought White Lies would be the perfect vehicle for the songs . " 
 = = = Early releases = = = 
 Playing under the new name , White Lies played their first gig at Hoxton Square 's Bar & Kitchen on 28 February 2008 , supporting Team <unk> and Semifinalists . The band admitted rehearsing for two months for the gig , as well as putting off their debut for five months to gather media hype . Following this , the band received numerous record label offers , eventually signing to Fiction Records a matter of days after their first performance . The band also signed publishing rights to Chrysalis Music Publishing . The band said they chose the name because " white lies are quite dark ... that 's how we see ourselves " and that white lies " protect the upsetting truths " of the band 's lyrics . Receiving airtime on BBC Radio 1 , Zane Lowe named " Death " his " Hottest Record in the World " on 5 February 2008 , despite the song having never been officially released . Radio 1 would go on to feature the band at Radio 1 's Big Weekend in May 2008 , where they headlined the BBC Introducing stage . 
 On 10 March 2008 , White Lies were announced as one of four bands taking part in the first ever NME New Noise Tour ( now the NME Radar Tour ) . The tour visited eleven cities in the UK throughout May 2008 . The band were first featured in the magazine in the issue dated 22 March 2008 , appearing in the " Everyone 's Talking About ... " section of their Radar article . Live Editor Hamish MacBain described tracks " Death " and " XX " ( later titled " Unfinished Business " ) - the only two songs available on the band 's MySpace - as " ... not to afraid of a little sincerity , not afraid of a little scale " . The band released their debut single one month later , a 7 @-@ inch vinyl of " Unfinished Business " on 28 April 2008 . The limited pressing was released by Chess Club Records , an independent record label co @-@ founded by drummer Jack Brown . To mark the release , the band supported <unk> in London 's Scala on 16 April 2008 , as well as a performance at the 2008 Camden Crawl . 
 = = = To Lose My Life ... ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = 
 They made their television debut on Later ... with Jools Holland on 30 May 2008 , playing " Unfinished Business " and " Death " . This marked their final public performance prior to recording their debut album , scheduling sessions in ICP Studios in Belgium and Kore Studios in West London . The album was provisionally titled To Lose My Life or Lose My Love , with a scheduled release date was set for January 2009 . The title came from a line in the album 's title track , " To Lose My Life " . During the summer of 2008 , the band played numerous UK and overseas music festivals , including major festivals Oxegen , T in the Park , and the Reading and Leeds Festivals . Beginning in September 2008 , the band played their first headline tour , performing thirteen dates in the United Kingdom . The tour marked the release of " Death " on 22 September 2008 , with a further six dates played in the United States in October 2008 . The tour included an appearance at the CMJ Music Festival in New York on 23 – 24 October , alongside Jay Reatard , Amazing Baby and <unk> . Following this , the band returned to support Glasvegas on their fifteen date UK tour in November and December 2008 . NME.com exclusively announced their debut album would be released on 12 January 2009 , with shortened title To Lose My Life .... The band preceded the album with the single release of " To Lose My Life " one week earlier . The full @-@ length video for " To Lose My Life " premiered exclusively on the band 's MySpace on 21 November 2008 . 
 On 11 November 2008 , NME announced that White Lies would be taking part in the 2009 <unk> NME Awards Tour , alongside Friendly Fires , Florence and the Machine and headliners Glasvegas . The annual tour , taking place in early 2009 , visited seventeen cities in the UK . On 7 February 2009 , it was announced in NME that the entire tour had sold out . On the Manchester tour date , the band dueted with Florence Welch to play " Unfinished Business " . The band would later also be announced for Xfm 's Winter Wonderland festival in London , as well as one of four bands playing NME 's Big Gig on 26 February 2009 . 
 At the beginning of 2009 , the band were featured in numerous polls as " ones to watch " for the coming year . The BBC placed them second in their Sound of 2009 poll , as well as coming third in the 2009 BRITs Critics ' Choice Award , behind Florence and the Machine and Little Boots . To mark the album release , " From the Stars " appeared as iTunes 's " Single of the Week " on 30 December 2008 , two weeks prior to the album 's release . In addition , the band played a Live Lounge session for Jo Whiley 's BBC Radio 1 show on 14 January 2009 , playing " To Lose My Life " as well as a cover of Kanye West 's " Love Lockdown " . The cover was included as a b @-@ side to " Farewell to the Fairground " , released on 23 March 2009 . 
 Upon the release of To Lose My Life , White Lies became the first British act in 2009 to achieve a number one album , and the first album to debut at number one . After charting high in the midweek sales , the album beat off competition from Lady Gaga , The Script and Kings of Leon . In support of the release , the band played on Channel 4 's Shockwaves Album Chart Show , Last Call with Carson Daly and the Late Show with David Letterman , the latter being the band 's first performance on US television . Following supporting Snow Patrol on their tour of both Ireland and the United Kingdom , the band embarked on their own headline world tour , playing sold out dates across Europe , North America , Japan and the United Kingdom . While in North America , the band co @-@ headlined the NME Presents tour with Friendly Fires . The bands were supported by The Soft Pack , with White Lies headlining seven of the fifteen dates , including their first appearance at the South by Southwest festival . During the tour , the band were forced to play a shortened , six song set at New York 's Bowery Ballroom , due to McVeigh having throat problems . During summer 2009 , the band played a number of major UK and overseas music festivals , including Rock Werchter , Benicàssim , Coachella , Glastonbury , Isle of Wight , Lollapalooza , Oxegen , Radio 1 's Big Weekend , Reading and Leeds , Roskilde and T in the Park . " Death " was re @-@ released on 29 June 2009 . To mark the release , live performances from a selection of the band 's festival appearances were broadcast online through the band 's web player , titled " The Summer of Death " . 
 Also In September 2009 , White Lies performed as a support act for Coldplay , including a date at Wembley Stadium , where the band performed in front of a half full stadium . The band played as the first support act and was greatly received . 
 = = = Ritual ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In an interview with the BBC 's Newsbeat programme , McVeigh stated that due to the nature of the band 's songwriting techniques clashing with their difficult touring schedules , there will be no new White Lies material until 2010 . Despite this , McVeigh has mentioned that the ambitious recording of " Nothing to Give " and " The Price of Love " ( from To Lose My Life ... ) act as a taster of the different sound to come on their sophomore release . In September 2009 , the band released " <unk> " as a digital download through iTunes for the first time . A live favourite amongst fans , the track had previously only been released on the ( now deleted ) vinyl release of " To Lose My Life " . During the same month , the band supported Kings of Leon 's tour of the United States , and Coldplay 's tour of the United Kingdom . As well as this , the band played their own headline tour across Europe during October — November 2009 , including some of their biggest shows to date in the UK . A number of the tour dates were later cancelled , due to McVeigh falling ill during their concert in Munich , Germany . Having fully recovered in time for the beginning of their UK dates , the tour continued as normal , with cancelled dates being rescheduled for February 2010 . 
 On 13 February 2010 , White Lies became the first high @-@ profile artist to perform at the <unk> music venue in Manchester . The band played there again on 14 February , with tickets for the second show made available exclusively through the band 's website . The performances were the band 's only scheduled headline performances of 2010 . Both concerts sold out in a matter of minutes , with 38 @,@ 000 people applying for the 400 tickets available . As well as this , the band showed their mutual love of Muse at a number of European stadium shows between June and September 2010 , and played the 2010 V Festival in the United Kingdom . 
 During November 2010 , White Lies confirmed that their second album , Ritual , had been completed and would be released on 17 January 2011 . Produced by Alan Moulder , the album 's first single " Bigger than Us " was released on 3 January 2011 . An eleven date tour of the United Kingdom was also announced for February 2011 . 
 = = = Big TV ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 In an interview with NME in January 2013 , bassist Charles Cave revealed that the band 's third album is intended to be released in late summer , with one of the tracks promoting the record being called " Getting Even " . On 4 June 2013 it was revealed that the album , which was produced by Ed Buller and recorded earlier this year , will be titled Big TV . Also , the track list for the album was published and " Getting Even " was released as a free download . The first official single from the album , " There Goes Our Love Again " , was released on 5 August 2013 , with the album being released in the UK and Europe a week later , on 12 August 2013 through Fiction Records . It was released on 20 August 2013 in the US ( through Harvest Records ) , and in Canada ( Universal Music ) . 
 On 23 / 24 / 25 July 2013 , White Lies played 3 intimate shows at Hoxton Square Bar & Kitchen in London , celebrating the 5 year anniversary of the band 's first ever gig at the same venue . They played tracks from Big TV and some of their earlier songs in front of 300 fans each night . During their Summer / Fall 2013 tour , the band is scheduled to play more than thirty concerts in Europe and North America . In August 2013 they made their Main Stage debut at Reading and Leeds Festivals . 
 On 6 November 2013 , the band released a limited edition EP to celebrate their tour , called Small TV . The five @-@ track EP released on Fiction Records was limited to 1000 copies and features covers from Lana Del Rey and Prince in addition to new versions of their own tracks . 
 The band is currently working on their fourth studio album , after first being reported on in 2015 . In December 2015 , the band signed to Infectious Music for the release of the new record which will be mixed by David Wrench . Their fourth studio album , Friends , will be released on October 7 , 2016 . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 As Fear of Flying , Banquet Records described the band 's second single as " Quite danceable indie " . The Guardian 's official website named them an indie @-@ pop band , stating " they made promising , if unremarkable , Franz Ferdinand @-@ styled pop with cheeky <unk> lyrics " . In an interview with BBC London , they cited Talking Heads as a major influence . White Lies ' darker sound has been primarily compared to Joy Division , Interpol and Editors , as well as Arcade Fire , The Killers , Echo & the Bunnymen , Tears for Fears and The Teardrop Explodes . McVeigh 's singing voice has been compared to that of Ian Curtis and Julian Cope . When asked about the comparisons in an interview with ITN Music , McVeigh stated that " We weren 't alive during that period of music ... we 've never really been that into Joy Division , especially not the Editors ... or even Interpol really " , adding " I don 't think our music sounds a whole lot like those comparisons , I think we 're a lot more euphoric and uplifting " . As White Lies , the band have reiterated the influence of Talking Heads , both musically and in songwriting . As well as this , the band have stated that The Secret Machines are one of their main influences . In a commentary on a " Track by Track " interview on Spotify , one band member said that the band was influenced by The Cars , specifically how their guitar riffs on " Be Your Man " from the " Big TV " album was influenced by The Cars song " Just What I Needed " . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Harry McVeigh – lead vocals , guitar ( 2007 – present ) 
 Charles Cave – bass guitar , backing vocals , lyrics ( 2007 – present ) 
 Jack Lawrence @-@ Brown – drums ( 2007 – present ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 To Lose My Life ... ( 2009 ) 
 Ritual ( 2011 ) 
 Big TV ( 2013 ) 
 Friends ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 2013 Best Album Artwork : Big TV 
 2009 MOJO Honours Lists : MOJO Breakthrough Award 
 2009 Q Awards : Best New Band 
 = = = Nominations = = = 
 2009 NME Awards : Best New Band 
 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards : Best Push Artist 
 = Cannon Fodder 2 = 
 Cannon Fodder 2 : Once More unto the Breach , also known as Cannon Fodder 2 is an action @-@ strategy shoot ' em up game developed by Sensible Software and published by Virgin Interactive for the Amiga and DOS in November 1994 . The game is the sequel to Cannon Fodder , a successful game released for multiple formats in 1993 . The game is a combination of action and strategy involving a small number of soldiers battling through a time @-@ travel scenario . The protagonists are heavily outnumbered and easily killed . The player must rely on strategy and heavy secondary weapons to overcome enemies , their vehicles and installations . 
 The game retained the mechanics and gameplay of its predecessor but introduced new levels , settings and graphics . Former journalist Stuart Campbell designed the game 's levels , making them harder and more tactically demanding , as well as introducing a multitude of pop culture references in the level titles . The development of the game 's plot was hampered by budget constraints and the resulting lack of explanation confused reviewers . Critics enjoyed the gameplay retained from the original Cannon Fodder but were disappointed at the lack of new mechanics or weapons , comparing the game to a data disk . Reviewers praised the game 's level design , though less so those of its alien planet . Critics gave Cannon Fodder 2 positive reviews but lower scores than its predecessor and gave mixed criticism of the new theme music and increased difficulty . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Cannon Fodder 2 is a military @-@ themed action game with strategy and shoot ' em up elements . The player controls a small squad of up to four soldiers . These soldiers are armed with machine guns which kill enemy infantry with a single round . The player 's troops are similarly fragile , and while they possess superior fire @-@ power at the game 's outset the enemy infantry becomes more powerful as the game progresses . As well as foot soldiers , the antagonists include vehicles and missile @-@ armed turrets . The player must also destroy buildings which spawn enemy soldiers . For these targets , which are invulnerable to machine gun fire , the player must utilise secondary , explosive weaponry : grenades and rockets . Ammunition for these weapons is limited and the player must find supply crates to replenish his troops . Wasting these weapons can potentially result in the player not having enough to fulfil the mission objectives . The player can opt to shoot crates – destroying enemy troops and buildings in the ensuing explosion – at less risk to his soldiers than retrieving them , but again at a greater risk of depleting ammunition . 
 The player proceeds through 24 missions divided into several " phases " each , making 72 levels in all . There are various settings including medieval , gangster @-@ themed Chicago , an alien spacecraft and an alien planet . The player must also contend with mines and other booby traps . As well as shooting action , the game features strategy elements and employs a point @-@ and @-@ click control system more common to strategy than action games . As the player 's troops are heavily outnumbered and easily killed , he must use caution , as well as careful planning and positioning . To this end , he can split the squad into smaller units to take up separate positions or risk fewer soldiers when moving into dangerous areas . In alternative settings , heavy weapons are replaced graphically by such units as battering rams ( replaces trucks ) and wizards ( replaces rockets ) . 
 The game 's plot – minimally expounded in the manual – concerns soldiers partaking in a Middle Eastern conflict ( which forms the game 's early levels ) abducted by aliens to do battle on an alien world ( which forms the later levels ) . During the process of space travel , the aliens send the soldiers to various times and places , resulting in the intervening medieval and Chicago settings . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game is the sequel to Cannon Fodder , which drew criticism for its juxtaposition of war and humour and its use of iconography closely resembling the remembrance poppy . The cover art 's poppy was ultimately replaced with a soldier , in turn replaced by a hand grenade for Cannon Fodder 2 , regarding which Amiga Power joked : " the great thing about an explosive charge wrapped in hundreds of meters wound @-@ inflicting wire is that it doesn 't have the same child @-@ frightening , ' responsible adult ' freaking , society @-@ disrupting effect as an <unk> @-@ <unk> flower . " The One felt the new historical and science @-@ fiction themes an attempt to avoid similar controversy as befell Cannon Fodder . Amiga Power itself had become embroiled in the controversy due to its planned use of the poppy on its cover ( also abandoned ) and perceived inflammatory commentary its editor Stuart Campbell . Campbell later left the magazine to join Sensible Software as a programmer and worked on the sequel as his first game . 
 A small team of " essentially four " people – among them first @-@ time level @-@ designer Campbell – created the game , retaining the Cannon Fodder engine . Prior to Campbell 's arrival from a journalism career , Sensible Software had devised the game 's time @-@ travelling theme and decided upon the various settings . However , it had not yet developed a plot to expound these themes . It was not possible to illustrate the story in the game itself – due to Cannon Fodder 2 's – simple nature and so Campbell began work on an elaborate " plot @-@ to @-@ be " , partially completing a novella intended to accompany the final product . This version of the story had the time @-@ travelling aliens plotting to intervene in various parts of human history to create chaos , which they intended to exploit to enslave and destroy humanity . The protagonists ' kidnappers were envisioned as sympathisers who would send them through time to defend mankind . However , Virgin vetoed the proposal as too expensive and took charge of the manual 's production . The result was a simplified explanation which described the soldiers as in the employ of the aliens and did not clarify the time @-@ travel element . Campbell later said the loss of the novella was an example of a publisher preferring to maximise profit from a game rather than build intellectual property towards the end of the Amiga 's commercial life . 
 As the game was to retain the same engine , the developers could not add new gameplay features . Campbell instead set out to make the levels more interesting , creating multiple paths through the missions . More obvious solutions would be more difficult , and the hidden , " proper " paths easier to execute once deduced . While Campbell intended the game to be harder , he also wished to improve the difficulty curve , which he argued was a flaw of its predecessor . He also tended to make the levels smaller and reduced instances of water obstacles , which he regarded as frustrating in the first game . The designer conceded that some levels turned out to be too difficult – due to his inexperience as a developer and the fact he became so skilled while play testing – but maintained that level 8 of the original was worse than any of his creations . Campbell named most of the game 's levels after songs titles and lyrics ( prominently The Jesus and Mary Chain ) , but also referenced wider pop culture artifacts such as <unk> and Bugs Bunny cartoons , as well as some original titles . He also referenced classic games in the level design itself . 
 At the time , Creator Jon Hare said changing the formula would be detrimental , and unnecessary to provide enjoyment and value . He later reflected that Sensible had poorly managed the project in " delegating " the design to newcomer Campbell . He felt this to be a consequence of Sensible Software <unk> spreading itself thin , by that point attempting to exploit its success . Hare sold Sensible to Codemasters in 1999 and consequently worked on an abortive Cannon Fodder 3 , with such a title ultimately published by Russia 's Game Factory Interactive for the PC in 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cannon Fodder 2 retains the same mechanics and core gameplay of its predecessor , prompting reviewers to say : " It 's still as wonderfully playable as it ever was " , and to acknowledge " all the amazing control and playability " of the original . Reviewers complained about the lack of plot , with Amiga Power stating : " There 's little explanation as to why you 're doing this [ time @-@ travelling ] and absolutely none in the game . As a result , the game doesn 't hang together . " AUI called the plot " pointless " , while Amiga Computing called it a " slight problem " , saying " you have to guess what is going on in the game because there 's no plot explanation [ ... ] it 's all very confusing ! " 
 The game is markedly more difficult than its predecessor . Amiga Format called this " good / bad news " , whereas The One directed its " major criticism " at the difficulty level , saying " some of the levels are quite simply horrendous " , and that the game is " close to being intensely frustrating at times . " Amiga Computing also felt the high difficulty to be the " biggest problem " : " I like a game to get progressively harder rather than getting virtually impossible after just four missions . " Amiga Format also criticised the difficulty and felt " some of the levels are a bit of a drag . " Amiga Power was annoyed at the early tutorial missions , finding them redundant , but otherwise noted the increased challenge as a positive , and said : " The original game went in pulses of fiendishly hard and stupidly simple levels , but in <unk> the difficulty curve 's , well , more of a curve . " The reviewer praised the clever level design , explaining : " The levels penalise you for taking the obvious route and reward you for trying an obscure approach [ ... ] loads of levels make you think before you move , injecting puzzle elements into the killing " , citing the example of traps with empty vehicles as bait . The reviewer praised the smaller , tighter levels with a difficulty curve within those levels : " gung @-@ ho " sections building to tactical play against tougher enemies . He compared this favourably with the first game : " The level design is consistently better " , in particular the " Beirut , <unk> and Chicago levels look and play wonderfully . " He nevertheless felt the thematic shifts lacked coherence and atmosphere . 
 The game 's alien planet levels drew much criticism , on which Amiga Computing opined : " whoever chose the colour schemes should be thrown away in jail . " While he praised their mechanics , Amiga Power 's reviewer said : " I hate the entire look of the alien planet [ ... ] From the disgusting purple pools to the silly flowers . " Some reviewers enjoyed the graphics but felt there was no change between the two games . CU Amiga said " it 's the same game tarted up with new graphics " as well as the new levels . Amiga Computing praised the new main theme music . Amiga Power said it was not as good as its predecessor and also pointed out that the in @-@ game music remained the same as the original Cannon Fodder and had grown tiresome . The magazine questioned the lack of an option to disable it . Critics decried the lack of new weapons , pointing out that the original armaments and vehicles had merely been made to look different in the various settings , while behaving in the same manner . 
 Reviewers more generally criticised the similarity between Cannon Fodder and Cannon Fodder 2 . The One , AUI , and Amiga Computing compared the new game to a " data disk " rather than a full sequel . Kieron Gillen later reflected that it would be called a " semi @-@ sequel " or " stand @-@ alone add @-@ on pack " if released today . CU Amiga conceded that the designers could have added little new to such a simple game without tampering with the basic , successful mechanics ; Sensible Software was accused of " laziness " by The One , and of " greed " by AUI . 
 While it awarded 90 % , Amiga Power felt the game was poor value for money compared to the original , while CU Amiga said it was " still worth buying " . AUI said the game was " a must " for those without the original , otherwise Cannon Fodder 2 is " basically exactly the same game as before " , with the " saving grace " of new levels . Amiga Computing enjoyed the game but said it was not as good as expected and that there are " too many similarities and not enough differences to make this sequel a classic . " The One summarised : " If you 've got <unk> , love it , and want seconds , only harder , look no further – but , if like myself you 've played Cannon Fodder to death and would 've liked to have seen the game developed in some way , I think you 'll be a bit disappointed " . 
 = Computer Bismarck = 
 Computer Bismarck is a computer wargame developed and published by Strategic Simulations , Inc . ( SSI ) in 1980 . The game is based on the last battle of the battleship Bismarck , in which British Armed Forces pursue the German Bismarck in 1941 . It is SSI 's first game , and features turn @-@ based gameplay and two @-@ dimensional graphics . 
 The development staff consisted of two programmers , Joel Billings and John Lyons , who programmed the game in BASIC . Originally developed for the TRS @-@ 80 , an Apple II version was also created two months into the process . After meeting with other wargame developers , Billings decided to publish the game as well . To help accomplish this , he hired Louis Saekow to create the box art . 
 The first commercially published computer war game , Computer Bismarck sold well and contributed to SSI 's success . It is also credited in part for legitimizing war games and computer games . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The game is a simulation of the German battleship Bismarck 's last battle in the Atlantic Ocean during World War II . On May 24 , 1941 , the Bismarck and Prinz Eugen sank the British HMS Hood and damaged the HMS Prince of Wales at the Battle of the Denmark Strait . Following the battle , British Royal Navy ships and aircraft pursued the Bismarck for two days . After being crippled by a torpedo bomber on the evening of May 26 , the Bismarck was sunk the following morning . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Computer Bismarck is a turn @-@ based computer wargame in which players control British forces against the battleship Bismarck and other German units . The German forces can be controlled by either a computer opponent ( named " Otto von Computer " ) or a second player . The game takes place on a map of the North Atlantic Ocean on which letters from the English alphabet represent military units and facilities ( airfields and ports ) . Units have different capabilities , as well as statistics that determine their mobility , firepower , vulnerability and other gameplay factors . Turns take the form of phases , and players alternate inputting orders to maneuver their respective units . Phases can serve different functions , such as informing players of status changes , unit movement , and battles . Players earn points by destroying their opponent 's units . After the Bismarck is sunk or a number of turns have occurred , the game ends . Depending on the number of points players have earned , either the British or German forces are declared the victor . 
 = = Development = = 
 During college , Joel Billings used computers to do econometrics , mathematical modeling and forecasting . This experience led him to believe that computers could handle war games and remove tedious paperwork from gameplay . While between his undergraduate and graduate education , Billings met an IBM programmer and discussed computers . Billings suggested starting a software company with him , but the programmer was not interested in war games , stating that they were too difficult and complicated to be popular . Billings posted flyers at hobby shops in the Santa Clara , California area to attract war @-@ game enthusiasts with a background in programming . John Lyons was the first to reply and joined Billings after quickly developing a good rapport . 
 Billings chose the Bismarck 's last battle because he felt it would be easier to develop than other war games . Computer Bismarck was written in BASIC and compiled to increase its processing speed . In August 1979 , Billings provided Lyons with access to a computer to write the program . Lyons began programming a simplified version similar to a fox and hounds game — he had " hounds " search a playing field for a " fox " . At the time , the two were working full @-@ time and programmed at Billings ' apartment during the night . Lyons did the bulk of the programming , while Billings focused on design and assisted with data entry and minor programming tasks . 
 The game was originally developed for the Tandy Corporation 's TRS @-@ 80 . Two months into development , Billings met with Trip Hawkins , then a marketing manager at Apple Computers , via a venture capitalist , who convinced Billings to develop the game for the Apple II ; he commented that the computer 's capacity for color graphics made it the best platform for strategy games . In October 1979 , Billings ' uncle gave him an Apple II . Billings and Lyons then converted their existing code to work on the Apple II and used a graphics software package to generate the game 's map . 
 After Lyons began programming , Billings started to study the video games market . He visited local game stores and attended a San Francisco gaming convention . Billings approached Tom Shaw from Avalon Hill — the company produced many war games that Billings played as a child — and one of the founders of Automated Simulations to share market data , but aroused no interest . The lukewarm responses made Billings believe he would have to publish SSI 's games . After Computer Bismarck was finished in January 1980 , he searched for a graphic designer to handle the game 's packaging . 
 Billings met Louis Saekow through a string of friends but was hesitant to hire him . Inspired by Avalon Hill 's games , Billings wanted SSI 's games to look professional and include maps , detailed manuals , and excellent box art . Two months prior , Saekow had postponed medical school to pursue his dream of becoming a graphic designer . To secure the job , Saekow told Billings that he could withhold pay if the work was unsatisfactory . In creating the box art , Saekow used a stat camera ; his roommate worked for a magazine company and helped him sneak in to use its camera after hours . Saekow 's cousin then handled printing the packaging . Without any storage for the complete products , Billings stored the first 2 @,@ 000 boxes in his bedroom . In February 1980 , he distributed 30 @,@ 000 flyers to Apple II owners , and displayed the game at the <unk> exposition a month later . SSI purchased a full @-@ page advertisement in the April 1980 BYTE which stated " Now there 's a true historical wargame for your home computer ... There 's never been anything like it " . It mentioned the ability to play against the computer or another person , and save a game in progress . The Apple II version was $ 59 @.@ 95 , and the advertisement promised future support for the TRS @-@ 80 and other computers . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 BYTE 's 1980 review called Computer Bismark a " milestone in the development of commercial war games " , and approved of the quality of the documentation and the option to play against the computer , but was otherwise not favorable . Acknowledging that " it is perhaps unfair to expect the first published [ computer war game ] to be a fully developed <unk> " , the magazine criticized Computer Bismarck for overly faithfully copying the mechanics of the Bismarck board game , including those that worked efficiently on a board but less so on a computer . The review also noted that the computer game " perpetuates the [ board game 's ] irritating system of ship @-@ movement rates " , and concluded that " the failings of Computer Bismarck can be summarized by saying that it does not take advantage of the possibilities offered by the computer " . 
 The game was better received by other critics . Popular Mechanics that year praised the game 's detail and ability to recreate the complex maneuvering involved in the real battle . He referred to it as unique and " fantastic " . Creative Computing cautioned that the game " is probably not for everyone . The point which I probably cannot emphasize enough is that it is an extremely complex simulation ... However , for those ready for a [ challenge ] ... I enthusiastically recommend Computer Bismarck " . United States Navy defense researcher Peter Perla in 1990 considered war games like Computer Bismarck a step above earlier war @-@ themed video games that relied on arcade @-@ style action . He praised the addition of a computer controlled opponent that such games provide to solitaire players . Perla attributes SSI 's success to the release of its early wargames , specifically citing Computer Bismarck . 
 Computer Gaming World in 1988 agreed that Computer Bismarck contributed to SSI 's success , commenting that the title earned the company a good profit . He also stated that it encouraged game enthusiasts to submit their own games to SSI , which he believed helped further the company 's success . Describing it as the first " serious wargame for a microcomputer " , Proctor credited Computer Bismarck with helping to legitimize war games and computer games in general . He stated that the professional packaging demonstrated SSI 's seriousness to produce quality products ; prior to Computer Bismarck , most computer games were packaged in zipper storage bags . Saekow became a permanent SSI employee and designed artwork for most of its products . 
 BYTE noted the similarity of the game 's mechanics to Avalon Hill 's Bismarck , stating that " it would seem proper as a matter of courtesy to acknowledge that the game was based on an Avalon Hill design " . In 1983 , Avalon Hill took legal action against SSI for copying game mechanics from its board games ; Computer Bismarck , among other titles , was involved in the case . The two companies settled the issue out of court . The game was later re @-@ released as part of the company 's " SSI classics " line of popular games at discounted prices . One of SSI 's later games , Pursuit of the Graf Spee , uses an altered version of Computer Bismarck 's core system . 
 In December 2013 the International Center for the History of Electronic Games received a software donation of several SSI , including Computer Bismarck with the source code for preservation . 
 = My Man ( Jade Ewen song ) = 
 " My Man " is a song by English singer Jade Ewen . It was written by Ina Wroldsen , and produced by Harry Sommerdahl and Kalle Engstrom for Ewen 's debut studio album . The song was released as a digital download in the United Kingdom on 17 September 2009 . Musically , " My Man " is a pop and contemporary R & B and song backed by electro and R & B beats and a synthesizer . It is notably different from her previous single " It 's My Time " , which was composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber for the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 . 
 " My Man " was positively reviewed by critics , who praised the chorus and Ewen 's vocals . The song peaked at number 35 on the UK Singles Chart and number 13 on the UK R & B Chart . Promotion for the single was cancelled after Ewen joined girl group Sugababes to replace founding member Keisha Buchanan . The accompanying music video for " My Man " was directed by Urban Strom and filmed in July 2009 in Beverly Hills , near Los Angeles , California . It features Ewen 's love interest using a torch to search for her in a mansion . 
 = = Background <unk> development = = 
 In January 2009 , Ewen participated in the UK national selection for the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 . She was eventually selected to represent the UK with the song " It 's My Time " , composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber who accompanied her on piano onstage . Ewen was placed fifth on the contest , which was the highest placing for the UK since 2002 . Having already signed with Polydor Records before the Eurovision selection , Ewen began working on her debut album . " My Man " was written by Ina Wroldsen , and produced by Harry Sommerdahl and Kalle Engstrom . 
 In September 2009 , it was reported that Sugababes member Amelle Berrabah had left the group and Ewen would be replacing her position in the band . Further suspicion arose amid an announcement that Ewen was " taking time off from all promotional activity for the foreseeable future " . However , it was announced on 21 September 2009 that founding Sugababes member Keisha Buchanan had left the band . Ewen was immediately announced as her replacement , and promotion for " My Man " thereafter was ceased . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " My Man " is a pop and R & B song with influences of <unk> described by Nick Levine of Digital Spy as a " sassy R & B club banger " . The song is notably different from her previous ballad , " It 's My Time " , featuring a more contemporary R & B sound than the latter . Speaking upon the change in musical direction , Ewen clarified : " What I 'm now doing now is really me , [ sic ] so if people don 't like it I 'm going to take it more personally . " " My Man " opens with electro and bass @-@ driven R & B beats , synthesizers that are reminiscent of those featured in " Yeah ! " by Usher , and later develops into " a pop / R & B <unk> " . The lyrical content of " My Man " is about a woman who " pledges devotion to a man who sounds almost too good to be true " . Ewen stated that the lyrics were not directed at any man in particular . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 " My Man " received positive reviews from critics . Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song a four out of five star rating and called it " very good contemporary pop " and a " complete U @-@ turn " from " It 's My Time " . Philip Ellwood of Entertainment Focus praised the song 's chorus , in addition to Ewen 's vocal performance . He also wrote that the end result is " a monster hit waiting to happen and a single that is better than it has any right to be " . <unk> commended the song as " instantly catchy and memorable " . Vicki Lutas of BBC described " My Man " as " sexy , strong and ferocious " . She applauded the chorus , but admitted that the song " sounds a bit generic " and " lacks Jade 's sparkle " . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 " My Man " debuted and peaked at number 35 on the UK Singles Chart for the issue dated 3 October 2009 , and became Ewen 's second consecutive top forty single after " It 's My Time " , which peaked at number 27 earlier in the year . On the UK R & B Chart , " My Man " peaked at number 13 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " My Man " was directed by Urban Strom and produced by Danny Germaine in July 2009 . It was shot in a mansion in Beverly Hills , Los Angeles , California . For the video , the singer wore a " clingy " white vest and hotpants . It begins with showing a man who is in bed and cannot sleep . Ewen is later shown in the mansion which prompts the man to turn on the light of a torch , leave the bed and search for her . Ewen then begins dancing on the wall as the torch is being flashed at her by the man . During the second verse , she is shown singing on a couch , again with the torch being flashed . When the song 's bridge begins , Ewen is shown dancing outside on the porch where the man is watching her . As the video ends , it is revealed that the man was dreaming , in which Ewen appears near the room 's curtains . 
 The video was well received by critics . A writer from the website Female First described the video as " glamorous " , while Nadia Mendoza of The Sun called Ewen " a natural " and stated that she " oozes with sex appeal as she flirts with the camera at the plush Beverly Hills mansion " . Mendoza also praised the revamp of her image and described her as " [ looking ] sizzling in new shots " . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Ewen first performed " My Man " on BBC Switch on 8 July 2009 . She wore a white @-@ coloured shirt , blue jeans and pink high heels . Further promotion for the song was cancelled after Ewen joined the Sugababes ; she clarified that her solo career would be " put to one side " , saying : " The Sugababes is my main project " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Osbert fitzHervey = 
 Osbert fitzHervey ( died 1206 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman royal judge . Brother of Hubert Walter and Theobald Walter , Osbert served three kings of England and may have contributed to the legal treatise attributed to his uncle , Ranulf de Glanvill . Ralph of Coggeshall , a medieval writer , praised Osbert 's knowledge of law , but condemned his acceptance of gifts from plaintiffs and defendants in legal cases . Osbert was one of a group of men who are considered the first signs of a professional judiciary in England . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 Osbert was from East Anglia , where he held lands . He was a younger brother of Hubert Walter , later Archbishop of Canterbury , and thus the son of Hervey Walter and his wife Maud de Valoignes , one of the daughters ( and co @-@ heiresses ) of Theobald de Valoignes , lord of Parham in Suffolk . Osbert was one of six brothers . The older brothers , Theobald Walter and Hubert , were helped in their careers by their uncle , Ranulf de Glanvill . Glanvill was the chief justiciar for Henry II ; and was married to Maud de Valoignes ' sister , Bertha . The other three brothers – Roger , Hamo ( or Hamon ) and Bartholomew – only appear as witnesses to charters . Although English biographer Edward Foss , citing earlier works , claimed that Osbert was descended from a younger son of Robert , duke of Orleans , who arrived in England with William the Conqueror , this is not accurate . 
 Osbert 's lands were chiefly in Norfolk and Suffolk , but he also had some lands in Essex and some from the Count of Perche . Other lands were held from two monastic houses in East Anglia : St Benet Holme and Bury St Edmunds . 
 = = Career = = 
 Osbert served as a royal judge under three English kings : Henry II , Richard I , and John . He was often sent as an itinerant justice to East Anglia ; the historian Barbara Dodwell said of him that " of all the justices his knowledge of East Anglian disputes was probably the greatest " . It appears that Osbert 's royal service was confined to judicial matters , as no other evidence of any other offices has surfaced . 
 The treatise Tractatus of Glanvill , which is traditionally attributed to Osbert 's uncle Ranulf de Glanvill , and to which Osbert himself may have contributed , names only seven judges , including Osbert . He was one of a group of royal justices that included Simon of <unk> , Ralph Foliot , Richard Barre , William de Warenne , and Richard <unk> , used by Hubert Walter , the Justiciar of England during Richard 's reign , and chosen for their ability rather than any familial ties . This group replaced the previous system of using mostly local men , and represent the first signs of a professional judiciary . In 1194 Osbert was one of the collectors of the carucage in eastern England , along with Barre and de <unk> . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In 1198 Osbert married Margaret of Rye , with whom he had at least one son . Osbert paid the king 20 pounds for the right to marry Margaret . Osbert died in 1206 , without having made a will . At his death , his yearly income was more than 240 pounds . Ralph of Coggeshall mentions Osbert , without using his name , as a royal judge who would go to Hell in his " Vision of <unk> " . This work detailed the punishments that awaited sinners , and Osbert was accused of accepting gifts from both sides of lawsuits . Coggeshall did state that Osbert was " most expert in worldly law " and was famous for " his overflowing eloquence and experience in the law " . According to Coggeshall , Osbert 's punishment in Hell would consist of having to swallow hot coins and then being forced to vomit the coins back up . After his death , William of Huntingfield offered King John a fine for the right to the custody of Osbert 's heir and lands , the fine amounting to 200 marks and two palfreys . 
 = I Want You ( Marvin Gaye album ) = 
 I Want You is the fourteenth studio album by American soul musician Marvin Gaye , released March 16 , 1976 , on Motown @-@ subsidiary label Tamla Records . Recording sessions for the album took place throughout 1975 and 1976 at Motown Recording Studios , also known as Hitsville West , and Gaye 's personal studio Marvin 's Room in Los Angeles , California . The album has often been noted by critics for producer Leon Ware 's exotic , low @-@ key production and the erotic , sexual themes in his and Gaye 's songwriting . The album 's cover artwork adapts neo @-@ mannerist artist Ernie Barnes 's famous painting The Sugar Shack ( 1971 ) . 
 I Want You consisted of Gaye 's first recorded studio material since his highly successful and well @-@ received album Let 's Get It On ( 1973 ) . While it marked a change in musical direction for Gaye , departing from his trademark Motown and doo @-@ wop @-@ influenced sound for funky , light @-@ disco soul , the album maintained and expanded on his previous work 's sexual themes . Following a mixed response from critics at the time of its release , I Want You has earned retrospective recognition from writers and music critics as one of Gaye 's most controversial works and influential to such musical styles as disco , quiet storm , R & B , and neo soul . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1975 , Marvin Gaye had come off of the commercial and critical success of his landmark studio album Let 's Get It On ( 1973 ) , its successful supporting tour following the album 's release , and Diana & Marvin ( 1973 ) , a duet project with Diana Ross . However , similar to the conception and recording of Let 's Get It On , Gaye had struggled to come up with an album as an appropriate follow @-@ up . And much like Let 's Get It On Gaye reached for outside help , this time seeking the assistance of Leon Ware , a singer and songwriter who had found previous success writing hits for fellow Motown alum , including pop singer Michael Jackson and the rhythm and blues group The Miracles . Ware had been working on songs for his own album which he would later issue under the title Musical Massage , a collection of erotic singles Ware had composed with a variety of writers , including Jacqueline Hillard and Arthur " T @-@ Boy " Ross , brother of Diana Ross . When Motown CEO Berry Gordy paid a visit to Ware , the songwriter was more than happy to play Gordy his selection of tracks . After hearing a preliminary mix of the songs however , Gordy figured that Ware should let Gaye handle his material . 
 While the majority of the album 's songs were conceived by Ware , I Want You was transformed into a biographical centerpiece for Gaye , who was then in a volatile marriage with Anna Gordy , sister to Berry Gordy , and also in a long @-@ standing affair with Janis Hunter , who would later become the mother of his two youngest children . Gaye and Hunter were introduced to each other by producer Ed Townsend in 1973 at Hitsville West , while Townsend and Gaye were recording Let 's Get It On . In his book Mercy , Mercy Me : The Art , Loves , and Demons of Marvin Gaye , the author and music writer Michael Eric Dyson elaborated on the relationship between I Want You and Gaye 's affair with Hunter : " I Want You is unmistakably a work of romantic and erotic tribute to the woman he deeply loved and would marry shortly , Janis Hunter . Gaye 's obsession with the woman in her late teens is nearly palpable in the sensual textures that are the album 's aural and lyrical signature . Their relationship was relentlessly passionate and emotionally rough @-@ hewn ; they played up each other 's strengths , and played off each other 's weaknesses . " 
 Though it was often hinted that Let 's Get It On was the album Gaye had dedicated to her , Marvin has stated that this album was dedicated to Hunter , who is believed to have been in the studio when he recorded it . According to music critics , her presence may have increased the emotion in Ware 's and Gaye 's conception of I Want You . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Gaye and Ware recorded and mixed the album at Gaye 's newly christened " Marvin 's Room Studio " , located on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles , and at Motown Recording Studios . The recording sessions took place throughout 1975 and 1976 . Much like Gaye 's previous studio effort Let 's Get It On , I Want You featured Gaye 's contribution of background vocals and heavy multi @-@ tracking . Gaye 's vocalizing style was in classic doo @-@ wop tradition accompanied by the low tempo of string arrangements and other instrumentation was provided by The Funk Brothers . 
 Gaye 's albums , and especially I Want You , have been influential on modern soul music and contemporary R & B. EMI Artists and Repertoire executive Gary Harris , who later assisted neo soul singer D 'Angelo in recording his debut album Brown Sugar ( 1995 ) , later commented on Gaye 's significant artistry on I Want You and its opening title track . In an interview with writer Michael Eric Dyson , Harris said : 
 Another significant feature of the recording sessions for I Want You was Gaye 's use of the synthesizer in his music . During the time of recording , the instrument had entered its modern period of use and had been included in the music of such popular acts as Stevie Wonder and Led Zeppelin . For the instrumental version of " After the Dance " , Gaye implemented it for a more spacey sound than his previous recordings had featured . Other recordings from these sessions to feature Gaye 's synthesizer were later featured on the deluxe edition re @-@ release of I Want You . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The original Sugar Shack painting , which was later used for the front album cover of I Want You , was painted and released by neo @-@ mannerist artist Ernie Barnes in 1971 . In 1974 , Barnes redesigned the painting for use by television producer Norman Lear for the opening credits of Good Times , his hit CBS sitcom that ran from 1974 to 1979 . The Sugar Shack portrays a cultural image of a shack full of black people dancing . The Sugar Shack was painted by Barnes in his signature post @-@ mannerist style , using serpentine lines , elongation of the human figure , clarity of line , unusual spatial relationships , painted frames , and distinctive color palettes . This style of technique and composition is similar to the mannerist style of 16th @-@ century artists such as Michelangelo and Raphael , which has led Barnes to be credited as the founder of the Neo @-@ Mannerism movement . Art critic Frank <unk> later called The Sugar Shack a " stunning demonstration of the fusion of Neo @-@ Mannerism and Genre painting that Barnes alone has perfected and practices " , and went on to say : 
 The Sugar Shack has been known to art critics for embodying the style of art composition known as " Black Romantic " , which , according to Natalie Hopkinson of The Washington Post , is the " visual @-@ art equivalent of the Chitlin ' circuit . " According to Barnes , he created the original version after reflecting upon his childhood , during which he was not " able to go to a dance . " In an interview with <unk> , Barnes was asked whether there were any messages he was attempting to express through the painting . He stated " ' Sugar Shack ' is a recall of a childhood experience . It was the first time my innocence met with the sins of dance . The painting transmits rhythm so the experience is re @-@ created in the person viewing it . To show that African @-@ Americans utilize rhythm as a way of resolving physical tension " 
 Gaye was introduced to Barnes by colleague Barbara Hunter , which led to him buying eight Barnes originals , including The Sugar Shack . After Gaye asked him for permission to use the painting as an album cover , Barnes then augmented the painting by adding references to Gaye 's album , including banners hanging from the ceiling of the shack promoting the album 's singles . Since the initial wide acclaim for The Sugar Shack , Barnes has gained further recognition from art critics as one of the best black painters of his time and was cited by the Oakland Tribune as the " Picasso of the black art world . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 I Want You was released March 16 , 1976 in the United States on the Motown @-@ subsidiary label Tamla Records . While not as successful sales @-@ wise as Gaye 's previous landmark albums What 's Going On and Let 's Get It On , I Want You sold in excess of 1 million copies in the United States with help mostly coming from its first single " I Want You " . The single topped the Billboard Soul Singles chart , quickly becoming Marvin Gaye 's eleventh number @-@ one hit on that chart , while peaking at number fifteen on the Billboard Pop Singles chart . 
 The album 's second single , the quiet storm track " After the Dance ( Vocal ) " , charted modestly , peaking at # 14 on the Soul Singles chart and # 74 on the Pop Singles chart , while another single release version of the song , a double A @-@ sided vinyl record for dance clubs and discothèques , hit the top ten of the Billboard Disco Singles chart . The song became a staple of dance clubs and discothèques during the late 1970s . " After the Dance " was hailed as one of Gaye 's signature songs during the late 1970s and was later described by Gaye @-@ biographer David Ritz as " emblematic for the final chapter of his career . " I Want You became his fourth album to reach the top ten of the Billboard 200 chart and his fifth number @-@ one album on the Soul Albums chart . 
 Despite its chart success , I Want You received mixed reviews from music critics at the time of its release . It has been noted by music writers that the critical reception of disco music in general had been poor and ill @-@ considered , which may have caused the slightly disco @-@ styled I Want You to suffer critically , in comparison to Gaye 's previous albums . Los Angeles Times writer Dennis Hunt called the album " disappointing " and " only partially commendable " . Rolling Stone 's Vince Aletti criticized Leon Ware 's production for being too low @-@ key , and perceived that Gaye lacks the certain passion in his lyricism and singing from his previous records . Aletti compared the album to Gaye 's previous work , writing that " Gaye seems determined to take over as soul 's master philosopher in the bedroom , a position that requires little but an affectation of constant , rather jaded <unk> . The pose has already been established in Let 's Get It On , on which Gaye was hot , tender , aggressive , soothing and casually raunchy — the modern lover with all his contradictions . I Want You continues in the same vein but with only the faintest traces of the robust passion that shot through and sustained the earlier album ... one expects something with a little more substance and spirit . But there 's no fire here , only a well @-@ concealed pilot light . " 
 Cliff White of NME called the album " almost a voyeur 's delight " , and was not favorable of Gaye 's sensual themes , stating " Although getting down , getting mellow , and getting it on are paramount considerations in the privacy of my own home , I don 't particularly want to be party to someone else 's night life . Not on record anyway ... Like peeking through the windows of the Gaye residence in the wee wee hours . Perhaps that 's your kick , but personally I find it a mite frustrating . " White also criticized the album 's sound , describing the songs as " all expressions of the same mood . Sensual , satisfied , and spaced out " , and calling I Want You " simply the explorative aftermath of Let 's Get It On . The sweet <unk> 's of a drowsy , sweat @-@ streaked lover . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote favorably of the album 's sound quality . However , he criticized the lyrical content , as well as Ware 's involvement in songwriting , stating " was it Ware who instructed Marvin to eliminate all depth and power from his voice ? I mean , if you 're into insisting on sex it 's in bad taste to whine about it . " 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 After critical re @-@ examination of the album , I Want You has been recognized by writers and music writers as one of Marvin Gaye 's most controversial and influential works and , much like its predecessor Let 's Get It On , has served as a major influence on the quiet storm and contemporary R & B genres . Its standing has also improved among critics following an expanded edition release of the album on July 29 , 2003 , which featured extensive liner notes and photography by Ryan Null . Following that release , Allmusic praised Gaye 's different direction in music and the eroticism portrayed in Leon Ware 's smooth @-@ tempo production and Gaye 's intimate lyricism . Reviewer Thom Jurek wrote : 
 Such musicians as Todd Rundgren , Robert Palmer and Madonna have stated they were influenced by I Want You , while songs from the album have been sampled by such hip hop artists as EPMD to Mary J. Blige , who sampled the title track for her hit song " Be Happy " . The careers of neo soul and R & B musicians including D 'Angelo , Musiq Soulchild , R. Kelly , Maxwell ( particularly on Urban Hang Suite ) , Sade , and Prince show the influence of the soulful sound and equally romantic and erotic lyrics of I Want You , Let 's Get It On and Leon Ware 's Musical Massage . According to one critic , Ware 's arrangements " solidified the suite @-@ like theme for the album . " Much like Let 's Get It On , slow jam music , as well as modern soul and the quiet storm genre , are now viewed by critics to have been engendered by I Want You and by Gaye . 
 Following the release of I Want You , Ware released Musical Massage ( 1976 ) , which received little mainstream notice . Despite this , Musical Massage , Ware 's second studio album , became a cult hit among soul music fans who were intrigued by I Want You and songs from that album 's producer . Critical recognition of Ware 's album later improved , being cited by Allmusic as " the perfect mix of soul , light funk , jazz , and what was about to become the rhythmic foundation for disco . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Deluxe edition = = = 
 On July 29 , 2003 , I Want You was reissued by Motown as a two @-@ disc expanded edition release , featuring 24 @-@ bit digital remastering of the original album 's recordings , previously unissued material , and a 24 @-@ page booklet , which contains the original LP liner notes by Marvin Gaye , as well as comprehensive essays by writers including David Ritz . 
 = = = 2002 remaster bonus tracks = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Artwork by : Ernie Barnes , Frank Mulvey 
 Arranged by ( Strings , Horns ) : Coleridge @-@ Taylor Perkinson 
 Bass : Chuck Rainey , Henry Davis , Ron Brown , Wilton Felder 
 Bongos , <unk> : Bobbye Hall Porter , Eddie " Bongo " Brown 
 Drums : James Gadson 
 Electric Piano ( Fender Rhodes ) , Piano : Jerry Peters , John Barnes , Sonny Burke 
 Engineer : Fred Ross , Art Stewart 
 Executive Producer : Berry Gordy , Marvin Gaye 
 Guitar : David T. Walker , Dennis Coffey , Jay Graydon , Melvin " Wah Wah " Watson , Ray Parker , Jr . 
 Percussion : Gary Coleman , Jack Arnold 
 Producer : Leon Ware , Marvin Gaye , Arthur " T @-@ Boy " Ross ( co @-@ produced tracks : A1 , A3 , B1 , B2 , B4 @-@ B6 ) 
 Vocals : Marvin Gaye 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Sample use = = 
 The information regarding sampling of songs from I Want You is adapted from <unk> 
 " I Want You ( intro jam ) " 
 " HaHa Tysons " by DJ Harrison produced at <unk> Records 
 = Exelon Pavilions = 
 The Exelon Pavilions are four buildings that generate electricity from solar energy and provide access to underground parking in Millennium Park in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . The Northeast Exelon Pavilion and Northwest Exelon Pavilion ( jointly the North Exelon Pavilions ) are located on the northern edge of the park along Randolph Street , and flank the Harris Theater . The Southeast Exelon Pavilion and Southwest Exelon Pavilion ( jointly the South Exelon Pavilions ) are located on the southern edge of the park along Monroe Street , and flank the Lurie Garden . Together the pavilions generate 19 @,@ 840 kilowatt @-@ hours ( 67 @,@ 697 MBtu ) of electricity annually , worth about $ 2 @,@ 350 per year . 
 The four pavilions , which cost $ 7 million , were designed in January 2001 ; construction began in January 2004 . The South Pavilions were completed and opened in July 2004 , while the North Pavilions were completed in November 2004 , with a grand opening on April 30 , 2005 . In addition to producing energy , three of the four pavilions provide access to the parking garages below the park , while the fourth serves as the park 's welcome center and office . Exelon , a company that generates the electricity transmitted by its subsidiary Commonwealth Edison , donated $ 5 @.@ 5 million for the pavilions . Chicago Tribune architecture critic Blair Kamin praised the South Pavilions as " minor modernist jewels " , but criticized the North Pavilions as " nearly all black and impenetrable " . The North Pavilions have received the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) silver rating from the United States Green Building Council , as well as an award from the American Society of Heating , Refrigerating and Air @-@ Conditioning Engineers ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid @-@ 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . As of 2009 , Millennium Park trailed only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 In 1836 , a year before Chicago was incorporated , the Board of Canal Commissioners held public auctions for the city 's first lots . Citizens with the foresight to keep the lakefront as public open space convinced the commissioners to designate the land east of Michigan Avenue between Randolph Street and Park Row ( 11th Street ) " Public Ground — A Common to Remain Forever Open , Clear and Free of Any Buildings , or Other Obstruction , whatever . " Grant Park has been " forever open , clear and free " since , protected by legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court rulings . In 1839 , United States Secretary of War Joel Roberts Poinsett decommissioned the Fort Dearborn reserve and declared the land between Randolph Street and Madison Street east of Michigan Avenue " Public Ground forever to remain vacant of buildings " . 
 Aaron Montgomery Ward , who is known both as the inventor of mail order and the protector of Grant Park , twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove buildings and structures from Grant Park , and to keep it from building new ones . In 1890 , arguing that Michigan Avenue property owners held easements on the park land , Ward commenced legal actions to keep the park free of new buildings . In 1900 , the Illinois Supreme Court concluded that all landfill east of Michigan Avenue was subject to dedications and easements . In 1909 , when he sought to prevent the construction of the Field Museum of Natural History in the center of the park , the courts affirmed his arguments and the museum was built elsewhere . 
 As a result , the city has what are termed the Montgomery Ward height restrictions on buildings and structures in Grant Park ; structures over 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall are not allowed in the park , with the exception of <unk> . However , within Millennium Park , the 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) Crown Fountain and the 139 @-@ foot ( 42 m ) Jay Pritzker Pavilion were exempt from the height restrictions , because they were classified as works of art and not buildings or structures . Shorter structures do not run afoul of the height restrictions . The Harris Theater , which lies between the North Pavilions , was built mostly underground to avoid the restrictions . The Northwest Pavilion , tallest of the four , is three stories high ; the Northeast Pavilion is two stories , and the South Pavilions are each one story . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The pavilions are named for Exelon , a Chicago @-@ based company that generates the electricity transmitted by its subsidiary Commonwealth Edison ( ComEd ) . The city of Chicago has collaborated with Exelon and ComEd on a variety of environmental projects , including the installation of solar power in buildings , support for sustainable design and renewable energy , and furthering educational and social awareness of green architecture in the city . The pavilions cost $ 7 million , $ 5 @.@ 5 million of which was donated by Exelon and ComEd . 
 The lead designer for the North Pavilions was Thomas H. Beeby of Hammond Beeby Rupert Ainge Architects . Beeby 's designs for the North Pavilions are " in harmony with the Harris Theater " , for which he was the architect as well . The North Pavilions are along Randolph Street on either side of the theater , which is Millennium Park 's indoor performing @-@ arts venue . 
 The South Pavilions were designed by architect Renzo Piano of Renzo Piano Building Workshop . Piano designed the Art Institute of Chicago 's Modern Wing , which is across Monroe Street from the South Pavilions and opened in 2009 . The facades of the South Pavilions are limestone and glass in order to complement the Modern Wing , even though it was not completed until several years after the pavilions were finished . Piano also designed the Nichols Bridgeway , which connects Millennium Park and the Art Institute , and is next to the Southwest Pavilion . 
 The design process for the Exelon Pavilions began in September 2001 , with construction starting in January 2004 . The general contractor for all four pavilions was Walsh Construction . The South Pavilions were completed in July 2004 and opened when Millennium Park celebrated its grand opening on July 16 , 2004 . The North Pavilions were not finished in July 2004 , but were completed in November of that year . All four Exelon Pavilions were officially opened to the public on April 30 , 2005 . 
 = = Structures = = 
 The North Pavilions were designed as minimalist black cubes , and together are capable of producing 16 @,@ 000 kilowatt @-@ hours ( 54 @,@ 594 MBtu ) of electricity annually . The outermost layer of the exterior of each pavilion is a curtain wall made of recycled aluminum . These walls contain specially designed " mono @-@ crystalline photovoltaic modules and insulated glass " . Convection from radiant solar heat gain causes air to cycle within air cavities covered by the photovoltaic modules . A " highly heat @-@ reflective thermoplastic membrane " is used to waterproof each roof , and helps mitigate the urban heat island effect . 
 The photovoltaic modules generate electricity to power much of the pavilions ' lighting . The North Pavilions are the first Chicago buildings to use building integrated photovoltaic cells , which are a solar energy system incorporated into the building 's structural elements . Millennium Park 's planners claimed that the pavilions had the first electricity @-@ generating curtain walls in the Midwest . 
 = = = Northwest Pavilion = = = 
 The Northwest Pavilion , located at 151 E. Randolph Street , houses the Millennium Park Welcome Center and an Exelon energy display . It contains the Millennium Park offices , and public restrooms . The three @-@ story Northwest Pavilion is the largest of the four pavilions , with 6 @,@ 100 square feet ( 566 @.@ 7 m2 ) , and is the only pavilion that does not provide access to the parking garage below . The Northwest Pavilion has 460 photovoltaic modules to harness solar energy , houses recycling facilities , and its " interior finishes and construction materials are derived from renewable resources " . 
 The Millennium Park Welcome Center in the Northwest Pavilion offers guides to the park and wheelchairs . It houses exhibitions on parks and energy , and has interactive displays on how the pavilions ' solar panels function and on renewable energy . There are exhibits with interactive web @-@ based touch screens that depict the city 's use of solar energy , and a dynamic multi @-@ screen video presentation on electricity generation and usage . The building 's atrium includes a sculpture by Chicago @-@ based artists Patrick McGee and Adelheid Mers with three backlit 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) two @-@ way mirrors . The sculpture , titled Heliosphere , Biosphere , <unk> , is " designed to interpret the links between the Earth 's atmosphere , the solar system and scientific applications " . It is the only permanent work of art by Chicago artists within the park . 
 = = = Northeast Pavilion = = = 
 The Northeast Pavilion houses a pedestrian entrance to the Millennium Park parking garage , and provides access to the Harris Theater 's rooftop terrace . It is at 201 E. Randolph Street , east of the theater and west of the McDonald 's Cycle Center . The pavilion 's second floor has the Chicago Shop , which offers a self @-@ guided Millennium Park audio tour for rental and sells official Millennium Park and Chicago souvenirs . The two @-@ story Northeast Pavilion is the second @-@ largest , with 4 @,@ 100 square feet ( 380 @.@ 9 m2 ) of surface area , and also has 460 photovoltaic modules to generate electricity from sunlight . 
 = = = South Pavilions = = = 
 The south pavilions are east and west of the Lurie Garden along Monroe Street , and their glass walls allow views of the garden . Both of the South Pavilions provide access to the parking garage below the park . The 550 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 51 m2 ) Southwest Pavilion is the smallest of the four pavilions , and has the least number of photovoltaic modules with 16 on its roof . It is west of the garden and east of the Nichols Bridgeway . The Southeast Pavilion is east of the garden , has the second smallest area at 750 square feet ( 69 @.@ 7 m2 ) , and has 24 rooftop photovoltaic modules . Together these two pavilions are capable of producing 3 @,@ 840 kilowatt @-@ hours ( 13 @,@ 102 @.@ 6 MBtu ) of electricity annually . 
 = = Reception and recognition = = 
 Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning Chicago Tribune architecture critic Blair Kamin praised the decision to have architects design the pavilions as an " inspired stroke " , speculating that if their designs had been left to contractors , visitors to Millennium Park could have instead seen unimpressive " blunt utilitarian huts " . Kamin was pleased with Piano 's South Pavilions , describing them as " minor modernist jewels , almost house @-@ like " . He lauded the way their limestone walls complement the transparent glass by way of contrast , and noted that they anticipated Piano 's then @-@ forthcoming addition to the Art Institute of Chicago Building . Kamin gave the South Pavilions a rating of three stars out of a possible four , or " very good " . 
 Kamin was less pleased with Beeby 's North Pavilions , which he described as " nearly all black and impenetrable " and compared to Darth Vader 's helmet . He acknowledged the pavilions ' innovative technology , and their " urban design function " as wings for the Harris Theater , which Kamin felt " allows the theater to better stand up to the Frank Gehry @-@ designed Pritzker Pavilion to its south " . Because they were not finished when he wrote his review in July 2004 , Kamin did not give the North Pavilions an overall star rating ; he did express the hope that they would have a more pleasant appearance once completed . 
 The pavilions have been recognized for their innovative use of renewable energy and green design . In 2005 , the North Pavilions received the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) silver rating from the United States Green Building Council . They received a Technology Award Honorable Mention in the category of " Alternative and / or Renewable Energy Use – New Construction " from the American Society of Heating , Refrigerating and Air @-@ Conditioning Engineers ( <unk> ) . The United States Department of Energy has recognized all the pavilions as part of its Million Solar Roofs Initiative . In 2005 Chicago ranked fourth among U.S. cities in solar installations ; the completion of the Exelon Pavilions took the city to a total of 1 MW of installed photovoltaic systems . The pavilions together generate 19 @,@ 840 kilowatt @-@ hours ( 67 @,@ 697 MBtu ) of electricity annually , worth $ 2 @,@ 353 per year at 2010 average Illinois electricity prices . According to the City of Chicago , this is enough energy to power the equivalent of 14 Energy Star @-@ rated efficient houses in Chicago . 
 = = Image map = = 
 Northwest Exelon Pavilion 41 ° 53 ′ 2 @.@ 67 ″ N 87 ° 37 ′ 20 @.@ 54 ″ W 
 Northeast Exelon Pavilion 41 ° 53 ′ 2 @.@ 72 ″ N 87 ° 37 ′ 16 @.@ 90 ″ W 
 Southwest Exelon Pavilion 41 ° 52 ′ 51 @.@ 70 ″ N 87 ° 37 ′ 20 @.@ 10 ″ W 
 Southeast Exelon Pavilion 41 ° 52 ′ 51 @.@ 62 ″ N 87 ° 37 ′ 17 @.@ 02 ″ W 
 = St George 's Church , Trotton = 
 St. George 's Church is an Anglican church in Trotton , a village in the district of Chichester , one of seven local government districts in the English county of West Sussex . Most of the structure was built in the early 14th century . However , some parts date to around 1230 , and there is evidence suggesting an earlier church on the same site . In 1904 , a largely intact and unusually detailed painting was found on the west wall depicting the Last Judgment as described in Matthew 25 : 31 – 46 . 
 The church is dedicated to St. George , patron saint of England . The rector of St George 's also oversees the parish of Rogate with <unk> , and most services are held at St. Bartholomew 's church in Rogate : just two services a month take place at Trotton . The church is also used once a month by the British Orthodox Church . The church is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building for its architectural and historical importance . 
 = = History = = 
 Historians have disagreed about its age , and the existence of an older church on the same site . The tower has been dated by its architecture to between 1230 and 1240 , but other historians question this date and suggest the tower and the body of the church both date to the 14th century . The porch appears to be a 17th century addition . There is a tomb of Margaret de <unk> in the nave . It has been suggested that its location there , rather than the chancel as would be expected for the family of the lord of the manor ( which her surname suggests she was ) , may indicate that the church was built on the site of an earlier , smaller , church and the tomb was in the chancel of that church . Local historian Roger Chatterton @-@ Newman disagrees , saying there would be no need for a church on the site any earlier . 
 A comprehensive restoration was undertaken by Philip Mainwaring Johnston in 1904 . The work cost £ 700 ( £ 68 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , and a time capsule containing details of the builders , church officials and contemporary world events was buried at the end of the job . 
 = = Description and architecture = = 
 The church is situated in the village of Trotton , West Sussex , just off the A272 near the River Rother . It stands between the early 15th @-@ century bridge over the river and the 16th @-@ century manor house . 
 The church has a plain , simple Decorated @-@ style exterior , apart from the tower which is Early English style . The nave and chancel are in a single chamber , separated by a narrow step instead of a chancel arch . The tower stands at the western end of the church , and contains a ring of four bells hung for change ringing . The tenor ( largest ) bell dates from 1908 , the others from 1913 ; all were cast by John Taylor & Co . The church is built of rubble with ashlar dressings . The roof of the main body is tiled ; during the 14th century it had a thatched roof , but this was replaced in about 1400 . The tower roof is a shingled octagonal cap . 
 = = Wall paintings = = 
 In 1904 , the whitewash was removed from the west wall and a wall painting from the very early days of the church was discovered . This , in itself , is not remarkable . Plenty of early churches have wall paintings ; however , this one was unusually rich and detailed . In the centre is Jesus Christ , beneath him is Moses and on his right is the " Carnal Man " surrounded by the Seven Deadly Sins . On his left is the " Spiritual Man " surrounded by the Seven Acts of Mercy . These two characters are depicted on the opposite sides of Christ than is usual in such depictions of the Last Judgement . The red paintwork is mostly in good condition , although the Seven Deadly Sins have started to fade . 
 There are also paintings on the north and south walls depicting the Camoys family . Camoys was the lord of the manor and it appears he had the church built primarily for his family . This would explain the unusual detail in the paintings . They were intended as rich decoration rather than simply for educating an illiterate congregation . 
 = = Tombs = = 
 A 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) table @-@ tomb in the middle of the chancel contains the remains of Thomas de Camoys , 1st Baron Camoys ( died 1421 , although the inscription says 1419 ) and his wife , Elizabeth , daughter of Edmund Mortimer , 3rd Earl of March . Baron Camoys fought at the Battle of Agincourt , and his wife was the inspiration for the character of Gentle Kate in William Shakespeare 's play Henry IV . The sides of the brass memorial are decorated with <unk> and shield @-@ shaped ornamentation , which enhance the comparatively plain figures . The baron and baroness are depicted holding hands and only slightly smaller than life @-@ size . Ian Nairn and Nikolaus Pevsner described the memorial as " one of the biggest , most ornate and best preserved brasses in England " . 
 The nave contains a <unk> slab with a brass of Margaret de <unk> ( died 1310 ) . This is the oldest known brass of a woman in England . There used to be a 15th @-@ century niche @-@ tomb in the south wall , but it had been largely removed by 1780 . The table @-@ tomb of Sir Roger Lewknor ( died c . 1478 ) is in the northeast corner of the chancel . Its sides have festoon motifs and slender carved niches . In the southeast corner is the pilastered tomb of Anthony Foster ( died 1643 ) . 
 = = The church today = = 
 St George 's Church was listed at Grade I on 18 June 1959 . Such buildings are defined as being of " exceptional interest " and greater than national importance . As of February 2001 , it was one of 80 Grade I listed buildings , and 3 @,@ 251 listed buildings of all grades , in the district of Chichester . 
 The present ecclesiastical parish of Trotton covers a large north – south area of countryside , includes the village of Trotton and the hamlets of Chithurst and Ingrams Green , and is served by St Mary 's Church at Chithurst as well as St George 's . Both churches are in the Rural Deanery of Midhurst , one of eight deaneries in the Archdeaconry of Horsham in the Diocese of Chichester . 
 Eucharistic services are held on the second and fourth Sundays every month . The church is open during the day for visitors . 
 = Derick Neikirk = 
 Derick Lee Neikirk ( also spelled Derek Neikirk or Derrick Neikirk , born September 5 , 1974 ) is an American professional wrestler and former minor league baseball player . He has competed for several promotions , and currently competes for Impact Zone Wrestling ( IZW ) , a territory of the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) based in Phoenix , Arizona . He has also wrestled in several other promotions and was signed to a contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) for several years . Much of his career has been connected with fellow wrestler Mike Knox , as the two have held championships together as a tag team and have feuded on multiple occasions . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 Before entering professional wrestling , Neikirk played catcher for the Mesa Community College baseball team in the Arizona Community College Athletic Conference ( ACCAC ) . In 1996 , he was named to the All @-@ ACCAC Team . That year , he was picked by the Detroit Tigers in the 19th round of the Major League Baseball Draft 
 At age 21 , Neikirk played in Detroit 's rookie @-@ class , minor league team , the Gulf Coast League Tigers of the 1996 Gulf Coast League in Lakeland , Florida . He played catcher in 18 games out of a 60 @-@ game season . His statistics were as follows : 47 plate appearances , 38 at bats , 8 hits , 4 runs , 1 run batted in ( RBI ) , 5 walks , 7 strikeouts , and 8 total bases . Also , Neikirk ground into a double play 4 times , was hit by a pitch 3 times , and made 1 sacrifice hit . He had a batting average of .211 , an on @-@ base percentage of .348 , a slugging percentage of .211 , and an on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) of .558 . 
 That same year , Neikirk was promoted to the high @-@ A @-@ class , minor @-@ league team , the Visalia Oaks , of the 1996 California League , in Visalia , California . While there , he played catcher in 9 games out of a 140 @-@ game season . His statistics were as follows : 29 plate appearances , 27 at @-@ bats , 4 hits , 3 runs , 2 RBIs , 2 walks , 9 strikeouts , and 4 total bases . He also had a batting average of .148 , an on @-@ base percentage of .207 , a slugging percentage of .148 , and an OPS of .355 . 
 In 1999 , at age 24 , Neikirk returned to baseball playing for the independent minor league team , the Adirondack Lumberjacks , of the 1999 Northern League , in Glens Falls , New York . While there , he played catcher in 42 games out of an 86 @-@ game season . His statistics were as follows : 118 at @-@ bats , 31 hits , 3 doubles , 1 triple , 2 home runs , and 42 total bases . He had a batting average of .263 and a slugging percentage of .356 . 
 On a weighted @-@ average , 100 @-@ point scale , Neikirk 's Baseball Cube scouting report is as follows : 
 Power : 39 
 Batting : 22 
 Speed : 43 
 Contact : 43 
 Patience : 62 
 = = Wrestling = = 
 Throughout his professional wrestling career , Neikirk has competed primarily in the United States . He was also wrestled in Egypt and has worked for the World Wrestling Alliance in Europe and for <unk> in Mexico . Much of his career has been spent portraying a heel ( villain ) through an arrogant demeanor and by turning on allies . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Neikirk trained under Les Thatcher for a career in professional wrestling . In 2002 , he formed a tag team known as The A Squad with Chet Jablonski . On July 10 , 2002 , The A Squad defeated Ice Cream Man and Cody Hawk to win the HWA Tag Team Championship , although this title reign is not recorded in the company 's official history . That year , Neikirk was rated number 481 on Pro Wrestling Illustrated 's annual PWI 500 list of the top wrestlers in the world . On August 31 , 2003 , Neikirk wrestled a match on WWE 's Sunday Night Heat television program in which he was defeated by Test . In 2003 , he improved his PWI 500 ranking and was placed at number 442 . 
 He later wrestled for Ultimate Pro Wrestling ( UPW ) , where he formed a tag team with Mike Knox . The team was also part of a stable known as The Outlaws . Neikirk and Knox later moved to IZW , where they were known as Team Elite . They defeated Navajo Warrior and Hawaiian Lion on January 18 , 2005 to win the IZW Tag Team Championship . They held the title belts until March 15 , when they dropped them to California Connection ( Peter Goodman and Antonio Mestre ) . On January 6 , 2004 , Neikirk turned on Knox by <unk> him in the face . He explained this action by saying that he was tired of carrying the team and that Knox had " dropped the ball " . That night , Neikirk and Kox faced each other as part of a six @-@ man match , but Neikirk turned on his teammates and left the ring . Neikirk and Knox had a blow off match on May 25 . Neikirk won the match , but the referee then reversed his decision and awarded the victory to Knox . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Deep South Wrestling ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In 2005 , he and Knox were signed by World Wrestling Entertainment and was sent to the Deep South Wrestling ( DSW ) , which was a developmental territory for WWE . They resumed wrestling together as Team Elite . Competing as a singles wrestler , Neikirk won the DSW Heavyweight Championship on December 22 that year by defeating Mike Mizanin . He finished the year ranked number 367 in the PWI 500 . He held the Heavyweight Championship for six months before dropping it to <unk> O 'Reilly . On August 3 , 2006 , Team Elite faced High Impact ( Mike Taylor and Tony Santarelli ) for the DSW Tag Team Championship . Neikirk and Knox lost the match , which led to them splitting up and feuding . They faced each other at several DSW house shows , with Knox winning most of the matches . At the same time , Neikirk also teamed with <unk> O <unk> to wrestle The Full Blooded Italians ( Little Guide and Tony Mamaluke ) on several house shows promoted by WWE 's Extreme Championship Wrestling . In 2006 , he achieved his highest ranking on the PWI 500 , as he was rated number 310 . 
 = = = = Florida Championship Wrestling ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 In 2007 , Team Elite reunited and won the DSW Tag Team Championship on March 8 with a victory over The Majors Brothers . They held the title until WWE ended its association with DSW on April 18 , 2007 . Neikirk and Knox were sent to Florida Championship Wrestling , another WWE developmental territory , where they continued to form a tag team . Neikirk also appeared on WWE 's Extreme Championship Wrestling program as one of Paul Heyman 's bodyguards . 
 In January 2008 , he was suspended by WWE for a violation of the company 's Wellness Program . He was released from his WWE contract on January 8 . 
 = = = Return to IZW = = = 
 He then returned to Impact Zone Wrestling , where he won the NWA Arizona Heavyweight Championship on December 30 , 2008 in a match against <unk> Gallo . The match ended in controversy , however , because both men 's shoulders were on the mat as the referee counted the pinfall . Neikirk raised his shoulder just before the final count and was awarded the victory and the title belt . The title was declared vacant until the two men could face each other again on January 27 , 2009 . This rematch ended in a draw , but Gallo defeated Neikirk to win the vacant title on March 10 . Neikirk regained the title , which had been renamed the Arizona Heavyweight Championship , that summer . He held the belt until dropping it to Mike James on August 11 . NWA Representative Greg DeMarco then tried to strip James of the belt and return it to Neikirk , but Neikirk refused to accept the title . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing move 
 Round Trip ( Inverted suplex stunner ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Elite Xtreme Wrestling 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Deep South Wrestling 
 DSW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 DSW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Mike Knox 
 Heartland Wrestling Association 
 HWA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Chet Jablonski 
 Impact Zone Wrestling 
 IZW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IZW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Mike Knox 
 NWA Arizona Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine = 
 Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine , later Victoria Mountbatten , Marchioness of Milford Haven ( Victoria Alberta Elisabeth Mathilde Marie ; 5 April 1863 – 24 September 1950 ) was the eldest daughter of Louis IV , Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine ( 1837 – 1892 ) , and his first wife Princess Alice of the United Kingdom ( 1843 – 1878 ) , daughter of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . 
 Her mother died while her brother and sisters were still young , which placed her in an early position of responsibility over her siblings . She married her father 's first cousin , Prince Louis of Battenberg , an officer in the United Kingdom 's Royal Navy , in a love match and lived most of her married life in various parts of Europe at her husband 's naval posts and visiting her many royal relations . She was perceived by her family as liberal in outlook , straightforward , practical and bright . 
 During World War I , she and her husband abandoned their German titles and adopted the British @-@ sounding surname of Mountbatten , which was simply a translation into English of the German " Battenberg " . Two of her sisters – Elisabeth and Alix , who had married into the Russian imperial family – were murdered by communist revolutionaries . 
 She was the maternal grandmother of Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , the consort of Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Victoria was born on Easter Sunday at Windsor Castle in the presence of her maternal grandmother , Queen Victoria . She was christened in the Lutheran faith in the arms of the Queen on 27 April . Her early life was spent at <unk> , a suburb of Darmstadt , until the family moved to the New Palace in Darmstadt when she was three years old . There , she shared a room with her younger sister , Elisabeth , until adulthood . She was privately educated to a high standard and was , throughout her life , an avid reader . 
 During the Prussian invasion of Hesse in June 1866 , Victoria and Elisabeth were sent to England to live with their grandmother until hostilities were ended by the absorption of Hesse @-@ Kassel and parts of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt into Prussia . During the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 , military hospitals were set up in the palace grounds at Darmstadt , and she helped in the soup kitchens with her mother . She remembered the intense cold of the winter , and being burned on the arm by hot soup . In 1872 , Victoria 's eighteen @-@ month @-@ old brother , Friedrich , was diagnosed with haemophilia . The diagnosis came as a shock to the royal families of Europe ; it had been twenty years since Queen Victoria had given birth to her haemophiliac son , Prince Leopold , Duke of Albany , and it was the first indication that the bleeding disorder in the royal family was hereditary . The following year , Friedrich fell from a window onto stone steps and died . It was the first of many tragedies to beset the Hesse family . 
 In early November 1878 , Victoria contracted diphtheria . Elisabeth was swiftly moved out of their room and was the only member of the family to escape the disease . For days , Victoria 's mother , Princess Alice , nursed the sick , but she was unable to save her youngest daughter , Victoria 's sister Marie , who died in mid @-@ November . Just as the rest of the family seemed to have recovered , Princess Alice fell ill . She died on 14 December , the anniversary of the death of her father , Prince Albert . As the eldest child , Victoria partly assumed the role of mother to the younger children and of companion to her father . She later wrote , " My mother 's death was an irreparable loss ... My childhood ended with her death , for I became the eldest and most responsible . " 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 At family gatherings , Victoria had often met Prince Louis of Battenberg , who was her first cousin once removed and a member of a morganatic branch of the Hessian royal family . Prince Louis had adopted British nationality and was serving as an officer in the Royal Navy . In the winter of 1882 , they met again at Darmstadt , and were engaged the following summer . 
 After a brief postponement because of the death of her maternal uncle , the Duke of Albany , Victoria married Prince Louis on 30 April 1884 at Darmstadt . Her father did not approve of the match ; in his view Prince Louis had little money and would deprive him of his daughter 's company , as the couple would naturally live abroad in Britain . However , Victoria was of an independent mind and took little notice of her father 's displeasure . Remarkably , Victoria 's father secretly married the same evening his untitled mistress , Alexandrine de <unk> , the former wife of the Russian chargé d 'affaires in Darmstadt . His marriage to a divorced commoner shocked the assembled royalty of Europe and through diplomatic and family pressure Victoria 's father was forced to seek an annulment of his own marriage . 
 Over the next sixteen years , Victoria had four children : 
 They lived in a succession of houses at Chichester , Sussex , Walton @-@ on @-@ Thames , and Schloss Heiligenberg , Jugenheim . When Prince Louis was serving with the Mediterranean Fleet , she spent some winters in Malta . In 1887 , she contracted typhoid but , after being nursed through her illness by her husband , was sufficiently recovered by June to attend Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee celebrations in London . She was interested in science and drew a detailed geological map of Malta and also participated in archaeological digs both on the island and in Germany . In leather @-@ bound volumes she kept meticulous records of books she had read , which reveal a wide range of interests , including socialist philosophy . 
 She personally taught her own children and exposed them to new ideas and inventions . She gave lessons to her younger son , Louis , until he was ten years of age . He said of her in 1968 that she was " a walking encyclopedia . All through her life she stored up knowledge on all sorts of subjects , and she had the great gift of being able to make it all interesting when she taught it to me . She was completely methodical ; we had time @-@ tables for each subject , and I had to do preparation , and so forth . She taught me to enjoy working hard , and to be thorough . She was outspoken and open @-@ minded to a degree quite unusual in members of the Royal Family . And she was also entirely free from prejudice about politics or colour and things of that kind . " 
 In 1906 , she flew in a Zeppelin airship , and even more daringly later flew in a biplane even though it was " not made to carry passengers , and we perched securely attached on a little stool holding on to the flyer 's back . " Up until 1914 , Victoria regularly visited her relatives abroad in both Germany and Russia , including her two sisters who had married into the Russian imperial family : Elisabeth , who had married Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich , and Alix , who had married Emperor Nicholas II . Victoria was one of the Empress 's relatives who tried to persuade her away from the influence of Rasputin . On the outbreak of war between Germany and Britain in 1914 , Victoria and her daughter , Louise , were in Russia at Yekaterinburg . By train and steamer , they travelled to St Petersburg and from there through Tornio to Stockholm . They sailed from Bergen , Norway , on " the last ship " back to Britain . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Prince Louis was forced to resign from the navy at the start of the war when his German origins became an embarrassment , and the couple retired for the war years to Kent House on the Isle of Wight , which Victoria had been given by her aunt Princess Louise , Duchess of Argyll . Victoria blamed her husband 's forced resignation on the Government " who few greatly respect or trust " . She distrusted the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill , because she thought him unreliable — he had once borrowed a book and failed to return it . Continued public hostility to Germany led King George V of the United Kingdom to renounce his German titles , and at the same time on 14 July 1917 Prince Louis and Victoria renounced theirs , assuming an anglicised version of Battenberg — Mountbatten — as their surname . Four months later Louis was re @-@ ennobled by the King as Marquess of Milford Haven . During the war , Victoria 's two sisters , Alix and Elisabeth , were murdered in the Russian revolution , and her brother , Ernest Louis , Grand Duke of Hesse , was deposed . On her last visit to Russia in 1914 , Victoria had driven past the very house in Yekaterinburg where Alix would be murdered . In January 1921 , after a long and convoluted journey , Elisabeth 's body was interred in Jerusalem in Victoria 's presence . Alix 's body was never recovered during Victoria 's lifetime . 
 Victoria 's husband died in London in September 1921 . After meeting her at the Naval and Military Club in Piccadilly , he complained of feeling unwell and Victoria persuaded him to rest in a room they had booked in the club annexe . She called a doctor , who prescribed some medication and Victoria went out to fill the prescription at a nearby pharmacist 's . When she came back , Louis was dead . On her widowhood , Victoria moved into a grace @-@ and @-@ favour residence at Kensington Palace and , in the words of her biographer , " became a central matriarchal figure in the lives of Europe 's surviving royalty " . In 1930 , her eldest daughter , Alice , suffered a nervous breakdown and was diagnosed as schizophrenic . In the following decade Victoria was largely responsible for her grandson Philip 's education and upbringing during his parents ' separation and his mother 's institutionalisation . Prince Philip recalled , " I liked my grandmother very much and she was always helpful . She was very good with children ... she took the practical approach to them . She treated them in the right way – the right combination of the rational and the emotional . " 
 In 1937 , Victoria 's brother , Ernest Louis , died and soon afterwards her widowed sister @-@ in @-@ law , nephew , granddaughter and two of her great @-@ grandchildren all died in an air crash at Ostend . Victoria 's granddaughter , Princess Cecilie of Greece and Denmark , had married Victoria 's nephew ( Ernest Louis 's son ) , George Donatus of Hesse . They and their two young sons , Louis and Alexander , were all killed . Cecilie was pregnant at the time and the stillborn child was found among the wreckage . Cecilie 's youngest child , Johanna , who was not on the plane , was adopted by her uncle Prince Louis of Hesse and by Rhine but the little girl only survived her parents and older brothers by eighteen months , dying in 1939 of meningitis . 
 Further tragedy soon followed when Victoria 's son , George , died of bone cancer the following year . Her granddaughter , Lady Pamela Hicks , remembered her grandmother 's tears . In World War II Victoria was bombed out of Kensington Palace , and spent some time at Windsor Castle with King George VI . Her surviving son , Louis , and two of her grandsons served in the Royal Navy , while her German relations fought with the opposing forces . She spent most of her time reading and worrying about her children ; her daughter , Alice , remained in occupied Greece and was unable to communicate with her mother for four years at the height of the war . After the Allied victory , her son , Louis , was offered the post of Viceroy of India , but she was deeply opposed to his accepting , knowing that the position would be dangerous and difficult . He accepted anyway . 
 She fell ill with bronchitis ( she had smoked since the age of sixteen ) at her son Louis 's home at Broadlands , Hampshire , in the summer of 1950 . Saying " it is better to die at home " , Victoria moved back to Kensington Palace , where she died . She was buried four days later in the grounds of St. Mildred 's Church , Whippingham on the Isle of Wight . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With the help of her lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , Baroness Sophie Buxhoeveden , Victoria wrote an unpublished memoir , held in the Mountbatten archive at the University of Southampton , which remains an interesting source for royal historians . A selection of Queen Victoria 's letters to Victoria have been published with a commentary by Richard Hough and an introduction by Victoria 's granddaughter , Patricia Mountbatten . 
 Victoria 's son remembered her fondly : " My mother was very quick on the uptake , very talkative , very aggressive and argumentative . With her marvellous brain she sharpened people 's wits . " Her granddaughter thought her " formidable , but never intimidating ... a supremely honest woman , full of commonsense and modesty . " Victoria wrote her own typically forthright epitaph at the end of her life in letters to and conversation with her son : " What will live in history is the good work done by the individual & that has nothing to do with rank or title ... I never thought I would be known only as your mother . You 're so well known now and no one knows about me , and I don 't want them to . " 
 = = Titles and styles = = 
 5 April 1863 – 30 April 1884 : Her Grand Ducal Highness Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine 
 30 April 1884 – 14 July 1917 : Her Grand Ducal Highness Princess Louis of Battenberg 
 14 July – 7 November 1917 : Lady Mountbatten 
 7 November 1917 – 11 September 1921 : The Most Honourable The Marchioness of Milford Haven 
 11 September 1921 – 24 September 1950 : The Most Honourable The Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Alfred Pullin = 
 Alfred William Pullin , known by the pseudonym Old Ebor ( 30 July 1860 – 23 June 1934 ) , was a British sports journalist who wrote primarily about rugby union and cricket . He wrote mainly for British newspapers the Yorkshire Post and the Yorkshire Evening Post . Considered by critics to be one of the greatest authorities in the country on his two sports , he wrote a daily column using his pseudonym " Old Ebor " for 40 years . Most often associated with his reporting on Yorkshire County Cricket Club , he has been credited as defining the role of a sports journalist . Two of his most widely known works were on cricket : Talks with Old English Cricketers and History of Yorkshire County Cricket , 1903 – 23 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pullin was born in <unk> , Carmarthenshire in 1860 , to Alfred Trask Pullin , the local schoolmaster , and his wife , Adelaide Evans . His father studied for Holy Orders ; ordained in 1875 , he moved to Yorkshire as an assistant curate . 
 Pullin first worked in journalism in 1880 , as Castleford district reporter on the Wakefield Express before moving to write for other local newspapers in Cleckheaton and Bradford . Aged 25 , he began to write for the Athletic News when he first used the name " Old Ebor " , which meant " Old York " . In later years , he preferred to be called " Old Ebor " to his real name , even by his friends . He began to work for the Yorkshire Post as Bradford reporter . 
 With a family background in rugby union , he played for Cleckheaton as three quarter back in the early 1880s , but was not successful enough to pursue his sporting career . Later , he became a rugby referee . 
 = = Sports journalist = = 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 During the 1890s , newspapers began to develop sports pages . In 1893 , Pullin became cricket and rugby union correspondent for the Yorkshire Post and the Yorkshire Evening Post , writing under his pseudonym " Old Ebor " . He followed the Yorkshire and England cricket and rugby teams around the country , and did not miss an England rugby international for 40 years . He also wrote about golf in the Yorkshire Evening Post using the pen name " <unk> Man " . With the popularity of football growing in the north of England , he also began to develop his knowledge of that game as well . 
 Pullin 's reputation quickly grew among followers of sport , and by the end of his career he was personally acquainted with many sports journalists . On average , he wrote two columns each day in summer , during the cricket season , and one per day in the winter . As a cricket writer , he became particularly associated with Yorkshire cricket team at a time when the team rose to a position of dominance , and the club remained very important to him . Len Hutton wrote that he and many others in Yorkshire had been brought up on Pullin 's writing , while all cricketers were in his debt for the influence of his writing . Hutton himself as a young player appreciated Pullin 's encouragement " in and out of print " . Pullin retired from full @-@ time writing in 1931 but continued to write in newspapers until his death . 
 Outside of journalism , Pullin was a director at the relatively short @-@ lived Leeds City Football Club . In Bradford , he was also a freemason and twice became " Worshipful Master of Lodge of Hope " . 
 = = = Talks with Old English Cricketers = = = 
 A prolific worker , Pullin also wrote several books on cricket . These included Talks with Old English Cricketers ( 1900 ) , a biography of Alfred Shaw ( 1902 ) and The History of Yorkshire County Cricket 1903 – 23 ( 1924 ) . The first of these was his most widely known , and had a considerable impact . The historian Mick Pope writes that it " stirred deep debate among the cricketing public and in the county committee rooms concerning the predicament of several old and seemingly forgotten professional cricketers and with it , tarnished the blossoming reputation of Yorkshire County Cricket Club during a period that they were set to dominate on the field . " 
 The book arose from a series of articles written over the winter of 1898 for the Yorkshire Evening Post , in which he interviewed former players and reflected their experiences after retirement . Encountering the desperate circumstances in which many former players lived , Pullin was moved to campaign on their behalf . Hodgson suggests that he " did not mince his words ... He held a deep regard for the players , and found it difficult to contemplate the forlorn situation and desperate straits that several of the old Yorkshire cricketers he interviewed were faced with . " When investigating the whereabouts of John Thewlis , Pullin was told " Think dead ; if not , Manchester " . Pullin later wrote about Thewlis : " The moral responsibilities of cricket managers , so far as a player is concerned , should surely not end with the termination of his active career . He ought not to be cast aside like an old shoe . " 
 There had already been public debate on the fate of retired cricketers , and counties had improved pay and conditions for their professional players . For example , several counties , including Yorkshire , had instituted winter pay before Pullin 's writings were published . However , former players did not benefit from these reforms . 
 Pope suggests that Pullin 's writing gave the debate " a renewed vigour and sharp focus once again . " Although Pullin toned down his comments by the time the articles were published in book form , his attacks on Yorkshire County Cricket Club and general cricket administration aroused public support and led to action . Thewlis , for example , was given work as a groundsman and provided with a pension . In Pullin 's entry into the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Lincoln Allison notes that the book reflected Pullin 's close and sympathetic relationship with the players . Allison describes it as a pioneering work : the unhappy experiences of cricketers after retirement was a phenomenon not widely known at the time . E.W. Swanton , a press box colleague for the last few years of Pullin 's career , writes : " It was his revelations about the straits of poverty to which some of these heroes of the past were reduced that first roused the conscience of the public and the county committees , Yorkshire 's not least . " Derek Hodgson , in the official history of Yorkshire County Cricket Club , writes that Pullin " produced one of the most valuable source books on Victorian cricket " . 
 = = = Style and legacy = = = 
 Pullin had a wide knowledge of the game , and remembered past events and players very clearly . His readers appreciated his expertise and frequently wrote to him with queries . A tribute in the Yorkshire Post after his death suggested that Pullin enjoyed this correspondence and felt very close to his readers . His obituary in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack stated that " his writings were at all times discriminative , informative and voluminous " . The Manchester Guardian noted that Pullin wrote at a time when many famous cricketers played . It stated that , of these times , he " wrote with a keenness of judgement , a descriptive style , and a fund of anecdote that made the games live again " . E.W. Swanton described him as " a thick , bearded fellow " and " a faithful old war @-@ horse " . The Yorkshire Post said that Pullin " stood for all the best in sporting critics of the older school ... He was proud , and rightly proud , of the high position which he held in sporting journalism and in the administrative circles of the games on which he wrote " . The newspaper judged that he wrote about cricket and rugby players " with a clarity akin to genius ... There can scarcely be a football or cricket ground in England where he was not known and welcomed , and his striking appearance and still more striking personality became traditional in the Press box which he graced . To the players of the games he was generous in praise and kindly in his criticism . " Gerald <unk> was told when he became a journalist in 1931 that Pullin originally sent reports to his newspaper by pigeon . <unk> writes : " For the vast Yorkshire cricketing public Old Ebor wrote at inordinate length , unhampered by any consideration of literary style — he was one of the severely factual school — and it amazed me how any pigeon ever struggled into the air when shackled to one of his weighty effusions . " 
 Lord Hawke , writing a foreword to his history of Yorkshire , referred to Pullin as the non @-@ playing member of the county team : " His criticisms on our side form an invaluable guide to the captain , his enthusiasm is contagious , but never allows his judgement to become unbalanced , whilst his eloquent writings on cricket have gone to every part of the world in which there are lovers of the game ... I feel bound to say to the esteemed author of this book — ' Well done , thou faithful friend . ' " Hawke later said that Pullin 's judgement of young cricketers was very good , and that " through his writing he did much to assist the Yorkshire club in encouraging the game and its players " . 
 In the 1920s , Pullin was included in the Births and deaths section of Wisden , a rarity for non @-@ players , due to his standing as a reporter . Wisden described him as one of the greatest authorities on cricket . Pullin retired in 1931 . Although his reputation was later obscured by writers such as Neville Cardus , Allison believes that " Pullin 's greatest achievement was to define the role of the journalist in sport as the critic , popularizer , and interpreter of a particular team to its public . " Cardus himself wrote that Pullin " was one of the first writers who gave me help and counsel when I began to write on cricket . He belonged to the dignified old school of cricket journalism and had much in common with Sydney Pardon , though he was always the hard @-@ headed Yorkshireman . He kept his mind on the game , had no use for frills , and despised modern stunting . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1881 , Pullin married Alice Ramsden . The couple had four sons . He did not have many friends , but he was very close to the ones he had . His early association with churches , through his father , gave him an interest in ecclesiastical music ; he often played the harmonium to entertain himself and his family . He had strong views on organ music , and once he had formed an opinion he rarely changed his mind . 
 Pullin died in 1934 while travelling to a Test match at Lord 's Cricket Ground . He collapsed on a bus and was pronounced dead on his arrival at hospital . He had been suffering from heart trouble for some time , but wished to continue working and to die " with his boots on " . He was buried in Wakefield cemetery . Upon his death , senior figures from Yorkshire County Cricket Club paid tribute to his influence , and his dignity and <unk> were praised by the Leeds branch of the National Union of Journalists . Hutton , who had just broken into the Yorkshire team aged 18 , wrote that he " had just got into the habit of looking for that kindly , alert , grey @-@ bearded face of Mr Pullin 's either among the players before the day 's play or in a Press @-@ tent " . Cardus concluded his tribute to Pullin in the Manchester Guardian : " [ He ] wrote simply , well , and with courtesy and knowledge . A good man and a good friend " . 
 = History of The Simpsons = 
 The Simpsons is an American animated television sitcom starring the animated Simpson family , which was created by Matt Groening . He conceived of the characters in the lobby of James L. Brooks 's office and named them after his own family members , substituting " Bart " for his own name . The family debuted as shorts on The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 . After a three @-@ season run , the sketch was developed into a half @-@ hour prime time show called The Simpsons , which debuted on December 17 , 1989 . The show was an early hit for Fox , becoming the first Fox series to land in the top 30 ratings in a season ( 1990 ) . 
 The show was controversial from its beginning and has made the news several times . In the early seasons , some parents and conservatives characterized Bart as a poor role model for children and several United States public schools even banned The Simpsons merchandise and t @-@ shirts . In January 1992 , then @-@ President George H. W. Bush made a speech during his re @-@ election campaign in which he said : " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " In 2002 , the show was nearly sued by the Rio de Janeiro tourist board for creating an unreal image of the city on the show . 
 The Simpsons Movie , a feature @-@ length film , was released in theaters worldwide on July 26 and July 27 , 2007 . Previous attempts to create a film version of The Simpsons failed due to the lack of a script of appropriate length and production crew members . Eventually , producers Brooks , Groening , Al Jean , Mike Scully , and Richard Sakai began development of the film in 2001 . They conceived numerous plot ideas , with Groening 's being the one developed into a film . The script was re @-@ written over a hundred times , and this creativity continued after animation had begun in 2006 . The film was a box office success , and received overwhelmingly positive reviews . 
 The Simpsons eventually became the longest @-@ running American sitcom , the longest @-@ running American animated program , and in 2009 it surpassed Gunsmoke as the longest @-@ running American primetime , scripted television series . Since its debut on December 17 , 1989 , the show has broadcast 596 episodes and its 27th season started airing on September 27 , 2015 . 
 = = The Tracey Ullman shorts ( 1987 – 1989 ) = = 
 When producer James L. Brooks was working on the television variety show The Tracey Ullman Show for the fledging Fox network , he decided that he wanted to include small animated sketches before and after the commercial breaks . Having seen one of cartoonist Matt Groening 's Life in Hell comic strips , Brooks asked Groening to pitch an idea for a series of animated shorts , which Groening initially intended to present as his Life in Hell series . Groening later realized that animating Life in Hell would require the rescinding of publication rights for his life 's work , and passed on the offer . Richard Sakai contacted Groening to see if he had any other characters he would be willing to let Fox merchandise , and , in short , Groening developed a dysfunctional family that became the Simpsons . Garth <unk> contends that Groening created the characters at home and brought them the next day , while Phil Roman claims Groening sketched out the characters on the drive to Fox . Groening 's account states he hurriedly formulated The Simpsons while waiting in the lobby of Brooks 's office for the pitch meeting , which is the most common and famous story . He named the characters after his own family members , substituting " Bart " for his own name , adapting an anagram of the word " brat " . 
 Fox negotiated a deal which would prove extremely lucrative for Groening , in which he retained a large portion of revenue from merchandising . To animate the short segments , Brooks and company settled on Klasky Csupo , a small animation house who offered to produce the cartoons for cheap . Brooks initially just wanted to animate the shorts through the basic line drawings , and Klasky @-@ Csupo offered color for the same cost . The studio only employed three young animators — CalArts graduates Bill Kopp , Wes Archer , and David Silverman — who adapted Groening 's scripts for animation in one week , doing layouts , animation and inbetweening by hand in the very short amount of time . Groening submitted only basic sketches to the three , and assumed that the figures would be cleaned @-@ up in production . However , the animators merely re @-@ traced his drawings , which led to the crude appearance of the characters in the initial short episodes . Colorist <unk> <unk> was the person who decided to make the characters yellow . 
 Appearing initially alongside cartoons by M. K. Brown , The Simpson family first appeared in short subjects in The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 and were featured the first three seasons . The actors who voiced the characters would later reprise their roles in The Simpsons . Dan Castellaneta performed the voices of Homer Simpson , Abraham Simpson , and Krusty the Clown . Homer 's voice in the shorts is a loose impression of Walter Matthau , whereas it became more robust and humorous on the half @-@ hour show , allowing Homer to cover a fuller range of emotions . Julie Kavner , Nancy Cartwright , and Yeardley Smith performed the voices of Marge Simpson , Bart Simpson , and Lisa Simpson respectively . The crew began to string the clips together on tape to play for the show 's live audience , and The Simpsons generated " the biggest laughs of the show " according to John Ortved , author of The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History . The writing staff of Ullman soon began to view The Simpsons as poor relations due to the popularity , and Brooks began to consider adapting the shorts for its own half @-@ hour series . Brooks ' decision was partly inspired by the cheerleading of David Silverman , who drunkenly approached him at a Christmas party and suggested the idea , passionately emphasizing what a primetime series would mean for the animation industry . 
 = = The Groening , Brooks , and Simon years ( 1989 – 1991 ) = = 
 In 1989 , a team of production companies adapted The Simpsons into a half @-@ hour series for the Fox Broadcasting Company . The team included what is now the Klasky Csupo animation house . Due to the increased workload of the full @-@ length episodes , production was subcontracted to South Korean animation studio AKOM . While character and background layout is done by the domestic studio , <unk> , coloring and filming is done by the overseas studio . 
 The Simpsons was co @-@ developed by Groening , Brooks , and Sam Simon , a writer @-@ producer with whom Brooks had worked on previous projects . Groening said his goal was to offer the audience an alternative to what he called " the mainstream trash " . Brooks negotiated a provision in the contract with the Fox network that prevented Fox from interfering with the show 's content . Fox network was unsure if the show could sustain the audience 's attention for the duration of the episode . They proposed doing three seven @-@ minute shorts per episode and four specials until the audience adjusted , but in the end , the producers gambled by asking Fox for 13 full @-@ length episodes . 
 Simon assembled and led the initial team of writers , and has been credited as " developing [ the show 's ] sensibility " . Writer Ken Levine says he " brought a level of honesty to the characters " and made them " three @-@ dimensional " , adding that Simon 's " comedy is all about character , not just a string of gags " . Simon saw The Simpsons as a chance to solve what he did not like about Saturday @-@ morning cartoon shows . He wanted all the actors in a room together , instead of reading their lines separated from each other . In addition to Castellaneta , Kavner , Cartwright and Smith , actors Harry Shearer and Hank Azaria were added to the show 's cast . 
 Groening developed a lengthy opening sequence in order to cut down on the animation necessary for each episode , but devised the two gags as compensation for the repeated material each week . In the first gag , the camera zooms in on Springfield Elementary School , where Bart can be seen writing a message on the chalkboard . This message , which changes from episode to episode , has become known as the " chalkboard gag " . The other gag is known as a " couch gag " , in which a twist of events occur when the family meets to sit on their couch and watch television . Groening , who had not paid much attention to television since his own childhood , was unaware that title sequences of such length were uncommon by that time . The theme , which plays over the sequence , was composed by Danny Elfman in 1989 , after Groening approached him requesting a retro @-@ style theme . The piece , which took two days to create , has been noted by Elfman as the most popular of his career . 
 The half @-@ hour series premiered on December 17 , 1989 with " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . The series was originally set to debut in the fall of 1989 with the episode " Some Enchanted Evening " , but the producers discovered that the animation was so appalling that 70 percent of the episode needed to be redone . At the time there were only a few choices for animation style . Usually , they would either follow the style of Disney , Warner Bros. , or Hanna @-@ Barbera . The producers wanted a realistic environment in which the characters and objects could not do anything that was not possible in the real world . They considered aborting the series if the next episode " Bart the Genius " turned out as bad , but it only suffered from easily fixable problems . The debut was moved to December , and " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " became the first episode of the series . In some of the episodes of the first season , the characters act completely differently from in later seasons ; Lisa , for example , is undisciplined and short @-@ tempered , while Homer is the voice of reason ; these roles are reversed in later episodes . 
 During the second season , The Simpsons aired the first Halloween special called " Treehouse of Horror " . The annual series typically consist of four parts : an opening and Halloween @-@ themed version of the credits , followed by three segments . These segments usually have a horror , science fiction or supernatural theme and quite often are parodies of films , novels , plays , television shows , Twilight Zone episodes , or old issues of EC Comics . Part of the attraction for the writers is that they are able to break the rules and include violence that would not make a regular episode . In some cases , the writers will have an idea that is too violent and far @-@ fetched or too short for a normal episode , but can be used as a segment in the seasonal special . The first " Treehouse of Horror " episode was the first time that an alternate version of the theme airs over the end credits . 
 = = = Bartmania and criticism from conservatives = = = 
 The show was controversial from its beginning . The rebellious lead character at the time , Bart , frequently received no punishment for his misbehavior , which led some parents and conservatives to characterize him as a poor role model for children . Several US public schools even banned The Simpsons merchandise and t @-@ shirts , such as one featuring Bart and the caption " Underachiever ( ' And proud of it , man ! ' ) " . In the season two opening episode " Bart Gets an F " , Bart fails four consecutive history exams and the school psychiatrist recommends that Bart repeat the fourth grade . Several critics thought that the episode " Bart Gets an F " was a response to these controversies . However , Brooks denied that it was a response and added , " we 're mindful of it . I do think it 's important for us that Bart does badly in school . There are students like that . Besides , I 'm very wary of television where everybody is supposed to be a role model . You don 't run across that many role models in real life . Why should television be full of them ? " 
 In the October 1 , 1990 edition of People , First Lady Barbara Bush called The Simpsons " the dumbest thing [ she ] had ever seen " which led to the writers sending a letter to Bush where they posed as Marge Simpson . Bush immediately sent a reply in which she apologized . A few years later , on January 27 , 1992 then @-@ President of the United States George H. W. Bush made a speech during his re @-@ election campaign where he said , " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " The writers decided that they wanted to respond by adding a response to the next broadcast of The Simpsons , which was a rerun of " Stark Raving Dad " on January 30 . The broadcast included a new tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek opening where they watch Bush 's speech . Bart replies , " Hey , we 're just like the Waltons . We 're praying for an end to the Depression , too " . The criticism eventually led to the idea for the episode " Two Bad Neighbors " , which has George and Barbara move into the house across the street from the Simpsons . 
 = = = Competing with The Cosby Show = = = 
 The Simpsons first season was the Fox network 's first TV series to rank among a season 's top 30 highest @-@ rated shows . Due to its success , the Fox network decided to switch The Simpsons timeslots in hopes that it would result in higher ratings for the lead out shows . It would move from 8 : 00 PM on Sunday night to the same time on Thursday where it would compete with The Cosby Show , the number one show at the time . Many of the producers were against the move , as The Simpsons had been in the top 10 while airing on Sunday and they felt the move would destroy its ratings . 
 " Bart Gets an F " was the first episode to air against The Cosby Show and averaged an 18 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating and 29 % of the audience . In the weeks ratings , it finished tied for eighth behind The Cosby Show which had an 18 @.@ 5 rating . However , an estimated 33 @.@ 6 million viewers watched the episode , making it the number one show in terms of actual viewers that week . At the time , it was the most watched episode in the history of the Fox Network . Ratings wise , new episodes of The Cosby Show beat The Simpsons every time during the second season and The Simpsons eventually fell out of the top 10 . At the end of the season Cosby averaged as the fifth highest rated show on television while The Simpsons ranked 38th . It would not be until the third season episode " Homer at the Bat " that The Simpsons would beat The Cosby Show in the ratings . The show remained in its Thursday timeslot until the sixth season , when it moved back to its original timeslot on Sundays . 
 = = = Music release and " Do the Bartman " = = = 
