 David Geffen , founder of Geffen Records , had the idea to record the album The Simpsons Sing the Blues based on The Simpsons , to be released in time for Christmas 1990 . The writers wrote humorous lyrics for the actors to perform over blues and hip hop . The album faced great publicity before its release . One particular element that was highly publicized was Michael Jackson 's involvement , which was denied around the time of the album 's release . Early published reports attributed Jackson as the composer of " Do the Bartman " , which Groening denied in a press release . However , Groening revealed in 1998 that " Do the Bartman " was actually co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Jackson , but he could not receive credit for it because he was under contract to another record label . Jackson was a fan of The Simpsons , especially Bart , and had called the producers one night offering to write Bart a number one single and do a guest spot on the show , which is how " Do the Bartman " came about . Jackson eventually guest @-@ starred in the episode " Stark Raving Dad " . 
 The album The Simpsons Sing the Blues peaked at # 3 on the Billboard 200 , making it the highest charting Simpsons album . On February 13 , 1991 , the record was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over 3 million copies . The producers followed up on the album with The Yellow Album in 1998 , which featured original recordings by Prince , Linda Ronstadt , C + C Music Factory , and George Clinton of Funkadelic as well as the cast of The Simpsons . The soundtrack albums Songs in the Key of Springfield ( 1997 ) , Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons ( 1999 ) , The Simpsons Movie : The Music ( 2007 ) , and The Simpsons : Testify ( 2007 ) were also released . 
 = = The Jean and Reiss years ( 1991 – 1993 ) = = 
 Although they initially worked well together , Simon and Groening 's relationship became " very contentious " according to Groening . According to John Ortved 's book The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History , Simon resented the media attention Groening received , particularly the praise for the show 's writing ; Simon felt that Groening 's involvement was limited , and that he should have been the one receiving credit for the show . As well as Groening , Simon was often at odds with Brooks and production company Gracie Films and left the show in 1993 . Before leaving , he negotiated a deal that saw him receive a share of the show 's profits every year , and an executive producer credit despite not having worked on the show since . Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who had written for The Simpsons since the start of the show , took over as showrunners for the third season . Compared to being an executive producer , the showrunner position is more involved with the show and acts as head writer and manages the show 's production for an entire season . As well as a turnover in the staff , The Simpsons moved the production of the animation from Klasky Csupo to Film Roman in season four . 
 During the fourth season the episode " A Streetcar Named Marge " was produced . The musical within the episode contains a controversial song about New Orleans , which describes the city as a " home of pirates , drunks and whores " , among other things . Jeff Martin , the writer of the episode , had meant the song to be a parody of the opening number in Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street , which speaks of London in unflattering terms . A New Orleans critic viewed " A Streetcar Named Marge " and published the song lyrics in his newspaper before the episode aired . Many readers took the lyrics out of context , and New Orleans ' Fox affiliate , WNOL , received about one hundred complaints on the day the episode aired . Several local radio stations also held on @-@ air protests in response to the song . The Simpsons ' producers rushed out an apologetic chalkboard gag for " Homer the Heretic " , which aired a week after " A Streetcar Named Marge " . It read , " I will not defame New Orleans " . 
 Ullman filed a lawsuit in 1992 , claiming that her show was the source of The Simpsons ' success and therefore should receive a share of the show 's profit . " I breast @-@ fed those little devils , " Ullman once said of The Simpsons . She wanted a share of The Simpsons ' merchandising and gross profits and believed she was entitled to $ 2 @.@ 5 million of Fox 's estimated $ 50 million in 1992 . The Fox network had paid her $ 58 @,@ 000 in royalties for The Simpsons as well as $ 3 million for the 3 ½ seasons her show was on the air . Eventually the courts ruled in favor of the network . 
 = = The Mirkin years ( 1993 – 1995 ) = = 
 Several of the show 's original writers who had worked on The Simpsons since the first season had left following the completion of season four . David Mirkin took over as showrunner and executive producer for the fifth and sixth season . In The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History ( 2009 ) , John Ortved describes Mirkin as an " outsider " on the show as , unlike the bulk of the writing staff , Mirkin was not a Harvard University graduate . The writing staff were , at least initially , divided on Mirkin 's abilities as a leader . Mirkin conducted the show 's writing sessions in one room , rather than splitting the writers into two groups as other showrunners had done , and often worked late into the night . Writer Richard Appel praised Mirkin 's leadership and comedy style , saying that " the shows were great under him . " In contrast to much of Ortved 's account , in a 2004 interview with Animation Magazine , Mirkin stated that he " really wasn 't at all <unk> [ ed ] to join [ the show 's writing ] crew , " because he " had worked with and written with " many of his fellow writers previously . 
 Mirkin said that he " brought [ the show ] back to a more story @-@ oriented " approach and increased the character and emotion focus , while " at the same time still keeping it surreal and weird " . During his tenure , Mirkin moved the show 's focus towards Homer , and developed some of the secondary characters , such as Apu . He also strongly opposed censorship and network interference . Mirkin 's era and style of humor are popular amongst the show 's fans , but the writing staff were divided on his style of humor , which saw the show move away from more " realistic " emotional and character based stories to " pure comedy " and " surreal " humor . The episode " Deep Space Homer " was controversial when the episode was in production . Some of the writers felt that having Homer go into space was too " large " of an idea and Groening felt that the idea was so big that it gave the writers " nowhere to go " . 
 The writing staff wanted to do an episode where the Simpsons family traveled to Australia . They had previously poked fun at several American institutions and thought it would be interesting to poke fun at a whole nation . They designed Australia and the Australian people very inaccurately and many things were completely made up for fun . The episode " Bart vs. Australia " received a mixed reception in Australia , with some Australian fans saying the episode was a mockery of their country . Shortly after it had aired , the Simpsons staff received over 100 letters from Australians who were insulted by the episode . Reiss claimed that this episode is Australia 's least favorite , and that " whenever we have the Simpsons visit another country , that country gets furious , including Australia " . He also claimed that they were " condemned in the Australian Parliament after the episode had aired " . 
 Former showrunners Jean and Reiss had left to produce their own series , The Critic , along with The Simpsons co @-@ creator Brooks . The Critic was a short @-@ lived animated series that revolved around the life of movie critic Jay Sherman . For the second season of The Critic , Brooks cut a deal with the Fox network to have the series switch over . The episode " A Star Is Burns " was pitched by Brooks , who had wanted a crossover that would help launch The Critic on Fox , and he thought having a film festival in Springfield would be a good way to introduce Sherman . In addition , Jean and Reiss returned to produce two episodes ( " A Star is Burns " and " ' Round Springfield " ) with the staff of The Critic , to relieve some of the stress on The Simpsons ' writing staff . Groening felt that the crossover was a thirty @-@ minute advertisement for another show and blamed Brooks , calling it an attempt to get attention for one of his unsuccessful shows . After unsuccessful attempts to get the episode pulled , he decided to go public with his concerns shortly before the episode aired and had his name removed from the credits . In response , Brooks said , " for years , Al [ Jean ] and Mike [ Reiss ] were two guys who worked their hearts out on this show , staying up until 4 in the morning to get it right . The point is , Matt 's name has been on Mike 's and Al 's scripts and he has taken plenty of credit for a lot of their great work . In fact , he is the direct beneficiary of their work . ' The Critic ' is their shot and he should be giving them his support . " 
 Groening conceived the idea of an episode in which the character Mr. Burns was shot , which could be used as a publicity stunt . The writers decided to write the episode " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " in two parts with a mystery that could be used in a contest . Part one was the final episode of the sixth season and originally aired on the Fox network on May 21 , 1995 . Part two was the premiere of the seventh season and originally aired on September 17 , 1995 . It was important for the writers to design a mystery that had clues , took advantage of freeze frame technology , and was structured around one character who seemed the obvious culprit . In the months following the broadcast of the first part , there was widespread debate among fans of the series as to who shot Mr. Burns . Fox offered a contest to tie in with the mystery where the viewers could guess who the culprit was . It ran from August 13 to September 10 and was one of the first contests to tie together elements of television and the internet . Fox launched a new website , <unk> , devoted to the mystery which got over 500 @,@ 000 hits during the summer of 1995 . The winner would be animated on an episode of the show . No one , however , was ever animated on the show . This was because no one officially guessed the right answer , so the chosen winner did not have the right answer and was paid a cash prize in lieu of being animated . 
 = = The Oakley and Weinstein years ( 1995 – 1997 ) = = 
 After season six , Mirkin suggested that Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein took over as showrunners , but remained on the show in an advisory capacity , helping them with technical aspects of the show such as editing and sound mixing , and attending the scripts ' table readings . Oakley and Weinstein wanted to produce Treehouse of Horror episodes , episodes about Sideshow Bob , Itchy & Scratchy and several " format @-@ bending " episodes such as " 22 Short Films About Springfield " . They aimed for " at least two episodes per season that ' pushed the envelope ' , [ and ] expanded the definition of what an episode could be . " Season eight featured several episodes in which focus was given to secondary characters and in which new issues , such as divorce , were explored . Their preferred choice of guest stars were those with unique and interesting voices , and several of their guest stars were " old grizzled men with distinctive voices " . 
 Their goal for the episodes was to be realistic and focus more on the five members of the Simpson family and explore their feelings and emotions towards each other . Oakley considered season three to be the single greatest comedic season of television ever produced and so attempted to recreate the feel of that season , focusing on stories with real emotions and situations , as well as some off @-@ the @-@ wall episodes . Season three was their basis for Homer : " We liked Homer the way he was in the second and third seasons . That was what we consciously used as our model . Dimwitted , loving , hyper @-@ enthusiastic , creatively goofy , parody of the American father – drawn with real emotions , though admittedly amplified . " 
 The script supervisor for the show and voice of the character Lunchlady Doris , Doris Grau , died on December 30 , 1995 . The episode " Team Homer " , which aired eight days later , was one of the last episodes to feature her voice and featured a dedication to her . From season nine until season eighteen , Lunchlady Doris appeared only as a background character . She returned as a speaking character in several episodes since " The Mook , the Chef , the Wife and Her Homer " , and is now voiced by Tress MacNeille . 
 The episode " Lisa the Vegetarian " featured a permanent character development when Lisa becomes a vegetarian . The story had been pitched by David S. Cohen and the producers felt it would be a surefire way to get Paul McCartney to guest star . McCartney agreed , but only on the condition that Lisa would stay a vegetarian and not revert . The trait stayed and is one of the few permanent character changes made in the show . In the season 13 episode " She of Little Faith " , Lisa underwent another permanent character change when she converted to Buddhism . 
 On February 9 , 1997 , The Simpsons surpassed The Flintstones with the episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " as the longest @-@ running prime @-@ time animated series in the United States . The producers took this milestone and made the episode deal with the issue of longevity and the problems that arise when the producers try to make a show " fresh " again ; themes commonly known as " jumping the shark " . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger , in a review printed two days after the episode originally aired , praised the writers for not airing a " very special " episode to celebrate the milestone of overtaking The Flintstones . He noted " [ the episode is ] so self @-@ aware it put the best in @-@ jokes on St. Elsewhere to shame . " 
 = = The Scully years ( 1997 – 2001 ) = = 
 Oakley and Weinstein stood down as showrunners after season eight because they " didn 't want to break [ the show ] " and Mike Scully took over as showrunner in 1997 . As showrunner and executive producer , Scully said his aim was to " not wreck the show " , Scully was popular with the staff members , many of whom praised his organization and management skills . Writer Tom Martin said he was " quite possibly the best boss I 've ever worked for " and " a great manager of people " while writer Don Payne commented that for Scully " it was really important that we kept decent hours " . Scully noted : " I wrote a lot of Lisa 's shows . I have five daughters , so I like Lisa a lot . I like Homer , too . Homer comes very naturally to me : I don 't know if that 's a good or a bad thing . A lot of my favorite episodes are the ones when Homer and Lisa are in conflict with each other ... They 're very human , I think that 's their appeal . " 
 Despite this , Scully 's tenure as showrunner of The Simpsons has been the subject of criticism from the show 's fans . John Ortved wrote " Scully 's episodes excel when compared to what The Simpsons airs nowadays , but he was the man at the helm when the ship turned towards the iceberg . " The BBC noted " the common consensus is that The Simpsons ' golden era ended after season nine " , while an op @-@ ed in Slate by Chris Suellentrop argued The Simpsons changed from a realistic show about family life into a typical cartoon during Scully 's years . The Simpsons under Scully has been negatively labelled as a " gag @-@ heavy , Homer @-@ centric incarnation " by Jon Bonné of MSNBC , while some fans have bemoaned the transformation in Homer 's character during the era , from sweet and sincere to " a boorish , self @-@ aggrandizing oaf " , dubbing him " Jerkass Homer " . Martin said that he does not understand the criticism against Scully and that he thinks the criticism " bothered [ Scully ] , and still bothers him , but he managed to not get worked up over it . " Ortved noted in his book that it is hard to tell how much of the decline is Scully 's fault , and that blaming a single showrunner for lowering the quality of the show " is unfair . " 
 UGO Networks ' Brian Tallerico has defended the season against the criticism . He wrote in a 2007 review that comparing " tenth season Simpsons episodes to the prime of the series ( 3 @-@ 7 ) is just unfair and really kind of self @-@ defeating . ' Yeah , I laughed , but not as hard as a couple of years ago . So it sucks . ' That 's nonsense . The fact is that even the tenth season of The Simpsons was funnier than most [ other ] show 's best years . " PopMatters ' Hassenger commented in his review that although the show had declined in quality , " this is not to say that these episodes are without their charm ; many , in fact , are laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny and characteristically smart . " 
 On May 28 , 1998 , Phil Hartman , voice actor of Troy McClure and Lionel Hutz , was shot and killed by his wife while he slept in their Encino , Los Angeles , home . His wife , Brynn Omdahl , then committed suicide several hours later . In the weeks following his death , Hartman was celebrated in a wave of tributes . Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly opined that Hartman was " the last person you 'd expect to read about in lurid headlines in your morning paper ... a decidedly regular guy , beloved by everyone he worked with " . After Hartman 's death in 1998 , rather than replace him with a new voice actor , the production staff retired McClure and Hutz from the show . McClure last appeared in the season ten episode " Bart the Mother " , which was dedicated to Hartman . 
 In the season 10 episode " Thirty Minutes over Tokyo " , the family travels to Japan . The episode references and mocks several aspects of Japanese and American culture , as well as differences between the two . At a sumo wrestling match , Bart and Homer encounter the Japanese emperor , Akihito . After Homer throws him into a trunk of sumo thongs , Bart and Homer are put in jail , where they have to re @-@ enact a kabuki play about the forty @-@ seven Ronin , do origami , flower arranging and meditation . The episode also references the Japanese 's adaption to American culture . Although all other episodes of The Simpsons have been dubbed and broadcast on Japanese television , " Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo " has never aired in Japan . The scene , which shows Homer throw the emperor of Japan into a box filled with sumo thongs , was considered disrespectful . 
 = = = Labor difficulties = = = 
 Up until the production of season ten in 1998 , these six main voice actors were paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . In 1998 , a salary dispute between them and the Fox Broadcasting Company arose , with the actors threatening to strike . Fox went as far as preparing for casting of new voices , but an agreement was soon made and their salaries were raised to $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode . Groening expressed his sympathy for the actors in an issue of Mother Jones a while after the salary dispute had been settled . He told the magazine : " [ The cast members ] are incredibly talented , and they deserve a chance to be as rich and miserable as anyone else in Hollywood . " The show also made a change for the writers to become signatories to the Animation Guild . Most writers in animation belong to the guild , but The Simpsons as well as other animated shows on Fox were different . Scully commented that " everyone expected a big fight with the studio " and continued that " it never materialized , because they conceded that prime @-@ time animation was successful and everyone was benefiting . " 
 Voice actress Maggie Roswell left The Simpsons in spring 1999 after a pay dispute with Fox . The network originally reported that she decided to quit only because she was tired of flying between Denver and Los Angeles for the recording sessions . It was then announced by Roswell that she had asked for a raise , not only because she was tired of the traveling , but because of the increasing cost of flight tickets . Roswell was paid $ 1 @,@ 500 to $ 2 @,@ 000 per episode during the three seasons before she left , and she asked Fox for a raise to $ 6 @,@ 000 per episode . However , Fox only offered her a $ 150 raise , which did not even cover the travel costs , so she decided to quit . As a result of Roswell 's departure , the Maude Flanders character was killed off in the episode " Alone Again , Natura @-@ Diddily " . Voice actress Marcia Mitzman Gaven was hired to fill in for Roswell 's other characters . Roswell returned to The Simpsons in 2002 in the season premiere of the fourteenth season . She reached a deal with Fox to record her lines from her Denver home and thus the dispute ended . 
 = = The return of Jean ( 2001 – 2007 ) = = 
 Jean returned full @-@ time to The Simpsons during the tenth season . He once again became showrunner with the start of the thirteenth season in 2001 , this time without Reiss . Jean said that " the hardest thing at this point is just thinking of fresh ideas . People are so on top of things that we 've done before , so the challenge now is to think of an idea that 's good , but hasn 't been seen . " In April 2001 , in an interview with the The New York Times , Jean stated that he wanted " to take the show back to the family " . His return was welcomed , with MSNBC 's Jon Bonné stating : " [ Jean ] has guided the show away from its gag @-@ heavy , Homer @-@ centric incarnation ... these are certainly brighter days for the show 's long @-@ time fans . " Bill Gibron of PopMatters.com noted that " the show corralled much of its craziness for more personal stories " and that " Homer ’ s Neanderthal nonsense and bratty Bart gave way to ' softer ' episodes focusing on Marge and Lisa . " 
 In the season 13 episode " Blame It on Lisa " , The Simpsons visit Rio de Janeiro in Brazil . In the week following the episode 's original broadcast , it faced intense controversy involving the country of Brazil , most specifically the Rio de Janeiro Tourist Board ( Riotur ) . The board claimed that the city was portrayed as having rampant street crime , kidnappings , slums and a rat infestation . The tourist board asserted that the show " went too far " and undermined an $ <unk> ( £ 12.5m ) advertising campaign to attract visitors to the city . Fernando Henrique Cardoso , then the president of Brazil , stated that the episode " brought a distorted vision of Brazilian reality . " By April 9 , Riotur , was preparing to sue the producers and Fox , for damage to its international image and loss of revenue . The issue threatened to become a diplomatic incident . Upon knowledge of an impending lawsuit , the show 's producers contacted Fox lawyers , who informed them that a city could not technically sue for defamation . In response , executive producer Brooks apologized , stating " we apologize to the lovely city and people of Rio de Janeiro " . Jean commented that it was " one of the biggest controversies in the history of the show " . 
 In season 14 , production switched from traditional cel animation to digital ink and paint . The first episode to experiment with digital coloring was " Radioactive Man " in 1995 . Animators used digital ink and paint during production of the season 12 episode " Tennis the Menace " , but Gracie Films delayed the regular use of digital ink and paint until two seasons later . The already completed " Tennis the Menace " was broadcast as made . 
 As the show 's revenue continued to rise through syndication and DVD sales , the main cast stopped appearing for script readings in April 2004 . The work stoppage occurred after weeks of unsuccessful negotiations with Fox , in which the cast asked for an increase in their pay to $ 360 @,@ 000 per episode , or $ 8 million over a 22 @-@ episode season . The strike was resolved a month later and their salary was raised to something between $ 250 @,@ 000 and $ 360 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 Season 16 featured one of the few major character developments since the show 's inception . It was reported a long time in advance of the airing of the episode " There 's Something About Marrying " that a major character would come out as gay during the episode . At the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International convention in July 2004 , Al Jean revealed : " We have a show where , to raise money , Springfield legalises gay marriage . Homer becomes a minister by going on the internet and filling out a form . A long @-@ time character comes out of the closet , but I 'm not saying who . " This led to much media speculation and publicity in the press for the episode . Many fans correctly guessed that it would be one of Homer 's sisters @-@ in @-@ law , either Patty or Selma , while others believed it to be Waylon Smithers . 
 = = Film ( 2007 ) = = 
 20th Century Fox , Gracie Films , and Film Roman produced an animated The Simpsons film that was released on July 27 , 2007 . The production staff of The Simpsons had entertained the thought of a film since early in the series , but production never came together . Groening felt a feature @-@ length film would allow them to increase the show 's scale and animate sequences too complex for a TV series . The film was directed by David Silverman and written by a team of Simpsons writers comprising Groening , Brooks , Jean , Reiss , Mirkin , Scully , George Meyer , John Swartzwelder , Jon Vitti , Matt Selman , and Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham . Work continued on the screenplay from 2003 onwards and did not cease , taking place in the small bungalow where Groening first pitched The Simpsons in 1987 . Groening read about a town that had to get rid of pig feces in their water supply , which inspired the plot of the film . He also wanted to make the film dramatically stronger than a TV episode , as " we wanna really give you something that you haven 't seen before . " Production of the film occurred alongside continued writing of the series despite long @-@ time claims by those involved in the show that a film would enter production only after the series had concluded . 
 After winning a Fox and USA Today competition , Springfield , Vermont hosted the film 's world premiere . The Simpsons Movie grossed a combined total of $ 74 million in its opening weekend in the US , taking it to the top of the box office , and set the record for highest grossing opening weekend for a film based on a television series , surpassing Mission : Impossible II . It opened at the top of the international box office , taking $ 96 million from seventy @-@ one overseas territories — including $ 27 @.@ 8 million in the United Kingdom , making it Fox 's second highest opening ever in that country . In Australia , it grossed A $ 13 @.@ 2 million , the biggest opening for an animated film and third largest opening weekend in the country . As of November 23 , 2007 the film has a worldwide gross of $ 525 @,@ 267 @,@ 904 . The film garnered a 90 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , with 171 of a total 191 reviews being determined as positive . It received a rating of 80 out of 100 ( signifying " generally favorable reviews " ) on Metacritic from 36 reviews . 
 = = Post movie seasons ( 2007 – present ) = = 
 Jean continued as showrunner after the movie . Critics have argued that the quality of the show has declined in Jean 's tenure . Jacob Burch , an administrator of the website <unk> , said in an interview that the show " seems less cohesive , more about trying to get the jokes in there , instead of make a story and let the jokes come off of that " and adds " I just think there 's only so much you can do [ with the characters ] . " Steven Hyden of A.V. Club argues in an online debate over this issue that " The Simpsons has come to rely too much on wacky Homer shtick and tired , meaningless guest stars " and that the writers are " content to amuse themselves with in @-@ jokes , non sequiturs , and self @-@ consciously silly plot twists . " Jean responded to this criticism by saying : " Well , it 's possible that we 've declined . But honestly , I 've been here the whole time and I do remember in season two people saying , ' It 's gone downhill . ' If we 'd listened to that then we would have stopped after episode 13 . I 'm glad we didn 't . " 
 The writers of The Simpsons went on strike together with the Writers Guild of America at the end of 2007 . The broadcasting of The Simpsons was not affected by the strike . Since it takes a long time to produce an episode of an animated show , the episodes are written up to a year in advance . So the strike would have had to go on for a while for the show to have run out of new episodes . Production of season 20 was further delayed because of contract negotiations with the six main voice actors . The dispute was resolved , and the actors ' salary was raised to $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . The delay in production has caused the planned 22 episodes to be shortened to 20 . 
 = = = 20th anniversary and run length record = = = 
 To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the premiere of The Simpsons , Fox announced a year @-@ long celebration of the show titled " Best . 20 Years . Ever . " , which ran from January 14 , 2009 to January 14 , 2010 . Morgan Spurlock , an Academy Award nominated documentary filmmaker ( Best Documentary Feature for Super Size Me in 2004 ) and fan of The Simpsons since his college days , was asked to direct the special The Simpsons 20th Anniversary Special – In 3 @-@ D ! On Ice ! in February 2009 . Spurlock believes " the reason [ the producers ] called [ him ] to begin with was to not have a show that would be a glad @-@ hand , pat @-@ everyone @-@ on @-@ the @-@ back special , that 's why rooting it in the people who kept this show on the air for the last 20 years is important . " It was shown on January 10 , 2010 alongside " Once Upon a Time in Springfield " , which was promoted as the 450th episode of the series . 
 The episode " Million Dollar Maybe " featured a new character created by the winner of the " Best . Character . Ever . " contest , in which fans could submit their own ideas for a new , and possibly recurring , Simpsons character . Over 25 @,@ 000 entries were sent in . The winner of the contest was Peggy Black from Orange , Connecticut , who created the character Ricardo Bomba . She described Ricardo as " someone that all the women love and all the men want to be " and " something like a Casanova . " Jean was one of the judges of the contest , which he described as " a thank you to loyal fans . " He also noted that there is a possibility the Ricardo character might appear on the show again . Another change was to air The Simpsons in 720p high @-@ definition television with the episode " Take My Life , Please " on February 15 , 2009 . With the new broadcasting system came a new opening sequence . It was the first major permanent change to the show 's introduction since the beginning of the show 's second season in 1990 ; previous changes have included variations in the duration of the intro . This new intro also includes some 3D animation when the camera pans over Springfield . 
 To commemorate the show 's twentieth anniversary , the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44 cent stamps featuring Homer , Marge , Bart , Lisa and Maggie . The stamps , designed by Groening , were made available for purchase on May 7 , 2009 and approximately one billion stamps were printed . The Simpsons is the first television series still in production to receive this recognition . After entering into their 21st season in late 2009 , the show beat Gunsmoke 's record as the longest @-@ running American primetime , scripted television series . 
 = = = Cancellation threat = = = 
 On October 4 , 2011 , 20th Century Fox Television released a statement saying : " 23 seasons in , The Simpsons is as creatively vibrant as ever and beloved by millions around the world . We believe this brilliant series can and should continue , but we cannot produce future seasons under its current financial model . We are hopeful that we can reach an agreement with the voice cast that allows The Simpsons to go on entertaining audiences with original episodes for many years to come . " One of the problems was that The Simpsons was possibly worth more cancelled than on the air . A 17 @-@ year @-@ old syndication deal with local TV stations prohibits Fox from selling the show to cable networks . As long as The Simpsons still produces new episodes , Fox cannot break this deal . In the mean time , cable networks have grown to become just as big a market as the local TV stations . Another consideration was that Fox 's parent company News Corp was having meetings discussing the possibility of a cable channel that would only air The Simpsons episodes . Analyst considers a cancellation and subsequent second @-@ run deal that includes cable networks to be worth $ 750 million . On this issue , Jean commented in an interview with TV Guide that " It 's a big company , and there are definitely people whose interests would have been better served by ending it . Those interests were superseded because we 're still valuable to the network in terms of our ratings . " 
 For the negotiations , the studio requested that the cast members accept a 45 percent cut of their salaries so that more seasons could be produced after season 23 , or else that season would be the series ' last . The actors were willing to take a pay cut , but wanted a percentage of the back @-@ end payments instead . At one point Shearer even offered a 70 percent pay cut in exchange for back @-@ end percentages , but the studio was unwilling to make any deal involving back @-@ end percentages . In the end , the studio and the actors reached a deal , in which the actors would take a pay cut of 30 percent , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode , prolonging the show to its 25th season . As well as the voice actors , everybody involved in the show took a pay cut . This included animators , writers , the post @-@ production crew and even Jean himself . The further use of digital animation also saves money , as the animation of the show becomes more efficient . 
 In 2013 , FXX purchased the exclusive American cable rights to the series . Airing from August 2014 , the show will also be available on @-@ demand via the Simpsons World website . The website is only available in the United States . 
 = Hellingly Hospital Railway = 
 The Hellingly Hospital Railway was a light railway owned and operated by East Sussex County Council , used for transporting coal and passengers to Hellingly Hospital , a psychiatric hospital near Hailsham , from the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway 's Cuckoo Line at Hellingly railway station . 
 The railway was constructed in 1899 and opened to passengers on 20 July 1903 , following its electrification in 1902 . After the railway grouping of 1923 , passenger numbers declined so significantly that the hospital authorities no longer considered passenger usage of the line to be economical , and that service was withdrawn . The railway closed to freight in 1959 , following the hospital 's decision to convert its coal boilers to oil , which rendered the railway unnecessary . 
 The route took a mostly direct path from a junction immediately south of Hellingly Station , past Farm and Park House Sidings , stopping places to load and unload produce and supplies from outbuildings of the hospital . Much of the railway has been converted to footpath , and many of the buildings formerly served by the line are now abandoned . 
 = = Construction and opening = = 
 In 1897 , East Sussex County Council purchased 400 acres ( 160 ha ) of land at Park Farm , about three miles ( 5 km ) north of Hailsham , from the Earl of Chichester , to be the site of a new county lunatic asylum that became Hellingly Hospital . Construction work on the hospital began in 1900 , to the design of George Thomas Hine , who had designed the nearby Haywards Heath Asylum . Building materials were transported to the site by a 1 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 2 km ) standard gauge private siding from the goods yard at Hellingly railway station on the Cuckoo Line . The connection was built by the asylum 's builders , Joseph Howe & Company , and was authorised by the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway ( LBSCR ) on condition that East Sussex Council paid the cost , estimated at £ 1 @,@ 700 . 
 A small wooden platform was built at Hellingly railway station , opposite the main line platform . This had no connection to the station buildings and was used only for the transfer of passengers between main @-@ line and hospital trains , and kept chained off when not in use . Coal yards and sidings were also built at Hellingly station . The hospital opened to patients , and the railway to passengers , on 20 July 1903 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The railway left the Cuckoo Line at Hellingly Station . Although the railway joined the Cuckoo Line at both the northern and southern ends of the platform , virtually no through trains ran . Due to the arrangement of the lines at the junction with the Cuckoo Line , passenger trains to and from the hospital reversed south of Hellingly station . 
 After leaving the main line immediately south of Hellingly , the railway passed over gated level crossings at Park Road and New Road . Farm Siding , a single siding on the west of the line beyond the crossings , was a collection point for the farm 's agricultural produce in the early years of the railway , but later fell out of use . The line climbed most of the way from here to the hospital at 1 in 50 . About halfway between Hellingly and the hospital the line entered the hospital grounds , passing to the west of Park House Siding , which served the hospital 's Park House annexe . 
 As it approached the hospital , the line split ; the southern fork led to a siding to the north @-@ west of the hospital , while the other turned sharply east and south through almost 180 ° before splitting again . One fork ran into a large workshop and the other led to a short platform , which was initially used for passengers . Following the suspension of passenger services it was converted into a coal dock . 
 The line had no signals or automatic points to control the switching between lines at junctions with the main line and with the sidings . On the approach to a level crossing the fireman ran ahead with a red flag , to stop the traffic ; he also manually operated the points . 
 = = Motive power = = 
 Joseph Howe & Company used an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 saddle tank locomotive to transport building materials during the hospital 's construction . The locomotive was purchased new in 1900 , and sold in 1903 following the completion of the hospital and electrification of the line . 
 In 1902 , the decision was taken to electrify the railway using power generated from the hospital 's own power plant , which was also connected to the National Grid . The line was electrified at <unk> DC using a single overhead line . 
 Engineers Robert W. Blackwell & Co provided a small 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 electric locomotive capable of pulling two loaded coal wagons . It is not known where the locomotive was manufactured , as the company has no record , but the design of the controls suggests that it may have been imported from Germany . A small railcar with space for 12 passengers was also provided . The locomotive and the railcar were each fitted with a single trolley pole to collect electricity from the overhead wire . The passenger car was used for the duration of passenger services on the line , and the locomotive from the electrification of the line until closure in 1959 . At that time , it was the oldest operational electric locomotive in the British Isles . 
 = = Operations = = 
 At the railway grouping of 1923 , the LBSCR became part of the Southern Railway and the agreements between the hospital ( renamed the East Sussex Mental Hospital in 1919 ) and the LBSCR were updated . The wooden platform at Hellingly station was drastically shortened in 1922 . Because service levels depended on patient numbers and the hospital 's coal and food requirements , the line never operated to a timetable . By 1931 , passenger numbers had fallen to such an extent that the hospital authorities no longer considered passenger usage of the line to be economical , and the passenger service was withdrawn . The passenger car was moved to the hospital grounds , fitted with an awning , and became the hospital 's sports <unk> surviving into the mid @-@ 1990s before being destroyed in a fire started by vandals . The wooden platform at Hellingly station was removed in 1932 , and the platform at the hospital was converted into a coal bay . 
 There were only two minor accidents : a car that collided with the locomotive whilst driving through the hospital grounds , and a wagon whose brakes failed whilst stabled at Farm Siding , which rolled down the line to Hellingly station . 
 On 22 November 1939 , plans were put in place for the restoration of passenger services to allow ambulance trains to reach the hospital , and authorisation was given for their operation . However , the line was never used to transport patients , as although Park House was used as a hospital by the Canadian Army during the Second World War , patients left ambulance trains at Hellingly station and were transferred to Park House by road . 
 = = Closure = = 
 In the late 1950s , the hospital , under the control of the Hailsham Hospitals Management Committee since the 1948 establishment of the National Health Service , decided to convert its boilers from coal to oil . The railway was therefore no longer needed to transport coal ; the last load was delivered on 10 March 1959 , and the empty coal wagon returned to Hellingly on 25 March 1959 . 
 Under the terms of the agreement between the hospital authorities , the LBSCR , and its successors , the hospital authorities were obliged to keep the railway in good repair to allow its use by main @-@ line wagons . With a greatly reduced need for goods traffic to the hospital following the conversion of the boilers , it was decided that the railway was not worth the expense of continued maintenance and necessary upgrading , and the line was officially closed on 25 March 1959 following the departure of the last coal wagon . 
 The line was used for occasional excursions by railway enthusiasts for a short period after official closure , using the electric locomotive and a brake van borrowed from British Railways . The exact date of the last run is not recorded ; the last recorded use of the line was an excursion organised by the Norbury Transport and Model Railway Club on 4 April 1959 , but it is known that later excursions ran . In the early 1960s a railway society in Yorkshire proposed to buy the track as a preserved railway . However , as the psychiatric hospital was still open the request was not considered practical , and the track was lifted in the early 1960s . The fittings and locomotive were disposed of by <unk> and Sons of Hailsham . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The Cuckoo Line closed shortly after the Hospital Railway . Hellingly station closed to passengers on 14 June 1965 , and the line closed for goods traffic on 26 April 1968 . The station building complete with platform is now a private residence , and the Cuckoo Line trackbed was converted to the Cuckoo Trail long @-@ distance footpath in 1990 . Much of the route of the Hospital Railway is also now a footpath . 
 Traces of the railway can still be seen , including a cast iron pole that supported the overhead wire , the remains of the engine shed ( burnt down in 2004 ) , and a short section of track . Hellingly Hospital is now closed Approval for redevelopment as a housing complex was obtained in 2009 . 
 = IPhone 5 = 
 The iPhone 5 is a smartphone that was designed and marketed by Apple Inc . It is the sixth generation of the iPhone , succeeding the iPhone 4S and preceding the iPhone 5S and iPhone 5C . Formally unveiled as part of a press event on September 12 , 2012 , it was released on September 21 , 2012 . It was the first iPhone to be completely developed under the guidance of Tim Cook . 
 The iPhone 5 featured major design changes in comparison to its predecessor . These included an aluminum @-@ based body which was thinner and lighter than previous models , a taller screen with a nearly 16 : 9 aspect ratio , the Apple A6 system @-@ on @-@ chip , LTE support , and Lightning , a new compact dock connector which replaced the 30 @-@ pin design used by previous iPhone models . This was the second Apple phone to include its new Sony made <unk> Camera , first introduced on the iPhone 4S . 
 Apple began taking pre @-@ orders on September 14 , 2012 , and over two million were received within 24 hours . Initial demand for the iPhone 5 exceeded the supply available at launch on September 21 , 2012 , and was described by Apple as " extraordinary " , with pre @-@ orders having sold twenty times faster than its predecessors . While reception to the iPhone 5 was generally positive , consumers and reviewers noted hardware issues , such as an unintended purple hue in photos taken , and the phone 's coating being prone to chipping . Reception was also mixed over Apple 's decision to switch to a different dock connector design , as the change affected iPhone 5 's compatibility with accessories that were otherwise compatible with previous iterations of the line . 
 The iPhone 5 was officially discontinued by Apple on September 10 , 2013 with the announcement of its successors , the iPhone 5S and the iPhone 5C . The iPhone 5 had the shortest lifespan of any iPhone ever produced with only twelve months in production . 
 = = History = = 
 Rumors about the iPhone 5 began shortly after the announcement of the iPhone 4S , though detailed leaks did not emerge until June 2012 . On July 30 , 2012 , reports pinpointed the dates on which the iPhone 5 would be unveiled and released , along with some accurate predictions of its features . On September 4 , 2012 , Apple announced they would be hosting an event at the Yerba Buena Center for the Arts in San Francisco on September 12 , 2012 . A shadow of the numeral 5 was featured in the invitations sent to the media , suggesting that the next iPhone would be unveiled at the event . 
 At the unveiling , Apple announced the iPhone 5 and also introduced new iPod Nano and iPod Touch models . They also stated that pre @-@ orders would be accepted starting September 14 , 2012 . Over two million pre @-@ orders were received within 24 hours . Initial demand for the new phone exceeded the record set by its predecessor , the iPhone 4S , by selling over 5 million units in the first three days . On November 30 , 2012 , Apple added an unlocked version of the iPhone 5 to their online US store , with the 16 GB model starting at US $ 649 . 
 The iPhone 5 was officially discontinued by Apple on September 10 , 2013 with the announcement of its successors , the iPhone 5S and the iPhone 5C . While the 5C shared almost the same internal hardware as the iPhone 5 , the 5C used a lower @-@ cost poly @-@ carbonate plastic case in place of the original 5 's aluminum form . The introduction of the 5C deviated from Apple 's previous market strategy , where the previous iPhone model would remain in production , but sold at a lower price point below the new model . 
 On April 28 , 2014 , Apple initiated an out of warranty recall program to replace any failing power buttons of iPhone 5 models which were manufactured prior to March 2013 at no cost . On August 23 , 2014 , Apple announced a program to replace batteries of iPhone 5 models that " may suddenly experience shorter battery life or need to be charged more frequently " which were sold between September 2012 and January 2013 . 
 = = = Litigation = = = 
 Following the release of the iPhone 5 , Samsung announced that it was filing a lawsuit against Apple for infringing eight of its patents . The case was scheduled to begin in 2014 . In a statement , Samsung said it had " little choice but to take the steps necessary to protect our innovations and intellectual property rights " . Litigation between the two involving patent infringement has been ongoing and is being fought in several court cases around the world . 
 = = Production = = 
 The components and labor required to construct the most basic iPhone 5 are estimated to cost US $ 207 , which is US $ 19 more than the cost of components for the corresponding iPhone 4S model . The LTE module in the iPhone 5 alone costs $ 34 , $ 10 more than the cellular module in the iPhone 4S . Similarly , screens used in the iPhone 5 cost $ 44 , which is $ 7 more than the screen of its predecessor . Mashable noted that the profit margin of selling each device is " huge " as the iPhone 5 retails for US $ 649 . 
 After the announcement of the device , a lack of supply was evident . This was due to a shortage of components such as the screen . Reports emerged , stating that Sharp was unable to ship the screen before the debut of the iPhone 5 , and other manufacturers reported that it was difficult to keep up with demand . As a result , the number of pre @-@ orders rose due to the uncertainty of stock at retail stores , and the delivery dates for pre @-@ orders were postponed to dates that were after the initial release date of the device . 
 = = = Quality control inspectors strike = = = 
 China Labor Watch , a New York State – based NGO , reported that " three to four thousand " Foxconn workers who work at the iPhone 5 production plant in Zhengzhou stopped working on October 5 , 2012 . The strikes occurred after Apple implemented a stricter quality standard on their products , which includes a 0 @.@ 02 mm restriction on indentations inflicted during production , and imposed demands related to scratches on frames and back covers . The strikes were also attributed to the employer forcing employees to work on a public holiday . The report stated training was inadequate for quality demands expected and led to employees producing products that did not meet standards . During the strike , conflicts between quality control inspectors and employees resulted in brawls . China Labor Watch also claimed that concerns raised by inspectors were not addressed by factory management . Foxconn spokesmen admitted that a micromanagement problem exists , but also said that there were only 300 to 400 workers absent and the conflicts did not influence production processes . In November 2012 Foxconn chairman Terry Gou reported that the delay in production was due to undisclosed difficulties in assembly . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Operating system and software = = = 
 The iPhone 5 features iOS , Apple 's mobile operating system . The user interface of iOS is based on the concept of direct manipulation , using multi @-@ touch gestures . Interface control elements consist of sliders , switches , and buttons . Interaction with the OS includes gestures such as swipe , tap , pinch , and reverse pinch , all of which have specific definitions within the context of the iOS operating system and its multi @-@ touch interface . Internal accelerometers are used by some applications to respond to shaking the device ( one common result is the undo command ) or rotating it vertically ( one common result is switching from portrait to landscape mode ) . 
 The iPhone 5 is shipped with iOS 6 , which was released on September 19 , 2012 . Many of the iPhone 5 's features that work specifically with the included iOS 6 @.@ 0 operating system only worked in certain territories on release . Apple has said this is a rolling program , which will take longer to implement across more regions . 
 The phone can act as a hotspot , sharing its internet connection over WiFi , Bluetooth , or USB , and also accesses the App Store , an online application distribution platform for iOS developed and maintained by Apple . The service allows users to browse and download applications from the iTunes Store that were developed with Xcode and the iOS SDK and were published through Apple . 
 The iPhone 5 can play music , movies , television shows , ebooks , audiobooks , and podcasts and can sort its media library by songs , artists , albums , videos , playlists , genres , composers , podcasts , audiobooks , and compilations . Options are always presented alphabetically , except in playlists , which retain their order from iTunes . Users can rotate their device horizontally to landscape mode to access Cover Flow . Like on iTunes , this feature shows the different album covers in a scroll @-@ through photo library . Scrolling is achieved by swiping a finger across the screen . Alternatively , headset controls can be used to pause , play , skip , and repeat tracks . On the iPhone 5 , the volume can be changed with the included Apple Earphones , and the Voice Control feature can be used to identify a track , play songs in a playlist or by a specific artist , or create a Genius playlist . 
 Like the iPhone 4S , the iPhone 5 has Siri , that allows the user to operate the iPhone by spoken commands . The software was improved in iOS 6 to include the ability to make restaurant reservations , launch apps , dictate Facebook or Twitter updates , retrieve movie reviews and detailed sports statistics . 
 On the iPhone 5 , texting can be aided by the voice assistant , which converts speech to text . In addition to regular texting , messaging on the iPhone 5 supports iMessage , a specialized instant messaging program and service that allows unlimited texting to other Apple devices running iOS 5 or later . This supports the inclusion of content such as images and sound in text messages , integration with the device 's voice @-@ controlled software assistant , and read acknowledgements for sent messages . Input to the device comes from a keyboard displayed on the multi @-@ touch screen or by voice @-@ to text by speaking into the microphone . Entered text is supported by predictive and suggestion software ; there is a multi @-@ language spell @-@ checker which recognises many regional accents of different languages . 
 iOS 6 features several new and / or updated apps , which includes Apple Maps and Passbook . Apple 's built @-@ in Maps app , which replaced the former Maps app powered by Google Maps , had been universally derided and lacked many features present in competing maps apps . It uses Apple 's new vector @-@ based engine that eliminates lag , making for smoother zooming . New to Maps is turn @-@ by @-@ turn navigation spoken directions , 3D views in some major cities and real @-@ time <unk> iOS 6 is able to retrieve documents such as boarding passes , admission tickets , coupons and loyalty cards through its new Passbook app . An iOS device with Passbook can be scanned under a reader to process a mobile payment at locations that have compatible hardware . The app has context @-@ aware features such as notifications for relevant coupons when in the immediate vicinity of a given store . 
 Facebook comes integrated through Apple 's native apps with iOS 6 . Facebook features can be directly accessed from within native apps such as Calendar which can sync Facebook events , or use Facebook 's like button from within the Apple App Store . 
 New privacy settings are available to the user . In addition to location services , the following have been added in iOS 6 : photos ( already partially restricted in iOS 5 ) , contacts ( address book ) , calendars , reminders , bluetooth sharing , Twitter , Facebook , and Sina <unk> iOS 6 also comes with a " Limit ad tracking " user control in the general settings menu to allow users the option to prevent targeted advertising . Apple 's Advertising Identifier replaces the company 's existing Unique Device Identification ( <unk> ) standard . Advertising networks not yet using Apple 's Advertising Identifier device identifier standard would not be affected , although Apple will require the standard in the future . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Apple emphasized the improved build quality of the iPhone 5 at its press event . The frame used in previous versions was redesigned to use an aluminum composite frame . The iPhone 4 and iPhone 4S used stainless steel instead of aluminium due to Steve Jobs ' preference for the metal which he thought , " looks beautiful when it wears " . 
 The iPhone 5 is 18 % thinner , 20 % lighter , and has 12 % less overall volume than its predecessor , the iPhone 4S . The phone 's aluminum body is 0 @.@ 30 in ( 7 @.@ 6 mm ) thick . At the September 2012 conference Apple claimed it was the thinnest smartphone in the world at 7 @.@ 6 mm , though that claim was disputed as the Chinese Oppo Finder was thinner and some other smartphones could be considered to be thinner , depending upon where thickness is measured . The Oppo Finder measured 6 @.@ 65 mm ( 0 @.@ 262 in ) at its thinnest point and 7 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 in ) at its thickest point making it overall thinner than the iPhone . 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The iPhone 5 uses a system on chip ( SoC ) , called the Apple A6 . The SoC comprises a 1 @.@ 3 GHz dual @-@ core processor , 1GB of RAM and a tri @-@ core PowerVR <unk> running at 266 MHz . The iPhone 5 's operating memory ( <unk> @-@ 1066 <unk> ) was doubled , from 512 MB to 1 GB . Storage capacities available are fixed at 16 , 32 or 64 GB , the same as the 4S ; plug @-@ in memory cards are not supported . The two color options are black ( with black glass and slate @-@ colored metal trim ) , and white ( with white ceramic and silver @-@ colored metal trim ) ; again the same color options ( though differently implemented ) as its predecessor the 4S had . The iPhone 5 retains the 8 MP back camera on the iPhone 4S , but has improved low @-@ light performance , and has a 40 % faster photo capture than its predecessors , while having a purple hue when a strong source of light is present in the photograph . The front camera , which is accessible through the FaceTime and camera app has a lower resolution , at 1 @.@ 2 megapixels . The rechargeable lithium @-@ ion polymer battery with a charge capacity of <unk> is built in and cannot be replaced by the user ; it is rated at ≤ 225 hours of standby time and ≤ 8 hours of talk time . There are three separate models of the phone available : one supporting CDMA and two GSM versions . This can have knock @-@ on effects for which version of the device will actually work in which countries / regions . The phone takes a nano @-@ SIM , smaller than the micro @-@ SIM of the iPhone 4 and iPhone 4S . 
 Hardware benchmarking conducted using <unk> and <unk> validates several claims that Apple included on their website and mentioned at the unveiling of the device , these include two times faster and two times the graphics performance . In the <unk> overall hardware assessment , the iPhone 5 received a score that was approximately 2 @.@ 5 times higher than the iPhone 4S . The benchmark conducted using <unk> for the iPhone 5 returned a score that was 2 times better than the iPhone 4S . The result was however inconsistent as a 3D graphics benchmark assessment using <unk> returned a score that was only approximately 1 @.@ 45 times better than the iPhone 4S . Battery life assessments conducted by AnandTech concluded that the battery life is shorter on the iPhone 5 than its predecessor when performing certain tasks , however when performing other tasks the iPhone 5 battery outlasts the iPhone 4S . 
 The Retina Display is 1 @,@ 136 × 640 pixels with an aspect ratio of almost exactly 16 : 9 , ( minus one extra row of horizontal pixels ) . With a diagonal of 4 " it has a display size of 6 @.@ 7 square inches , compared to 5 @.@ 7 in iPhone 4 and 4S . The pixel density remains the same as the 4S model , which is 326 pixels per inch . Screen icons of the iPhone 5 are arranged in a matrix of six rows of four icons each . The increased screen size allows the sixth row of icons to be added to the five rows that were present in the iPhone 4 . In @-@ cell touch sensor technology from Sharp <unk> the screen which allows for a thinner phone . The screen 's color saturation is 44 % greater than its predecessor . 
 There are three microphones ( placed on the front , side and back ) for noise cancellation and video calls . 
 On April 28 , 2014 , Apple initiated an out of warranty recall program to replace any failing power buttons of iPhone 5 models which were manufactured prior to March 2013 at no cost . 
 On August 23 , 2014 , Apple announced a program to replace batteries of iPhone 5 models that " may suddenly experience shorter battery life or need to be charged more frequently " which were sold between September 2012 and January 2013 . 
 = = = Accessories = = = 
 The iPhone 5 , as well as the iPod Touch ( 5th generation ) , iPod Nano ( 7th generation ) , iPad ( 4th generation ) , and iPad Mini feature a new dock connector named Lightning , which replaces the 30 @-@ pin Apple Dock connector introduced in 2003 by Apple on the iPod ( 3rd generation ) . The Apple Lightning connector has eight pins and all signaling is digital . This new connector is smaller than the previous one , helping the iPhone 5 to be slimmer than its predecessors . Apple Lightning cables have duplicate pins on two sides of each plug , so it can be inserted either way round . Various accessories will be available to convert the Apple Lightning connector to the older 30 @-@ pin Apple Dock connector or USB , although not all old accessories will work , as not all signals are available , in particular video output and the iPod Out feature for BMW automobiles . 
 Earphones known as Apple EarPods are included with the iPhone 5 and other devices announced at the Apple media event on September 12 , 2012 . They superseded earphones that were included with previous generation iPhones and iPods . According to technology commentators , the redesign of the earphones is aimed to improve sound quality by allowing air to travel in and out more freely . Apple states that the redesign of their earphones allows it to " rival high @-@ end headphones that cost hundreds of dollars more " . Reviews by Gizmodo and TechRadar reported that although the redesigned earphones sounded better than its predecessor , reviewers felt that quality of sound produced is poor . 
 = = = Network compatibility = = = 
 AT & T , Verizon , and Sprint offer LTE access in the US , while in the UK , only EE and Three are able to offer LTE access . On March 26 , 2013 , T @-@ Mobile announced they would begin carrying the iPhone 5 , making it the first iPhone to be available on all four nationwide carriers in the United States . The T @-@ Mobile version of the iPhone features a modified version of the <unk> iPhone 5 model enabling Advanced Wireless Services ( AWS ) support . All carriers in Canada selling the iPhone 5 have their own LTE networks , including Rogers Wireless , Fido Solutions , Bell Mobility , Virgin Mobile Canada , Telus Mobility and <unk> Mobile . 
 42 officially recognized bands exist for LTE , however rollouts are coalescing around the more @-@ popular bands , based on what historically has been made available in specific regions . In Europe , bands available for LTE include , 2 @.@ 6 GHz ( the 3G @-@ expansion band ) and 800 MHz ( cleared of analogue TV ) , with 1 @,@ 800 MHz appearing in a few places including the UK . In Germany , the only carrier network supported is that of T @-@ Mobile with its 1 @,@ 800 MHz band allocated to LTE . Some countries in Europe , including Denmark , Norway , Sweden , and others — will not be able to offer LTE connectivity via the iPhone 5 to their customers on their current LTE networks , as they have already deployed LTE in the 2 @.@ 6 GHz band , which the iPhone 5 does not support . In November 2012 , a representative of <unk> reported that the iPhone 5 only supports LTE on networks that have been tested and certified by Apple . 
 Unlike the iPhone 4S , which was the only " world phone " produced by Apple , there are three versions of the iPhone 5 , which differ by the frequency used . All three work on 2G GSM / GPRS and 3G UMTS / EDGE networks on both the 800 and 1900 MHz bands used in the Americas , and the 900 and 1800 MHz bands used elsewhere . The CDMA <unk> model works on CDMA networks , such as that of Sprint and Verizon . Another version supports LTE only on the 1700 / 2100 MHz AWS band , and the 700 MHz band recovered after the conversion to digital television in the US ( channels 52 to 56 ) , currently the only network that supports the band is AT & T. GSM <unk> supports several other LTE bands available in other countries , such as LTE bands 1 , 3 , 5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The iPhone 5 received mainly positive reviews from commentators and reviewers . Tim Stevens from Engadget praised the iPhone 5 for its high resolution screen surpassing that of the iPhone 4S , which he considered to be one of the best phone screens available on the market . Stevens was critical of the new connector , which is incompatible with devices and cables that use the superseded 30 @-@ pin connector , although the LA Times reported that this was a change necessary to make the device smaller than its predecessor . Engadget agreed that Apple fulfilled most of the promises stated on its website , such as " better battery performance " , " two times the graphics performance " and " two times faster . " David Pogue of The New York Times considered the 4 @-@ inch Retina display a " nice but not life @-@ changing change " , and praised the Lightning connector for its size , sturdiness , and reversibility , while noting its lack of support for older accessories , remarking that " Apple has a long history of killing off technologies , inconveniently and expensively , that the public had come to love " . Technology columnist Ed Baig of USA Today was impressed that Apple had met the public 's " lofty expectations " for the iPhone 5 in a competitive market . In a repair @-@ ability review , <unk> found the iPhone 5 easier to disassemble and repair than its predecessor . 
 Wired reported that the iPhone 5 design , carried on in the iPhone 5S and iPhone SE , was regarded as " long been the golden child of Apple phone design and a benchmark for phones in general " , while the succeeding iPhone 6 / 6S design was less critically acclaimed as it " felt a little bit wrong , as though you were holding a slick $ 650 bar of soap " . Wired described the iPhone 5 as " elegance rooted in the way the aluminum and glass work together . It felt streamlined , yet substantial , which is different from the iPhone 6 , which feels substantial in size alone . Plus , unlike the ubiquitous rounded corners of the 6 , the iPhone 5 didn ’ t really look like anything else on the market at the time " . However , the iPhone 5 's design was not suited to scaling up , in contrast to the iPhone 6 / 6S which could better accommodate the growing consumer trend towards larger screen sizes and indeed spawned the 6 / 6S Plus phablet models . 
 = = = = Criticism = = = = 
 Reviewers and commentators were critical of the new Maps app that replaced Google Maps in iOS 6 . It had been reported to contain errors such as misplacement of landmark tags , directing users to incorrect locations and poor satellite images . Nine days after Maps ' release , Apple issued a statement apologizing for the frustration it had caused customers and recommending that they try alternate mapping services . 
 = = = = Errors = = = = 
 Gizmodo editor Diaz discussed the correspondence between Apple and a reader about purple flare in pictures taken on iPhone 5 camera . Apple 's response to the issue was that it is normal and advised the customer to aim the camera away from bright light sources when taking photos . Tests conducted by TechCrunch indicate that the problem existed on the iPhone 4S but was more distinct and pronounced on the iPhone 5 . Consumer Reports found that the purple haze effect occurred on several other manufacturers ' phones including the Samsung Galaxy S III and Motorola Droid <unk> Maxx , and that it was not less pronounced on the iPhone 4S . The report concluded that digital cameras in general , including higher @-@ end <unk> , can all suffer from lens flare in which a purple @-@ tinted effect was not uncommon . 
 = = = = Problems = = = = 
 There were anecdotal claims of the iPhone 5 's coating chipping off , exposing the bright aluminium underneath . Apple executive 's response to email correspondence from an affected customer summarized that it was normal for aluminum to scratch . The term " <unk> " , a reference to " <unk> " which affected the iPhone 4 , was applied by various sources such as CNET , Yahoo News , and All Things Digital to describe the <unk> issue . 
 Some users reported on the Internet that the white model leaked light behind the screen , though the issue was not unique to the iPhone 5 , as it also affected other Apple devices . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 <unk> reported that the iPhone 5 sold out twenty times faster than the 4 and 4S models . Apple said that they were " blown away by the customer response " . Phil Schiller , Apple 's vice @-@ president of worldwide marketing , said that over two million iPhone 5 orders had been received in the first 24 hours . AT & T said that the iPhone 5 was the fastest @-@ selling iPhone the company had ever offered , selling over five million units on launch weekend and exceeding the supply available . The release and sale of the iPhone 5 has also slowed down the growth of Android according to market share reports released by Kantar <unk> <unk> . During the first 16 days after the phone 's initial release it comprised over 20 % of all phones sold in that period . 
 J.P. Morgan 's chief economist , Michael <unk> said that " sales of iPhone 5 could boost annualized US GDP growth by $ 3 @.@ 2 billion , or $ 12 @.@ 8 billion at an annual rate . " Shortly after the announcement of the iPhone 5 and preceding the launch , Apple 's stock price rose to a record $ 705 @.@ 07 , but within three months fell to $ 507 @.@ 48 . According to the analysis of Eric <unk> , Apple 's stock decline and resulting losses were not the result of any issue with the new Maps application , but disappointed investors . He points to initial hardware sales of only five million , compared to projections up to twice that , as the primary cause . 
 Since the release of the iPhone 5 , discounts on previous generation iPhones have enabled Apple to maintain a market lead in the United States and Japan , but the iPhone continued to lag behind the combined total of Android phones in the global market . 
 = = Timeline of models = = 
 = Hammersley Fork = 
 Hammersley Fork ( also known as Hammersley Fork Creek ) is a tributary of Kettle Creek in Potter County and Clinton County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 10 @.@ 0 miles ( 16 @.@ 1 km ) long and flows through Warton Township in Potter County and Leidy Township in Clinton County . The watershed of the stream has an area of 32 @.@ 7 square miles ( 85 km2 ) . The main rock formation in the watershed is the Pottsville Formation . A number of bridges cross the stream . 
 There are no state roads and virtually no township roads in the watershed of Hammersley Fork . However , there are dirt roads and gravel roads , and several stream crossings in the watershed . The first settlers arrived in the watershed in 1827 and the first roads in the area were constructed several years later . Industrial activities such as logging were common in the watershed in the early 20th century , but there is currently virtually no such activity there . Wild trout naturally reproduce in the stream throughout its entire length . Most of the creek has a substantial riparian buffer . 
 = = Course = = 
 Hammersley Fork begins in central Eulalia Township , Potter County , near the Sinnemahoning Creek watershed . It flows southeast to Elk Lick Knob , where it receives the tributary Black Mark Hollow . The stream then turns south and flows into a valley , passing Bunnell Ridge . The valley gets deeper and the stream receives several small tributaries . It turns southwest shortly downstream of the mouth of Elkhorn Run . In the southern reaches of the township , the stream receives the tributary Bell Branch and turns south @-@ southeast , exiting Eulalia Township . 
 Upon leaving Eulalia Township , Potter County , Hammersley Fork enters Leidy Township , Clinton County and continues south , passing by Susquehannock State Forest . The stream continues south for some distance and crosses Pennsylvania Route 144 . Immediately after crossing Pennsylvania Route 144 , the stream reaches its confluence with Kettle Creek . Hammersley Fork joins Kettle Creek 19 @.@ 90 miles ( 32 @.@ 03 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 The concentration of alkalinity in Hammersley Fork ranges from 0 @.@ 011 to 0 @.@ 015 ounces per cubic foot ( 11 to 15 mg / l ) . Particles in the stream include coarse sand and fine gravel . The stream experiences relatively high water temperatures and in July 2003 , its temperature between Dry Hollow and Bunnell Run ranges from 68 to 72 ° F ( 20 to 22 ° C ) . Between Dry Hollow and Nelson Branch , the temperature ranged from 70 to 73 ° F ( 21 to 23 ° C ) . 
 The sediment load in Hammersley Fork is 0 @.@ 27 pounds per acre ( 0 @.@ 30 kg / ha ) per year . The nitrogen load is 1 @.@ 55 pounds per acre ( 1 @.@ 74 kg / ha ) per year , while the phosphorus load is less than half a pound per acre per year . 
 Between the mouth of Dry Hollow and the mouth of Bunnell Run , the waters of Hammersley Fork are a Rosgen type F and a Rosgen type C stream . The upper part of the stretch of the stream between Dry Hollow and Nelson Branch is a Rosgen type C stream . The middle part of the stretch is a Rosgen type B stream and the lower part is a Rosgen type F to D stream . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Hammersley Fork is 968 feet ( 295 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the stream 's source is between 1 @,@ 800 and 1 @,@ 820 feet ( 549 and 555 m ) above sea level . 
 The Pottsville Formation is the main rock formation in the watershed of Hammersley Fork . The highlands northwest of the Hammersley Fork watershed range from 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) to 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 670 m ) and the highest elevation in the watershed is 2 @,@ 365 feet ( 721 m ) above sea level . The elevation range in the watershed is 1 @,@ 374 feet ( 419 m ) . At its mouth , the stream is 54 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) wide . The average basin slope is 16 @.@ 24 degrees . There are numerous gravel bars in the lower reaches of the stream . This width is maintained because deposition in the area is often removed . There is also a <unk> in the lower reaches of the stream . At the <unk> , it splits three ways for 69 feet ( 21 m ) . A spot on Hammersley Fork near its mouth is the only location in the Kettle Creek watershed that has been channelized . 
 Hammersley Fork flows over bedrock or large cobbles for much of the stretch between Dry Hollow and Nelson Branch . From the mouth of Nelson Branch to 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) downstream , the stream mostly flows in the central part of its valley . The tributary Nelson Branch has a patch of erosion that is 26 feet ( 8 m ) high and 59 feet ( 18 m ) long . There is a floodplain at the mouth of Hammersley Fork . Two bridges cross Hammersley Fork near its mouth . One carries Pennsylvania Route 144 and the other carries Hammersley Avenue . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Hammersley Fork has an area of 32 @.@ 7 square miles ( 85 km2 ) , making it the second @-@ largest sub @-@ watershed of Kettle Creek after Cross Fork . There are 57 @.@ 42 miles ( 92 @.@ 41 km ) of streams in the watershed . The mouth of the stream is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Tamarack . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Short Run . The stream also passes through the quadrangle of Hammersley Fork . 
 A number of camps and residences are on the left bank of Hammersley Fork 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) upstream of the mouth . There are a number of dirt roads and gravel roads on the edge of the upper reaches of the stream 's watershed . However , there are no state routes and almost no township roads in the watershed . However , much of the upper part of the watershed can only be accessed on foot . There are five road crossings of the stream and its tributaries . There is some agricultural land along the stream . 
 = = History and recreation = = 
 Hammersley Fork was <unk> into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 and its identifier is <unk> . It is named after J. P. Hammersley . 
 Jacob " Old Jake " Hammersley and Archie Stewart settled at the mouth of Hammersley Fork in 1827 , with Hammersley settling on the east bank of the stream and Stewart settling on the west bank . They were the first settlers to come that far upstream in the Kettle Creek watershed . Additionally , the two constructed a gristmill on the west bank of the stream . There were no roads in the watershed by 1833 . Later in the 1800s , Nathan Tuttle operated a gang mill on the stream . A settlement , also called Hammersley Fork , was created on the stream by 1852 . In 1902 , John <unk> started a village called Hammersley in the middle reaches of Hammersley Fork . Its intended purpose was as a supply point for logging camps in the area . By 1902 to 1910 , there was a network of railroads in the watershed . 
 Logging was a large industry in the watershed of Hammersley Fork in the early 1900s , but there have been almost no industrial activities in the area since then . An old railroad grade is located on Hammersley Fork . Fish have been stocked in the stream since the 1930s or 1940s . 
 A two @-@ span steel stringer / multi @-@ beam or girder bridge carrying <unk> over Hammersley Fork was built in 1933 and repaired in 2010 . The bridge is 64 @.@ 0 feet ( 19 @.@ 5 m ) long . A two @-@ span bridge was built over the stream in 1962 and repaired in 2011 . This bridge is 107 @.@ 0 feet ( 32 @.@ 6 m ) long and carries Pennsylvania Route 144 . 
 The Cherry Springs Civilian Conservation Corps camp was built near the headwaters of Hammersley Fork in 1933 . The Hammersley Trail , which is part of the Susquehannock Trail System , passes by the mouth of Hammersley Fork . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Wild trout naturally reproduce in Hammersley Fork from its headwaters downstream to its mouth . Great blue herons have been observed at the headwaters of Hammersley Fork , despite the fact that they are more commonly found in large river valleys . Little yellow stoneflies also inhabit it . Brown trout first appeared in the stream in the 1920s after being stocked in Cross Fork and in the 1940s the brown trout populations significantly increased . 
 The Forrest H. <unk> Natural Area is located on Hammersley Fork . Most of the stream flows through this natural area . It is a 1521 @-@ acre area that includes a 158 @-@ acre area of old @-@ growth hemlock trees . The Hammersley Wild Area is also located in the watershed . The stream 's watershed is a Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory Biological Diversity Area . The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection also classifies the watershed as an exceptional @-@ value area . 
 From the mouth of Hammersley Fork to 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) upstream of the mouth , the canopy cover ranges from 0 to 50 percent . Much of the creek , however , has a significant riparian buffer . 
 The canopy coverage of the section of Hammersley Fork between Dry Hollow and Bunnell Run is 62 percent on average . However , the lower part of this section has 86 percent canopy coverage . The upper part of the stretch of the stream between Nelson Branch and Dry Hollow has a canopy coverage of 93 percent . The middle part of this section has a coverage of 58 percent and the lowest part has a canopy coverage of 89 percent . The tree coverage at the confluence of Nelson Branch with Hammersley Fork is 70 percent . The canopy coverage up to 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) downstream of the confluence averages 40 percent . Tree species in this stretch include hemlock , red maple , river birch , sycamore , and willow . 
 = Ryan Ellis = 
 Ryan Ellis ( born January 3 , 1991 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman currently playing for the Nashville Predators of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . 
 After his second season in the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) , Ellis was selected 11th overall by the Predators in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . During his junior career , he was key in guiding the Windsor Spitfires to back @-@ to @-@ back Memorial Cups as Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) champions in 2009 and 2010 . Individually , he was named to the CHL and OHL All @-@ Rookie Teams in 2008 , the First OHL All @-@ Star Team in 2009 and 2011 and the Second OHL All @-@ Star Team in 2010 . He was awarded the OHL 's Bobby Smith Trophy as the League 's scholastic player of the year in 2008 , the Max Kaminsky Trophy as the top defenceman in 2009 and 2011 and the Red Tilson Trophy as the most outstanding player in 2011 . On a national basis , he was named CHL Defenceman and Player of the Year in 2011 . Serving as the Spitfires ' team captain in 2010 – 11 , he became the franchise 's all @-@ time leading point @-@ scorer among defencemen . 
 Ellis began his international career with Canada by winning three gold medals in 2008 at the World U17 Hockey Challenge , IIHF World U18 Championship and Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament . At the under @-@ 20 level , Ellis has made three appearances at the World Junior Championships , winning gold in 2009 and silver in 2010 and 2011 . He is the tournament 's all @-@ time leading scorer among defencemen and Canada 's all @-@ time assists leader . He also won gold with Team Canada at the 2016 world championships . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor = = = 
 Ellis played minor hockey throughout Ontario , beginning with a club from Belmont , Ontario , at age four . Playing for teams from Missisauga , he won a silver and gold medals at the peewee and bantam provincials , respectively . Joining the Cambridge Hawks at the midget level , he won an Ontario Alliance championship with the club in 2007 . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Ellis was selected in the second round , 22nd overall , by the Windsor Spitfires in the 2007 Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) Draft . Establishing himself as a top defencemen in the League during his rookie campaign , he scored 15 goals and 63 points over 63 games . His points total and + 30 plus @-@ minus rating led all OHL rookie defencemen . In the 2008 playoffs , Ellis added five points in five games as the Spitfires were eliminated by the Sarnia Sting . He was named to the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) and OHL All @-@ Rookie Teams , along with Spitfires teammate Taylor Hall . Ellis was further recognized for his academic performance , maintaining an 81 percent average in university preparation courses at St. Anne Catholic High School in Belle River , earning him the League 's Bobby Smith Trophy as scholastic player of the year . He received the award over fellow nominee Steven Stamkos of the Sting , who had won it the previous year . 
 Ellis was named OHL Defenceman of the Month for October 2008 the following season . He earned the distinction twice more over the course of the campaign in February and March 2009 . On November 3 , he was chosen as OHL Player of the Week , having scored seven points in the previous two games . Ellis his second such distinction on April 20 , 2009 , registering two goals and five assists in three games . During the season , he represented the OHL in the 2008 ADT Canada @-@ Russia Challenge . He also competed for the Western Conference at the 2009 OHL All @-@ Star Classic <unk> participated in the 2009 CHL Top Prospects Game . 
 Improving to 22 goals , 67 assists and 89 points in 57 games in 2008 – 09 , Ellis led all OHL defencemen and finished second in team scoring to Taylor Hall . He ranked first in the League in assists , seventh in points and second in plus @-@ minus rating ( + 52 ) . As a result , Ellis was named to the OHL First All @-@ Star Team and awarded the Max Kaminsky Trophy , beating fellow nominees P. K. Subban and Cameron <unk> as the League 's top defenceman . The distinction made him a finalist for CHL Defenceman of the Year , but he lost to Jonathon Blum of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) ' s Vancouver Giants . Ellis was additionally voted the smartest player , hardest shot and best offensive defenceman in the Western Conference in an annual poll of OHL coaches . Ellis later cited the smartest player selection as his most rewarding recognition to that date . 
 Windsor entered the 2009 OHL playoffs as the top @-@ ranked team in the West . Ellis added 31 points in 20 games , tying for third in post @-@ season scoring while helping the Spitfires to a J. Ross Robertson Cup as OHL champions . Earning a berth in the 2009 Memorial Cup , the Spitfires went on to win the national major junior championship over the Kelowna Rockets . Ellis recorded four points in six games to be named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . 
 Going into the 2009 NHL Entry Draft , he was listed by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau as the 16th best prospect ( fifth among defencemen ) in North America . He was selected in the first round , 11th overall , by the Nashville Predators . Standing at 5 feet and 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 metres ) , he was considered small for a defenceman . Addressing this supposed weakness , Hall of Fame defenceman Bobby Orr said of him , " he 's not very big , but you 'll see ... he 's a heck of a hockey player . " Ellis has publicly discredited any size concerns , alluding to his ability to play physically in spite of it . He has been compared to Detroit Red Wings defenceman Brian Rafalski for his success as a small , offensive defenceman . 
 Ellis subsequently attended his first NHL training camp with Nashville in September 2009 , but was returned to Windsor after suffering a wrist injury . As a result , he missed ten games with the Spitfires , making his season debut in early @-@ November . Struggling offensively upon recovering , he focused on improving his defensive and physical play . Finishing the season with 61 points over 48 games in 2009 – 10 , he ranked fourth among League defencemen in point @-@ scoring and was named to the OHL Second All @-@ Star Team . Windsor defended both their OHL and Memorial Cup championships in the ensuing post @-@ season . Ellis scored 33 points over 19 games in the OHL playoffs , tying with Jeff Skinner for second in OHL scoring , behind Taylor Hall . Windsor beat the Barrie Colts in the OHL Finals before defeating the Brandon Wheat Kings 9 – 1 in the Memorial Cup Final . Ellis recorded three assists in the national championship game . 
 Attending his second Predators training camp , he was again returned to junior for the 2010 – 11 season . Upon his return to Windsor , he was named team captain . After recording five goals and 17 points in November 2010 , he was named OHL Defenceman of the Month . During the month , he surpassed Joel Quenneville as the Spitfires ' all @-@ time leading scorer among defencemen . He scored the game @-@ winning goal in overtime against the London Knights on November 10 for his record @-@ setting 230th career point with Windsor . Ellis was honoured in a pre @-@ game ceremony on November 26 for the feat ; the game that night against the Oshawa Generals was billed as " Ryan Ellis Night . " Also in November , Ellis served as captain for Team OHL in the 2010 Subway Super Series against Russia . Several months later , he recorded his 300th career OHL point on February 25 , 2011 . Registering three assists in a 4 – 2 win against the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds , he became the third defenceman in OHL history to reach the mark , following Denis Potvin ( 330 points , 1968 – 73 ) and Rick <unk> ( 329 points , 1987 – 92 ) . He completed the season with 313 points all @-@ time . His single @-@ season total of 100 points ( 24 goals and 76 assists ) established a career @-@ high while leading all OHL defencemen by a 21 @-@ point margin . It was the first time in over 17 years that an OHL defenceman scored 100 points in a season . Among all OHL skaters , he ranked fifth overall . After winning his second Max Kaminsky Trophy and first Red Tilson Trophy as the OHL 's most outstanding defenceman and player , respectively , he was further distinguished as CHL Defenceman and Player of the Year . Ellis beat out Simon <unk> and Stefan Elliott for the former recognition , while being voted over Sean <unk> and Darcy <unk> for the latter . It was the first time a player won both awards since Bryan Fogarty did so 22 years prior . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 On January 7 , 2012 , Ellis scored his first NHL goal with the Predators in a game against the Carolina Hurricanes on goaltender Justin Peters . 
 = = International play = = 
 Ellis made his debut with Hockey Canada at the 2008 World U17 Hockey Challenge , representing Ontario , the tournament 's host province . He scored his first international goal against Team Pacific on December 29 , 2007 , a game in which he was also chosen as Ontario 's best player . Team Ontario won eight straight games as they won the tournament . With nine points in eight games , Ellis was the tournament 's leading defenceman and was named to the All @-@ Star Team , along with Ontario teammate Matt Duchene . 
 Later that year , Ellis was named to Canada 's team for the 2008 IIHF World U18 Championships in Russia . Leading his team in shots on goal , he helped Canada to a gold medal , defeating Russia 8 – 0 in the final . He recorded a goal and an assist in the championship victory . Finishing with three goals and seven points , he was the tournament 's leading defenceman . Four months later , he re @-@ joined the national under @-@ 18 team for the 2008 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament , held in Slovakia and the Czech Republic . Ellis led all team defencemen in scoring with five points ( a goal and four assists ) , helping Canada go undefeated in four games . They defeated Russia 6 – 3 in the final to capture the gold medal . 
 Moving on to the Canada 's under @-@ 20 team , he made his first of three World Junior Championship appearances in 2009 . Named to the team at 17 years old , he was one of three draft @-@ eligible players on the club with John Tavares and Evander Kane . Head Coach Pat Quinn had coached Ellis previously at the World U18 Championships . He selected Ellis to the team as the eighth defencemen , instead of choosing a traditional 13th forward , because of his abilities on the power play . In the semifinal against Russia , Ellis was instrumental in tying the game with five seconds remaining in regulation . Twice , he preventing the puck from being cleared out of the offensive zone , which allowed a play to develop that resulted in Jordan Eberle 's game @-@ tying goal . Canada beat Russia in a shootout before defeating Sweden in the final to win gold . Ellis scored seven points over six games to finish fourth among tournament defencemen in scoring . It also set a Canadian record for most points by a 17 @-@ year @-@ old defenceman . 
 The following year , Ellis returned for the 2010 World Junior Championships in Saskatchewan . Canada went undefeated in the tournament until the gold medal game , where they lost to the United States in overtime . The defeat ended Canada 's five @-@ year gold medal streak at the World Juniors and marked the first time Ellis competed in an international competition without winning gold . He finished with eight points over six games , ranking second among tournament defencemen behind teammate Alex Pietrangelo . 
 As a two @-@ time veteran of Canada 's junior team , Ellis opted not to attend their annual summer evaluation camp . In December 2010 , he was named to the squad as one of four returning players for the 2011 World Junior Championships , held in Buffalo , New York . Ellis became the seventh player in Canadian history to play three times in the tournament . He was later chosen as team captain . Ellis began the tournament tied with Pietrangelo as the country 's all @-@ time top @-@ scoring defenceman at the World Juniors . By scoring a goal in the opening game against Russia , a 6 – 3 win for Canada , he broke the tie to take the all @-@ time scoring lead among Canadian defencemen . Later in the tournament , Ellis recorded three assists in a game against Norway , making him the World Juniors ' all @-@ time leading scorer among defencemen , passing Finnish defenceman Reijo <unk> 's mark of 21 points . In the quarterfinal , he assisted on a goal against Switzerland to break Eric Lindros 's 19 @-@ assist record as Canada 's all @-@ time leader at the tournament . Playing Russia in the gold medal game , Ellis scored the opening goal in a 5 – 3 losing effort , earning silver for the second consecutive year . Finishing the tournament with three goals and ten points to lead all blueliners , he earned Best Defenceman and All @-@ Star Team honours . He was additionally voted by tournament coaches as one of Canada 's best three players . With 25 points over three years at the tournament , he tied Jordan Eberle as Canada 's second @-@ best scorer of all @-@ time , behind Lindros ' 31 points . 
 Ellis was a late addition to Team Canada at the 2016 world championships , joining the team in mid @-@ tournament after Nashville was knocked out of the NHL playoffs ; the team went on to win the gold medal . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Ellis is an offensive defenceman . A fast skater and skilled stickhandler , he is capable of manoeuvring the puck up the ice from the defensive zone . Known as a power play specialist , he often " quarterbacks " from the blueline — controlling puck distribution between teammates in the offensive zone — and possesses a hard and accurate shot . He is also a physical player , though he is undersized as a defenceman at 5 feet and 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 metres ) . He is able to compensate for his lack of overpowering strength with good defensive positioning and active stick @-@ checking . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ellis was born in <unk> , Ontario , to parents Jim and Mary Lou . He has one sister , Erica . He went to Tall Pines School . Moving away from home for his junior career , he attended St. Anne High School . In February 2010 , Ellis was selected as his hometown Hamilton / Burlington area 's 2009 Golden Horseshoe Athlete of the Year , beating out college quarterback Danny <unk> and marathon runner Reid <unk> . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 Windsor Spitfires ' all @-@ time leading point @-@ scorer , defencemen ( surpassed Joel Quenneville , 229 points ) ; 
 World Junior Championships ' all @-@ time leading point @-@ scorer , defencemen – 25 ( surpassed Reijo <unk> , 21 points ) ; 
 Canadian national junior team 's all @-@ time leading assist @-@ scorer – 20 ( surpassed Eric Lindros , 19 assists ) . 
 = Psilocybe makarorae = 
 Psilocybe makarorae is a species of psilocybin mushroom in the family Strophariaceae . Officially described as new to science in 1995 , it is known only from New Zealand , where it grows on rotting wood and twigs of southern beeches . The fruit body ( mushroom ) has a brownish cap with lighter coloured margins , measuring up to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) wide . The cap shape is either conical , bell @-@ shaped , or flat depending on the age of the mushroom , and it features a prominent umbo . Although the whitish stem does not form a true ring , it retains remnants of the partial veil that covers and protects the gills of young fruit bodies . P. makarorae mushrooms can be distinguished from the similar North American species Psilocybe caerulipes by microscopic characteristics such as the presence of cystidia on the gill faces ( pleurocystidia ) , and cheilocystidia ( found on the gill edges ) with more elongated necks . Based on the bluing reaction to injury , P. makarorae is presumed to contain the psychedelic compounds psilocybin and psilocin . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first mentioned in the literature in 1981 , when Pierre Margot and Roy Watling described a specimen collected in 1969 by Grace Marie Taylor near the Franz Josef Glacier as an unnamed Psilocybe with affinities to the North American species Psilocybe caerulipes . It was officially described as new to science in 1995 by mycologists Peter R. Johnston and Peter K. Buchanan . In his 1996 book Psilocybin Mushrooms of the World , Paul Stamets noted that the two authors are known to work with law @-@ enforcement officials to assist in prosecuting those who illegally collect psychoactive mushrooms . 
 The type material was collected in 1990 , near the Haast Pass crossing the <unk> River . The specific epithet makarorae refers to the type locality . P. makarorae is classified in Gastón Guzmán 's section <unk> owing to the spore shape and bluing reaction upon injury . It is distinguished from other species in this section by the size of the caps , the presence of pleurocystidia , and the short @-@ necked cheilocystidia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially conical to bell shaped , but as the mushroom grows , it expands to become convex with a prominent umbo , and attains a diameter of 15 – 55 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 2 in ) . The cap surface is dry to slightly tacky . Its colour is yellow @-@ brown to orange @-@ brown , often paler towards the margin , which has fine striations corresponding to the gills on the underside . The flesh is white . Gills have an adnexed attachment to the stem , and are pale greyish @-@ brown . The whitish stem is 30 – 60 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long by 2 – 4 mm wide . It is cylindrical , with a surface of pressed silky fibrils . The base of the stem is often brownish , with white rhizoids present . The veil of young fruit bodies is cortinate — resembling the cobweb @-@ like partial veil found in Cortinarius species . As the mushroom grows , its remnants often remain visible on the stem , but it never forms a complete ring . Both the cap and the stem stain greenish @-@ blue when damaged . 
 The spore print is dark purplish @-@ brown . Spores typically measure 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 μm , averaging 8 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 0 by 5 @.@ 3 μm . Its shape in face view is ovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) to roughly rhomboid , while viewed from the side it appears elliptical . The spore wall is brown , smooth , about 0 @.@ 8 – 1 μm thick , and has a germ pore . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored and somewhat club @-@ shaped , tapering slightly to the base ; they are clamped , and measure 25 – 31 by 7 – 8 @.@ 5 μm . 
 The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) have dimensions of 18 – 26 by 6 – 9 μm , and a shape ranging from ventricose @-@ rostrate ( broad in the middle and tapering to a <unk> neck ) to mucronate ( ending abruptly in a short sharp point ) . They are hyaline ( translucent ) , thin @-@ walled , and clamped , with necks that are 3 – 5 μm long . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are similar in shape to cheilocystidia , but narrower ( 4 – 8 μm wide ) , and usually have a shorter neck measuring 2 @.@ 5 – 4 μm . The cap cuticle is a cutis ( characterised by hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface ) of long @-@ celled , 2 – 3 μm diameter , gelatinised hyphae . The hypodermium ( the tissue layer under the cap cuticle ) is filamentous , comprising 4 – 6 μm diameter cells with pale brown walls . <unk> are common . The subhymenium ( the tissue layer under the hymenium ) is poorly developed , containing 2 – 4 μm diameter cells with pale brown walls . The tissue comprising the hymenophore is made of short cylindric , 3 – 6 μm diameter hyaline cells . 
 P. makarorae contains the psychedelic compounds psilocybin and psilocin . Although the potency is not known definitely , Stamets suggests that , based on the degree of the bluing reaction , they are " probably moderately potent " . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Psilocybe makarorae closely resembles the North American species P. caerulipes , but the former can be distinguished microscopically from the latter by the presence of pleurocystidia , and cheilocystidia with longer necks . There are several other psychoactive species of Psilocybe found in New Zealand : P. <unk> , P. cubensis , P. semilanceata , P. subaeruginosa , P. subcubensis , and P. tasmaniana . P. subaeruginosa is distinguished from P. makarorae by having chocolate brown pleurocystidia . Closely related to P. subaeruginosa is the poorly known P. tasmaniana ; some have considered the two species synonymous . It has been reported growing on dung and dung @-@ enriched woody debris in open areas of Eucalyptus forests . P. cubensis is a common , dung @-@ loving species that can be readily recognized by its larger size ( cap diameter up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) ) , golden color , and well @-@ formed membranous ring ; P. subcubensis is nearly identical , differing only in microscopic characteristics . Known only from the Auckland region , P. <unk> fruits in soil rich in woody debris near Leptospermum and Dacrydium , and in Monterey Pine ( Pinus radiata ) plantations . P. semilanceata , one of the most common Psilocybe mushrooms , is only found in high @-@ altitude grasslands on the South Island . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Psilocybe makarorae is known only from New Zealand . The reported collection locations have been on both the North and South Islands , including the Bay of Plenty , Westland District , Central Otago , and Dunedin , although Stamets suggests that it is more widely distributed . Like all Psilocybe species , it is saprobic , and feeds on decomposing organic matter . Fruit bodies grow scattered or in groups on the fallen , rotting wood of southern beeches ( genus Nothofagus ) , and are often encountered near lakes and picnic grounds . 
 = A Polish Nobleman = 
 A Polish Nobleman is a 1637 painting by Rembrandt depicting a man in a costume of either Polish szlachta or boyar nobility . The identity of the subject of the painting is unclear , and has given rise to several different interpretations . The view that the figure 's dress is clearly Polish is not universally held and it may have been a self @-@ portrait . 
 The painting has changed owners several times , and its past owners have included Catherine II the Great and Andrew Mellon . It is currently located at the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Description = = 
 The portrait represents a man , estimated by some to be 45 years of age , standing turned to the viewer 's right , looking at the viewer with a commanding expression . In his uplifted right hand he holds a baton with a golden cap . He has a thick moustache and wears a high fur cap on which there is a golden chain with precious stones and a coat of arms in the center . From his ear a large pear @-@ shaped pearl hangs from a golden pendant earring . He wears a reddish brown mantle with a broad fur collar and , over it , a heavy gold chain from which the order of three horse tails , set in rich pendants , hangs on his right shoulder . A full light from the left falls on the right side of his face . The background is brownish @-@ grey . 
 = = History and provenance = = 
 The painting was created by Rembrandt in 1637 . It was not given an official title . The current one is the most recent , widely accepted one . Prior and alternate names include Portrait of a Slav Prince , Portrait d 'un <unk> , and Man in Russian Costume . Its authenticity was supported by an analysis of the panel 's wood , which showed that it was cut from a tree felled around 1635 that was also used in the painter 's River Landscape with Ruins ( 1650 ) . The painting underwent restoration in 1985 and has been X @-@ rayed . 
 The painting 's first owner or owners are not clear , but it might have been owned by a certain Harman van <unk> . It was purchased in 1768 by Catherine II the Great and held in the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg . It was purchased by Andrew Mellon in 1931 , and given by the Mellon Trust to the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. in 1937 . The painting was one of a number of artworks that Mellon had purchased from the Hermitage during the 1930s . He denied having made these purchases for several years , since the US was in a major depression — which would have made the acquisitions seem extravagant — and at odds with the Soviet government . The works were kept for some time in a non @-@ public section of the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Analysis = = 
 This work was labeled by some art critics as a <unk> , a painting with an exaggerated facial expression or a stock character in costume . For instance , Melissa Percival notes that in this particular painting the viewer may notice an extravagant fur cape , lopsided hat , tufted mustache , and similar paraphernalia , all giving " an impression that the painting should not be taken too seriously " . 
 Scholars have attempted for more than a century to understand who is portrayed in this painting . Earlier proposals that the subject was John III Sobieski ( who would have been eight years old in 1637 ) or Stephen Bathory ( who died in 1586 ) have been discredited . According to Otakar Odložilík , while the man in the painting is clearly wearing Polish garb , it is neither certain who he is , nor whether he is a Pole . Odložilík 's research on this issue suggested that the painting may be that of Andrzej Rej , a Polish noble and diplomat of that era who passed through Amsterdam , the Netherlands , where Rembrandt was working , at the time the painting was created . Nonetheless , without any documents from that era clearly acknowledging that fact , as Odložilík noted , it may never be known for certain who the subject really is . 
 Odložilík concluded ( writing in 1963 ) that most scholars are in consensus that Rembrandt portrayed a real Polish noble . He cited research by Kurt <unk> who has suggested that it may be Rembrandt 's brother Adriaen who modeled for him , but judged it as unlikely . Other views have emerged since the publication of his article . In 1979 the art historian Kenneth Clark opined that it was a self @-@ portrait , idealized and " got up in fancy dress . " Walter Liedtke of the Metropolitan Museum of Art writing in 2001 identifies the hat as Russian and <unk> de Winkel in 2006 asserted that " ... the man cannot be identified as a Pole but as a Muscovite boyar . " The National Gallery website states that it is " probably not a portrait of a specific individual " , but notes a strong resemblance to Rembrandt himself and suggests in turn that it may be a self @-@ portrait . One objection to its classification as a self @-@ portrait , that the subject 's jowls were too pronounced , was addressed by an X @-@ ray analysis showing that Rembrandt modified the painting during the course of its creation . 
 = Gilbert Brulé = 
 Gilbert Jean Marco Brulé ( born January 1 , 1987 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey centre who currently plays for KHL Medveščak Zagreb of the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . Drafted out of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , Brulé played major junior with the Vancouver Giants for three seasons . After being named the WHL rookie of the year in 2004 , Brulé was selected as the WHL playoff MVP and led the Memorial Cup in scoring , as part of the Giants ' WHL championship @-@ winning season two years later . Selected sixth overall in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft , he began his NHL career with the Columbus Blue Jackets before being traded to the Edmonton Oilers prior to the 2008 – 09 season . After three seasons with the Oilers , he was placed on waivers , then acquired by the Coyotes for the 2011 @-@ 12 season and playoffs . He then joined the ZSC Lions for the 2012 @-@ 13 season . Brulé was released by the Zurich @-@ based team in October 2012 . Internationally , Brulé has represented Team Canada at the 2004 World U @-@ 17 Hockey Challenge and 2004 U @-@ 18 Junior World Cup , winning silver and gold medals , respectively . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early junior career = = = 
 Brulé was selected first overall in the 2002 WHL Bantam Draft by the Vancouver Giants . The selection was originally possessed by the Prince Albert Raiders , but was dealt to the Giants in exchange for their third overall and third round selections . He debuted in one game with the Giants during the subsequent WHL season , while playing Junior A in the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) with the Quesnel Millionaires . Recording 57 points ( 32 goals and 25 assists ) over 48 games in his lone BCHL season , he was named the Interior Conference 's recipient of the Bruce Allison Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year . 
 In 2003 – 04 , Brulé joined the Giants and tallied 60 points in 67 games . He became the first Giants player to win a major WHL award , receiving the Jim Piggott Memorial Trophy as league rookie of the year . The distinction made him a nominee for Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) Rookie of the Year , which went to Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) rookie of the year Sidney Crosby of the Rimouski Océanic . He joined Crosby on the CHL All @-@ Rookie Team . 
 The following season , Brulé finished third in WHL scoring with 87 points ( 39 goals and 48 assists ) , establishing a Giants single @-@ season point @-@ scoring record ( surpassed by Casey Pierro @-@ Zabotel in 2008 – 09 ) . During the campaign , he was chosen to a squad of WHL All @-@ Stars against the Russian select team in the 2004 ADT Canada @-@ Russia Challenge in November . Several months later , he competed in the 2005 CHL Top Prospects Game , where he recorded the first hat trick in the history of the all @-@ star match and was named Team Cherry 's player of the game . At the end of the season , Brulé was named the CHL Scholastic Player of the Year , having taken more high school credits than any other WHL player . 
 = = = NHL debut and Memorial Cup tournament = = = 
 Brulé was selected sixth overall in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft by the Columbus Blue Jackets . He remained the highest @-@ drafted Giants player in team history until Evander Kane was selected fourth overall in 2009 . Brulé had been the second @-@ ranked prospect behind Crosby by the International Scouting Services ( ISS ) at the beginning of the 2004 – 05 season , while the NHL Central Scouting Bureau ( CSB ) named him the WHL 's top prospect in their preliminary rankings . By the end of the season , Brulé was ranked fourth overall by the ISS and fifth among North American skaters by the CSB . At the time of his draft , he was touted as an offensively skilled player with a competitive and physical edge . The ISS scouted him as an " outstanding skater with great vision on the ice ... a natural goalscorer . " 
 Brulé made the Blue Jackets ' lineup in his first NHL training camp and signed with the club to a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract on October 3 , 2005 . He made his NHL debut against the Washington Capitals in the Blue Jackets ' season opener two days later , notching an assist on a goal by Dan Fritsche in a 3 – 1 loss . The following game , he suffered a fractured sternum after receiving a hit from Calgary Flames defenceman Roman Hamrlík on October 7 . After missing 17 games , he returned to the lineup on November 20 . Brulé scored his first NHL career goal that night against Phoenix Coyotes , his team 's lone tally in a 5 – 1 loss , beating goaltender David LeNeveu with a shot from the left offensive zone faceoff circle . Ten days later , he suffered his second injury in as many months , breaking his leg during a game against the Minnesota Wild . 
 Upon recovering , he was returned to the WHL on January 13 , 2006 . By reassigning Brulé before he played 10 NHL games , the Blue Jackets retained the first year of his rookie contract . Another strong factor in the decision to return him to junior was the acquisition of centre Sergei Fedorov , making Brulé expendable . Returning to the Giants , Brulé scored at a near @-@ goal @-@ a @-@ game pace . He was named WHL Player of the Week on February 20 , 2006 , after recording 5 goals and 10 points in 3 Giants wins . He was later chosen as WHL Player of the Month for February with 12 goals and 23 points in 13 games . Completing the season with 23 goals and 38 points in 27 games , he earned WHL Second All @-@ Star Team honours . In the opening round of the WHL playoffs , Brulé was named WHL and CHL Player of the Week by scoring four goals and seven points over three games against the Prince George Cougars . He received his second WHL and CHL Player of the Week honour during the WHL Finals against the Moose Jaw Warriors on May 10 , having accumulated five goals and nine points in two games . His award @-@ winning week included a three @-@ goal , four @-@ point performance in Game 1 of the series – a 7 – 5 win for the Giants . He went on to lead the WHL in scoring with 30 points in 18 games to earn the <unk> Trophy as playoff MVP , helping the Giants to their first President 's Cup as WHL champions . 
 Advancing to the 2006 Memorial Cup , the Giants tied for third out of four teams after the round @-@ robin . Requiring a tie @-@ breaker game to determine who would play in the semi @-@ final , Brulé recorded five points ( two goals , three assists ) against the Peterborough Petes , one point short of the tournament single @-@ game record , in a 6 – 0 win . The Giants were subsequently eliminated in the semi @-@ final by the Moncton Wildcats 3 – 1 . Brulé registered the only Giants goal in the game . Finishing with 12 points in 5 games , Brulé earned the Ed Chynoweth Trophy as the national tournament 's leading scorer . He was also named to the Memorial Cup All @-@ Star Team , alongside Giants teammate Paul Albers . 
 Four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years after his junior career , the club honoured him in a ceremony prior to a game against the Kamloops Blazers on January 28 , 2011 , as part of " Gilbert Brulé Night " . Brulé was the fourth alumnus added to the club 's Ring of Honour , commemorating the team 's best players ; a plaque was unveiled inside the stadium bearing his name and the number 17 he wore on his jersey as a Giant . At the end of the Giants ' 2010 – 11 WHL season , they released their fan @-@ voted " Top 10 Giants of the Decade " , which listed Brulé at # 2 , behind Milan Lucic . 
 = = = Columbus Blue Jackets = = = 
 Still eligible for junior , Brulé made the Blue Jackets ' roster for the 2006 – 07 season . A month into the campaign , he was assured by General Manager Doug MacLean that he would not be returned to the Giants as he had been the previous season . He was scratched several times under head coach Gerard Gallant , but after Gallant was replaced by Ken Hitchcock in late @-@ November , he began receiving more playing time . Playing mostly on the fourth line in his rookie season , he averaged 10 minutes of ice time per game . He went on to tally 19 points ( 9 goals and 10 assists ) over 78 games in his first full NHL season . 
 During his second NHL season , Brulé recorded 9 points ( 1 goal and 8 assists ) over 61 games with the Blue Jackets . He was sent down to the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in January 2008 for a month @-@ long assignment as his play struggled , notching 5 goals and 10 points in 16 games with the Blue Jackets ' minor league affiliate , the Syracuse Crunch . At the end of the Blue Jackets ' regular season , Brulé was reassigned to Syracuse for the club 's Calder Cup playoff run . Helping the Crunch advance to the second round , he recorded 2 goals and 5 points over 13 post @-@ season games . 
 = = = Edmonton Oilers = = = 
 In the 2008 off @-@ season , Brulé was traded to the Edmonton Oilers for forward Raffi Torres on July 1 , 2008 . He was one of the final cuts in his first training camp with the Oilers and was assigned to the Springfield Falcons , Edmonton 's AHL affiliate . On October 17 , 2008 , he suffered a knee @-@ on @-@ knee hit from opposing defenceman Adam McQuaid during a game against the Providence Bruins , causing him to miss several contests injured . During a call @-@ up to the NHL later in the season , Brulé scored his first goal with the Oilers on January 11 , 2009 , in a 2 – 1 win against the St. Louis Blues . He was reassigned to Springfield 10 days later . Finishing the season with 3 points in 11 games with the Oilers and 24 points in 39 games with the Falcons , he was re @-@ signed by Edmonton in the off @-@ season to a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract on August 12 , 2009 . 
 Brulé began the 2009 – 10 season as the Oilers ' fourth @-@ line centre out of training camp . With improved play and the injury of first @-@ line winger Ales Hemsky , Brulé moved up the Oilers ' depth chart and recorded his best statistical season in the NHL . However , after suffering from a recurring flu throughout the campaign , which sidelined him for a combined 11 games , he suffered a high @-@ ankle sprain during a game against the Dallas Stars on April 2 , 2010 ; following a collision with opposing forward Brian <unk> , his skate got jammed underneath goaltender Kari Lehtonen 's pad . The injury sidelined him for the remaining week of the campaign . He finished the season with a career @-@ high 17 goals , 20 assists and 37 points in 65 games , third in team @-@ scoring . Becoming a restricted free agent in the 2010 off @-@ season , Brulé filed for arbitration with the Oilers after failing to come to terms on a new contract . The two sides managed to avoid their arbitration hearing by signing a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 7 million deal on July 27 , 2010 . 
 After staying healthy through the first three months of the 2010 – 11 season , Brulé suffered continued injury problems for the rest of the campaign . After being sidelined with a stomach virus for four games , he suffered an abdominal injury the following month and missed 23 additional contests . After returning to the lineup , he sustained a concussion during a game against the Pittsburgh Penguins on March 13 , 2011 . In total , Brulé missed 39 games with injuries in 2010 – 11 , limiting him to 7 goals and 2 assists . 
 On June 24 , 2011 , it was reported that Brulé had been traded along with a fourth @-@ round draft pick to the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for forward Ryan Smyth . Due to health concerns , the deal never materialized as Brulé had not yet been cleared to play following his concussion ( under league rules , an injured player can be traded but cannot be bought out , which is what the Kings had planned on doing ) . Furthermore , Kings General Manager Dean Lombardi made it apparent to the media that the team wanted someone with a smaller salary cap hit if Brulé could not be bought out . The Oilers ultimately acquired Smyth in exchange for forward Colin Fraser ( whose cap hit was over $ 1 million less ) and a seventh @-@ round pick in the 2012 draft . 
 During the off @-@ season , Brulé worked with a sports psychologist to address the mental aspect of his game , including his confidence . Near the end of the Oilers ' training camp , on October 2 , 2011 , he was placed on waivers for the purpose of being assigned to the team 's AHL affiliate , the Oklahoma City Barons . While the departure of Andrew <unk> in July 2011 made room for Brulé to move up the Oilers ' depth chart at centre , the performance of Oilers rookies Ryan Nugent @-@ Hopkins and Anton Lander helped make him expendable . Regarding the move , Oilers General Manager Steve Tambellini described Brulé as having lacked consistency . Brulé cleared waivers two days later ; an Edmonton Sun article suggested that he would have likely been picked up by another team if not for his $ 1 @.@ 85 million salary . 
 = = = Phoenix Coyotes = = = 
 After recording 18 points ( eight goals and ten assists ) over 27 games with the Barons , Brulé was recalled by the Oilers on January 9 , 2012 , in lieu of injured forwards Nugent @-@ Hopkins and Jordan Eberle . In order to join the team , however , he needed to clear re @-@ entry waivers and he was consequently claimed by the Phoenix Coyotes the following day . Brulé debuted with the Coyotes on January 12 , playing 14 minutes in a 3 – 2 shootout loss to the Detroit Red Wings . Two games later , he recorded his first two points as a Coyote , a goal and an assist , in a 6 – 1 win against the Colorado Avalanche . 
 A free agent going into the NHL lockout , Brulé opted to sign as a free agent in Switzerland with ZSC Lions of the National League A on a one @-@ year contract August 13 , 2012 . In the 2012 – 13 season , he appeared in only 14 games before he requested an immediate release from his contract with the Lions to return to Canada for personal issues on October 23 , 2012 . 
 In the following season , Brulé accepted an invitation to the Coyotes ' training camp for the 2013 – 14 season . He was assigned to the Coyotes ' AHL affiliate , the Portland Pirates , to begin the season on a try @-@ out contract before on November 30 , 2013 , re @-@ signing with Phoenix on a one @-@ year , two @-@ way contract . Brulé played three games in his return to the Coyotes before he was reassigned to the Pirates . In declining to report back to the Pirates , Brulé opted to retire from professional hockey on January 1 , 2014 . 
 = = = Return to hockey = = = 
 On May 12 , 2014 , reports surfaced that Brulé opted to resume his playing career after signing a one @-@ year contract with Russian club <unk> Yekaterinburg of the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . 
 = = International play = = 
 Brulé made his international debut with Hockey Canada representing Team Pacific at the 2004 World U17 Hockey Challenge in Newfoundland . During the semi @-@ final , he scored a goal and three assists , leading Team Pacific to a win against the United States . His efforts earned him his third player of the game award of the tournament . In the gold medal game , Team Pacific lost to Team Ontario 5 – 2 , earning silver . Later that year , he represented Team Canada in the 2004 U18 Junior World Cup as an alternate captain . Brulé helped lead Team Canada to gold , scoring the game @-@ winning goal in the championship match , a 4 – 1 win against the Czech Republic . 
 The following year , Brulé participated in the Canadian national junior team 's summer development camp in preparation for the 2006 World Junior Championships . At the time of the final roster selection in December 2005 , however , Brulé was recovering from a leg injury , suffered during NHL play with the Blue Jackets . He was invited to the team 's summer camp again in 2006 , but declined , choosing to focus instead on making the roster for Columbus . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Brulé was born in Edmonton , Alberta , later moving to North Vancouver , British Columbia , during his childhood . He had a sister named Leah who died at the age of 12 as a result of complications from cerebral palsy . Brulé was nine years old at the time of his sister 's death and later had her name tattooed on his left wrist . Despite growing up in both Edmonton and Vancouver , Brulé was a childhood fan of the Los Angeles Kings . 
 In May 2010 , Brulé donated $ 10 @,@ 000 to a fund assisting an Edmonton boy suffering from lymphatic cystic <unk> . The money was allocated to a costly surgery to be performed in New York , which doctors in Canada were unable to perform . Brulé received further media attention a year later for picking up a pair of hitchhikers who turned out to be Irish rock band U2 frontman Bono and his assistant in a West Vancouver neighbourhood on May 31 , 2011 . In return , Brulé was given backstage passes for him , as well as his girlfriend and mother , for U2 's concert in Edmonton on the next day . During the show , Bono thanked Brulé for the ride . 
 In July 2013 , Brulé revealed in an interview that an adverse relationship with his father may have been at least partly to blame for his floundering NHL career . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Unusual Suspects = 
 " Unusual Suspects " is the third episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Vince Gilligan and directed by Kim Manners and aired in the United States on November 16 , 1997 on the Fox network . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 13 @.@ 0 , being watched by 21 @.@ 72 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to moderately positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . " Unusual Suspects " , however , functions as a flashback episode : in 1989 , two salesmen and a federal employee join forces when they meet Susanne Modeski , a woman who claims that she is being pursued by her supposedly violent ex @-@ boyfriend , an FBI agent named Fox Mulder . A sequel to the episode was later filmed during the series ' sixth season , entitled " Three of a Kind " . 
 The concept for having an episode dedicated to The Lone Gunmen arose when the show 's producers were forced to start production of the fifth season in the last week of August in Vancouver , but still needed series stars David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson for the filming of The X @-@ Files movie in Los Angeles . Writing duties fell to Vince Gilligan , who initially drafted a story about nanotechnology , before changing to the origins of The Lone Gunmen on behest of series creator Chris Carter . In addition , " Unusual Suspects " served as a cross @-@ over with the NBC series Homicide : Life on the Street , featuring Richard Belzer 's Detective John Munch character . Gillian Anderson as main character FBI Special Agent Dana Scully is absent in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens in medias res in 1989 , when a SWAT team conducts a raid on a Baltimore warehouse . Inside , they find a naked and disoriented Fox Mulder in a box , shouting , " They 're here ! " Three men attempt to flee the scene and are captured ; they are revealed to be the Lone Gunmen . As they sit in a city jail , they begin blaming each other for the predicament they have found themselves in . Detective John Munch interrogates John Fitzgerald Byers , who tries to explain what happened . 
 In the flashback , Byers , a public affairs officer for the FCC , attends a computer and electronics convention . There , he follows a beautiful woman who passes his booth ; he also passes by booths manned by Melvin Frohike and Richard Langly , who were both selling stolen cable television . When Byers bumps into the woman , she introduces herself as Holly and claims that her daughter had been kidnapped by her ex @-@ boyfriend , who is in the Baltimore area . 
 Holly possesses a piece of paper with " ARPANET / <unk> " written on it . Byers realizes that the words refer to the Defense Department 's computer network , which she requests he hack into . Byers , at the time an unquestioningly loyal government employee , complies after great reluctance . He finds an encrypted file on her daughter , named Susanne Modeski . Just then , a man whom Holly claims to be her boyfriend passes by Byers ' booth — Mulder . 
 Byers and Holly recruit Frohike to help them decipher the file . Both Byers and Frohike decide to assault Mulder , but they decide not to when he introduces himself as an FBI agent . Returning to his booth , Byers finds his FCC colleague being arrested for the hacking he committed . Frohike convinces Byers not to turn himself in , and recruits Langly to help them hack into the FBI database to learn more about Holly . They discover that " Holly " is actually Susanne Modeski , who is wanted for acts of murder , sabotage , and terrorism at a weapons facility in New Mexico . 
 Susanne admits her deception but claims that she was scapegoated for trying to leave her job at the weapons facility . There , she had been working on ergotamine , an <unk> gas that causes paranoia and anxiety . Susanne claims that the government plans to test the gas on civilians in Baltimore . After deciphering the file , the Lone Gunmen find that she was telling the truth , learning the location of the gas . Susanne also finds evidence that she had a tracking device put in a tooth , which she pulls out . 
 The four of them head to the warehouse , where they found the gas stored inside asthma inhalers . Suddenly , Mulder arrives to arrest them , but two dark @-@ suited men came to take Susanne . They fire at Mulder , hitting the boxes behind him and exposing him to the gas . The exposure causes Mulder to strip naked , hide in the box , and hallucinate about seeing aliens in the warehouse . Susanne shoots the men and escapes . More men then arrive , led by X , who intimidates the Lone Gunmen . Byers confronts X , asking him about his actions and mentioning the supposed cover @-@ up of the John F. Kennedy assassination . X 's unconvincing denial — " I heard it was a lone gunman " — becomes the origin of the trio 's name . X leaves , just as the police arrive and arrest the Lone Gunmen . 
 In the present , Detective Munch does not believe Byers ' story , but it is soon corroborated by Mulder . After the Lone Gunmen are released , they encounter Susanne after she has failed to get the press to believe her story ; she tells them to reveal the truth to as many people as possible . Susanne is then captured by X , who leers at the Lone Gunmen as he departs with her . Later , the three of them meet Mulder in the convention center and explain what happened to him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The concept for having an episode dedicated to The Lone Gunmen arose when the show 's producers were forced to start production of the fifth season in the last week of August in Vancouver , but still needed series stars David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson for the filming of The X @-@ Files movie in Los Angeles . The producers decided to create an episode dedicated to The Lone Gunmen , and writing duties were assigned to Vince Gilligan . Gilligan initially drafted a story involving nanotechnology , which was rejected by series creator Chris Carter . Carter came up with the idea for the episode to be how The Lone Gunmen met . Gilligan then developed the script , which took place in the city of Baltimore . The scenes with Duchovny were shot a few weeks after the rest of the episode . 
 The episode helped to solidify the different personalities of The Lone Gunmen . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz explained , " Up [ until ' Unusual Suspects ' ] , they were sort of interchangeable in the information they delivered . But then Vince , who loved the characters and really wanted a chance to dig more deeply into them , created a back story and they became a lot more interesting . " Actor Dean Haglund , who played Langly , said of the episode , " What we read in the script wasn 't really our origins as we 'd imagined it . I 'd thought we were all in a university garage band together or something . Bruce [ Harwood ] thought he was a photocopier repair man . " Much of the episode 's action focused on Byers , played by Bruce Harwood . This experience was different for him , and he noted , " I don 't think I 'd ever done an episode where I was the lead character . But I felt like the lead because it was my story about falling in love with this woman and then dragging these other two <unk> into the disaster that followed . " Vince Gilligan was particularly happy with his characterization of Byers , later admitting , " I just loved the idea of Byers working for the government and being this very gung @-@ ho pro @-@ government guy . That 's just a fundamental drama where you take a character on a journey and the journey take him 180 degrees from who he original [ ly ] was . " 
 Gilligan researched the episode in order to make it as authentic to 1989 as possible . Purportedly , he tasked Ken Hawryliw , who worked on props for the show , to find " the biggest cell phone you can find " , which yielded the Motorola featured in the episode . In addition , Gilligan met with a group of hackers who ran a news magazine called 2600 in order to learn hacker terminology and get inspiration for the episode . The episode featured cameos from several staff members of the show , including Hawryliw and Eric Knight , who was Duchovny 's personal assistant . Susanne 's alias , ' Holly ' was a reference to Gilligan 's girlfriend . 
 = = = Casting and directing = = = 
 Gilligan also came up with the idea to have a crossover with the show Homicide : Life on the Street , which also takes place in Baltimore . He later recalled , " I realized that the whole episode was framed around Byers telling his story to a Baltimore homicide detective . So I figured ' what the heck ? Homicide 's a great show , so why not try to get Richard Belzer to play his Detective [ John Munch ] character ? ' " Despite some hesitancy from Fox 's lawyers , the show got in contact with NBC executive producer Tom Fontana , who was more than willing to allow the use of Belzer : Gilligan later described Fontana as a " great guy " for assistance in the matter . The episode also features the first reappearance of X , who had been murdered in the season four opener " Herrenvolk " . The idea to bring back X was thought up by executive producer John Shiban , who helped Gilligan storyboard the episode . He noted , " we had the board set up and [ … ] and there was a piece missing and we just couldn 't come up with a how to get out of this situation , why doesn 't this assassin just kill The Lone Gunmen ? It was a flashback story and it was in 1989 and we were pacing around in my backyard , and [ … ] I just turned to him and said , ' X ! [ … ] X has another agenda ! X is the assassin , it 's not some other character , it 's our X. [ … ] He wouldn 't kill the Gunmen , ' cause he 's trying to help Mulder . ' " 
 The episode was directed by Kim Manners , who was extremely pleased with the final result . He explained , " it was a lot of fun to shoot that show . It was the first show that the Gunmen carried and I had a real good time shepherding Tommy , Dean , and Bruce , ' cause [ sic ] they were nervous , they had the whole hour to carry . " One scene with which Manners was extremely pleased was the shot wherein Susanne Modeski breaks into the Lone Gunmen 's hotel room and the Gunmen cower in fear in a corner . Manners was inspired by the 1939 film adaption of The Wizard of Oz , most specifically the image of " the Scarecrow , and the Tinman , and the Lion [ … ] shaking behind Dorothy . " Manners later noted that the sequence " really worked out well " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Unusual Suspects " premiered on the Fox network on November 16 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 0 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 13 @.@ 0 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 21 @.@ 72 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed to moderately positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club reviewer Todd VanDerWerff gave " Unusual Suspects " an A- , and wrote that the episode " is a love letter to the very idea of paranoia " . Furthermore , VanDerWerff argued that " as the episode moved its way to its climax , when Mr. X improbably lets the Gunmen live after seeing as much as they did [ ... ] it struck me that what we ’ re seeing here may not entirely be meant to be taken seriously , just as ' Memoirs Of A Cigarette Smoking Man ' [ sic ] is more about who the CSM wished he might have been than the person he actually was . This isn ’ t a true story ; it ’ s a manifesto . " Critical Myth 's John Keegan gave the episode 6 / 10 , and , while calling the entry " an interesting diversion from the normal format of the series " , he noted that " there are still some issues with the plausibility of the story , and ultimately , the questions surrounding Mulder overshadow the character development of the Gunmen themselves . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two compared the episode to " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , but called it " throw away and charming " . Shearman and Pearson criticized the episode for being " largely concerned in suggesting to the audience that the government is being conspiratorial … five seasons into a hit series which has turned that argument into a cliche . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She wrote that , " ' Unusual Suspects ' is filler – but amusing filler " . Vitaris further complimented the performance of Signy Coleman as Susanne Modeski , and called the return of " not @-@ yet @-@ dead " X as " welcome " . 
 = Vengeance ( 2009 film ) = 
 Vengeance ( Chinese : <unk> ) is a 2009 Hong Kong – French thriller film directed by Johnnie To , and written by Wai Ka @-@ Fai . It stars Johnny Hallyday , Anthony Wong , Lam Ka @-@ Tung , Lam Suet , Simon Yam and Sylvie Testud . Vengeance tells the story of Francis Costello , a French chef and former assassin . When his daughter , son @-@ in @-@ law and grandchildren are attacked by a gang of Triads , Costello heads to Macau to embark on a violent quest for revenge , enlisting the aid of three hitmen . The film explores the themes of assassination , violence and the influence of Triads in modern society . Produced by Milkyway Image , the film was released by ARP Sélection in France , and Media Asia Films in Hong Kong . 
 The idea of Johnnie To directing an English @-@ language film originated with the ARP co @-@ founders and French producers Michèle and Laurent <unk> , who had Alain Delon in mind for the lead role . In 2006 , after Delon turned down the role , the Pétins recommended Johnny Hallyday , who was cast in the lead role after meeting with To in early 2008 . Principal photography for Vengeance began in November 2008 , and concluded in February 2009 ; filming took place on location in Hong Kong and Macau , with a crew mainly based in Hong Kong . 
 Vengeance competed for the Palme D 'Or award at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival , and was released theatrically in France on 20 May 2009 . The film was later released in Hong Kong on 20 August 2009 . It premiered in North America at the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival . Vengeance was met with positive reviews , with several critics praising To 's direction , Hallyday 's performance , the cinematography and editing . During its theatrical run , the film grossed over US $ 1 @.@ 3 million worldwide , having been released in Asia and parts of Europe . In the United States , the film was distributed by IFC Films , which made it available as a video @-@ on @-@ demand selection on pay television formats . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Macau , three men break into a house , shoot a French woman ( Sylvie Testud ) and kill her husband and two children . The woman 's father , Francis Costello ( Johnny Hallyday ) , arrives to visit his daughter who is now suffering from serious injuries . She is nevertheless able to tell her father that there were three shooters and that she shot one of the killers in the ear . At a hotel , Costello meets Kwai ( Anthony Wong ) , Chu ( Lam Ka @-@ Tung ) and Fat Lok ( Lam Suet ) , a trio of hitmen who are hired to murder the unfaithful wife of Triad crime boss George Fung ( Simon Yam ) . After overhearing the murder in a hotel room , Costello reaches an unspoken agreement to walk away . Costello later tracks down Kwai 's syndicate , hands them a stack of Euros and his watch , and asks them to help him avenge his daughter 's family 's deaths . Before doing so , though , he takes a Polaroid picture of each of the hitmen , and writes down their names , so that he will not forget what they look like . Together , the four make their way to the apartment where the shooting occurred and surmise the weapons used . 
 The four men visit a landfill to meet Kwai 's cousin Tony , who supplies illegal arms . Tony mentions that he sold matching weapons to a trio of Hong Kong hitmen who work on Seafood Street . As the four men reach the street , they see a man with a bandage over his ear . However , they see only two men . Kwai 's syndicate decide to wait until the men lead them to the third attacker . The two suspects head towards the countryside as Kwai 's syndicate follows . 
 The two men later reach a Nature reserve as the third killer shows up . The trio meet their wives , their kids and Kwai 's syndicate during the barbecue . After a tense standoff , the trio explain that they killed Costello 's grandchildren because the children had seen their faces . Not wanting to start a shootout in front of the three attackers ' wives and children , everyone waits until they have left . A moonlit gun battle ensues , with both sides suffering injuries . The three attackers flee , while Costello and Kwai 's syndicate take refuge at a run @-@ down apartment in Hong Kong to perform surgeries by themselves to remove bullets from their bodies . Costello reveals that he is a former assassin and has a bullet in his head for twenty years which is affecting his memories . 
 Shortly after they have tended to their wounds , Kwai receives a phone call from George Fung , who informs him that three of his men need help , and are with an underground non @-@ registered doctor known as " Old Five " . Fung tells Kwai that his men were attacked by three Chinese men and one white man . The four men realize that Fung ordered the hit on Costello 's daughter and her family . They head to the dwelling and kill the three attackers and leave Old Five alive , who then makes a call to Fung , reporting what had happened . Fung then contacts Kwai , explaining that Costello 's son @-@ in @-@ law was handing over Fung 's financial reports to the police . Fung also says he only ordered his men to kill the parents . Kwai replies that his syndicate has switched their loyalty from Fung to Costello as a matter of honor . 
 Later that night , Fung sends more killers to Kwai 's refuge in order to eliminate Kwai 's syndicate . A gunfight ensues , with the four men emerging victorious . As they escape , Kwai 's syndicate lose track of Costello , who is walking through a crowded street , seemingly lost in the night rain . He pulls out the Polaroid pictures that he took of the hitmen earlier , and tries to find them in the crowd . They meet again , but it becomes evident that Costello has a problem with his memory , and has rapidly forgotten who his friends are , but also what he is doing . The hitmen try to explain to Costello that he is seeking revenge for his daughter , but Costello does not recognize her , nor does he understand the concept of revenge . The three men give up in despair , and take him to a beach where they meet a pregnant woman ( Michelle Ye ) with a group of children . Kwai gives her a stack of money and ask her to take care of Costello . Kwai 's syndicate return to Macau because they lost contact with Kwai 's cousin Tony who supplies their ammunition . When they reach the landfill where Tony is living , they find him and his partner dying as they were tortured by Fung and his gang . Soon , a large group of assassins sent by Fung show up and a gunfight ensues . Kwai , Chu and Fat Lok are killed . Costello and the pregnant woman learn of the shootout during a news report . 
 The next day , Fung is having tea in a public square surrounded by his subordinates . He sees a beautiful woman ( Kwai 's pregnant friend ) having tea in the same square . As he tries to get her attention , a large group of children come asking him to buy charity stickers . The children place stickers on Fung and his men . The pregnant woman leaves the square and meets up with Costello , then tells him that the man back in the square with the most number of stickers is Fung . Costello thanks her , makes his way to the square and begins to shoot a great many of the guards as well as Fung as chaos ensues . However , Fung turns out to be wearing a bulletproof vest . His subordinates help him run away from Costello , who gives chase on foot . As Costello walks , he checks the bystanders for stickers , which tips Fung off to the fact that Costello does not actually recognize him , apart from the stickers he is wearing . Fung removes the stickers from his coat , and puts them on the jacket of a subordinate instead . This causes Costello to shoot Fung 's subordinate . Fung then removes his coat with all the stickers and runs off . 
 Costello picks up the trenchcoat and shoots more subordinates who get in his way . Fung is finally the last surviving member , so he attempts to walk nonchalantly by Costello , relying on the Frenchman 's inability to recognize him without the coat , but as he is walking by , Costello sees a sticker on Fung 's tie . Both men reach for their guns fire at each other . Fung is hit and Costello demands that he put the coat on , which Fung refuses , so Costello shoots him in the leg . Fung then puts the coat on and Costello checks the bullet holes in the coat and sees that they align with the bullets stuck in the bullet @-@ proof vest he was wearing . Costello then stands up and fires a round into Fung 's head killing him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Johnny Hallyday plays Francis Costello , a retired assassin turned chef . The character is named after Jef Costello , the lead character played by Alain Delon in Jean @-@ Pierre Melville 's 1967 film Le Samouraï . 
 Anthony Wong plays Kwai , a Hong Kong hitman who agrees to assist Costello during his visit to Macau . 
 Lam Suet plays Fay Lok , Kwai 's partner in crime . Lam 's voice is dubbed by Conroy Chan . 
 Lam Ka @-@ Tung plays Chu , another one of Kwai 's partners in crime . Lam 's voice is dubbed by Terence Yin . 
 Simon Yam plays George Fung , the film 's antagonist . He is a crime boss of Lok , Chu and Kwai . 
 Other cast members include Sylvie Testud as Irene Thompson , Costello 's daughter ; Michelle Ye as a pregnant woman who aids Costello in his fight for revenge ; and Vincent Sze as Mr. Thompson , Irene 's husband and the father of her two children . Cheung Siu @-@ Fai , Berg Ng , and Felix Wong appear as a trio of hitmen hired to kill Irene and her family . Maggie <unk> plays Inspector Wong , a Hong Kong police inspector . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Vengeance is a French – Hong Kong co @-@ production between Hong Kong company Media Asia and French distributor ARP Sélection . It was produced by Milkyway Image , the independent production company founded by director Johnnie To and screenwriter Wai Ka @-@ Fai . The film reunites To and Wai , following their collaboration on the 2007 Hong Kong film Mad Detective . The crew for Vengeance were based mainly in Hong Kong , and were previous contributors of To 's previous films : Cheng Siu @-@ Keung served as a cinematographer ; Stanley Cheung served as a costume designer ; during post @-@ production Martin Chappell served as a sound editor , while David M. Richardson served as the film 's editor ; Lo <unk> composed the film 's score , having done the same for To 's previous films , Election , All About Ah @-@ Long and The Big Heat ; Nicky Li , a member of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team served as an action choreographer . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Having distributed several of To 's films in France , Michèle <unk> and her husband Laurent discussed the idea of having To direct an English @-@ language feature film . In March 2006 , the Pétins met To in Sai Kung Town , Hong Kong , where they expressed their idea to him . The couple mentioned Alain Delon as a possibility for the lead role . 
 To returned to France in May 2006 , while his film , Election 2 , premiered " Out of Competition " at the 60th Cannes Film Festival . He met with Delon , who had expressed his interest in working with To , and To promised to meet with Delon once a film treatment was written . To returned to France in March 2007 , where he handed the Pétins a step outline of what he and screenwriter Wai Ka @-@ Fai had envisioned . Delon , however , was no longer interested in the project . In July 2007 , the Pétins met with French musician and actor Johnny Hallyday , who was interested in making a new film . After meeting with Hallyday , who had expressed his love for world cinema , the Pétins decided that he would be perfect in the lead role . 
 In February 2008 , while promoting his previous film , Sparrow , at the Berlin International Film Festival , To was approached by the Pétins , who had promised him that they would set up a meeting with Hallyday . While Hallyday was a fan of his films , To had never heard of Hallyday . The producers gave To footage from Hallyday 's concert performances along with a copy of the 2002 French film The Man on the Train , in which Hallyday co @-@ starred . After viewing the given footage , To had expressed that he had enjoyed the film , but was more impressed with Hallyday 's concert performances . In March 2008 , To finally met with Hallyday over a dinner , expressing their love for music . Upon their first meeting , To decided that Hallyday would be perfect in the lead role . 
 Production plans were nearly put to a halt when To was hired to remake the 1970 French crime film Le Cercle rouge , meaning that Vengeance would not be made until 2010 . However , in June and July 2008 , Ding <unk> @-@ Shan , a long @-@ time production assistant and English translator for To , contacted Hallyday and the Pétins , and told them that production plans for The Red Circle were falling behind schedule and that To would be ready to film Vengeance by the end of October 2008 . Hallyday was <unk> about meeting with the director once again , and prepared for his role by viewing several of To 's previous films , before making his first visit to Hong Kong , where he would get the chance to meet with his co @-@ stars . Before principal photography began , Hallyday met his co @-@ stars , Anthony Wong , Lam Ka @-@ Tung , Simon Yam , and Lam Suet , during a dinner on 7 November 2008 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Vengeance took place in Hong Kong and Macau from 15 November 2008 to 31 January 2009 . The cast and crew of the film began with a celebration on the rooftop of the Milkyway Image studio in Kwun Tong , Hong Kong . While the story is set in Macau , several scenes were shot in Hong Kong . 
 For To , filming Vengeance differed from his usual style of filmmaking . While he is used to improvising his scenes as a director , Vengeance marked the first time that To had to work with a complete shooting script since the producers demanded that the story and dialogue already be written . Hallyday was the only actor to have read the script , while Anthony Wong had knowledge of the story . To explained that his purpose was to " keep the actors natural and spontaneous . They don 't have time to create something . They 're given a situation and they act it right away . " After filming was complete , the cast and crew celebrated by having a final dinner at a restaurant located near the Milkyway Image studio , hoping to meet again at the forthcoming Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Vengeance was first released in France on 20 May 2009 . It was later released in Belgium on 27 May 2009 . On 5 August 2009 , the film premiered in Asia at the 2009 Hong Kong Summer International Film Festival . It was released theatrically in Hong Kong on 20 August 2009 . Vengeance was also released in other Asian countries , including Malaysia on 27 August 2009 ; Taiwan on 31 October 2009 ; and Singapore on 5 November 2009 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Vengeance was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc formats in France and Hong Kong on 11 December 2009 . It is also available in VCD format in Hong Kong . Releases for the French version include a single @-@ disc edition DVD ; a two @-@ disc special edition DVD ; and a special edition Blu @-@ ray Disc . In France , the home video formats , along with its special features , do not include English subtitles . 
 IFC Films currently serves as a North American distributor . In the United States , the film was released as a video on demand option on pay television formats , beginning on 4 August 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Vengeance has received generally positive reviews from film critics . Based on 22 reviews , review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that the film currently holds an 91 % " Fresh " rating , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 2 out of 10 . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average out of 100 to critics ' reviews , the film received a score of 76 out of 100 based on 5 reviews . 
 Vengeance first received praise from several critics who attended the screening at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival . Chicago Sun @-@ Times film critic Roger Ebert wrote that the film had " certain parallels " with Clint Eastwood 's 1992 film Unforgiven . In his initial review , Ebert awarded Vengeance 3 ½ stars out of four , describing it as " a formula thriller done as an elegant genre exercise . " Justin Chang of Variety wrote that the film was " a smoothly executed revenge thriller . " David Phelps , a film critic for The <unk> concluded his review by writing , " If not one of To 's worst films , Vengeance is one of his best . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote that was film a " highlight " of Cannes , writing , " With his ruined face and pale snake eyes Mr. Hallyday holds the screen while Mr. To shakes it up . " Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film 's cinematography and editing : " Cheng Siu @-@ Keung 's moody cinematography gives Vengeance a noir @-@ ish sensibility while David Richardson 's smooth editing pulls the action sequences together in a most satisfying way . " Mike Hale of The New York Times wrote , " Vengeance is not top @-@ flight Johnnie To ... But the To poetry keeps breaking through : a gun battle in a city park stops and starts as clouds pass before the moon . " 
 Negative reviews had critics comparing Vengeance to To 's previous films . Lee Marshall of Screen International wrote , " What 's really lacking in Vengeance is the narrative inventiveness which lifted films like Breaking News or <unk> out of the Hong Kong crime genre box and turned them into arthouse crossover items . " Perry Lam of Muse Magazine wrote , " Overall , the movie lacks the flashes of life and brilliance that mark the best works in the genre . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In France , Vengeance was released to 280 theatres and in its first week , opened at eleventh place in the box office , grossing only US $ 539 @,@ 809 , and selling 63 @,@ 240 tickets . The film 's revenues decreased by 66 @.@ 9 % in its second weekend , moving down to fourteenth place and earning $ 178 @,@ 459 at the box office . After only two weeks of release , Vengeance grossed a total of $ 744 @,@ 881 in France alone . 
 Vengeance was released in Belgium seven days after its release in France . On the weekend of 27 May 2009 to 31 May , the film opened at 22nd place in the box office , earning $ 10 @,@ 397 on the opening weekend , with a total gross of $ 11 @,@ 439 . The film dropped down to the 29th spot in the box office , grossing only $ 6 @,@ 886 in its second week . At the end of its three weeks of theatrical release in Belgium , Vengeance grossed a total $ 27 @,@ 377 . 
 Vengeance was later released in Hong Kong , where it opened at sixth place , grossing $ 121 @,@ 837 on its opening weekend . The film dropped down to tenth place in its second week , grossing $ 37 @,@ 629 for a total gross of $ 208 @,@ 976 . During the next three weeks of its release , Vengeance continued a decrease in revenue as well as the number of theatres screening the film . The film dropped down to 21st spot on 3 to 6 September 2009 weekend , grossing only $ 1 @,@ 951 . By the end of its theatrical run in Hong Kong , the film grossed $ 236 @,@ 027 . In total , Vengeance has grossed $ 1 @,@ 346 @,@ 952 worldwide , despite not being released in other parts of Europe . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Vengeance first competed for the prestigious Palme D 'Or at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival . In North America , the film premiered as a " Special Presentations " feature at the Ryerson Theatre during the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival . 
 = = Remake = = 
 Israeli directors <unk> <unk> and Aaron <unk> were hired by Sony Pictures to direct an American version of the film . 
 = Washington State Route 536 = 
 State Route 536 ( SR 536 ) is a 5 @.@ 38 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 8 @.@ 66 km ) state highway serving Skagit County in the U.S. state of Washington . The highway travels southeast from SR 20 near Fredonia through Mount Vernon to an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) east of the city . SR 536 was created during the 1964 highway renumbering as a replacement for the Anacortes branch of Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) . SR 536 was shortened to its current route in 1973 after SR 20 was extended west and a spur route was established to serve Anacortes . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 536 begins as the Memorial Highway at an intersection with SR 20 located south of Skagit Regional Airport and east of Fredonia . The highway travels east through farmland before following the Skagit River southeast into Mount Vernon . SR 536 crosses the Skagit River on a swing bridge into Downtown Mount Vernon , turning east onto Division Street and south onto 3rd Street . The highway turns east at the Skagit Transportation Center onto Kincaid Street and crosses a BNSF rail line before ending at a diamond interchange with I @-@ 5 . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 4 @,@ 600 and 23 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly in Downtown Mount Vernon . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 536 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering as a 20 @.@ 63 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 33 @.@ 20 km ) highway connecting Anacortes to Mount Vernon . The highway , first codified as the Anacortes branch of PSH 1 in 1937 , began at the Anacortes Ferry Terminal and traveled south to SR 525 , turning east and traveling over the <unk> Channel , leaving Fidalgo Island . SR 536 continued east to Fredonia , intersecting the termini of SR 20 and SR 537 , before turning southeast over the Skagit River into Mount Vernon and ending at U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) . US 99 and PSH 1 were replaced by I @-@ 5 in segments between 1966 and 1970 , as SR 536 was widened , paved , and extended east to a new interchange . SR 20 was extended west to Whidbey Island and the Olympic Peninsula over SR 536 and SR 525 in 1973 , shortening SR 536 to its current route and creating SR 20 Spur in Anacortes . No major revisions to the route of SR 536 have occurred since 1973 , however WSDOT repaved the entire roadway and added sidewalk ramps in 2009 at a cost of $ 3 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Skagit County . 
 = Worsley = 
 Worsley ( pronounced locally as <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a town in the metropolitan borough of the City of Salford , in Greater Manchester , England . The population of the town at the 2011 census was 10 @,@ 035 . It lies along the course of Worsley Brook , 5 @.@ 75 miles ( 9 @.@ 25 km ) west of Manchester . The M60 motorway bisects the area . 
 Historically part of Lancashire , Worsley has provided evidence of Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon activity , including two Roman roads . The completion in 1761 of the Bridgewater Canal allowed Worsley to expand from a small village of cottage industries to an important town based upon cotton manufacture , iron @-@ working , brick @-@ making and extensive coal mining . Later expansion came after the First and Second World Wars , when large urban estates were built in the region . 
 Today , Worsley is under consideration to be made a World Heritage Site , including Worsley Delph , a scheduled monument . A significant part of the town 's historic centre is now a conservation area . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 Worsley is first mentioned in a Pipe roll of 1195 – 96 as <unk> , in the claim of a Hugh <unk> to a part of the fee of two knights in nearby Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell and Worsley . There are many variations on the name ; <unk> , 1195 ; <unk> , 1212 ; <unk> , c . 1220 ; <unk> , 1254 ; <unk> , <unk> , 1276 ; <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , 1292 ; <unk> , <unk> , 1301 ; Worsley , 1444 ; and " <unk> alias <unk> alias <unk> " , 1581 . The spelling of the name in early documents , suggests a Saxon origin . Ge @-@ <unk> , the Old English form of the name , means " the cleared place which was cultivated or settled . " The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle contain no references to Worsley . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Two Roman roads run through the area . Connecting Mamucium ( Manchester ) with Coccium ( Wigan ) , one passes through Worsley near Drywood , and over Mosley Common . The present @-@ day A6 road follows part of the course of another Roman road , which passes through the northern part of the area near Walkden and Little Hulton . In 1947 a hoard of 550 Roman coins was found near a quarry in Boothstown , dated to between AD 250 and 275 , and in 1958 the head of a man was found on Worsley Moss . Named " Worsley man " , and originally thought to be no more than 20 years old , upon the discovery of Lindow Man it was re @-@ examined and dated to approximately the 2nd century AD , in the Romano @-@ British period . 
 Worsley later fell under the control of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , who controlled much of the area around Manchester and who also defeated the British at the Battle of Chester in AD 615 . Edward the Elder rebuilt the fortifications at Manchester , and in AD 924 captured all the land between the rivers Mersey and Irwell , making it demesne in the Kingdom of Wessex . During the Middle Ages the area was covered with forests and marshlands . <unk> populated by craftsmen and serfs , Worsley grew as a settlement adjoining an ancient corn mill , close to the location of the present @-@ day Worsley Road Bridge . Most farms throughout Lancashire were small with their tenants dependent upon secondary employment , however in 1719 a John Kay of Worsley had five <unk> , two bulls , 17 cows , " young cattle upon the moors " , and a " cow at hire " , all valued at £ 97 5s . Marl was commonly used as a fertiliser , and is recorded in use in 1719 . Wheeler 's Manchester : Its Political , Social and Commercial History , Ancient and Modern ( 1836 ) states that about one @-@ fifth of the land around Worsley , Astley and Tyldesley was in tillage , lower on average than the surrounding areas . 
 = = = Bridgewater estates = = = 
 Worsley was , originally , the largest manor of the seven ancient manors of the Bridgewater Estates . It was created by William I and held for him by the Barton family in thegnage , and for them by a Norman knight named Elias , who fought in the crusades . On his death in Rhodes , the manor remained with Elias ' son , whose family had by that time adopted the name of the village as its family name . On 23 June 1311 a substantial part of the Manor of Hulton was granted to the <unk> . The family held both manors until the late 14th century , whereon they passed to the Massey family of Tatton , and then in the 16th century to the Brereton family of Malpas , Cheshire . The Brereton family added the Manor of Bedford ( a small area of land to the west of Worsley ) to the estate . Richard Brereton later married Dorothy Egerton , and upon his death the estates passed into the Egerton family . 
 In 1617 John Egerton , son of Sir Thomas Egerton , became Earl of Bridgewater . The Egerton family was descended from Sir Richard Egerton of Ridley , Cheshire . His illegitimate son , Thomas Egerton , was a prominent lawyer who served as Master of the Rolls from 1594 to 1603 , and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal from 1596 to 1617 and also as Lord High Chancellor of England . John Egerton succeeded to Worsley in 1639 , and died in 1649 . He was succeeded by the second and third Earls of Bridgewater . The title of Duke of Bridgewater was first given to Scroop Egerton in 1720 . He devised a navigation system for Worsley which was not carried out . His son , the third Duke of Bridgewater Francis Egerton , was to build the Bridgewater Canal . 
 The Duke purchased the Manor of Pemberton ( near Wigan ) in 1758 , the Manor of Hindley in 1765 , and the Manor of Cadishead in 1776 . Upon his death in 1803 he was succeeded by George Leveson @-@ Gower , 1st Duke of Sutherland . In 1833 the estate was inherited by Gower 's son , Francis Leveson @-@ Gower who changed his surname to Egerton , and in 1846 became the Earl of Ellesmere . In 1836 he purchased the Manor of Tyldesley . He is recorded as saying that he found Worsley to be " a God @-@ forsaken place , full of drunken , rude people with deplorable morals " . 
 Worsley New Hall , designed by Edward Blore , was built in 1846 for Francis Egerton the First Earl of Ellesmere . The plans are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum . Queen Victoria visited the hall in 1851 and 1857 ; Edward VII and Queen Alexandra visited when Edward was Prince of Wales in 1869 , and on 6 July 1909 . The hall was used as a hospital in World War I and in World War II housed Dunkirk evacuees , American soldiers preparing for D @-@ Day and the Lancashire Fusiliers . In 1943 the hall was badly damaged by fire and demolished in 1949 . 
 = = = Industrial Revolution = = = 
 Coal has been mined around Worsley from as long ago as 1376 , originally in bell pits . The coal seams in the area tend to be fairly thin , slanting downwards from north to south , and so deeper mining became necessary during the 17th century . 
 With the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the growing use of steam power , there was a rapid increase in the demand for coal . The Duke 's mines were among those supplying the surrounding districts but transport was both inefficient and expensive , and the mines also suffered from persistent flooding . His solution to these problems was to build a canal from Worsley to Salford , and an underground canal into the mines from Worsley Delph . The canal boats would carry 30 long tons ( 30 t ) at a time , – more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart . The Duke and his estate manager obtained an Act of Parliament empowering them to begin construction on a planned route directly to Salford , avoiding the River Irwell . 
 James Brindley was brought in for his technical expertise and suggested varying the route of the proposed canal away from Salford and across the Irwell into Manchester . A second Act was secured for this variance , which included an aqueduct to cross the Irwell . This was built relatively quickly for the time ; work commenced in September 1760 and the first boat crossed on 17 July 1761 . The canal opened in 1761 and along with the stone aqueduct at Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell , was considered a major engineering achievement . One writer said that when finished , it " will be the most <unk> thing in the kingdom , if not in Europe . The boats in some places are to go underground , and in other places over a navigable river , without communicating with its waters ... " 
 Worsley Delph , now a scheduled monument , was the entrance to the Duke 's underground mines . Two entrances , built years apart , allowed access to the <unk> boats , the largest of which could carry 12 long tons ( 12 t ) of coal . The entrances allow access to 46 miles ( 74 km ) of underground canal on four levels , linked by inclined planes . 
 The burgeoning village became a hub of commercial activity . The Duke employed craftsmen to service a wide range of industries including boat @-@ making , plastering , blacksmithing and mining . A local quarry supplied limestone , for which a kiln was constructed at the junction of Barton Road ( <unk> ) and Stableford Road . A quarry at the Delph supplied building materials for the region , including the stone used to construct Brindley 's aqueduct . To accommodate the workers needed for these industries the Duke built extra housing and cottages . In a diary entry of 1773 , Josiah Wedgwood wrote of the area " We next visited Worsley which has the appearance of a considerable Seaport Town . His Grace has built some hundreds of houses , & is every year adding considerably to their number . " Worsley Green became a thriving centre of industry . 
 With the death of the Duke in 1803 , his estates were inherited by his nephew , George Leveson @-@ Gower , who later became the Duke of Sutherland . The canal and coal estates were placed under the control of the Bridgewater Trust , and in 1833 the rest of the estates were inherited by the Duke of Sutherland 's son , Francis Leveson @-@ Gower who changed his surname to Egerton , and in 1846 became the Earl of Ellesmere . The mines ceased production in 1887 , and with the expiration of the Bridgewater Trust in 1903 the village began to change ; the Duke 's warehouse and the works on what is now Worsley Green were demolished . Worsley Brook was culverted , and a memorial fountain to the Duke was built from the bricks of the works ' chimney . 
 Although much of the industry that dominated Worsley was in decline , in 1937 Sir Montague Maurice Burton opened a clothing factory along the East Lancashire Road . Built in the Art Deco style , in 1938 the factory employed 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Under the Housing Act 1919 , large overspill estates were built by the council for veterans of the First World War , but a larger change to the area came after the end of the Second World War , when the then City of Salford was forced to rehouse many of its inhabitants . With little land left , 4 @,@ 518 new houses were built in the urban district by the Worsley Project . 18 @,@ 000 people were rehoused under the scheme , which included new facilities , shops and schools . Another housing estate was built during the 1970s to the north of Worsley Green . 
 In 1944 , during World War II , a flying bomb landed on a house near Worsley Dam . An Anti Aircraft Operations Room ( <unk> ) was built in the 1950s . Although unused the building still exists , in wooded land to the west of the town , on the site of the former Worsley New Hall . 
 = = Governance = = 
 From the 11th century , Worsley was a township in the Eccles parish of the hundred of Salford , and county of Lancashire . Worsley was originally in Eccles ecclesiastical parish , and also in Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell Poor Law Union . The Swinton area of the township was in 1867 included in the Swinton Local Board of Health , which from 1869 became the Swinton and Pendlebury Local Board of Health . In 1892 a small part of the township of Worsley was included in the Borough of Eccles . In 1894 , under the Local Government Act 1894 , Worsley Urban District was created . A part of the township then within the area of the Swinton and Pendlebury Local Board of Health was formed into Swinton township , becoming part of Swinton and Pendlebury Urban District . In 1907 two small detached parts of Worsley civil parish , then inside Swinton civil parish , were added to Swinton civil parish . A town hall was opened on 22 June 1911 . Worsley Urban District gained 21 acres ( 85 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land from Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell Civil Parish in 1921 , and in 1933 gained the area of Little Hulton Urban District . Parts were added to Eccles Borough and Irlam Urban District . 
 In 1955 Swinton and Pendlebury Borough gained a small part of Worsley Urban District , and under the Local Government Act 1972 , in 1974 Worsley 's Urban District status was abolished , becoming part of Salford Metropolitan District . 
 Following its 2006 review of parliamentary representation in Greater Manchester , the Boundary Commission for England recommended the creation of a modified Worsley constituency , incorporating a part of Eccles . The new constituency is called Worsley and Eccles South . Until the United Kingdom general election 2010 , Worsley was represented in the House of Commons by Barbara Keeley , Labour Party member for the Worsley constituency . After the election , Keeley became the MP for Worsley and Eccles South . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 30 ′ 0 ″ N 2 ° 23 ′ 0 ″ W ( 53 @.@ 5000 ° , − 2 @.@ <unk> ° ) , Worsley stands about 206 feet ( 63 m ) above sea level . Sheltered at the foot of a middle coal measure running approximately northwest and southeast across the area , the village lies along the course of Worsley Brook , which cuts through the ridge . The ridge also forms part of the northern edge of the Irwell Valley . The area is bordered on the north by the East Lancashire Road , and on the south by the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and part of the Bridgewater Canal . The larger towns of Swinton and Eccles lie to the east and southeast respectively , and to the west the area is largely bordered by Chat Moss , open fields , and forest . The M60 and M62 motorways cut directly through the area . 
 The underlying measures of coal have proved important for the development of the area ; it was around Worsley Delph that the settlement first began to grow . Parts of the area are within an indicated floodplain . Worsley 's climate is generally temperate , like the rest of Greater Manchester . The mean highest and lowest temperatures ( 13 @.@ 2 ° C ( 55 @.@ 8 ° F ) and 6 @.@ 4 ° C ( 43 @.@ 5 ° F ) ) are slightly above the national average , while the annual rainfall ( 806 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 76 in ) ) and average hours of sunshine ( 1394 @.@ 5 hours ) are respectively above and below the national averages . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the Office for National Statistics , at the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , the ward of Worsley had a population of 9 @,@ 833 , of which 4 @,@ 801 were male and 5 @,@ 032 female . It is the fifth least populous ward in Salford , and the third least densely populated . The ward has a higher proportion of married couples with and without children than Salford as a whole . Of those over 16 years old , 1 @,@ 929 were single ( never married ) and 4 @,@ 267 married . Worsley 's 4 @,@ 102 households included 632 married couples without children , 818 with dependent children and 356 with non @-@ dependent children . There were 249 lone @-@ parent households with children . 642 households were occupied by pensioners living alone . 
 Of those aged 16 – 74 , 1 @,@ 428 had no academic qualifications , 1 @,@ 078 had attained a level one qualification , 183 children aged between 16 – 17 and 242 people aged 18 – 74 were in full @-@ time education . Worsley ward has the lowest levels of unemployment in Salford , in April 2006 0 @.@ 9 % of the economically active population were unemployment benefit claimants , comparing well to Salford as a whole where the figure is 3 @.@ 7 % . The area is considered to be one of the more affluent parts of Salford . 
 At 12 @.@ 6 reported crimes per thousand population , the crime rate in Worsley is lower on average than Salford , which stands at 163 @.@ 1 per thousand population . 
 = = Economy = = 
 One of Worsley 's early industries was weaving . A cottage industry , cotton would be spun on spinning wheels and hand @-@ operated looms in people 's homes to produce cloth . Merchants would then purchase this cloth , selling it at the Bridgewater Hotel , then known as the Old Grapes Inn . 
 Worsley now has little industry , and is in the main a tourist destination and commuter town . The area has two large hotels ; a Novotel and a Marriott . Worsley Old Hall is now a public house and restaurant in the <unk> and Price chain , part of the Restaurant Group . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Worsley Village was in 1969 designated as a conservation area by the former Lancashire County Council . <unk> by the A572 Worsley Road , the area covered about 34 @.@ 25 acres ( 138 @,@ 600 m2 ) of land and included 40 listed buildings , such as the Packet House , a telephone kiosk , and the Delph sluice gates , but this list has since increased to 48 listed buildings . Much of the area around the canal and Worsley Delph was restored and landscaped between 1966 and 1967 by the Worsley Civic Trust and the local council , ready for a visit by Elizabeth II on 17 May 1968 . As the canal passes through Worsley , iron oxide from the mines has , for many years , stained the water bright orange . The removal of this colouration is currently the subject of a £ 2 @.@ 5 million remedial scheme . 
 Wardley Hall is an early medieval manor house and a Grade I listed building in Wardley . The current hall dates from around 1500 but was extensively rebuilt in the 19th and 20th centuries . Worsley Old Hall is a Grade II listed building near Walkden Road . The Post Medieval building is said to have been moated , but no signs of the moat now remain . 
 Parts of Worsley are currently being considered as World Heritage Sites . The area includes Worsley Delph ( itself a scheduled monument ) , parts of Worsley Green , and the Bridgewater Canal . 
 In 2015 , the Royal Horticultural Society announced plans for a restoration of the garden at Worsley New Hall , to open in 2019 under the name RHS Garden Bridgewater . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Following an Act of Parliament of 1861 , in 1864 the Eccles , Tyldesley and Wigan branch line was opened by the London and North Western Railway , along with a station at Worsley which required the demolition of six cottages . The first sod had been cut by the Earl of Ellesmere . An additional branch line to Bolton was opened in 1870 , branching from the Tyldesley Loopline line at Roe Green . A railway station at Monton Green was opened in 1887 to cater mainly for commuters into Manchester . The lines were important thoroughfares for the transport of coal in the area , including Mosley Common Colliery . Both lines were closed under the Beeching Axe in 1969 , and have since been partially reclaimed by Salford City Council as recreational pathways . 
 Early public transport included the Farnworth horse @-@ bus service , with a terminus at the nearby Stocks Hotel in 1885 . An electric tram service was founded in 1903 by the South Lancashire Tramways Company . 
 = = Education = = 
 One of the first Sunday schools to be established in England may have been at Worsley . Built in the 1780s in a cottage close to the present @-@ day courthouse , and founded by Thomas Bury ( a colliery manager for the 3rd Duke ) children were taught by a Luke Lowe , a cooper also in the Duke 's employ . In 1785 a further three Sunday schools were established in the area , and by 1788 over 300 children were attending the four schools . Francis Egerton built a day school in 1838 , which later became known as St Mark 's School . This was demolished during construction of the M62 motorway , and replaced with a new school on Aviary Road , opened 19 October 1968 . 
 The area of Worsley contains a number of primary schools , including ( but not limited to ) Christ the King RC Primary School , Hilton Lane Primary School and <unk> Lea Primary School . Secondary schools include Bridgewater School and Harrop Fold School . 
 Salford College has a campus in nearby Walkden ( once within Worsley Urban District ) . The college 's Worsley Campus , the Learning Resource and specialist Media Centre , caters for 16- to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds , and provides access to 50 internet workstations , 15 @,@ 000 books , and resources for e @-@ learning . It also has a suite of hair and beauty salons , a performing arts theatre and a sports hall and fitness suite . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Ellenbrook Chapel , the first church in Worsley was built in 1209 by the Worsley family . Methodism was first practised in the area in 1784 , by the notable preacher Matthew Mayer . Later services were held in various locations around the area , and in 1801 a Methodist chapel was built along Barton Road . The foundation stone for St Mark 's Church was laid on 14 June 1844 by George Granville Francis Egerton , the son of Francis Egerton . Designed by the architect George Gilbert Scott , the church was consecrated on 2 July 1846 by the Bishop of Chester , John Bird Sumner . The church tower is now home to the mechanism for the Bridgewater Clock from the Bridgewater workshops at Worsley Green . The clock strikes 13 times at 1 pm , originally so that workmen did not miss the end of their dinner break . Many gravestones in the churchyard were cut from rock sourced at Worsley Delph . Following a proposed hotel development in 1981 the area around the church and vicarage was designated a conservation area . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Worsley Golf Club was founded in 1894 on part of the Earl of Ellesmere 's estate at Broadoak Park . The area has a clay pigeon shooting club , west of the M60 . A racecourse development proposed on land near Boothstown was the subject of a public inquiry and rejected by the local council after a sustained campaign by local councillors . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Home Office policing in Worsley is provided by the Greater Manchester Police . The nearest police station is at Little Hulton . Public transport is co @-@ ordinated by the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive . Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Notable people from Worsley include the actress Helen Cherry , and television commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme . Statistician Harry Campion , who played a leading role in the development of official statistics after the Second World War , was born in Kearsley in May 1905 and brought up in Worsley . Arthur Thomas <unk> was a mathematician and oceanographer born in Boothstown in March 1890 . Footballer Ryan Giggs caused controversy in the mid @-@ 2000s when he bought a Victorian mansion on the outskirts of the village for £ 1 @.@ 9 million and demolished it to build a new house which cost up to £ 4 million . 
 = Interstate 680 ( California ) = 
 Interstate 680 ( I @-@ 680 ) is a north – south Interstate Highway in Northern California . It curves around the eastern cities of the San Francisco Bay Area from San Jose to Interstate 80 at Fairfield , bypassing cities along the eastern shore of San Francisco Bay such as Oakland and Richmond while serving others more inland such as Pleasanton and Concord . 
 Built in the 1920s and designated in 1955 , I @-@ 680 begins at a junction with I @-@ 280 and US 101 ( Bayshore Freeway ) , and heads northeast and north @-@ northwest through the northeast part of San Jose . After passing State Route 237 ( SR 237 ) in Milpitas and SR 262 in Fremont , I @-@ 680 abruptly turns northeast ( where a connection to a SR 238 freeway was planned ) and enters the hills and valleys of the California Coast Ranges . The highway crosses over Mission Pass , also known as the Sunol Grade , and descends into the Sunol Valley , where it meets SR 84 near Sunol . From Sunol , I @-@ 680 again heads north @-@ northwesterly through valleys , including the San Ramon Valley , along the Calaveras Fault . Junctions along this portion include I @-@ 580 in Dublin and SR 24 in Walnut Creek . Beyond the latter interchange , a three @-@ way directional junction with the SR 24 freeway west to Oakland , I @-@ 680 heads north into Pleasant Hill , where SR 242 splits and I @-@ 680 again heads northwesterly . After the junction with SR 4 in Martinez , the highway crosses the Carquinez Strait on the Benicia @-@ Martinez Bridge , immediately meeting the east end of I @-@ 780 on the Benicia end . The remainder of I @-@ 680 , from Benicia to I @-@ 80 at Fairfield , lies between a hilly area to the west representing the southwestern tip of the Vaca Mountains , and a marshy area ( along the Suisun Bay and Cordelia Slough ) to the east . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 680 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System . This route is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System from the Santa Clara @-@ Alameda county line to SR 24 in Walnut Creek . , and is a scenic route from either SR 238 or SR 262 ( <unk> 's designation is unclear ; just defines it as Mission Blvd . ) to the Contra Costa county line , and from the Alameda county line to SR 24 . It 's routed legislatively as ( a ) Route 101 near San Jose to Route 780 at Benicia passing near Warm Springs , Mission San Jose , Scotts Corners , and Sunol , and via Walnut Creek , and ( b ) Route 780 at Benicia to Route 80 near Cordelia . 
 The route begins at U.S. Route 101 at the Joe Colla Interchange , where it acts as a continuation of I @-@ 280 eastward . From here , it begins its journey northward through San Jose , where it meets the Capitol Expressway , signed as CR G21 , about a mile northeast of I @-@ 680 's southern terminus . The next exit northbound is SR 130 , which is also known as Alum Rock Avenue , unsigned at the intersection . As it continues through Santa Clara County , it meets numerous local roads before interchanging with the Montague Expressway . Here , it exits San Jose and enters the city of Milpitas , California , where it meets SR 237 , often referred to as Calaveras Boulevard . After one more intersection , I @-@ 680 exits Santa Clara County and enters Alameda County . 
 In Alameda County , the freeway begins in the city of Fremont , where it intersects SR 262 , which was unsigned until 2000 . Continuing through the city , it meets Mission Boulevard at SR 238 before exiting the city . Prior to 2002 , two ghost ramps existed here , remains of an abandoned freeway project replacing Mission Blvd . Amid Alameda County , it abruptly turns northeastward and enters a hilly area , where it crosses over Mission Pass , and descends into the Sunol Valley , where it runs concurrently with SR 84 for a short while . Afterwards , it enters Pleasanton and intersects with I @-@ 580 , currently California 's longest auxiliary interstate providing access to Oakland and the Central Valley . It enters Dublin for a short segment before exiting the county and entering Contra Costa County . 
 Upon entering Contra Costa County , the route meets numerous local roads through the cities of San Ramon , Danville , and Alamo before entering Walnut Creek , where it meets SR 24 . I @-@ 680 then enters Pleasant Hill for a short time and Concord , where it meets SR 242 . Upon exiting Concord , it meets SR 4 . It then enters Martinez , where it follows the Benicia @-@ Martinez Bridge over the Carquinez Strait , on which the route crosses the county line and enters Benicia in Solano County . On the Benicia @-@ Martinez bridge , I @-@ 680 northbound requires a toll , while I @-@ 680 southbound is free direction . In Benicia , I @-@ 680 interchanges with I @-@ 780 . It then exits the city and after passing through rural areas routing parallel to the San Joaquin Delta , it enters Fairfield , where it meets I @-@ 80 , which is the route 's northern terminus . 
 In the wake of the September 11 Attacks , a U.S. flag was painted on a large piece of concrete on a hill along the Sunol Grade . It stayed there for nine years before Caltrans painted it over , as the mural had been painted on without authorization . Due to this action being taken shortly before July 4th , 2010 , and also due to the mural 's fame , this was met with controversy . The flag was replaced shortly later . 
 Of the above names , only the name Sinclair Freeway for its designated portion usually appears on maps , and the other portions on maps are always unnamed , referred to as simply I @-@ 680 . 
 = = = High @-@ occupancy lanes = = = 
 A 14 @-@ mile ( 23 km ) southbound high @-@ occupancy toll ( HOT ) lane along I @-@ 680 between SR 84 in Alameda County and SR 237 in Santa Clara County opened on September 20 , 2010 . Solo drivers are required to pay a toll via a <unk> transponder . Studies regarding the implementation of northbound HOT lanes on I @-@ 680 are currently underway . 
 HOV Lanes exist on this portion from slightly north of I @-@ 580 to Walnut Creek , and again from Concord to the Benicia @-@ Martinez Bridge . The portion leading to the Benicia @-@ Martinez Bridge requires a car with 3 + persons , unlike California 's regular carpool lanes of 2 + persons . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Historic routing = = = 
 By the 1920s , a road ran south from Martinez through Walnut Creek , Dublin , Danville , and Sunol to Mission San Jose , where it met State Highway Route 5 ( Mission Boulevard , signed over the years as US 48 , US 101E , SR 9 , and now SR 238 ) . It was not yet paved south of Dublin , where it crossed Mission Pass between the Sunol Valley and the San Francisco Bay basin . The majority of this roadway was added to the state highway system in 1933 as portions of several routes : Route 108 from Mission San Jose to Sunol , Route 107 from Sunol to Walnut Creek , and Route 75 from Walnut Creek to Pleasant Hill . 
 At Martinez , the Martinez @-@ Benicia Ferry took automobiles across the Carquinez Strait to Benicia , where Route 7 , one of the original state highways from the 1910 bond issue , led north and northeast past Fairfield towards Sacramento and Oregon . The portion north from Benicia to Fairfield became part of Route 74 in 1935 , when Route 7 was realigned to the more direct American Canyon route that is now I @-@ 80 . None of the aforementioned roads were given state sign route numbers in 1934 , when that system was laid out , but by 1937 they had been numbered SR 21 . This route began at the intersection of Warm Springs Boulevard and Brown Road in Warm Springs , where Route 5 and Route 69 ( SR 17 ) split , followed Route 5 along Mission Boulevard to Mission San Jose ( this part later became an overlap with SR 9 ) , and then continued to US 40 ( Route 7 ) at Cordelia . The routing was very close to the present I @-@ 680 , following such roads as Pleasanton Sunol Road , San Ramon Valley Boulevard , Danville Boulevard , Main Street in Walnut Creek , Contra Costa Boulevard , and Pacheco Boulevard . 
 The portion of SR 21 between Pleasant Hill and Martinez was finally added to the state highway system in 1949 , as a branch of Route 75 . The ferry approach in Benicia became a spur of Route 74 in 1947 , and in 1953 it was transferred to Route 75 . The same law , effective immediately as an urgency measure , authorized the Department of Public Works to acquire the ferry system , then operated by the city of Martinez , which was planning to shut it down . Ownership was transferred just after midnight on October 6 , 1953 . 
 = = = History as an Interstate = = = 
 The Bureau of Public Roads approved urban routes of the Interstate Highway System on September 15 , 1955 , including a loop around the San Francisco Bay , soon numbered I @-@ 280 and I @-@ 680 . The east half ( I @-@ 680 ) began at the interchange of US 101 north of downtown San Jose and followed the Nimitz Freeway ( SR 17 / Route 69 , now I @-@ 880 ) to the split at Warm Springs ( the present location of SR 262 ) , SR 21 to Benicia , and Route 74 ( no sign route number ) to I @-@ 80 in Vallejo . The first piece of I @-@ 680 freeway built , other than the pre @-@ existing Nimitz Freeway , was in the late 1950s , along the SR 24 overlap between North Main Street in Walnut Creek and Monument Boulevard in Pleasant Hill . A southerly extension , bypassing downtown Walnut Creek to South Main Street , opened on March 22 , 1960 , connecting with the SR 24 freeway to Oakland . In the next decade , the freeway was completed from Vallejo south to SR 238 at Mission San Jose , and the roadway north from Benicia to Fairfield , which became the only remaining piece of SR 21 , was also upgraded to freeway standards . 
 In the 1964 renumbering , the legislative designation was changed to Route 680 . SR 17 was officially moved to former Route 5 between San Jose and Warm Springs , which had not had a signed designation since the Nimitz Freeway ( then I @-@ 680 ) was constructed , but this was instead marked as part of SR 238 ( which replaced SR 9 north of Mission San Jose ) , and SR 17 remained signed along the Nimitz Freeway . This was very short @-@ lived , as the Bureau of Public Roads approved a shift in the south end of I @-@ 680 in October 1964 . The legislature changed the routes in 1965 , swapping Routes 17 and 680 south of Warm Springs , and creating a new SR 262 on the short roadway at Warm Springs where they had overlapped to switch sides . However , until I @-@ 680 was completed in the early @-@ to @-@ mid 1970s , it remained signed along the Nimitz Freeway , and the old road between San Jose and Warm Springs continued to be marked as SR 238 . One more change was made to the routing of I @-@ 680 : in July 1973 , the remainder of SR 21 , from Benicia to Fairfield , was added to the Interstate Highway System . This became the new alignment of I @-@ 680 , and the old route to Vallejo became I @-@ 780 . The corresponding changes were made by the state legislature in 1976 . 
 = = = Joe Colla Interchange = = = 
 The interchange at the beginning of I @-@ 680 at I @-@ 280 and U.S. Route 101 was constructed years before its completion . The two bridges , with no on ramps or off ramps stood as a 110 foot tall monument to inefficiency for years in the 1970s . It became the butt of many local jokes . The highlight prank occurred in January 1976 , when a 1960 Chevrolet Impala was placed on the highest bridge overnight , where it obviously would be impossible to drive . The following day , San Jose City Councilman Joe Colla was photographed standing next to the car , a photo which was circulated across many newspapers . It has been suggested this stunt nudged the wheels of progress to find the funds to complete the freeway . In 2010 , the interchange was named the Joe Colla Interchange . 
 = = Exit List = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Casino Royale ( Climax ! ) = 
 Casino Royale is a 1954 television adaptation of the novel of the same name by Ian Fleming . An episode of the dramatic anthology series Climax ! , the show is the first screen adaptation of a James Bond novel and stars Barry Nelson and Peter Lorre . Though this marks the first onscreen appearance of the character of James Bond , Nelson 's character is played as an American agent with " Combined Intelligence " and is referred to as " Jimmy " by several characters . 
 Most of the largely forgotten show was located in the 1980s by film historian Jim <unk> , with the ending ( including credits ) found afterward . The rights to the program were acquired by MGM at the same time as the rights for the 1967 film version of Casino Royale , clearing the legal pathway and enabling it to make the 2006 film of the same name . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Act I " Combined Intelligence " agent James Bond comes under fire from an assassin : he manages to dodge the bullets and enters Casino Royale . There he meets his British contact , Clarence Leiter , who remembers " Card Sense Jimmy Bond " from when he played the Maharajah of Deauville . While Bond explains the rules of baccarat , Leiter explains Bond 's mission : to defeat Le Chiffre at baccarat and force his Soviet <unk> to " retire " him . Bond then encounters a former lover , Valerie Mathis who is Le Chiffre 's current girlfriend ; he also meets Le Chiffre himself . 
 Act II Bond beats Le Chiffre at baccarat but , when he returns to his hotel room , is confronted by Le Chiffre and his bodyguards , along with Mathis , who Le Chiffre has discovered is an agent of the Deuxième , France 's external military intelligence agency at the time . 
 Act III Le Chiffre tortures Bond in order to find out where Bond has hidden the cheque for his winnings , but Bond does not reveal where it is . After a fight between Bond and Le Chiffre 's guards , Bond shoots and wounds Le Chiffre , saving Valerie in the process . Exhausted , Bond sits in a chair opposite Le Chiffre to talk . Mathis gets in between them and Le Chiffre grabs her from behind , threatening her with a concealed razor blade . As Le Chiffre moves towards the door with Mathis as a shield , she struggles , breaking free slightly and Bond is able to shoot Le Chiffre . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Barry Nelson – James Bond 
 Peter Lorre – Le Chiffre 
 Linda Christian – Valerie Mathis 
 Michael Pate – Clarence Leiter 
 Eugene Borden – Chef De Partie 
 Jean Del Val – <unk> 
 Gene Roth – Basil 
 Kurt <unk> – Zoltan 
 Unknown actor – <unk> 
 William Lundigan – Host / Himself 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1954 CBS paid Ian Fleming $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 8 @,@ 812 in 2016 dollars ) to adapt his first novel , Casino Royale , into a one @-@ hour television adventure as part of their dramatic anthology series Climax ! , which ran between October 1954 and June 1958 . It was adapted for the screen by Anthony Ellis and Charles Bennett ; Bennett was best known for his collaborations with Alfred Hitchcock , including The 39 Steps and Sabotage . Due to the restriction of a one @-@ hour play , the adapted version lost many of the details found in the book , although it retained its violence , particularly in Act III . 
 The hour @-@ long Casino Royale episode aired on 21 October 1954 as a live production and starred Barry Nelson as secret agent James Bond , with Peter Lorre in the role of Le Chiffre and was hosted by William Lundigan . The Bond character from Casino Royale was re @-@ cast as an American agent , described as working for " Combined Intelligence " , supported by the British agent , Clarence Leiter ; " thus was the Anglo @-@ American relationship depicted in the book reversed for American consumption " . 
 Clarence Leiter was an agent for Station S , while being a combination of Felix Leiter and René Mathis . The name " Mathis " , and his association with the Deuxième Bureau , was given to the leading lady , who is named Valérie Mathis , instead of Vesper Lynd . Reports that towards the end of the broadcast " the coast @-@ to @-@ coast audience saw Peter Lorre , the actor playing Le Chiffre , get up off the floor after his ' death ' and begin to walk to his dressing room " , do not appear to be accurate . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The production went mostly unnoticed upon release . However , four years after the production of Casino Royale , CBS invited Fleming to write 32 episodes over a two @-@ year period for a television show based on the James Bond character . Fleming agreed and began to write outlines for this series . When nothing ever came of this , however , Fleming grouped and adapted three of the outlines into short stories and released the 1960 anthology For Your Eyes Only along with an additional two new short stories . 
 This was the first screen adaptation of a James Bond novel and was made before the formation of Eon Productions . When MGM eventually obtained the rights to the 1967 film version of Casino Royale , it also received the rights to this television episode . 
 The Casino Royale episode was lost for decades after its 1954 broadcast until a kinescope of it was located by film historian Jim <unk> in 1981 . It also aired on TBS as part of a Bond film marathon . However , the VHS release and TBS presentation did not include the full finale of the adaptation , which was at that point still lost . Eventually , the missing footage ( minus the last few seconds of the credits ) was found and included on a Spy Guise & Cara Entertainment VHS release . MGM subsequently included the truncated version on its DVD of the 1967 Casino Royale . 
 David Cornelius of <unk> remarked that " the first act freely gives in to spy pulp cliché " and noted that he believed Nelson was miscast and " trips over his lines and lacks the elegance needed for the role . " He described Lorre as " the real main attraction here , the veteran villain working at full weasel mode ; a grotesque weasel whose very presence makes you uncomfortable . " Peter Debruge of Variety also praised Lorre , considering him the source of " whatever charm this slipshod antecedent to the Bond oeuvre has to offer " , and complaining that " the whole thing seems to have been done on the cheap " . Debruge still noted that while the special had very few elements in common with the Eon series , Nelson 's portrayal of " Bond suggests a realistically human vulnerability that wouldn 't resurface until Eon finally remade Casino Royale more than half a century later . " 
 = Canadian Football League in the United States = 
 The Canadian Football League ( CFL ) , the sole major professional sports league in the United States and Canada to feature only teams from Canada , has made efforts to gain further audience in the United States , most directly through expansion into the country from 1993 to 1995 . The CFL plays Canadian football , which is somewhat different from the American football usual in the United States . 
 The first American team , the Sacramento Gold Miners , joined in 1993 . The league expanded to four American teams in 1994 and five in 1995 . In the latter year , the teams were aligned into a new South Division . The three years saw numerous franchise moves , <unk> , and ownership debacles on both sides of the <unk> border . The Baltimore Stallions became the only American @-@ based team to win the Grey Cup championship , in 1995 . 
 With the exception of Baltimore , the American teams consistently lost money . CFL games in the United States by its American teams averaged 10 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 in paid attendance , while the Stallions ranged from 30 @,@ 000 to 37 @,@ 000 . ( At the time , the CFL was a gate @-@ driven league ) . Tension also arose between the American and Canadian contingents over rule changes , scheduling , import rules , and even the name of the league itself . Facing these difficulties , the league again fielded only Canadian teams beginning in 1996 . 
 While expansion was the most notable CFL effort in the United States , the league had also made previous inroads . Eleven neutral @-@ site CFL games ( including exhibition games ) have been held in the United States , while National Football League ( NFL ) teams have been invited northward for interleague play . The CFL has also attempted to find a television audience in the United States , most notably during an NFL players ' strike in 1982 , and more recently on ESPN . 
 = = Pre @-@ expansion era = = 
 Until 1993 the Canadian Football League , and its predecessor associations , had always operated solely within Canada , despite most professional leagues in North America being cross @-@ border enterprises . The substantially different rules and fields of the Canadian and American games and the popularity of the National Football League and NCAA Division I @-@ A football in the United States were generally seen to inhibit the chances of any sort of expansion into the United States . <unk> CFL television ratings in the United States during the 1982 NFL strike seemed to bolster this argument . 
 = = = Neutral site games = = = 
 There had been a degree of cross @-@ fertilization between Canadian and American leagues earlier in the 20th century . A number of CFL – NFL interleague games were held in Canada . As well , eleven neutral @-@ site CFL games have been played on American soil . The earliest of these dates to 1909 , while the bulk occurred between 1951 and 1967 . The 1909 game , featuring the Ottawa Rough Riders and Hamilton Tigers , was sponsored by the New York Herald and played at a park in the Bronx ; this in the era when the Canadian game was more similar to rugby football and did not feature modern rules such as the forward pass . The next game , a 1951 match @-@ up between the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats and Toronto Argonauts in Buffalo , was billed as the first true all @-@ Canadian game played in the United States and drew more than 18 @,@ 000 , a decent crowd for the era . In 1958 , Hamilton defeated Ottawa in a regular @-@ season contest in front about 15 @,@ 000 in Philadelphia 's cavernous Municipal Stadium , 24 – 18 . It remains the only CFL game played outside Canada , involving two Canadian teams , that actually counted in the standings . 
 The American Pacific Northwest became a frequent site for games in the 1950s and 1960s . Western Canadian teams , particularly the BC Lions , were most often called upon to entertain their regional neighbours . News reports from the time suggest a hybrid game of three down Canadian ball played on the more restricted 100 yard American field . One BC – Winnipeg matchup in 1960 was held not on the west coast but in Cedar Rapids , Iowa , presumably because both teams had a number of former University of Iowa stars , including Willie Mitchell , who scored the Lions ' only touchdown in a 13 – 7 loss in front of 12 @,@ 583 . 
 Games tended to be characterized by low scores and frequent punting , with crowds between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 ; these numbers dropped off in the last two games of the era . A low scoring BC – Calgary game in Everett , Washington in 1967 drew just over 6 @,@ 000 ; there would not be another CFL game in the United States until the cusp of US expansion itself in 1992 . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The idea of attracting American fans through television has long been a goal of the CFL although the results have been intermittent . As early as 1954 , the Interprovincial Rugby Football Union ( forerunner of the CFL 's East Division ) struck a deal with NBC that lasted a year and featured 13 games . The infamous Fog Bowl of 1962 was — at least until play was suspended — broadcast by ABC . Over subsequent years various non @-@ major networks picked up an assortment of games . 
 The fledgling ESPN signed a deal in 1981 for 30 CFL regular season games and the playoffs , and CFL games became a fixture of the early years of the network . The next year , after NFL players went on strike in September , the CFL got another chance at major network exposure when NBC bought out the ESPN rights for $ 100 @,@ 000 a game to make up for its lost football programming . NBC would air CFL games on Sunday afternoons with full NFL production values and announcing crews . However , every one of the four matches shown was a blowout and ratings were a major disappointment . NBC quickly backed out of the arrangement . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The idea of expansion into the United States began to take shape in the early 1990s , prompted by precarious ownership situations and chronic money shortages amongst the existing Canadian teams . The chief catalyst of the league 's struggles was Carling O 'Keefe brewery 's decision to stop their lucrative television sponsorship in 1987 . The arrangement had provided steady income to all of the league 's teams , reaching $ 11 million per season before its withdrawal . The guaranteed revenues , instead of being used to grow the league , had subsidized outdated and shoddy financial practices and marketing both at the team and league level . It would take two decades for economic equilibrium to again be reestablished . 
 With the exception of the Edmonton Eskimos , every team in the league had faced some kind of crisis in the years leading up to 1993 . In the 1980s , the Montreal team folded twice , while the Calgary Stampeders and publicly owned Saskatchewan Roughriders had to mount public campaigns to survive . By 1993 , the BC Lions had experienced years of ownership chaos and the Winnipeg Blue Bombers faced $ 3 million in debt , despite frugal management . 
 The Toronto Argonauts were embroiled in a series of ownership crises after the initially successful ownership triumvirate of Bruce McNall , Wayne Gretzky , and John Candy faced mounting financial losses . The Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats were confronting an attendance swoon , fan malaise , and struggling community ownership . Both Ontario teams faced competition at the gate and for general attention from the Buffalo Bills of the NFL , then in the middle of their run of four consecutive Super Bowl appearances . The Ottawa Rough Riders and their fans were being treated to disappointing squads on the field and constant drama off the field from its under @-@ capitalized and mercurial owner , Bernie Glieberman . 
 Against this economic backdrop a new generation of venture capitalist owners had emerged , taking the place of the community groups , local <unk> , or philanthropists that typically had owned the teams and operated them without any serious profit motive . They were led by McNall in Toronto , Larry Ryckman in Calgary , and Glieberman in Ottawa . Larry Smith was hired as league commissioner in February 1992 , reportedly on the explicit understanding that he would pursue American expansion . While Smith would become the most visible face of the era , he makes clear that it was the owners who drove the initiative , particularly McNall and Ryckman . McNall 's issues with cash flow , later revealed to be the result of his wealth being inflated by illegal accounting , were one obvious instigator . While expansion was championed by the newer owners , equal distribution of the expansion fees also appealed to the community owned teams to shore up their finances . 
 = = = 1992 – 1993 = = = 
 With the green light from the owners , Smith began the task of expanding the league across the border , beginning with a June 1992 exhibition game between the Argos and Stampeders in Portland , Oregon . A total of 15 @,@ 362 attended , close to the averages later American teams would post . Portland was seriously considered for a franchise , but investors failed to emerge . The expansion announcement prompted numerous applications from a wide variety of American cities . By the end of the expansion era , a minimum of 22 cities are reported to have been considered for teams . 
 Coincidentally , the World League of American Football , an attempt by the NFL to create a spring league in major markets without NFL teams , suspended its North American operations after its 1992 season . WLAF owners Fred Anderson of the Sacramento Surge and Larry J. Benson of the San Antonio Riders applied to join the CFL as the Sacramento Gold Miners and San Antonio Texans , respectively . 
 On January 13 , 1993 the league approved both franchises by a vote of 7 – 1 , with Winnipeg dissenting . League owners also decided not to apply the requirement of 20 " non @-@ import " Canadian @-@ raised players to the American squads , fearing that the requirement would be a violation of US employment laws . 
 The experiment started on a sour note , however , when an ownership dispute forced Benson to pull San Antonio out on the same evening the franchise was to be formally introduced . Anderson decided to continue with the venture after Bensons 's withdrawal , but made clear that he did not want to be the only American franchise after 1993 . 
 The Gold Miners were placed in the very strong West Division and finished last with a record of 6 – 12 . They played at the austere Hornet Stadium , located on the campus of Sacramento State University and averaged around 17 @,@ 000 fans per game , selling 9 @,@ 000 season tickets . 
 = = = 1994 = = = 
 In 1994 the Gold Miners were joined by three other American teams : the Las Vegas Posse , the Baltimore CFL Colts and the Shreveport Pirates . On television ESPN and its subsidiary ESPN2 picked up some games alongside the usual broadcasting by TSN and CBC in Canada . Shreveport and Baltimore were placed in the Eastern Division , while Sacramento and Las Vegas wound up in the west . Another team was to have been added in Orlando , named either the Manatees or Sting Rays . However , in a debacle that had now become a pattern , the presumptive ownership group failed to appear at the press conference announcing their formation in January 1994 . 
 The Baltimore CFL Colts were in the headlines before even playing a down . Owned by Jim Speros , the team was marketed as a revival of the Baltimore Colts NFL franchise , who had left the city 10 years earlier and had also played at Memorial Stadium . The team 's embrace of the Colts ' history gained an instant following in Baltimore and headlines in the national sports media , although an injunction obtained shortly before the team 's first game forced the league to refer to the team as the " Baltimore <unk> " or " Baltimore Football Club " . Since Memorial Stadium had originally been built to accommodate baseball 's Baltimore Orioles as well as football , its playing surface was large enough to accommodate a full @-@ size Canadian field . 
 Baltimore was far and away the most successful of any American CFL team on the field and off , averaging crowds of over 37 @,@ 000 their first year . Knowing that Canadian football was considerably different from the American game , Speros stocked the Stallions mostly with CFL veterans . As coach , he brought in Don Matthews , who had already played in two Grey Cups and won one . The result was a team that eventually finished second in the East with a 12 – 6 record and became the first American team to qualify for the playoffs . They advanced all the way to the Grey Cup . In a thrilling match played in BC Place , the BC Lions defeated the Stallions on a last second field goal . Perhaps most remarkably , they were reported to have turned a profit in their first year after an initial US $ 7 million investment by Speros . 
 The Shreveport Pirates were actually a transplantation of Bernie Glieberman and his organization from Ottawa . The Gliebermans had hinted at moving the Rough Riders to the United States , making them even more unpopular than they already were in Canada 's capital . As part of a settlement with the CFL , Glieberman sold the Rough Riders to Bruce Firestone for CAN $ 1 @.@ 85 million , and in return was granted a US @-@ based expansion team which became the Shreveport Pirates . As part of the deal , Glieberman not only had to pay the expansion fee , but also had to settle his previous Ottawa debts . Team attendance was average but saw a general upward trend : the home finale drew over 32 @,@ 000 fans to 40 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Independence Stadium , the highest for any <unk> CFL game outside Baltimore . There was a groundswell of local support for the team but also significant difficulties in their first year : stifling weather , cultural clashes , organizational screw @-@ ups , and serious hints of under @-@ capitalization ( during training camp the team was housed in a dorm above a milking barn ) . A woeful record did not help : the team lost their first 14 games en route to a 3 – 15 record and last place in the East . 
 The Gold Miners , after spending much of 1993 adjusting to the Canadian game , rebounded strongly to finish 9 – 8 – 1 in their second season , one point short of the playoffs . They were led again by David Archer at quarterback , who had persisted with the team since its World League days as the Sacramento Surge . However , in what was to become a trend during the CFL expansion , the second Sacramento season saw an attendance decline . 
 At the other end of the spectrum , the Posse were an abject failure both on the field and off . Playing in Sam Boyd Stadium on the outskirts of the city and practicing on an ersatz practice field in the parking lot of the Riviera Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip , the team became infamous for botched gimmicks . Attendance was never good to begin with , but dropped to embarrassing levels as the season went on . With such dreadful gates , the team 's cash flow dwindled to the point that , according to one assistant coach , " we couldn 't even afford paper . " After only 2 @,@ 350 attended an October home game against Winnipeg , owner Nick <unk> announced the team was suspending operations . To avoid shuttering a team mid @-@ season , the league moved the Posse 's final home game to Edmonton . The team was little better on the field either , finishing 5 @-@ 13 — the second @-@ worst record in the league ( behind only the Pirates ) . 
 = = = 1994 – 1995 offseason = = = 
 The Las Vegas situation was one of a bevy of developments that absorbed the league in the 1994 to 1995 offseason . The team was not officially disbanded until April 1995 but not before the league damaged its credibility by twice giving provisional approval to a relocation to Jackson , Mississippi . A group from Miami , Florida tried to convince the league to let it buy the remains of the Posse and move them to South Florida as the Miami Manatees ( CFL ) in the Miami Orange Bowl . An exhibition game between Birmingham and Baltimore was held there in June 1995 to gauge support , which drew a decent crowd just above 20 @,@ 000 . 
 The Gold Miners grew increasingly dissatisfied with Hornet Stadium . Anderson blamed losses of US $ 10 million over two years on the facility . After attempts to have Sacramento State upgrade or replace the facility failed , he announced in October 1994 — with two weeks to go in the season — that the Gold Miners would be playing elsewhere in 1995 . After attempting to move to Oakland , the team eventually moved to the Alamodome in San Antonio , Texas ; where they would play as the San Antonio Texans . 
 With the Posse folding , the Gold Miners moving , and the Pirates facing money troubles three of the four CFL expansion teams had stumbled . The league , however , still managed to add two new cities before the 1995 season . The Memphis Mad Dogs were announced in November 1994 , followed by the Birmingham Barracudas in January 1995 . The Memphis deal was hailed as a large step forward for the league 's presence in the US as it brought in the marketing connections of Federal Express and the wealth of its founder Fred Smith . 
 = = = 1995 = = = 
 With the series of new additions , the league abandoned its longstanding East @-@ West divisional format . Instead , the five American teams — Baltimore , Birmingham , Memphis , San Antonio , and Shreveport — would be moved to a new South Division , while the eight Canadian teams moved to a North Division . The top five Canadian teams and top three American teams would qualify for the playoffs ; the lowest @-@ seeded North team would " cross over " to the South playoffs . The league gained its first national American television contract with ESPN2 , which agreed to televise more than 20 regular season games , plus the playoffs . The deal was reportedly worth about $ 1 @.@ 5 million . The CFL would remain on the network until 1997 . 
 The Birmingham Barracudas , owned by insurance tycoon Art Williams , entered the league playing at Legion Field , which could accommodate a Canadian football field with 15 @-@ yard end zones . Led by future Hall of Fame member Matt Dunigan , the Barracudas fell short of the South Division title , but remained competitive throughout the year . Despite selling 2 @,@ 000 season tickets and facing community apathy after numerous attempts at pro football squads had failed in the city , attendance for the first three games exceeded expectations . Williams knew that the ' <unk> potentially faced serious attendance problems once the traditional American football season began , and persuaded the CFL to let them play their late @-@ season home games on Sunday afternoons to avoid competition with high school and Alabama / Auburn football . However , attendance still dropped to unsustainable levels ; none of the final four home games attracted more than 10 @,@ 000 people . Williams claimed to have lost at least US $ 10 million on the season — at least as much as his startup costs — and blamed community apathy for the attendance woes . 
 Memphis had been a prime target for either expansion or relocation . Besides its location near Shreveport and San Antonio , in 1995 Fred Smith 's ownership group , which had narrowly missed out on an NFL team , was awarded a CFL team to begin play as the Memphis Mad Dogs . The Mad Dogs played in the Liberty Bowl , which had to be heavily reconfigured to accommodate the Canadian game . Astroturf sections were added around the grass field to accommodate the required width , while the expansion of the length of the field to 110 yards forced the end zones to become half Astroturf pentagons that averaged seven yards in the corners and fourteen yards behind the uprights . The grandstands stood mere yards from the end line , prompting veteran CFL quarterback Danny McManus to call the end zones " a lawsuit waiting to happen " . Even with the compromises made , it was later discovered that the Liberty Bowl grounds crew had marked 33 inch yards . 
 Like Williams , Smith knew the Mad Dogs would face an uphill battle attracting fans once the traditional American football season started . He persuaded the CFL to let them play their late @-@ season home games on Sundays to avoid competing against high school and Tennessee / Ole Miss football . It was to no avail ; late in the season the Mad Dogs struggled to attract more than 10 @,@ 000 people . Like Williams , Smith publicly blamed community apathy and media hostility for the lackluster attendance . The team went 9 – 9 in their only year . 
 In Shreveport , meanwhile , the Pirates saw marginal improvement on the field and continued woes off it . Notable NFL quarterback Billy Joe Tolliver was signed and put up decent numbers despite a 5 – 13 record . As elsewhere , the team saw a second season attendance decline . With the season winding down , the city had clearly soured on the Gliebermans . They became embroiled in legal difficulties and , in one particularly absurd incident , Bernie Glieberman had his lawyer attempt ( unsuccessfully ) to abscond with a half @-@ million dollar Tucker automobile that Glieberman had donated to a local museum . 
 Freshly relocated from Sacramento , the San Antonio Texans finally found success on the field in 1995 playing in the brand new ( and CFL regulation sized ) Alamodome . The team continued to be bankrolled by the enthusiastic Fred Anderson . Archer , entering his fifth year as Anderson 's quarterback , led the second best offence in the league ; he nevertheless suffered an injury late in the season , prompting the team to hire 45 @-@ year @-@ old Joe Ferguson ( whom Stephenson had coached as a member of the Buffalo Bills ) out of retirement to serve as a backup . They finished 12 – 6 and finally made the playoffs . In the first round they trounced Birmingham , 51 – 9 , before falling to the Baltimore Stallions , 21 – 11 , in the South Division final . Team attendance was around the same level Anderson had previously seen in Sacramento . 
 The Baltimore franchise finally received a permanent name , the " Baltimore Stallions " . Led by Tracy Ham and Mike Pringle , the Stallions started 2 – 3 , but then steamrolled through the rest of the season , winning 13 games in a row to finish first in the South Division . They knocked off Winnipeg and then San Antonio in the South Division final . They faced the Calgary Stampeders in the 1995 Grey Cup in Regina , Saskatchewan and won convincingly , 37 – 20 . The first and only American team to take the championship , the 1995 Stallions team has since acquired a reputation as one of the CFL 's best ever . At the time , their <unk> winning percentage over their first two seasons was the best start for an expansion team in North American professional sports history . 
 While the Stallions experienced a successful year on the field , and finished second to Edmonton in average attendance , the city 's excitement of 1994 died down . Attendance declined , with season ticket sales dropping to around 17 @,@ 000 . Later reports suggested that attendance numbers had been inflated by giveaways and the team projected some losses in 1995 . Despite these difficulties , the Stallions remained the model that lent expansion credibility ; other American owners looked to Baltimore in deciding on the future of their own teams . 
 = = = End of U.S. experiment = = = 
 = = = = League troubles = = = = 
 Despite some positive initial attendance numbers , after three years it was clear that general American fan interest in Canadian football was sparse . Canadian differences , such as three downs and the wider field had not been embraced south of the border . While the league had a small deal with ESPN2 , a major television contract had not materialized . There was no widespread national promotional effort for the league , and the general preference to avoid competing with the NFL in major markets hurt the league 's efforts to reach out to major media platforms . The July to November CFL season , designed to ensure the playoffs finish before Canada 's harsh winters set in , forced the American teams to play the first half of the season in oppressive heat and the second half in competition with high school , college football , and the NFL . 
 Tension had also arisen between the American owners and the Canadian teams . As early as the 1994 Grey Cup , the American owners , led by Speros in Baltimore , were calling for numerous changes to accommodate the American teams and their potential fans . The American owners proposed that the end zones to be reduced 15 yards in length , that the Grey Cup be played earlier in the year , that player quotas be removed for all teams , and that a name change be considered . By 1995 , Mad Dogs coach Pepper Rodgers was openly disparaging Canadian rules and even Canadian teams . Officials of the new American teams found that the Canadian clubs were hesitant to accommodate the new American audience . The Canadian owners refused to make any major changes to the rules , the schedule , or the name of the league ; the only accommodation for American teams was to allow smaller field sizes in American stadiums that could not fit a regulation CFL field . 
 Debates over rules and schedules might have been solvable had the league achieved economic stability but losses amongst American teams were drastic and widespread . In 1995 alone , Fred Anderson estimated that the U.S. teams had collectively lost more than US $ 20 million . The Baltimore Sun provides a similar estimate of US $ 21 million . The $ 10 million estimated loss in Birmingham was the most substantial , followed by US $ 4 to $ 6 million estimated for Anderson 's Texans . Memphis and Shreveport losses were estimated at about US $ 3 million apiece . The Baltimore losses were comparatively modest at US $ 1 to $ 1 @.@ 5 million , but stung the league given the prestige of the franchise . 
 Canadian teams were facing their own troubles , particularly with attendance . The eight Canadian teams were down to an average of 22 @,@ 740 in 1994 , a drop of 3 @,@ 000 from the previous year . It marked the beginning of an historic trough in Canadian CFL attendance that would last for most of the 1990s . A massive season ticket drive was undertaken prior to 1995 . Smith told the Rough Riders and Tiger @-@ Cats that unless they sold more tickets , they would be forced to either fold or move . In Calgary , Ryckman suggested he 'd move to the United States unless fans stepped up with 16 @,@ 000 season tickets . While season ticket goals were met , the overall increase in attendance was modest in 1995 to 24 @,@ 406 and would be wiped out the next year . 
 = = = = End game = = = = 
 With these troubles fresh , it was actually a move from the NFL that precipitated the end of the expansion experiment . On November 6 , 1995 — the week of the South Division Final — the NFL 's Cleveland Browns announced they were moving to Baltimore for the following season . A day after the game , the American owners called Smith and requested a meeting in Toronto ; in Smith 's words they told him , " we 'll pay our bills but we 're done . " 
 With the Browns ' announcement , local support for the Stallions dried up almost overnight . Speros quickly realized that as successful as the Stallions had been , they could not even begin to compete with an NFL team ; years later , he said that the Stallions would have effectively been " minor league " had they stayed in Baltimore . He began talks with Richmond , Norfolk , the Lehigh Valley , and , most seriously , Houston , which was about to lose the NFL Oilers . At one point , Speros was prepared to move to Houston and play in the Astrodome . He also intended to take on then @-@ Houston Astros owner Drayton McLane as a minority partner . Williams had decided to get out even before Baltimore 's fate was announced ; a day after being eliminated from the playoffs ( and a day before the Browns announced they were leaving Cleveland ) , he announced that the Barracudas would not be playing in Birmingham in 1996 , if they returned at all . Earlier , he had stated that he was not willing to play another season in Birmingham unless the league moved to a spring schedule ; he felt it would be folly to risk another season going head @-@ to @-@ head with Alabama and Auburn . 
 The end came swiftly in the months after the Grey Cup . By the time of a December 1 CFL Board of Governors meeting , the Mad Dogs had already folded and the Barracudas were on the brink . The Pirates held out a little longer and flirted with a relocation to Norfolk , but local officials broke off talks after they learned that Glieberman was still facing legal disputes in Shreveport . The Barracudas resurfaced in the news in January 1996 when Williams sold them for $ 750 @,@ 000 to a group that planned to move them to Shreveport as a replacement for the Pirates . However , that deal was contingent upon the league approving the sale and relocation , which never happened . 
 Smith had given the American teams until the end of January 1996 to decide whether they would return for the 1996 season . By then , sources were stating that four of the five American teams had " either folded , have no stadiums to play in or will not be permitted to be part of the CFL in 1996 " . Only the Stallions appeared to be able to take the field in some form for the 1996 season . Of the American owners , Anderson was the most amendable to retaining an American @-@ based team in 1996 . While he initially stated that the league needed at least three other American teams for the Texans to be viable , he was willing to bring the Texans back for 1996 if the Stallions moved to Houston , ensuring two American teams . He estimated that if there was even one other American team in the league , he could withstand annual losses of US $ 2 million indefinitely . However , that scenario looked less and less likely , as Speros — under prodding from Smith — had begun serious discussions with officials in Montreal . 
 Against this backdrop , a second round of league meetings was held on February 2 , where the Texans , Barracudas , Mad Dogs and Pirates were formally shuttered . Speros requested permission to move to Montreal , which was granted . He subsequently reconstituted his organisation as the third incarnation of the Alouettes . With these moves the CFL 's American expansion was brought to a close . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The entire league was once again based in Canada for the 1996 CFL season , with Larry Smith describing the move as a " retrenchment " . This did not stem the troubles the teams were facing . With no expansion fee revenue to buoy them , eight of the nine Canadian teams would lose money in 1996 . The Rough Riders disbanded at the end of the season and the Stampeders declared bankruptcy after Ryckman was fined $ 250 @,@ 000 for stock manipulation by the Alberta Securities Commission . After the indictment of McNall , Ryckman was the second major architect of expansion to run afoul of the law . 
 Other legal troubles were left over in wake of the expansion collapse . Louisiana courts eventually ordered the Gliebermans to repay Shreveport US $ 1 million with interest ; the dispute centered over whether the city had agreed to share losses or simply lent money to the ownership group . Art Williams , enraged after discovering some American owners had received discounts and extended payment periods on their franchise fees , threatened litigation and at first refused to honour the balance of Matt Dunigan 's sizable contract before the matter was dragged through court . 
 The expansion fees themselves were a significant legacy of the expansion effort . Smith claims US $ 14 to $ 15 million was brought in and that it saved the league . A more modest assessment suggests expansion saved the Stampeders and Tiger @-@ Cats at the very least — both teams were undeniably in distress during the era — and that the other Canadian teams bought time . 
 The post @-@ expansion financial crisis would eventually elicit a response from the NFL . By the end of 1996 , speculation was rampant that if the NFL placed a franchise in Toronto , it would mean the end of the CFL . Instead , in exchange for a new player agreement between the leagues , the NFL provided the CFL franchises with marketing assistance and a $ 3 million loan in 1997 . 
 In 1999 , World Wrestling Federation chairman Vince McMahon was offered the chance to buy the Argonauts , and countered with a proposal to buy the entire league and " have it migrate south " , which the owners refused . McMahon would instead partner with NBC to create the XFL , which would place teams in Birmingham , Las Vegas , and Memphis at the same stadiums as their respective CFL franchises previously played . The XFL failed after one year . 
 The CFL re @-@ gained relative stability in the 2000s , mostly thanks to enforcement of a salary cap , stricter standards of ownership , and increasingly lucrative television contracts negotiated with Canadian networks . The league has remained solely focused on its Canadian operations , with expansion efforts focused on returning a stable team to Ottawa ( the Renegades in 2002 and the Redblacks in 2014 ) and one @-@ off games such as Touchdown Atlantic and Northern Kickoff in more distant Canadian markets . Further U.S. expansion has been occasionally proposed but has not been formally explored ; the spectre of American CFL games has mainly been used as a device for satire and April Fool 's Day jokes . 
 The establishment of the Montreal Alouettes remains as the major legacy of the American experiment . After the 1996 team faced a lukewarm reception , Speros would sell the Alouettes to Robert <unk> , with Smith resigning as commissioner to become President of the team . <unk> 's patient ownership , and a move to a smaller outdoor stadium called Percival Molson Memorial Stadium , slowly returned the team to stability and steered it to three Grey Cups . The Stallions ' general manager , Jim Popp , followed the team to Montreal . Longtime Alouettes starting quarterback Anthony <unk> was the last remaining active player that played for an American CFL team ( Las Vegas ) upon his retirement after the 2013 season . 
 = = = List of American CFL teams = = = 
 = = = = Teams that played = = = = 
 = = = = Proposed teams that did not play = = = = 
 = = Post @-@ expansion American media = = 
 For five years after the expansion era contract with ESPN ended in 1997 , the CFL was absent on American television . At the end of 2001 the league began a relationship with America One that would last until 2009 . Coverage was relatively generous with 43 games , including the playoffs , covered in the last year . A more modest deal of 14 games was negotiated with the NFL Network in 2010 , which lasted two years . The 2012 season began without a contract and the league resorted to internet broadcasts on ESPN3 until NBC Sports Network agreed to a 14 @-@ game regular season package of its own ; unlike the NFL network , NBC opted to broadcast games during the NFL preseason as well as cover the playoffs and Grey Cup . Both the NBC and ESPN deals were renewed in 2013 with a slight scaling back of playoff coverage and ESPN2 also picking up a handful of games in the summer months . American broadcasts have been simulcasts of game coverage from Canadian networks . 
 = Slender smooth @-@ hound = 
 The slender smooth @-@ hound or <unk> ( Gollum attenuatus ) is a species of ground shark in the family Pseudotriakidae . It is endemic to the waters around New Zealand , where it is usually found close to the bottom over the continental slope at depths of 300 – 600 m ( 980 – 1 @,@ 970 ft ) . An extremely slim , plain brownish shark reaching 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , the slender smooth @-@ hound can be identified by its broad , flattened head with a long , distinctively bell @-@ shaped snout . Its mouth is angular with short furrows at the corners , and contains a very high number of tooth rows in both jaws . Its two dorsal fins are roughly equal in size . 
 The diet of the slender smooth @-@ hound is diverse , but dominated by small , benthic bony fishes and decapod crustaceans . It exhibits a specialized form of aplacental viviparity with oophagy : the females produce a single capsule in each uterus that contains 30 – 80 ova , of which one ovum develops into an embryo that consumes the rest of the ova and stores the yolk material in its external yolk sac . The growing embryo is mainly sustained by this yolk sac during gestation , though it may be additionally supplied with histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . The typical litter size is two pups , one per uterus . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the slender smooth @-@ hound as Least Concern ; it is taken as fishery bycatch but not in great numbers , and furthermore large portions of its range see minimal fishing activity . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first known specimen of the slender smooth @-@ hound was a 93 cm ( 37 in ) long adult male collected by the trawler <unk> in December 1953 , at a depth of 220 m ( 720 ft ) off Cape Palliser on New Zealand 's North Island . It was preserved by the crew as a curiosity and given to ichthyologist Jack Garrick , who described it in a 1954 issue of the scientific journal Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand . Garrick named the species Triakis attenuata , in reference to its extremely slender ( " attenuate " ) body . 
 In 1973 , Leonard Compagno proposed a separate genus for the slender smooth @-@ hound : Gollum , after the character in J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings , " to whom this shark bears some resemblance in form and habits . " He placed Gollum with the finback catsharks ( <unk> ) , but also noted its many anatomical similarities to the false catshark ( Pseudotriakis microdon ) . At the time , Compagno chose to maintain Pseudotriakis as the sole member of the family Pseudotriakidae because of its numerous unique traits . More recently , he and other taxonomists have increasingly tended to group Gollum and Pseudotriakis together in the family Pseudotriakidae . This arrangement was corroborated by a 2006 phylogenetic study by Juan Andrés López and colleagues , which found that the two genera have a high degree of genetic similarity across four protein @-@ coding genes and form a natural clade apart from <unk> . An additional species of Gollum has now been described , and there is at least one additional species yet to be described . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the slender smooth @-@ hound is restricted to the upper and middle continental slope around New Zealand , including submarine features to the north such as the Three Kings Ridge , the Challenger Plateau , and the Wanganella Bank . This uncommon species is mainly found between 300 and 600 m ( 980 and 1 @,@ 970 ft ) deep , but has been recorded from 129 to 724 m ( 423 to 2 @,@ 375 ft ) deep . It prefers a temperature of around 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) and a salinity of approximately 34 @.@ 8 ‰ . Generally swimming near the sea floor , this shark inhabits both soft and rocky @-@ bottomed habitats in terrain ranging from plateaus to steep slopes . 
 = = Description = = 
 The slender smooth @-@ hound has a very thin body and a broad , highly flattened head . The snout is long , with a distinctive bell @-@ shaped outline when viewed from above . The eyes have an elongate horizontal oval shape , and are equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . Beneath each eye is a prominent ridge , and behind is a much smaller spiracle . The nostrils are preceded by small , almost triangular flaps of skin . The line of the mouth forms an angle ; there are very short furrows at the mouth corners . The upper and lower jaws contain 96 – 99 and 108 – 114 rows respectively of small , very closely spaced teeth ; each tooth has a narrow upright central cusp flanked by smaller cusplets on both sides . The five pairs of gill slits are short . 
 The pectoral fins originate below the fourth gill slit and have gently curved margins . The pelvic fins are small and angular ; the males have pointed claspers . The two dorsal fins are similar in size and shape , with narrowly rounded apexes and concave trailing margins . The first dorsal fin originates over rear of the pectoral fins , while the second dorsal fin originates between the pelvic and anal fins . A midline ridge is present between the dorsal fins . The anal fin is less than half as high as the first dorsal fin , and has a nearly straight trailing margin . The short and narrow caudal fin makes up about one @-@ sixth of the total length ; the lower caudal fin lobe is indistinct , while the upper lobe has a strong ventral notch near the tip . The skin is densely covered by small , overlapping dermal denticles . The crown of each denticle is mounted on a short stalk and bears three horizontal ridges leading to marginal blade @-@ like teeth , with the central tooth particularly long . This species is plain brownish @-@ gray above and lighter below . It grows up to 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) long and 4 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) in weight , with females reaching a slightly larger size than males . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The slender smooth @-@ hound is likely a schooling species . It preys on a variety of benthic fishes and invertebrates , and also scavenges ; human garbage has been reported among its stomach contents . Small bony fishes , lanternfishes in particular , are the most important prey type , followed by decapod crustaceans . Cephalopods , gastropods , isopods , brittle stars , dogfish sharks , and cartilaginous fish egg capsules may also be consumed . On the Challenger Plateau , cephalopods are an important food source for juveniles under 50 cm ( 20 in ) long . 
 Like the false catshark , the slender smooth @-@ hound exhibits aplacental viviparity with oophagy , in a form different from that in the mackerel sharks . Mature females have a single functional ovary , on the right side , and two functional uteruses . Only one embryo develops within each uterus at a time , resulting in litters of two ( rarely one ) pups . The uterus inner surface is covered by villi . Within a uterus , 30 – 80 ova 4 – 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 31 in ) across are packed into a single rigid , amber @-@ colored capsule ; of these , only one ovum is fertilized and develops into an embryo , while the remaining ova begin to break down . The embryo consumes these other ova and transfers the yolk material into its external yolk sac , which serves as its main source of nourishment during gestation ; this oophagous process is completed by an embryonic length of 10 – 39 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 1 @.@ 54 in ) . The embryo may also receive secondary nutrition in the form of histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . When the embryo is 29 – 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) long , it emerges from the capsule , which by that time has become translucent and gelatinous . Embryos 4 – 25 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) long have well @-@ developed external gill filaments . The external yolk sac is entirely absorbed when the embryo is 34 – 42 cm ( 13 – 17 in ) long and close to being born . Males and females reach sexual maturity at approximately 70 cm ( 28 in ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans and of no economic value , the slender smooth @-@ hound is occasionally caught incidentally in bottom trawls and on bottom longlines . Much of its northern range lies in little @-@ fished waters , and thus the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Least Concern . However , this shark 's very low fecundity would render it susceptible to population depletion should fishing pressure increase in the future . 
 = Attack on Camp Holloway = 
 The attack on Camp Holloway occurred during the early hours of 7 February 1965 , in the early stages of the Vietnam War . Camp Holloway was a helicopter facility constructed by the United States Army near Pleiku in 1962 , to support the operations of Free World Military Forces in the Central Highlands of Vietnam . 
 In August 1964 , the United States Navy reported they were attacked by torpedo boats of the North Vietnamese Navy in what became known as the Tonkin Gulf Incident . In response to the perceived aggression of Communist forces in Southeast Asia , the United States Congress passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution which enabled U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson to deploy conventional military forces in the region to prevent further attacks by the North Vietnamese . Immediately after the Tonkin Gulf Resolution was passed , Johnson ordered the bombing of North Vietnamese Navy bases in retaliation for the reported attacks on U.S. Navy warships between 2 and 4 August 1964 . However , the Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam were not deterred by the threat of U.S. retaliation . 
 Throughout 1964 , the Viet Cong launched several attacks on U.S. military facilities in South Vietnam but Johnson did not start further retaliations against North Vietnam , as he tried to avoid upsetting U.S. public opinion during the 1964 United States Presidential Election . The Soviet Union , on the other hand , were experiencing political changes of their own as Nikita Khrushchev were removed from power . As leader of the Soviet Union , Khrushchev had begun the process of disengagement from Vietnam by reducing economic and military aid to North Vietnam . However , in the aftermath of Khrushchev 's downfall , the Soviet government had to redefine their role in Southeast Asia , particularly in Vietnam , to compete with the growing influence of the People 's Republic of China . 
 In February 1965 Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin travelled to Hanoi to rebuild Soviet ties with North Vietnam , and the formation of a military alliance was on the agenda . Coincidentally , senior security adviser to the U.S. President McGeorge Bundy was also in Saigon to report on the political chaos in South Vietnam . In the shadow of those events , the Viet Cong 409th Battalion staged an attack on Camp Holloway on 7 February 1965 . This time , with his victory in the 1964 presidential election secured , Johnson decided to launch Operation Flaming Dart which entailed strikes on North Vietnamese military targets . However , with Kosygin still in Hanoi during the U.S bombing , the Soviet government decided to step up their military aid to North Vietnam , thereby signalling a major reversal of Khrushchev 's policy in Vietnam . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 2 August 1964 , while operating off the North Vietnamese coast in the Gulf of Tonkin , the USS Maddox was engaged by three North Vietnamese torpedo boats . In the ensuing battle , a North Vietnamese torpedo boat was reported to be heavily damaged by U.S. fire , while the remaining North Vietnamese vessels were chased off by aircraft from the USS Ticonderoga . On 4 August 1964 , the United States Navy claimed that a second attack occurred when North Vietnamese Navy vessels fired torpedoes at the USS Maddox and USS Turner Joy . In response to the second " unprovoked attack " on U.S. warships , on 7 August 1964 the United States Congress unanimously passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution which gave President Lyndon B. Johnson the authority to deploy conventional U.S. military forces in Southeast Asia to " prevent further aggression " from North Vietnamese forces , without the formal declaration of war by the Congress . 
 Even though Johnson had been given a mandate to take military action against North Vietnam and their Viet Cong allies in South Vietnam , he hesitated to take further steps to retaliate against North Vietnam . Towards the end of 1964 , Johnson was in the midst of a presidential election and he did not want the U.S. public to believe that he was leading their country into war . Therefore , Johnson decided to wait until after the election , when his presidency was assured , that he would decide on other military moves . Meanwhile , the political situation in South Vietnam continued to worsen ; in August 1964 , South Vietnamese General Lan Van Phat tried to overthrow General Nguyễn Khánh , but the coup was aborted and Phat handed power to Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ , and Generals Nguyễn Chánh Thi and Nguyễn Văn Thiệu . However , on 20 December 1964 , Khánh formed a new military junta with Kỳ and Thi and the civilian @-@ led High National Council was subsequently dissolved . Thus , the South Vietnamese Government was once again plunged into chaos . 
 In Moscow , between November and December 1964 , at two sessions of the Presidium of the Soviet Communist Party Central Committee , Soviet leaders discussed the topic of Soviet military aid to North Vietnam . Although details of the discussions were not made public , the first indication of Soviet strategy in Vietnam came on 24 December 1964 , when the Soviet government invited the North Vietnamese @-@ backed National Liberation Front to open a permanent mission in Moscow . Then on 4 February 1965 McGeorge Bundy , national security adviser to President Johnson , arrived in Saigon to meet with the then U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam , General Maxwell Taylor , to discuss the political situation in the country . Two days later on 6 February 1965 , Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin arrived in Hanoi for a historic visit to North Vietnam , included in his entourage was a team of Soviet missile experts . 
 = = Attack = = 
 Early in 1965 , as American and Soviet leaders were cementing their strategy in Vietnam , the Viet Cong 409th Battalion was ordered to begin their part of the Communist spring offensive by attacking the U.S. airfield at Camp Holloway near Pleiku in Gia Lai Province and the South Vietnamese Army base at Gia Huu in Bình Định Province . Camp Holloway , which is about 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) east of Pleiku , was opened by the U.S. Army 's 81st Transportation Company in August 1962 , and the camp was subsequently named for Chief Warrant Officer Charles E. Holloway , who was killed in action in December 1962 . Towards the end of 1964 , about 400 members of the U.S. Army 52nd Combat Aviation Battalion — under the command of Lieutenant Colonel John C. Hughes — was deployed to Camp Holloway with the purpose of supporting South Vietnamese and other Free World Military Forces in the regions of I Corps and II Corps Tactical Zones . 
 Nguyen Thanh Tam , commander of the Viet Cong 409th Battalion , ordered his 30th Company to leave their base area and marched into the Central Highlands , to reconnoitre and attack the U.S. airfield at Camp Holloway and the U.S. advisory compound of Military Assistance Command , Vietnam II Corps . In February 1965 , Camp Holloway 's outer perimeter was protected by a South Vietnamese security contingent which included one Ranger battalion , five Regional Force companies and one armored squadron . However , in their reconnaissance of Camp Holloway , the Viet Cong found the security barrier which surrounded the U.S. advisory compound was the real challenge , as it was protected by several layers of concertina wire fences which measured about 10 meters ( 33 ft ) high . 
 To overcome the U.S. defenses at Camp Holloway , Tam organized the 30th Company into two sections . The first section , under Tam 's direct command , was to destroy U.S. aircraft on the airfield , and establish a route of retreat for the attack force . The second section , led by Nguyen Trong Dai , was ordered to attack the U.S. advisory compound and the facilities where U.S. pilots and technicians were housed . The 30th Company was issued with four mortars and 70 mortar shells for their attack on Camp Holloway , and were reinforced by one combat engineer platoon , a special operations platoon and a local force company of Gia Lai Province . Viet Cong combat engineers were required to break through the wire fences which protected the U.S. facility at Camp Holloway , and protect the attack forces ’ route of retreat using land mines . Meanwhile , the Gia Lai local force company had to set up ambush positions around the U.S. facility , to stop possible reinforcements . 
 At around 11 : 00pm on 6 February 1965 , about 300 Viet Cong soldiers of the 30th Company assembled at their positions outside Camp Holloway , where they began breaking through the wire fences . However , the Viet Cong 's mission nearly turned into a disaster when their combat engineers accidentally tripped an electrical wire after breaking through the third fence barrier , but the U.S. Military Police patrolling the area did not detect it . At 1 : <unk> on 7 February 1965 , the Viet Cong attackers opened fire with their AK @-@ 47 rifles , having successfully penetrated Camp Holloway . Shortly afterwards , the Viet Cong mortared the airfield and the U.S. advisory compound , while the sections of the 30th Company attacked their respective targets with small arms fire . About five minutes later , the Viet Cong began retreating from the facility . Later that morning the Viet Cong claimed victory , having caused the death of eight U.S. soldiers , and another 126 wounded . In addition , ten aircraft were destroyed and 15 more were damaged . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 When news of the attack on Camp Holloway reached Saigon on the morning of 7 February 1965 , General William Westmoreland , McGeorge Bundy and Ambassador Maxwell Taylor , flew out to Pleiku to survey the damage . Bundy then called President Johnson to put forward the MACV 's request for retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam . In response to Bundy 's request , Johnson hastily convened a session of the National Security Council , which involved the speaker of the House of Representatives and the Senate majority leader , to discuss the need for reprisal against the Communists in Vietnam . That afternoon , General Nguyễn Khánh arrived in Pleiku to meet with Westmoreland and Bundy , and they both informed him that recommendations for air strikes against North Vietnam had been made to the President of the United States . 
 Just 12 hours after the attack , Johnson started Operation Flaming Dart to bomb selected North Vietnamese targets . Accordingly , 49 U.S. fighter @-@ bombers took off from the USS Coral Sea and the USS Hancock to attack North Vietnamese barracks in Đồng <unk> , just north of the 17th Parallel . When informed of the strikes , Khánh reportedly opened a bottle of champagne to celebrate the occasion because it served to bolster the morale of the South Vietnamese military , and showed that the U.S. was now more determined to fight North Vietnam . The Viet Cong , however , were not deterred by those air strikes , as they launched another attack on a U.S. installation in Quy Nhon on 10 February 1965 , which caused the death of a further 23 U.S. military personnel . In response , a combined force of about 160 U.S. and South Vietnamese fighter @-@ bombers launched a larger attack against the North Vietnamese , targeting Chap Le and <unk> Hoa , also located just north of the 17th Parallel . 
 The U.S. bombing of North Vietnam in February 1965 had a decisive impact on the Soviet Union 's strategy in Vietnam . Since Ho Chi Minh and his Communist Party won control of North Vietnam in 1954 , Ho 's government had not always enjoyed cordial relations with their Soviet allies . For example , in 1957 the Soviet government proposed that both North and South Vietnam be given a seat in the United Nations , a move which would have undermined the North 's claim as the sole legitimate government of the whole country . Then in February 1964 , North Vietnam joined the People 's Republic of China in refusing to sign the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty , which was an insult to the policy of co @-@ existence adopted by the then Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . By that time , however , Khrushchev had already begun the process of disengagement from Vietnam because of the growing conflict in the region was becoming more expensive for the Soviet Union , with North Vietnam relying more on it for large amounts of economic and military aid . 
 The rift between Khrushchev 's Soviet government and North Vietnam was clearly obvious in August 1964 , when the Soviet Union responded in a relatively muted fashion after the U.S. conducted air strikes against North Vietnamese Navy bases in retaliation for the Tonkin Gulf incident . Despite the Soviets ’ lack of response , the North Vietnamese leadership restrained itself from criticizing the Soviet government , as they were still hoping that Khrushchev would supply North Vietnam with the anti @-@ aircraft weapons required to defend against further U.S. air attacks . However , the event which occurred in Moscow in October 1964 worked in North Vietnam 's favor , as Khrushchev was removed from power . Keen to counteract Chinese influence in the region , a new Soviet government led by Alexei Kosygin sought to end a defense pact with North Vietnam . 
 During Kosygin 's stay in Hanoi , North Vietnam was subjected to U.S. air strikes which infuriated the Soviet government . Consequently , on 10 February 1965 , Kosygin and his North Vietnamese counterpart , Prime Minister Phạm Văn Đồng , issued a joint communique which highlighted the Soviet resolve to strengthen North Vietnam 's defensive potential by giving it all " necessary aid and support " . Then in April 1965 , while on a visit to Moscow , General Secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party Lê Duẩn signed a missile agreement with the Soviet Union , which gave the North Vietnamese military what they needed to resist Operation Rolling Thunder . 
 = The Father , the Son , and the Holy Fonz = 
 " The Father , the Son , and the Holy Fonz " is the 18th episode of the fourth season of Family Guy . The episode follows Peter 's decision to find a new religion for himself . After several failed attempts , he chooses the one man who has always been there for him , Fonzie , and starts the First United Church of the Fonz . 
 The episode was written by Danny Smith and directed by James Purdum . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 26 million homes in its original airing in the United States . The episode featured guest performances by Paula Abdul , Tom Bosley , Gary Cole , Charles Durning , Sherman Hemsley , Phil LaMarr , Sherry Romito , Marion Ross , Amir <unk> , Fred Tatasciore , Sarah Utterback and Wally Wingert , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter 's devout Catholic father , Francis , visits Quahog . Upon arrival , he insists that Stewie be baptized as a Catholic . After visiting a church with Peter and Stewie , Francis is informed that the holy water is tainted and he will have to wait . Francis is in disbelief , and baptizes Stewie himself . Stewie soon becomes unwell and is informed that he must be quarantined and kept in a germ @-@ free environment by a doctor for the time being until his immune system 's strength recovers at the end of the episode . Then Lois discovers that Francis coaxed Peter into having Stewie baptized without her knowledge , and tells Peter to choose his own religious beliefs and not allow himself to be a slave to his father 's religion . Peter initially converts to Mormonism , but then discovers that Mormons cannot drink alcohol ; he then tries Jehovah 's Witnesses and attempts door @-@ to @-@ door preaching . He finds someone who is actually interested in hearing what he has to say ; however , he fails to teach them anything about the religion . As a final attempt , Peter tries Hinduism ; when he tackles the Hindu leader to the floor , believing the red dot on his head to be a laser spot from a sniper rifle , he is dismissed from the meeting . Unable to find a religion suited to him , Peter decides to create his own religion , based on Happy Days , calling his newly founded church the " First United Church of the Fonz " . 
 To the Griffins ' ( mainly Lois ' ) surprise , many people turn up for the first worship service , much to the annoyance of Brian , who dislikes the idea that Peter is a religious leader ( likely due to Brian being an atheist ) . In order to stop Peter from continuing his new religion , Brian joins forces with Francis to find a way to deter people from worshiping the Fonz . Three representatives from other religions show up to the services of the Church of the Fonz . The first informs people that he has formed the Church of George Jefferson ( from All in the Family ) and a good portion of the congregation leaves with him . The second claims to have created the Church of Captain Stubing ( from The Love Boat ) and another chunk of the congregation leaves with him . The third person is Kirk Cameron and Peter assumes that Cameron is there to announce the formation of the Church of Mike Seaver ( Cameron 's character on Growing Pains ) , but Cameron lets him know that he 's only here to convert people back to Christianity and the remainder of the congregation leaves with him . Back at home , Lois comforts Peter , who is upset at the failure of his Church , by telling him that if his church embraced the Fonz 's values of friendship , it is worthwhile , but Peter highly doubts it and Peter converts back to Christianity , however the scene shifts & Francis is shown looking at a picture of the Fonz , puts it down on a table , gets on his knees as if to pray , and claps to the beat of " Rock Around the Clock " as the episode ends . 
 = = Production = = 
 Episode writer and executive show producer Danny Smith has written all Family Guy episodes to date to feature Francis ; the first was " Holy Crap " . After Francis puts up the Christian cross on the Griffins ' dining table , Stewie 's line , " Yeah , nothing says ' eat up ' like a bleeding , half @-@ naked Jew nailed to a piece of wood , " was censored from the FOX and syndicated airings , but retained on the Cartoon Network , TBS , and DVD versions . On Adult Swim , this episode was rated TV @-@ MA due to its religiously blasphemous content , but on TBS and all other Adult Swim airings , the episode is rated TV @-@ 14 for suggestive dialogue ( D ) and offensive language ( L ) . A sequence shows Peter saying , " I 'm sorry , but if another person says taint today , I am going to bust a nut " , after the doctor informs him and Lois that Stewie was exposed to tainted holy water , was intended to be included in the episode , but was removed for unknown reasons . After Stewie is placed in a square box to quarantine him , Lois is shown leaving him half @-@ way through changing his diaper — Stewie then says " finish the job , woman ! It smells like New Orleans in here " . The script for this episode , including this sketch , was prepared before the events of Hurricane Katrina , so it was never intended to coincide with the events of Katrina . On all airings ( including the volume 3 DVD set ) , Stewie 's line has been changed to " It smells like Brian Dennehy in here ! " 
 The Fonz Statue in Peter 's church was originally meant to depict The Fonz in a way similar to Jesus 's depiction on the Christian cross , but it was rejected due to broadcasting standards . An animated scene showing the congregation of Peter 's church singing the Happy Days theme tune was created but never used as the series producers were unable to obtain the rights to it . The series producers were not able to get Henry Winkler or Garry Marshall to guest @-@ star in the episode , so to fill the time gap , they created the scene about Madonna , which they deemed to be " quite funny " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , the family is watching Aquaman on television . Peter is shown watching Jaws 5 on the television , a sequence which MacFarlane describes as " one of [ his ] favourite gags [ they 've ] ever done on the show " . Stewie is shown asking viewers to change the channel to one which is showing Desperate Housewives . When Peter is describing Jesus , he does so in a similar manner to that shown on Quantum Leap . Peter 's stuttering while attempting to say " wrong " is a reference to a scene in which Fonzie was unable to say the word on Happy Days . At one point a modified video of " Opposites <unk> " with Paula Abdul is shown with Peter dressed like a cat . The music playing in the background during the end credits is " Rock Around the Clock " , the original Happy Days opening theme ; additionally , the credits themselves are shown in a similar style and font . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Father , the Son , and the Holy Fonz " finished 40th in the weekly ratings for the week of December 12 – 18 , 2005 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 26 million viewers . Ryan Budke , of TV Squad , said , " This was one of the funniest episodes this year . " He added , " I was cracking up from beginning to end on this one . " He was " a little disappointed that Henry Winkler did not actually show up in the show " . 
 The Parents Television Council , a frequent critic of Family Guy , named the episode the worst of the week for its treatment of religion . 
 = Anuradhapura Kingdom = 
 The Anuradhapura Kingdom ( Sinhala : <unk> <unk> , Tamil : <unk> <unk> ் <unk> ் ) , named for its capital city , was the first established kingdom in ancient Sri Lanka . Founded by King Pandukabhaya in 377 BC , the kingdom 's authority extended throughout the country , although several independent areas emerged from time to time , which grew more numerous towards the end of the kingdom . Nonetheless , the king of Anuradhapura was seen as the supreme ruler of the country throughout the Anuradhapura period . Buddhism played a strong role in the Anuradhapura period , influencing its culture , laws , and methods of governance . Society and culture were revolutionized when the faith was introduced during the reign of King Devanampiya Tissa ; this cultural change was further strengthened by the arrival of the Tooth Relic of the Buddha in Sri Lanka and the patronage extended by her rulers . 
 Invasions from South India were a constant threat throughout the Anuradhapura period . Rulers such as Dutthagamani , Valagamba , and Dhatusena are noted for defeating the South Indians and regaining control of the kingdom . Other rulers who are notable for military achievements include Gajabahu I , who launched an invasion against the invaders , and Sena II , who sent his armies to assist a Pandyan prince . 
 Because the kingdom was largely based on agriculture , the construction of irrigation works was a major achievement of the Anuradhapura Kingdom , ensuring water supply in the dry zone and helping the country grow mostly self @-@ sufficient . Several kings , most notably Vasabha and Mahasena , built large reservoirs and canals , which created a vast and complex irrigation network in the Rajarata area throughout the Anuradhapura period . These constructions are an indication of the advanced technical and engineering skills used to create them . The famous paintings and structures at Sigiriya ; the <unk> , Jetavana stupas , and other large stupas ; large buildings like the Lovamahapaya ; and religious works ( like the numerous Buddha statues ) are landmarks demonstrating the Anuradhapura period 's advancement in sculpting . 
 = = The city of Anuradhapura = = 
 In 543 BC , prince Vijaya ( 543 – 505 BC ) arrived in Sri Lanka , having been banished from his homeland in India . He eventually brought the island under his control and established himself as king . After this , his retinue established villages and colonies throughout the country . One of these was established by Anuradha , a minister of King Vijaya , on the banks of a stream called <unk> and was named <unk> . 
 In 377 BC , King Pandukabhaya ( 437 – 367 BC ) made it his capital and developed it into a prosperous city . Anuradhapura ( <unk> ) was named after the minister who first established the village and after a grandfather of Pandukabhaya who lived there . The name was also derived from the city 's establishment on the auspicious asterism called Anura . Anuradhapura was the capital of all the monarchs who ruled the country during in the Anuradhapura Kingdom , with the exception of Kashyapa I ( 473 – 491 ) , who chose Sigiriya to be his capital . The city is also marked on Ptolemy 's world map . 
 = = History = = 
 King Pandukabhaya , the founder and first ruler of the Anuradhapura Kingdom , fixed village boundaries in the country and established an administration system by appointing village headmen . He constructed hermitages , houses for the poor , cemeteries , and irrigation tanks . He brought a large portion of the country under the control of the Anuradhapura Kingdom . However , it was not until the reign of Dutthagamani ( 161 – 137 BC ) that the whole country was unified under the Anuradhapura Kingdom . He defeated 32 rulers in different parts of the country before he killed Elara , the South Indian ruler who was occupying Anuradhapura , and ascended to the throne . The chronicle Mahavamsa describes his reign with much praise , and devotes 11 chapters out of 37 for his reign . He is described as both a warrior king and a devout Buddhist . After unifying the country , he helped establish Buddhism on a firm and secure base , and built several monasteries and shrines including the Ruwanweli Seya and Lovamahapaya . 
 Another notable king of the Anuradhapura Kingdom is Valagamba ( 103 , 89 – 77 BC ) , also known as <unk> Abhaya , who was overthrown by five invaders from South India . He regained his throne after defeating these invaders one by one and unified the country again under his rule . <unk> Tissa ( 137 – 119 BC ) , <unk> <unk> ( 77 – 63 BC ) , Vasabha ( 67 – 111 ) , Gajabahu I ( 114 – 136 ) , Dhatusena ( 455 – 473 ) , Aggabodhi I ( 571 – 604 ) and Aggabodhi II ( 604 – 614 ) were among the rulers who held sway over the entire country after Dutthagamani and Valagamba . Rulers from <unk> Tissa ( 44 – 22 BC ) to <unk> ( 29 – 19 BC ) also managed to keep the whole country under the rule of the Anuradhapura Kingdom . Other rulers could not maintain their rule over the whole island , and independent regions often existed in Ruhuna and <unk> ( hill country ) for limited periods . During the final years of the Anuradhapura Kingdom , rebellions sprang up and the authority of the kings gradually declined . By the time of Mahinda V ( 982 – 1017 ) , the last king of the Anuradhapura Kingdom , the rule of the king had become so weak that he could not even properly organize the collection of taxes . 
 During the times of Vasabha , Mahasena ( 274 – 301 ) and Dhatusena , the construction of large irrigation tanks and canals was given priority . Vasabha constructed 11 tanks and 12 canals , Mahasen constructed 16 tanks and a large canal , and Dhatusena built 18 tanks . Most of the other kings have also built irrigation tanks throughout Rajarata , the area around Anuradhapura . By the end of the Anuradhapura Kingdom , a large and intricate irrigation network was available throughout Rajarata to support the agriculture of the country . 
 = = = Arrival of Buddhism = = = 
 One of the most notable events during the Anuradhapura Kingdom was the introduction of Buddhism to the country . A strong alliance existed between Devanampiya Tissa ( 250 – 210 BC ) and Ashoka of India , who sent <unk> Mahinda , four monks , and a novice being sent to Sri Lanka . They encountered Devanampiya Tissa at <unk> . After this meeting , Devanampiya Tissa embraced Buddhism the order of monks was established in the country . Devanampiya Tissa , guided by <unk> Mahinda , took steps to firmly establish Buddhism in the country . 
 Soon afterwards , the <unk> <unk> arrived from India in order to establish the <unk> <unk> ( order of nuns ) in the country . She brought along with her a sapling from the Sri Maha Bodhi , the tree under which the Buddha attained enlightenment , which was then planted in Anuradhapura . Devanampiya Tissa bestowed on his kingdom the newly planted Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi . Thus this is the establishment of Buddhism in Sri Lanka 
 = = = Arrival of the Sacred Tooth Relic = = = 
 During the reign of <unk> ( 301 – 328 ) , <unk> , the sub king of Kalinga , and <unk> brought the Tooth Relic of the Buddha to Sri Lanka because of unrest in their country . <unk> carried it in procession and placed the relic in a mansion named <unk> . He ordered this procession to be held annually , and this is still done as a tradition in the country . The Tooth Relic of the Buddha soon became one of the most sacred objects in the country , and a symbol of kingship . The person who was in possession of the Tooth Relic would be the rightful ruler of the country . Therefore , it was often enshrined within the royal palace itself . 
 = = = Invasions = = = 
 Several invasions have been made against the Anuradhapura Kingdom , all of which were launched from South India . The first invasion recorded in the history of the country is during the reign of <unk> ( 247 – 237 BC ) , where he was overthrown by two horse dealers from South India named Sena and <unk> . After ruling the country for 22 years , they were defeated by <unk> ( 215 – 205 BC ) , who was in turn overthrown by another invasion led by a Chola prince named Elara ( 205 – 161 BC ) . Elara ruled for 44 years before being defeated by Dutthagamani . However , the Mahavamsa records that these foreign kings ruled the country fairly and lawfully . 
 The country was invaded again in 103 BC by five Dravidian chiefs , <unk> , <unk> , Panya Mara , <unk> Mara and <unk> , who ruled until 89 BC when they were defeated by Valagamba . Another invasion occurred in 433 , and the country fell under the control of six rulers from South India . These were Pandu , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , who were defeated by <unk> who regained power in 459 . More invasions and raids from South India occurred during the reigns of Sena I ( 833 – 853 ) and Udaya III ( 935 – 938 ) . The final invasion during the Anuradhapura Kingdom , which ended the kingdom and left the country under the rule of the Cholas , took place during the reign of Mahinda V. 
 However , none of these invaders could extend their rule to Ruhuna , the southern part of the country , and Sri Lankan rulers and their heirs always organized their armies from this area and managed to regain their throne . Throughout the history of Sri Lanka , Ruhuna served as a base for resistance movements . 
 = = = End of the kingdom = = = 
 In 993 , the Chola Emperor Rajaraja I invaded Sri Lanka , forcing the then Sri Lankan ruler Mahinda V to flee to the southern part of the country . The Mahavamsa describes the rule of Mahinda V as weak , and the country was suffering from poverty by this time . It further mentions that his army rose against him due to lack of wages . Taking advantage of this situation , Rajendra I son of Rajaraja I , launched a large invasion in 1017 . Mahinda V was captured and taken to India , and the Cholas sacked the city of Anuradhapura . They moved the capital to Polonnaruwa and subsequent Sri Lankan rulers who came into power after the Chola reign continued to use Polonnaruwa as the capital , thus ending the Anuradhapura Kingdom . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The kingdom was under the rule of a king . The consecration ceremonies and rituals associated with kingship began during the reign of Devanampiya Tissa , under the influence of Ashoka of India . The whole country was brought under the rule of a single monarch by Dutthagamani for the first time . Before this , it had several principalities independent of the Anuradhapura Kingdom . The succession of the throne was patrilineal , or if that cannot be the case , inherited by the eldest brother of the previous king . The king of Anuradhapura was seen as the supreme ruler throughout the island , even at times when he did not have absolute control over it . 
 Four dynasties have ruled the kingdom from its founding to its ending . The rulers from Vijaya to <unk> ( 60 – 67 ) are generally considered as the Vijayan dynasty . Pandukabhaya was the first ruler of the Anuradhapura Kingdom belonging to this dynasty . The Vijayan dynasty existed until Vasabha of the Lambakanna clan seized power in 66 AD . His ascension to the throne saw the start of the first Lambakanna dynasty , which ruled the country for more than three centuries . A new dynasty began with Dhatusena in 455 . Named the Moriya dynasty , the origins of this line are uncertain although some historians trace them to Shakya princes who accompanied the sapling of the Sri Maha Bodhi to Sri Lanka . The last dynasty of the Anuradhapura period , the second Lambakanna dynasty , started with <unk> ( 684 – 718 ) seizing the throne in 684 and continued till the last ruler of Anuradhapura , Mahinda V. 
 = = = Officials and governing = = = 
 Royal officials were divided into three categories ; officials attached to the palace , officials of central administration and officials of provincial administration . One of the most important positions was the <unk> , the advisor of the king . The king also had a board of ministers called <unk> <unk> . In central administration , <unk> ( Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Army ) was a position second only to the king , and held by a member of nobility . This position , and also the positions of <unk> ( sub king ) , administrative positions in the country 's provinces and major ports and provinces , were often held by relatives of the king . 
 The kingdom was often divided into sections or provinces and governed separately . Rajarata , the area around the capital , was under the direct administration of the king , while the Ruhuna ( southern part of the country ) and the Malaya Rata ( hill country ) were governed by officials called apa and <unk> . These administrative units were further divided into smaller units called rata . Officials called <unk> or <unk> were in charge of these . The smallest administrative unit was the <unk> ( village ) , under a village chief known as <unk> or <unk> . 
 = = = Buddhist priesthood = = = 
 A close link existed between the ruler and the Sangha ( Buddhist priesthood ) since the introduction of Buddhism to the country . This relationship was further strengthened during Dutthagamani 's reign . The monks often advised and even guided the king on decisions . This association was initially with the Mahavihara sect , but by the middle of the 1st century BC , the Abhayagiri sect had also begun to have a close link to the ruling of the country . By the end of the 3rd century AD , the Jetavana sect had also become close to the ruler . <unk> between the ruler and the priesthood often weakened the government , as happened during the reign of <unk> . Even Valagamba 's resistance movement was initially hampered because of a rift with the Mahavihara , and he succeeded only after a reconciliation was affected . Some rulers patronized only one sect , but this often led to unrest in the country and most rulers equally supported all sects . Despite this , religious establishments were often plundered during times of internal strife by the rulers themselves , such as during the reigns of <unk> I ( 639 – 650 ) and Kashyapa II ( 650 – 659 ) . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 Customs , traditions and moral principles based on Buddhism were used as the bases of law . Specific laws were eventually developed and adopted . <unk> , a 5th @-@ century commentary , gives details of complex regulations on the theft of fish . The chief judicial officer was known as <unk> and there were several judicial officers under him , known as <unk> . Apart from them , village headmen and provincial governors were also given the power to issue judgments . The king was the final judge in legal disputes , and all cases against members of the royal family and high dignitaries of the state were judged by him . However , the king had to exercise this power with care and after consulting with his advisers . Udaya I recorded judgments that were regarded as important precedents in the royal library in order to maintain uniformity in judicial decisions . 
 Initially , the administration of justice at village level was the responsibility of village assemblies , which usually consisted of the elders of the village . However , towards the end of the Anuradhapura Kingdom a group of ten villages , known as <unk> , was responsible for upholding justice in that area . The laws and legal measures to be followed by them were proclaimed by the king . Several rock inscriptions that record these proclamations have been found in archaeological excavations . Punishments differed from ruler to ruler . Some kings , such as <unk> ( 247 – 249 ) and <unk> Tissa ( 209 – 231 ) were lenient in this aspect , while rulers like <unk> ( 33 – 43 ) and <unk> I ( 263 – 273 ) were harsher . However , crimes such as treason , murder and slaughter of cattle were generally punishable by death . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of the Anuradhapura Kingdom was based mainly on agriculture . The main agricultural product was rice , the cultivation of which was supported by an intricate irrigation network . Rice cultivation began around the <unk> oya , <unk> oya and Mahaweli river and spread throughout the country . Shifting cultivation was also done during the rainy seasons . Rice was produced in two main seasons named Yala and Maha . Due to the extensive production of rice , the country was mostly self @-@ sufficient . Cotton was grown extensively to meet the requirements of cloth . Sugarcane and Sesame were also grown and there are frequent references in classical literature to these agricultural products . Finger millet was grown as a substitute for rice , particularly in the dry zone of the country . <unk> of these products , mainly rice , were exported . 
 The primary goods exported during the Anuradhapura period are gemstones , spices , pearls and elephants , while ceramic ware , silks , perfumes and wines were imported from other countries . Foreign merchants , mainly Arabs , often acted as middlemen in these imports and exports . Luxury cloth was also imported from Eastern India and China . A stone inscription in Anuradhapura implies that the market or bazaar was an important functionality in the city . Trade was limited in villages since they were mostly self @-@ sufficient , but essential commodities such as salt and metal had to be obtained from outside . The country 's position in the Indian Ocean and its natural bays made it a centre of international trade transit . Ports such as <unk> ( Mannar ) and <unk> ( Trincomalee ) were used as trading ports during the Anuradhapura Kingdom . 
 Currency was often used for settling judicial fines , taxes and payments for goods or services . However , remuneration for services to the king , officials and temples were often made in the form of land revenue . The oldest coins found at Anuradhapura date up to 200 BC . These earliest coins were punch marked rectangular pieces of silver known as <unk> . These eventually became circular in shape , which were in turn followed by die struck coins . <unk> metals , particularly gold and silver , were used for trading as well . Patterns of elephants , horses , swastika and <unk> were commonly imprinted on the coins of this period . 
 The primary tax of this period was named <unk> ( grain tax ) and charged for land used for cultivation . A water tax , named <unk> was also charged for the water used from reservoirs . Customs duties were also imposed in ports . Those unable to pay these taxes in cash were expected to take part in services such as repairing reservoirs . The administration of taxes was the duty of <unk> , the king 's treasurer . 
