 National Express operate a daily 481 service from London to Ipswich via Colchester , and a daily 484 service from London to Walton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Naze via Colchester and Clacton . 
 = = = Railway = = = 
 The town is served by Romford railway station on the TfL Rail in London fare zone 6 . Trains calling at the station are formed of the high @-@ frequency Liverpool Street @-@ Shenfield local TfL Rail service . Some Abellio Greater Anglia services to / from Southend Victoria and Colchester Town also call at the station . A branch line shuttle on the Romford to Upminster Line connects Romford to Upminster , operated by London Overground . 
 It is planned that the Liverpool Street @-@ Shenfield service will be replaced by Crossrail in 2018 and there is a proposal that Romford will be served by a future extension of the East London Transit . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Romford had an airport for passenger flights in the early 1930s located at Maylands Aerodrome . This is now the site of Maylands Golf Club on the A12 . 
 Regular services to Clacton were operated by E.H. Hillman using Puss Moth and Fox Moth aircraft and The Midland & Scottish Air Ferries operated regular flights from Romford to Glasgow . There were expansion plans for E.H. Hillman to expand services to Paris , Glasgow and Belfast , but operations moved from Romford to Stapleford Aerodrome in the mid 1930s . A conflict of interest between The Midland & Scottish Air Ferries and Scottish Motor Traction saw services cease in the mid 1930s . 
 = = Religion = = 
 There are several churches in Romford . Confusingly , two of them are dedicated to Edward the Confessor , one of England 's two kings that were made saints , and who lived at Havering @-@ atte @-@ Bower nearby . The main church , which is Anglican , is Romford 's original church and situated in Market Place , in the heart of the town . The other one , which is Roman Catholic , is located to the north of the town centre , in Park End Road . 
 Other churches in the town centre include Trinity Methodist Church , in Angel Way ; Salem Baptist Chapel in London Road ; and another Anglican church , Saint Andrew 's , in Saint Andrew 's Road . All are located to the west . 
 Romford also has a synagogue , in Eastern Road , consecrated on 25 May 1956 . 
 = = = Saint Edward the Confessor 's Church ( Church of England ) = = = 
 The current church building , with its prominent spire , dates from 1850 , and was designed by John Johnson . It is located on Market Place and replaced an earlier church of 1410 . It has several monuments to the Hervey and Cooke families . 
 = = = Saint Edward the Confessor 's Church ( Roman Catholic ) = = = 
 This church replaced a temporary building which stood on the site from 1854 , and was built with money and on land donated by William Petre , 12th Baron Petre , who was from a prominent Catholic family ; he was also responsible for other churches in Essex at Barking , Ongar , Brentwood and Chelmsford . Of relatively modest size and in a then rural location , St Edward ’ s was amongst the first 19th century churches built in Essex under the Catholic Diocese of Westminster , established in 1850 . The church was dedicated in May 1856 by Nicholas Wiseman , the first Archbishop of Westminster , and designed by the London @-@ based architect Daniel Cubitt Nichols . 
 In 1917 , a gallery was added to the west end of the chancel , and in 1934 the North Chapel was added . 
 The Church is built in the 13th century English Gothic style in coursed ragstone with a red @-@ tiled roof and a central wooden belfry , topped by a splayed @-@ foot spire and small dormers at the west end . The plan is of an aisle @-@ less nave with a lower chancel , north chapel and south porch with a stair tower for the gallery ( all at the west end of the church ) , with a sacristy linking it to the presbytery in the north @-@ east corner . The windows are of Bath stone . 
 = = = Saint Andrew 's Church = = = 
 Saint Andrew 's Church was built to cope with the growing population of Romford in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . It was built in 1861 @-@ 2 by John Johnson , the same architect who designed the present Saint Edward the Confessor 's Church . 
 = = = Trinity Methodist Church = = = 
 The red brick Trinity Methodist Church was completed in 1888 . It has survived many troubles , including flooding in its opening year , damage on the night of 8 / 9 December 1940 by enemy action , and an arson attack on Christmas Eve 1980 , when the church was only just saved from complete destruction by the presence of a police officer in a patrol car nearby , who managed to call the fire brigade . 
 = = = Salem Baptist Chapel = = = 
 Salem Chapel stands on land which had been part of the old Napoleonic Barrack Ground . Hence the name for the nearby Waterloo Road . The land was auctioned in 1839 , and in the following year the purchaser , a Mr George Gould , himself a Baptist , sold two plots fronting the London Road for the erection of a Baptist Chapel . The land was purchased and fenced for the sum of £ 300 which was raised by way of a mortgage . The original meeting room , ( now the Church Parlour ) was built and opened in July 1840 . The present chapel was completed and opened in 1847 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Havering Council 's urban strategy aims to make Romford a cultural destination , whilst recognising that Hornchurch forms the main cultural hub of the borough with a large theatre and arts spaces . As a former market and coaching town , Romford is well served by public houses and two that are located in the market place are listed buildings . The market and adjacent streets also form a conservation area . 
 Mass entertainment facilities in the town include the Brookside Theatre , Romford Greyhound Stadium , one of the few remaining dog racing tracks in London ; 2 multi @-@ screen cinemas ; and until April 2013 Romford Ice Arena , which was home to the local Romford Raiders ice hockey team . The Dolphin Centre was a popular swimming and leisure facility located in the town from 1982 to 1995 , but the site was redeveloped into the current Axis residential tower block and Asda superstore in the mid @-@ 2000s . There is also a Romford F.C. associated with the town . Romford Bowls Club , the premier bowls club in Essex , is based in Lodge Farm Park . The town is strongly associated with the electronic music group Underworld . 
 Romford 's position as a focus for electronic music production was reinforced by the presence of the Strictly Underground and Suburban Base record labels , with Suburban Base developing from the Boogie Times record store . According to a Billboard article in 1992 , Romford @-@ produced dance music formed part of a trend favouring suburban and provincial " bedroom " record labels over those in central London . 
 = = Local media = = 
 The local newspapers for the town and the borough of Havering are the Romford Recorder , Romford and Havering Post and Romford Yellow Advertiser . Two radio stations are located in the area : Time <unk> and Bedrock ( hospital radio ) 
 In 2013 the film Death Walks was filmed in Romford over a four @-@ month period . 
 The cult TV series Garth Marenghi 's Darkplace was set in the fictional Darkplace hospital , in Romford . 
 = Marine Parade Community Building = 
 Marine Parade Community Building ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> dàshà ) is a community building located in Marine Parade , Singapore . Opened in 2000 , the building houses the formerly separate Marine Parade Community Centre and Marine Parade Public Library , as well as a performing arts group , The Necessary Stage . Designed by William Lim Associates , one of the distinguishing features of the postmodern building is the mural cladding called the " <unk> of Life " , the largest piece of installation art in Singapore . 
 = = History = = 
 The current building sits on reclaimed land first occupied by the Marine Parade Community Centre , which was built in the early 1980s and later renamed to Marine Parade Community Club . In March 1995 , the People 's Association ( PA ) announced plans to spend S $ 9 @.@ 56 million to upgrade 54 community centres and clubs that were over ten years old , adding facilities such as lifts , dance studios , karaoke rooms and multi @-@ purpose air @-@ conditioned activities rooms , to make community centres more user @-@ friendly , with open concept offices and reception areas . 
 In June 1995 , then @-@ Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong asked PA to study the idea of having community centres share their premises with other civil users such as libraries , government offices and commercial developments . Goh , who is also a Member of Parliament for Marine Parade Group Representation Constituency , suggested combining the Marine Parade Community Club , which was slated for upgrading , with the National Library branch in Marine Parade , in a six @-@ storey building with three floors for the community club and three for the library . In June 1996 , Wong Kan Seng , PA 's deputy chairman , announced that due to the scarcity of land in Singapore , eight of the redeveloped community centres , including Marine Parade Community Club , would be located with other civil users . 
 As 30 % of the upgrading cost had to be paid by the community club , several fundraising activities were carried out for the redevelopment . These activities , which included music concerts , golf tournaments and <unk> , raised a total of S $ 6 million . The old club building was demolished in 1997 and construction of the Marine Parade Community Building began the same year . SAL Construction was the project 's main contractor . Built at a cost of S $ 30 million , the new building was completed in January 2000 , and was open to the public on 6 March 2000 . It was officially opened by Goh Chok Tong on 28 May 2000 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The Marine Parade Community Building currently houses the Marine Parade Community Club , the Marine Parade Community Library and a professional theatre company , The Necessary Stage . It also originally had an al fresco Starbucks café on the ground floor . 
 = = = Marine Parade Community Club = = = 
 Opened on 6 March 2000 , the Marine Parade Community Club is equipped with a glass @-@ walled gymnasium overlooking part of the East Coast Parkway , a covered basketball court on the rooftop and an air @-@ conditioned sports hall . There are also a 263 @-@ seat <unk> , a roof terrace for gatherings , and music , study and activity rooms . 
 = = = Marine Parade Community Library = = = 
 Opened on 10 November 1978 , the Marine Parade Community Library was originally located at the town centre of Marine Parade Housing Estate before it shifted to its new premises at the community building . The library is Singapore 's second @-@ oldest community library and the only one built on reclaimed land . It started moving in stages to the community building in April 2000 , and was officially opened by Goh Chok Tong on 28 May 2000 . The Marine Parade Community Library is the first public library in Singapore to be housed together with a community club and an arts group . The library 's old premises was renovated for an NTUC <unk> supermarket . 
 The library is spread over four floors of the Marine Parade Community Building , with a floor area of 3 @,@ 500 square metres ( 37 @,@ 675 square feet ) . As one of the first neighbourhood libraries , the library 's entire second floor is its children 's book section , featuring murals , trivia and multimedia tools . The library has more than 150 @,@ 000 books and 2 @,@ 500 videos available for loan . There is a café on the ground floor , and the library is fitted with numerous couches and benches for the public 's use . Other facilities include multimedia stations , do @-@ it @-@ yourself service stations , and music posts equipped with headphones . 
 = = = The Necessary Stage = = = 
 The Necessary Stage was the first arts group to be housed in a community building with a community club by Singapore 's National Arts Council ( NAC ) . The move was part of the NAC 's Arts Housing Scheme that offered alternative locations to arts groups besides old vacant buildings , in line with PA 's plan to repackage its community clubs as fashionable multi @-@ purpose spaces . The Necessary Stage 's 672 @-@ square metre ( 7 @,@ 467 square feet ) premises at the basement of the community building was about three times the size of its old premises at <unk> Arts Centre , which did not have a proper theatre space for productions . The arts group 's facility at the community building features a " Black Box " , a stage @-@ less theatre with flexible seating . The NAC spent S $ 2 @.@ 1 million on construction costs for the unit at Marine Parade , which includes a foyer and the 120 @-@ seat Black Box . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Overall , the architectural form of the Marine Parade Community Building has been described as a " dragon " , with the roof as a crest and the artwork as the eye of the dragon . The horizontal louvres on the library block was seen as the tail fins of the dragon , an auspicious beast in Chinese culture . 
 = = = Design concept = = = 
 Sited adjacent to Housing and Development Board apartment blocks of the Marine Parade Housing Estate , the Marine Parade Community Building could be seen as an attempt to engage the wider community . The activities of the community building were planned to overlap and to coalesce , as a one @-@ stop destination for the entire family . The rich congruence of the multiple programmes for the building is expressed architecturally as a collage of diverse elements . The building was designed by a local architectural firm , William Lim Associates , which adopted a postmodern pluralist approach , expressed through a multiplicity of materials and forms . 
 = = = Wall mural = = = 
 The community building is clad in a huge wall mural , a commissioned work of art by Thai architect Surachai <unk> . The mural is Singapore 's largest piece of installation art , measuring 63 metres by 12 metres ( 207 feet by 39 feet ) , and covers the curved north- and east @-@ facing façade of the community building . Called the " <unk> of Life " , the artwork made use of a variety of materials such as glass and wood . The artwork 's centrepiece resembles a huge human eye plastered on a wall , made up of tiny mosaic tiles arranged by computer @-@ aided design . 
 Surachai 's abstract piece was the winner in the " Art on Wall " design competition , organised by the Marine Parade Community Club Management Committee in 1998 . A panel of international judges picked the winning design from a total of 66 entries submitted by artists , architects and designers from all over Southeast Asia , including 40 entries from Singapore . Led by local art historian T. K. Sabapathy , the panel felt that the winning entry best reflected the contest 's themes of dynamism , interaction , fusion and harmony . The mural was installed on the curved facade of the community building at a cost of S $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 The library block is predominantly clad in glass , fitted with horizontal fins , on its frontage with the main road . The alfresco café had a street frontage and was spread into the shared forecourt . The roof of the community building resembles the leaves of a palm tree , and covers the community club 's rooftop basketball court . The court 's location on the roof level was a departure from the norm , as in other community centres then , the basketball court occupies space on the ground floor . 
 = Arisa ( manga ) = 
 Arisa ( Japanese : <unk> ) is a Japanese mystery shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) manga series written and illustrated by Natsumi Ando . It appeared as a serial in the monthly manga magazine Nakayoshi from the February 2009 issue to the September 2012 issue . Kodansha published the chapters in twelve bound volumes , from April 2009 to September 2012 . Set in present @-@ day Japan , it focuses on teenager Tsubasa Uehara , as she investigates the mystery surrounding her twin sister 's failed suicide attempt . With her sister left comatose , Tsubasa poses as her in the hopes of uncovering the identity of the King , a person who grants wishes to Arisa 's class , often resulting in violence . 
 Del Rey licensed the series for an English @-@ language translation in North America . It published the first volume in October 2010 , and shortly afterward , Kodansha Comics USA took over publishing , with the final volume published in January 2014 . The series was positively received by English @-@ language readers , with three volumes placing on the New York Times Bestseller List for manga . Arisa generally received positive reviews from English @-@ language reviewers , and the first volume placed on the Young Adult Library Services Association 's list of " Great Graphic Novels for Teens " in 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in modern @-@ day Japan , the plot centers on Tsubasa Uehara ( <unk> <unk> , Uehara Tsubasa ) and Arisa <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Arisa ) , twin sisters separated by their parents ' divorce who keep in contact through letters . Finally meeting again as teenagers three years later , tomboyish Tsubasa is envious , but proud , of her popular sister , in comparison to her own school life where she is often referred to as the " Demon Princess . " When Arisa receives a letter from her school denouncing her as a traitor , she attempts suicide and becomes comatose . Shocked and saddened , Tsubasa poses as her , attending her school to find out why she tried to kill herself . She learns that Arisa 's class sends wishes on their cellphones to a person called King each Friday . The King only grants one wish weekly , resulting mostly in violence . Tsubasa resolves to stop the King and find out the person 's identity to save Arisa , in the hopes of waking her from her coma . 
 Assisted in her investigations by Akira Manabe ( <unk> <unk> , Manabe Akira ) , Arisa 's classmate who learns Tsubasa 's identity , she encounters Mariko Takagi ( <unk> <unk> , Takagi Mariko ) , Arisa 's best friend whom the King manipulates ; Midori Yamashita ( <unk> 緑 , Yamashita Midori ) , Arisa 's boyfriend ; Rei Kudō ( <unk> <unk> , Kudō Rei ) , a transfer student whom Arisa had befriended online and who serves as the messenger of the King ; and Shizuka Mochizuki ( <unk> <unk> , Mochizuki Shizuka ) , Manabe 's childhood friend who lost the use of her legs after a failed suicide attempt provoked by the King . Arisa awakens from her coma , but pretends to have amnesia and returns to Midori 's side . She reveals that she was the original King : although she granted harmless wishes in the beginning , she eventually stole the answers to an exam for Mariko 's wish , fearing disappointment if she refused . Midori caught her in the act , and she shared the task of granting the class 's wishes with him , until he injured her mother , in an attempt to grant her wish . Midori then replaced her as King , using violence and bullying to grant wishes . Horrified by his cruelty and the perceived similarities between them , she then reached out to her twin , hoping that Tsubasa would be able to uncover the truth . Tsubasa learns that Midori suffered psychological trauma in his childhood after being abandoned by his mother and witnessing his twin , Akari , die of neglect . She later foils his attempt to kill her mother , as he hated his own mother and believed that Arisa hated hers as well . Arisa confesses that she loves him for noticing her loneliness , and he realizes that he loves her too . In the conclusion , Arisa 's mother spends more time with her , and Arisa reconciles with Tsubasa . 
 = = Development = = 
 Manga artist Natsumi Ando 's concept art of Arisa had two earlier models of Tsubasa with chin @-@ length and shoulder @-@ length hair , respectively . Ando initially felt worried about the absence of a potential romantic partner for Tsubasa , as Arisa 's target audience is girls ; however , as the manga progressed , she thought of it as " a selling point . " As a result of this , she was able to focus on Tsubasa 's emotions towards her twin . Soon after beginning the manga 's serialization , Ando created " Tsubasa " , a bonus chapter focusing on Arisa 's pretending to be her elder sister ; she continued to delay its publication , because it seemed inappropriate to have a bonus story with Arisa appear when she was comatose in the main storyline . According to Ando , it made a good chapter with which to conclude the series . 
 = = Release = = 
 Written and illustrated by Natsumi Ando , the chapters of Arisa appeared as a serial in the monthly manga magazine Nakayoshi from the February 2009 issue to the September 2012 issue . Kodansha collected the chapters into twelve bound volumes , and published them from April 28 , 2009 , to September 6 , 2012 . 
 In 2009 , Del Rey announced that it had licensed the series for an English @-@ language translation in North America . Del Rey released the first volume on October 26 , 2010 ; Kodansha Comics USA continued publication of the series , with the final volume published on January 21 , 2014 . Digital editions of the series have also been published by Kodansha in the United Kingdom . Arisa has also been translated into German by Carlsen Comics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Arisa was positively received by English @-@ language readers . The second , fifth , and sixth volumes each placed on the New York Times Bestseller List for manga . 
 Young Adult Library Services Association placed the first volume of Arisa on its list of " Great Graphic Novels for Teens " for 2011 . About.com 's Deb Aoki reviewed the first volume of Arisa positively , praising it as " compelling " and " a much darker tale " than Ando 's previous work Kitchen Princess ; she later placed Arisa on her 2010 list of the " Best New Manga " for the shōjo category . Otaku USA magazine 's Danica Davidson agreed that the plot was darker than Kitchen Princess and described the artwork as " pretty and cutesy " . According to Matthew Warner of Mania Entertainment , the initially cliched @-@ seeming characters and plain premise helped to provide a " strong contrast " to the main storyline and " the depraved and twisted nature of Arisa ’ s class " . While noting the presence of clichés and " plot holes " , Carlo Santos of Anime News Network enjoyed the first volume , describing it as " a shoujo @-@ styled Naoki <unk> thriller , built upon layers of addictive mystery " ; he had mixed feelings about her artwork , writing that it conveyed the plot well , but did not possess a distinct artistic style . In her review of the third volume , Rebecca Silverman , another reviewer for Anime News Network , wrote that while the middle @-@ school setting felt believable and the mystery was intriguing , some aspects of the plot were trying on the reader 's suspension of disbelief , and the artwork , though usually enjoyable , failed to be convincingly scary during frightening scenes . In her follow @-@ up review of the eleventh and twelfth volumes , Silverman interpreted Arisa as struggling with Stockholm syndrome and wrote that it was unsettling , as by the conclusion , the character still remained in " an emotionally unhealthy ( or even abusive ) relationship . " She enjoyed the suspense and wrote that Midori 's backstory sufficed to explain his actions , concluding " Arisa has been a wild ride , an unexpected horror / mystery shoujo gem . " 
 = The Ones ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " The Ones " is the nineteenth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt , and directed by Beth McCarthy . The episode aired in the United States on April 23 , 2009 , on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) . Guest stars in this episode include Josh Casaubon , Salma Hayek , and Brian Williams . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) goes shopping with Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) for an engagement ring for Elisa ( Hayek ) . Jack grows worried about whether he and Elisa 's potential marriage could survive in the real world , but Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) counsels him on married life . Meanwhile , Elisa tells Liz that she is keeping a secret from Jack . A prank results in an injury back at TGS and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) falls in love with an attractive emergency medical technician ( Casaubon ) who comes to help . 
 " The Ones " received generally mixed reception . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 6 @.@ 3 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 6 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . For her performance in this episode , Krakowski received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is planning to marry his girlfriend Elisa ( Salma Hayek ) as he believes she is " the one " , but Elisa tells Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) she has a secret . After asking Liz to tell Jack of her reluctance to get married , Elisa kisses Liz and walks away . Liz simply says " I see why he ( Jack ) likes it " . She confesses to Jack and Liz that she killed her first husband in a crime of passion after he cheated on her , and did not go to prison because she could not get an impartial jury due to her consequent notoriety . Jack considers marrying her anyway , saying that love requires one to overlook another 's flaws , but worries about what would happen if he would ever be unfaithful . Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tells Jack that he has never cheated on his wife , Angie ( Sherri Shepherd ) , which makes Jack think that he too can be faithful . However , when Elisa grows too suspicious of Jack 's relationship with Liz , he calls off the engagement . 
 Meanwhile , at the 30 Rock studios , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) and James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) decide to play a prank on J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) , which results in Lutz getting hurt , after a flat @-@ screen monitor falls on top of him . Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) becomes romantically interested in one of the paramedics ( Josh Casaubon ) , but unsure of how to contact him , tries to bring him to the studio by giving the show 's page , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , strawberries , which triggers his allergies . Kenneth willingly consumes some , after Jenna tells him that the paramedic might be " the one " , only for Jenna to decide against having a relationship with the paramedic because he has a son . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Ones " was written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt , and directed by Beth McCarthy , a long @-@ time television director who worked with series creator Tina Fey on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . This was Burditt 's tenth writing credit , and was McCarthy 's sixth directed episode . " The Ones " originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 23 , 2009 . 
 At the beginning of the episode , Jack and Liz are at a jewelry store , as Jack is searching for an engagement ring for Elisa . They shot that scene in a Cartier store in New York 's Fifth Avenue , which was filmed on February 22 , 2009 . A scene featuring Sue LaRoche @-@ Van der Hout ( Sue Galloway ) as the Grim Reaper , in which Jenna is led to believe Kenneth has gone into shock because of the strawberries , was cut from the airing . According to Jane Krakowski , in the DVD commentary for this episode , there were alternate scenes with Jenna letting Kenneth know about the tampering she did to Kenneth 's items , his chickpea , water bottle , and harmonica . 
 " The Ones " was actress Salma Hayek 's final guest appearance on 30 Rock . Her first appearance on the show was in the episode " Señor Macho Solo " , as a nurse for Jack 's mother and love interest for him . She next guest @-@ starred in the episodes " Flu Shot " , " Generalissimo " , " St. Valentine 's Day " , and " Larry King " . 
 News anchor Brian Williams , of NBC Nightly News , guest @-@ starred as himself in this episode . In a scene with Tracy and Jack at a club , Tracy reveals to Jack that he has been giving out his phone number to different women , though it is not his real number , which results in Williams receiving the calls . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Kenneth revealing that his real name is " Dick Whitman " is a reference to the main character Don Draper of Mad Men ( played by Jon Hamm , who had a recurring role on 30 Rock earlier in the season ) . " Earn this " , spoken by Kenneth as Jenna has poisoned him again , references the 1998 film Saving Private Ryan when actor Tom Hanks says the same words to actor Matt Damon 's title character . When she is told that Kenneth has gone into a severe allergic shock and needs to have his hands cut off , Jenna apologizes to him for what she has done , telling him " I 'm just a girl sitting in front of a boy she poisoned so this other guy would go to town on her " , which Jenna misquotes from actress Julia Roberts ' character from the romantic comedy Notting Hill ( 1999 ) . After Kenneth drinks his strawberry water , as he risked his life so that Jenna can meet the paramedic again , Jenna says to Kenneth " You magnificent <unk> ! " , a line quoted by actor George C. Scott in the American biographical war film Patton ( 1970 ) . Kenneth blows white smoke out while referencing bringing back something from " the other side " ( death ) echoes the same look when actor Haley Joel Osment remarked " I see dead people " in the movie The Sixth Sense ( 1999 ) . 
 The final three clips in the montage of Tracy taking off his shirt are real clips from Tracy Morgan interviews . Also , Elisa wears a " What the <unk> ? ! " Battlestar Galactica t @-@ shirt , as she admits her secret to Jack and Liz . " It 's not product placement — I just like it ! " , says Liz to Jack , after he storms into her office and she is wearing a <unk> , a sleeved blanket with sleeves usually made of fleece material . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Ones " was watched by 6 @.@ 3 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It earned a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 6 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was the eighth highest @-@ rated show on the NBC network that week , while it finished in 19th place — tied with episodes of Brothers & Sisters , The Celebrity Apprentice , and Heroes — in the weekly ratings for the week of April 20 – 26 , 2009 . Jane Krakowski received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards for her work in this episode , but lost it to actress Kristin Chenoweth . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . IGN contributor Robert Canning rated the episode an 8 out of 10 , saying it " gave all the main characters an opportunity to shine " and that the episode " delivered some great laughs and elevated some standard sit @-@ com plots to a much funnier level . " He argued that Liz helped make the episode good . Though , Canning found Elisa 's secret disappointing and felt that Salma Hayek 's exit from the show too much like a conventional sitcom . Entertainment Weekly 's Aly Semigran wrote that the episode gave good character revelations about Tracy , Jenna , and Kenneth , but that episode did not exceed expectations from the previous week 's episode , " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " . Writing for The Star @-@ Ledger Alan Sepinwall reported that despite the episode not being a 30 Rock classic it " had more than enough funny things in it to keep me satisfied . " The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin wrote that " The Ones " felt " a little stock " but that it was " just pretty good . " He further added that " the one " gag featured in this episode " was mildly amusing but a little obvious . " He felt that Elisa 's secret felt more like a Soap opera secret than a 30 Rock one . Nonetheless , Rabin gave " The Ones " a B- . David Bauder of the Guelph Mercury , however , was complimentary towards Hayek 's guest appearances throughout season 3 , noting , that they are " the best this absurdist comedy has to offer . Hayek throws herself into her role with gusto , matching Tina Fey and Alec Baldwin step for silly step " . 
 Jenna 's storyline in the episode received mixed reception . Canning enjoyed her subplot but found it predictable and stereotypical , while Sepinwall reported it did not work , and wrote that Jenna 's stories need to have Liz or Jack featured prominently or that she be put with Scott Adsit 's 30 Rock character , Pete Hornberger , as in this episode , " as her insanity 's only amusing when contrasted against a relatively normal character . As with Sepinwall , Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad believed Jenna 's subplot was fair , observing it was great in parts but " it just went on too long and got tedious and silly . " He believed it would be a good idea to have Jenna dating or perhaps marrying a recurring character , but opined " The Ones " did not choose that path . Tom O 'Neil from the Los Angeles Times , in an August 2009 article , was thrilled for Krakowski receiving an Emmy nomination for her work on 30 Rock , but felt that " The Ones " would not be the episode for which she 'd win the Outstanding Supporting Actress award . 
 = 2008 Turkish Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Turkish Grand Prix ( formally the IV Petrol <unk> Turkish Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 11 May 2008 at the Istanbul Racing Circuit , Istanbul , Turkey . It was the fifth race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 58 @-@ lap race was won by Felipe Massa for the Ferrari team after starting from pole position . Lewis Hamilton finished second in a McLaren , with Kimi Räikkönen third in the second Ferrari . 
 Massa claimed pole , with teammate Räikkönen fourth , the two Ferrari cars sandwiching the McLarens of Heikki Kovalainen and Hamilton . At the first corner Räikkönen clipped Kovalainen 's rear tyre and gave him a puncture . The safety car was deployed on the first lap , after a collision , but only remained out for one lap . During the course of the race , Hamilton , intending to make one more pit stop than both Ferrari drivers , was faster than Massa due to carrying a lighter fuel load and overtook him on lap 24 . After Hamilton had made his third pit stop , he rejoined in second behind Massa but in front of the Championship leader , Räikkönen . Massa won the race , with Hamilton 3 @.@ 779 seconds behind , and Räikkönen a further half @-@ second behind . The two BMW Sauber cars of Robert Kubica and Nick Heidfeld took fourth and fifth . 
 In the week running up to the grand prix , the Super Aguri team had withdrawn from Formula One , due to financial problems , leaving the sport with only ten teams . Massa 's victory was his third consecutive pole position and victory in Turkey , having also won the race from pole in 2006 and 2007 . Rubens Barrichello celebrated his 257th Grand Prix start , breaking Riccardo Patrese 's previous record of 256 . Due to the race result , Räikkönen 's lead in the Drivers ' Championship was lowered to seven points . Massa rose to second from fourth , whilst Hamilton dropped to third , both drivers tying on 28 points but separated by Massa 's two wins thus far to Hamilton 's one . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari increased their lead to 22 points ahead of BMW Sauber , with McLaren a further two points behind in third . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers , in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , BMW Sauber , Renault , Williams , Red Bull Racing , Toyota , Toro Rosso , Honda , Force India and McLaren . This was two drivers fewer than in previous rounds of the 2008 season , due to the withdrawal of the Super Aguri team from the sport following the previous race . 
 Going into the race , Kimi Räikkönen was leading the Drivers ' Championship , on 29 points ; nine points ahead of Lewis Hamilton , with Räikkönen 's teammate , Felipe Massa , in fourth 11 points behind . BMW Sauber drivers Robert Kubica and Nick Heidfeld were third and fifth , on 19 and 16 points respectively . In the Constructors ' Championship Ferrari were leading on 47 points ; 12 points ahead of BMW Sauber on 35 points , with McLaren just one further point behind them . The race was also Rubens Barrichello 's 257th Grand Prix , which broke the record for the number of Grand Prix starts previously held by Riccardo Patrese . The particular Grand Prix at which he broke this record was disputed , as there was some disagreement about what constituted a " start " , such as the 2002 Spanish Grand Prix , where Barrichello entered but did not actually take part in the race on Sunday . Barrichello and Honda decided to make Turkey the site for their celebrations , issuing a statement that said , " In view of the lack of consensus regarding which specific race marks Rubens ’ 257th Grand Prix , Rubens will celebrate the milestone of 257 Grand Prix appearances at the Turkish Grand Prix " . His Honda team gave him a special anniversary livery and helmet , both of which prominently featured the number 257 . Patrese said that he would feel some sadness at having his record broken . 
 The Super Aguri team had been in financial trouble since a proposed takeover deal backed by equity firm Dubai International Capital , under the " Magma Group " banner , failed to take effect . Early in the week before the Grand Prix , after team owner Aguri Suzuki revealed the extent of his difficulties , the team 's trucks were blocked from entering the paddock by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , Formula One 's governing body . This decision was taken by the FIA after being informed by Honda 's Formula One team CEO , Nick Fry , that Super Aguri , who used Honda engines and Honda @-@ derived chassis , would not be racing at Istanbul Park . Suzuki then admitted that his financial troubles could not be solved by existing primary sponsor SS United Group Oil & Gas Company , leaving the team with no choice but to withdraw from Formula One as of May 6 . Super Aguri had competed in Formula One since the 2006 Bahrain Grand Prix . After scoring its first championship points after 22 race starts at the 2007 Spanish Grand Prix , the team finished ninth overall in the 2007 Constructors ' Championship . 
 The Toro Rosso team 's plan to introduce its new car , the STR3 , at this race were postponed due to a lack of spare parts . This was due to an accident suffered by driver Sébastien Bourdais during testing prior to the previous race , which had resulted in the chassis sustaining heavy damage . Toro Rosso had already used an updated version of its 2007 car , the STR2 , for the first four races of the season , and were now forced to race with it in Turkey as well . The team 's other driver , Sebastian Vettel , said that he was " disappointed " that the new car was not ready . However , this was the last race in which the STR2 competed , as the STR3 subsequently made its début at the next race . 
 Ferrari decided not to use a new nose for their car that that had made its début at the previous race due to the low @-@ downforce nature of the Turkish circuit . According to team manager Luca <unk> , " The cars used by Kimi [ Räikkönen ] and Felipe [ Massa ] are basically to the same specification as those that were used in Spain , with the exception that at Istanbul Park we will not use the slotted nose . This is because this solution is much more efficient at medium to high downforce levels , whereas Turkey requires less downforce . The new nose worked very well , but as we said when we gave it its race debut in Barcelona , we would only use it at circuits where we deem it will bring us an advantage over a more conventional component . " 
 McLaren 's Heikki Kovalainen was passed fit to race in the days leading up to the race . At the previous race , Kovalainen had suffered a serious crash , although he escaped uninjured apart from minor concussion . Kovalainen said that he felt ready to race again : " I arrived here today feeling confident that I would pass the FIA test as I feel 100 % and if I had not felt 100 % I would have told the team already and stayed at home . My preparation for this weekend has gone well and we have done a lot of fitness training . " 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race – two on Friday , and a third on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . In the first free practice session , several large damp patches around the circuit – caused by late track cleaning rather than rain – dissuaded drivers from attempting laps and left the frustrated teams sitting in the pits waiting for the surface to dry as low track temperatures made the situation worse . When the cars did take to the track , many of the drivers either went off the road or spun . Räikkönen only did three laps , before retiring with a gearbox problem , causing him to finish last . Massa set the session 's fastest time , ahead of McLaren duo Heikki Kovalainen and Hamilton . After the session had ended , Fisichella was given a three @-@ place grid penalty by the stewards for exiting the pit lane whilst the light at its exit was still red . 
 The second free practice session was held in dry conditions , but the track was still damp from earlier drizzle . After 30 minutes , Red Bull 's Mark Webber crashed at turn six , his car sustaining serious damage . Webber was unhurt , although the crash meant that he finished the session in 19th position as he was unable to complete any further laps . The session was briefly stopped as a result while the marshals cleared away the debris . In this session , Räikkönen set the fastest time , with Hamilton next up . Massa was third , while David Coulthard of Red Bull broke up the Ferrari @-@ McLaren domination by setting the fourth @-@ fastest time , ahead of Kovalainen . The third and final practice session was held on the Saturday morning in dry conditions , but with damp patches on the track from earlier rain . As was the pattern for the season , the championship contenders appeared to work on preparations for the final part of qualifying and the race in this session and thus carry heavier fuel loads . Webber set the fastest time in the session , with Renault 's Fernando Alonso in second , and Coulthard in third . Massa was fifth , Hamilton seventh , Räikkönen 11th and Kovalainen 12th . 
 Following the withdrawal of the Super Aguri team 's two entries , minor changes were made to the qualifying procedure . In the first qualifying session , which would run for 20 minutes , the five slowest cars ( a reduction from the previous number of six ) would be eliminated , leaving 15 drivers to continue into the second session . In the second session , which would last 15 minutes , the five slowest runners ( again reduced from six ) were to once again be eliminated , leaving the ten fastest drivers to compete in session three , as had previously been the case . The time taken for each session remained the same . The third session would determine the positions from first to tenth , and would decide pole position . Cars which failed to make the final session could refuel before the race , so ran lighter in first and second sessions . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Qualifying was a two @-@ way battle between Ferrari and McLaren , with BMW Sauber not showing as strong a pace as they had in previous qualifying sessions , and Alonso not on as light a fuel load as he had in Spain . Massa qualified on pole with a time of 1 : 27 @.@ 617 , ahead of Kovalainen and Hamilton . Hamilton elected not to run a lap on the softer option of the two tyre compounds , feeling that they were running low on grip in the later stages of the lap . He completed his final lap of the session on a " scrubbed " set of the harder tyre compound and it got him third place . Afterwards Hamilton said that he felt that his tyre choice had been incorrect . However , he changed his mind the following day , having made an examination of the relevant telemetry data . Championship leader Räikkönen qualified fourth , ahead of Kubica and Webber . Alonso , Trulli , Heidfeld and Coulthard completed the top 10 . Nico Rosberg driving for Williams qualified 11th , ahead of Barrichello and his teammate Jenson Button . Vettel qualified 14th , followed by Timo Glock for Toyota . Nakajima qualified in 16th , ahead of Nelson Piquet Jr . ( Renault ) and Bourdais . Afterward Bourdais said that his low position was due to being held up by both Force India drivers : " Bad traffic , basically the Force India guys , ruined my afternoon : on my first run I was held up by Sutil as early as Turn 3 and on the second , I came up behind Fisichella in Turn 8 " . Fisichella qualified 19th but his three @-@ place penalty saw him drop behind teammate Sutil to 20th and last place on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start , Hamilton immediately overtook Kovalainen to claim second behind Massa . Räikkönen had a bad start and was squeezed into the first corner by Kovalainen . The two cars made light contact , with Räikkönen 's front wing touching Kovalainen 's left rear tyre . This resulted in a puncture for the McLaren driver which forced him to make an unscheduled pit stop on the second lap , which dropped him to 18th and last position . Räikkönen damaged his front wing but continued the entire race distance without changing the nose section of his car . Meanwhile , Kubica took advantage to move up into third position , whilst Räikkönen was also passed by Alonso . Further back , Vettel collided with Sutil and both were forced to pit , Vettel with a puncture and Sutil for a new front wing . Sutil 's team mate Fisichella and Nakajima collided at the first turn as well , after Fisichella braked too late and could not avoid the Williams driver . Fisichella retired on the spot but Nakajima , despite losing both his front and rear wing in the incident , was able to make it back to his pit box before retiring . The incident resulted in the safety car being deployed . 
 The safety car was withdrawn at the end of the second lap and the race got underway again with Massa in the lead . Räikkönen , meanwhile , overtook Alonso for fourth place . Between lap four and lap eleven , Massa and Hamilton exchanged fastest laps and the McLaren driver managed to hold the gap between him and the leader at one and a half seconds . The two drivers left third @-@ placed Kubica behind , who in turn was being caught quickly by Räikkönen . Further back , Kovalainen passed Sutil on lap 12 and Vettel on lap 17 . Hamilton then began to close the gap between himself and Massa , posting consecutive quick lap times and was within seven – tenths of a second by lap fifteen . Alonso was the first of the leading runners to make a pit stop on lap 15 , dropping to tenth . Hamilton pitted one lap later and dropped to sixth , while Massa stayed out for another three laps . Both he and Kubica pitted at the same time , leaving Räikkönen temporarily in the lead . On lap 20 , he set the fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 21 @.@ 506 , before he himself pitted at the end of lap 21 , as did the then second @-@ placed Heidfeld . Räikkönen rejoined ahead of Kubica , while Heidfeld came out ahead of both Alonso and Webber , to elevate himself to fifth . Massa was now back in the lead , but with Hamilton just 0 @.@ 8 seconds behind . Running lighter on fuel with a view to making an additional pit stop to the Ferrari driver , Hamilton was able to close the gap on Massa and on lap 24 , he overtook him at turn twelve . Hamilton now led , with Massa second and Räikkönen third . 
 Hamilton soon broke away from Massa , lapping over a second quicker than the Ferrari driver . Further back , Bourdais spun off at turn twelve , with a rear suspension failure that put him out of the race . The top five in the race were now Hamilton , Massa , Räikkönen , Kubica and Heidfeld . Over the next six laps , Hamilton stretched his lead to over six seconds before pitting on lap 32 . He rejoined the race in third , 2 @.@ 6 seconds behind second @-@ placed Räikkönen . Further back , on lap 34 , Kovalainen passed Glock , only to be immediately re @-@ passed . He did succeed up the main straight , on the same lap . Two laps later , he passed Button . 
 Eight laps after Hamilton 's pit stop , Ferrari called Massa in for his final stop of the afternoon , making Räikkönen the leader of the race once more . This lead , however , only lasted for a couple of laps as the Finn pitted on lap 43 , also making his final stop of the afternoon . On lap 43 , Hamilton led by 14 @.@ 4 seconds from Massa with Räikkönen a further seven seconds behind . Two laps later Hamilton was forced to make his third and final pit stop . The McLaren driver rejoined the track behind Massa but crucially ahead of championship leader Räikkönen . The top three would remain this way for the remainder of the race . 
 Further back in fourth and fifth were the two BMW Saubers of Kubica and Heidfeld and behind them were Alonso , Trulli , Webber , Rosberg and Coulthard , with Kovalainen pursuing closely behind them . Kovalainen passed Coulthard on lap 48 , and then on the next lap passed Rosberg . However , Rosberg immediately overtook Kovalainen to regain his position , and Kovalainen was forced to pit on lap 50 . After his final pit stop , Kovalainen rejoined the circuit in 13th position . Felipe Massa won the race , making it his third consecutive win at the circuit , 3 @.@ 7 seconds ahead of Hamilton , with Räikkönen a further half @-@ second behind in third . The two BMWs of Kubica and Heidfeld finished fourth and fifth respectively while further back Alonso , Webber and Rosberg completed the top eight . Coulthard finished ninth , Trulli 10th and Button 11th . After his puncture at the start , Kovalainen had managed to recover to 12th by the end of the race , passing Glock in the closing stages . Glock , Barrichello , Piquet , Sutil and Vettel were the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The race victory was Massa 's third win in Turkey in as many years , having won in both 2006 and 2007 . The top three finishers appeared in the subsequent press conference . Massa said that : 
 It was a very tough race but the team work magnificently , giving me a great car . When Hamilton came underneath me at an incredible pace , I preferred not to take too many risks : the pit wall informed me that he was clearly running a lighter fuel load even if we were not certain he was on a three stop strategy . When that became clear , we were calmer , knowing we had everything in place to go for the win . 
 Ron Dennis , McLaren 's team principal , commented on Hamilton 's drive : " Today we saw a truly phenomenal drive from Lewis [ Hamilton ] , in which he optimised a three @-@ stop strategy that we were forced to adopt as a consequence of concerns we had with his tyres . " Hamilton said that he felt that McLaren had closed the gap on Ferrari , and that he was " very excited " about the next race in Monaco . 
 Räikkönen said : " It was a difficult weekend for me but six points are definitely better than nothing . At the start , I was almost alongside Heikki but then he slowed and I had to brake too to avoid a heavy crash . We touched just enough to damage the end plate of the front wing on my car : it was not a very serious problem , but it definitely didn 't help my race . " Räikkönen also said that he decided not to change his front wing , which was damaged after his collision with Kovalainen , the process would have taken too long . 
 Fisichella , who had collided with Nakajima on the first lap , which caused both drivers to retire , blamed Bourdais : " I made a good start but then under braking Bourdais changed direction twice and I couldn 't brake in time and went into the back of the Williams . " Nakajima said that , " I don 't know exactly what happened ; I just went into the first corner following the guy in front . I didn 't change my line and I was suddenly hit from behind . " 
 Bourdais commented on his retirement : " Something broke at the back of the car ... Going into Turn 12 , I braked at the usual point and the car went sideways , I felt the right rear corner of the car drop and it spun me round . " 
 Räikkönen 's lead in the Drivers ' World Championship was reduced by two points to seven , ahead of Massa and Hamilton , the latter two on 28 points each . Kubica was in fourth , on 24 points , followed by his teammate Heidfeld on 20 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , the Ferrari team increased its lead with a total of 66 points , whilst BMW Sauber were second with 44 points . McLaren were third with 42 points , Williams fourth with 13 points , and Red Bull were fifth , on ten . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 ^ 1 Giancarlo Fisichella got a three place grid penalty for exiting the pitlane whilst the red lights were still on during Friday 's first practice session . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Tropical Storm Fay ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Fay was the sixth named storm of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season ; it was a moderate tropical storm which caused flooding in parts of Texas and Mexico . In early September , a trough of low pressure moved south into the Gulf of Mexico , and became stationary . A low pressure center developed along this trough , and on September 5 , a Hurricane Hunter airplane reported that the system had gained sufficient organization to be a tropical depression , 95 miles ( 153 km ) southeast of Galveston . The depression drifted south @-@ southwest while strengthening , reaching its peak strength of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) on the morning of September 6 . The system then made an abrupt turn to the west @-@ northwest , and remained steady in strength and course until landfall the next day , near Matagorda . The system weakened at a fast rate after landfall , but its circulation would not totally dissipate for three more days . 
 The storm caused extremely heavy rainfall in inland areas ; damage totalled $ 4 @.@ 5 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 5 @.@ 2 million USD in 2007 ) ; no deaths occurred as a result of Fay . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In the first few days of September 2002 , an upper @-@ level trough emerged in the Gulf of Mexico and stalled . Thunderstorms developed along the trough and concentrated around a weak low pressure system . Gradually , the trough and associated low pressure drifted south into the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico . A low pressure area in the northwest Gulf of Mexico became the dominant circulation and slowly developed persistent convection near the center . On September 5 , a reconnaissance aircraft investigated the system . During the flight , a low @-@ level center became evident and some deep convection persisted ; as a result , it was classified as a tropical depression . Wind shear within the Gulf of Mexico was weak and remained favorable to tropical cyclone formation . A reconnaissance flight later that day discovered an ill @-@ defined circulation which led to low confidence of the location of the center of circulation . However , enough convection persisted for the depression to be upgraded into Tropical Storm Fay that evening . 
 Stationary in movement , the associated convection became removed from the center of circulation ; despite this , the system gradually intensified . On September 6 , the storm reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Light wind shear prevented Fay from intensifying further , and the gradual movement was dictated by a weak mid @-@ level ridge to the north . A low pressure system to the south of Fay produced wind shear and resulted in decreased convection on the southern half of the circulation , with the majority of convective activity located on the northern half . Fay soon became disorganized which prompted National Hurricane Center forecaster Avila to state , " [ Fay ] rather resembles a subtropical storm " . Fay moved little , and intensified slightly late on September 6 . 
 On September 7 , Fay began to drift northwest towards the Texas coast as rainbands reached the northwest portion of the Texas coastline . Fay accelerated towards the Texas coast and made landfall early on September 7 . The storm meandered throughout inland Texas , and as the system moved inland , forward speed decreased and Fay weakened to a tropical depression . The last advisory was issued on Fay on September 7 , although the depression persisted for several days just inland of the Texas Coast . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Coinciding with the development of the tropical depression , forecasters issued a tropical storm warning for parts of the Texas coast . When the depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Fay , the warnings were extended from Matagorda , Texas to coastal Louisiana . On September 8 , forecasters extended the warnings to Port Aransas , Texas , and areas from Port O 'Connor to High Island , Texas were put under a hurricane watch as the storm was forecast to reach hurricane strength before making landfall . However , the hurricane watch for those areas were discontinued when Fay failed to reach hurricane strength . In addition , coastal Texas as well as coastal Louisiana were under a coastal flood warning , while parts of inland Texas were under flash flood warnings and flood warnings . 
 Schools closed in Galveston and High Island on September 6 in anticipation of the storm , and voluntary evacuation orders were put into effect along low @-@ lying coastal areas . Some grocery stores in Angleton reported supply shortages . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In Louisiana and Mississippi , effects were minor , and limited to moderate rain up to three inches ( 76 mm ) . 
 The effects in Texas were moderate to severe in some locations , with flooding being the main source of damage . In total , 400 houses sustained damage from flooding . Along the coast , a waterspout spawned by Fay made landfall , and caused minor damage along the northern end of Galveston Island . Storm surge along the Texas coast was 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) above the normal high tide . Peak rainfall throughout the area was in the range of 10 @-@ 15 inches ( 250 – 380 mm ) . Severe damage resulted from Fay in Sweeny , where about 1 @,@ 000 homes and businesses were damaged by the storm , and there was $ 3 @.@ 5 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 4 @.@ 1 million 2007 USD ) in damage . Rainfall totals up to 24 inches ( 600 mm ) caused severe flash flooding there , and in areas near there . Another area that received severe damage from Fay was Matagorda County , where flooding from the storm left $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 5 million 2007 USD ) in damage to roads and public facilities . 
 Twelve tornadoes were reported during Fay 's landfall ; the most notable one destroyed a mobile home , and damaged a barn . Heavy rain from Fay 's remnants also dropped 2 – 3 inches ( 50 – 75 mm ) of rain over Frio County . Rainfall of 8 inches ( 200 mm ) was reported near the <unk> County line with an isolated report of 12 inches ( 300 mm ) in other areas . The rainfall caused severe <unk> which forced people to flee to roof tops . Damage to buildings , roads and crops totaled up to $ 800 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ; $ 940 @,@ 000 2007 USD ) . 
 In Mexico , effects were mostly related to rainfall ; up to 16 inches ( 400 mm ) fell in some areas . When Fay flooded areas such as Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , 100 families were evacuated from their homes , and 120 people were stranded in hotels . It is reported that in that town , 10 trees fell causing little or no damage . Also , the Rio Grande flooded its banks to 3 @.@ 3 meters ( 10 ft ) above flood stage . It is reported that 300 families were not able to return to their homes for several weeks as a result of the flooding . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Nine counties in Texas were declared disaster areas after Tropical Storm Fay : Brazoria , Frio , Galveston , La Salle , Live Oak , Matagorda , Nueces , San Patricio and Wharton . The declaration enabled business owners and residents to apply for federal and state government aid programs . Disaster housing checks handed out after the storm totaled to over $ 2 @.@ 7 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 3 @.@ 1 million 2007 USD ) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) had carried out over 2 @,@ 700 home and building inspections . Non @-@ government relief programs such as The Individual and Family Grant Program had distributed over $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ; $ 469 @,@ 000 2007 USD ) in checks , and over $ 1 million ( 2002 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 2 million 2007 USD ) in relief funds . The Small Business Administration also funded over $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ; $ 294 @,@ 000 2007 USD ) in relief aid . After Tropical Storm Fay , the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) announced that they would apply special tax relief for the nine counties in Texas that were declared disaster areas . 
 = Attarintiki Daredi = 
 Attarintiki Daredi ( English : Which Path Leads to My Aunt 's House ? ) is a 2013 Indian Telugu @-@ language drama film written and directed by Trivikram Srinivas . It stars Pawan Kalyan , Samantha Ruth Prabhu and Pranitha Subhash in the lead roles with Nadhiya , Boman Irani and Brahmanandam in supporting roles . 
 The film was produced by B. V. S. N. Prasad under the banner Sri Venkateswara Cine Chitra in association with Reliance Entertainment . The soundtrack album and background score were composed by Devi Sri Prasad . Prasad Murella was the cinematographer . The film focuses on Gautham Nanda , a business heir who acts as a driver in his estranged aunt Sunanda 's house to mend her strained relationship with his grandfather Raghunandan who expelled her for marrying against his wishes years before . 
 Attarintiki Daredi was made with a budget of ₹ 550 million . Principal photography began in January 2013 and ended in July 2013 , with the film being primarily shot in and around Hyderabad . Significant portions were shot in Pollachi and Europe . The film was released on 27 September 2013 and received positive critical reception . It earned a worldwide share of ₹ 748 @.@ 8 million , grossed nearly ₹ 1 @.@ 3 — 1 @.@ 87 billion , and emerged as the highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of all time until it was surpassed by Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) . 
 The film won four Filmfare Awards , six SIIMA Awards and six Santosham Film Awards apart from the B. Nagi Reddy Memorial Award . The film was dubbed into Hindi as Daring Baaz and was remade into Kannada as Ranna with Sudeep , <unk> Ram and Haripriya in the lead roles . And in Bangladesh as <unk> Prem <unk> ( 2013 ) is inspired from this movie , starring Shakib Khan and Joya <unk> and to release 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Raghunandan is a rich , unhappy businessman based in Milan . He wishes to reconcile with his estranged daughter Sunanda whom he expelled because she married Rajasekhar against his wishes . His grandson Gautham Nanda promises Raghunandan that he will bring her back to their home on his 80th birthday . Sunanda has three daughters : Two of them are Prameela and Sashi . Gautham enters the house as Siddhu , a driver who was appointed by Rajasekhar after saving him from a heart attack . Gautham tries to woo Prameela but gives up when he learns that Prameela is in love with another man . Sashi hates Gautham and is suspicious of him and Paddu , his friend and a nurse who is appointed to take care of Rajasekhar . 
 Sunanda later reveals to Gautham that she is aware of his real identity much before the incidents and warns him to abstain from doing anything with the intention of taking her back to Raghunandan . 
 To save Prameela 's love , Gautham and Paddu go to a village and accidentally Sashi falls into the jeep due to a head injury thus suffering with amnesia . Gautham introduces himself as her lover for the time being . Sashi believes it . The trio go to the venue ; Gautham and Paddu enter the house . They and the bridegroom escape from there and reach Sunanda 's home after a violent altercation with the family members of the bridegroom where Sashi 's memory is revived . The bride 's father Siddhappa asks for compensation for the damage caused by Siddhu , to which Sunanda promises Sashi 's marriage with Siddhappa 's elder son . To avoid complications , Rajasekhar fires Gautham . Gautham later learns that Sashi loved him from the beginning but was hesitant to express her feelings . He traps <unk> Bhaskar , a rich NRI staying in Uganda who has a penchant for women , and enters Sunanda 's home as his assistant . 
 Bhaskar falls for Sashi but his attempts are repeatedly thwarted by Gautham . On the day of her marriage , Sashi elopes with Gautham . While waiting with him for the train to Chennai , Siddhappa 's men reach the station to stop them only to be trashed by Gautham and his assistants , led by Balu . Through Balu , Sashi comes to know Gautham 's real motive . An angry Rajasekhar , with Sunanda , arrive to shoot Gautham but Rajasekhar is taken aback after knowing his true identity . Gautham reveals that the day Sunanda left the house , Raghunandan tried to commit suicide but accidentally killed Gautham 's mother . He says that he chose to love his grandfather though he killed his mother . Sunanda chose to hate him as he injured Rajasekhar and expelled them . 
 Sunanda and Rajasekhar realise their folly and reconcile with Gautham . Sashi is kidnapped by four henchmen appointed by Bhaskar where she narrates the story to the henchmen . Gautham and Paddu reach the spot and Sashi reconciles with Gautham . Bhaskar 's wealth is seized by the government of Uganda and he is left with the same amount with which he ran away from Rajasekhar 's house when he assisted him in the past . Raghunandan reconciles with Sunanda and Gautham is unanimously appointed as the CEO of the company thanks to the support of Sunanda and Raghunandan . The film ends with Gautham holding Raghunandan 's hand with affection . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Trivikram Srinivas planned to direct Pawan Kalyan in a film produced by D. V. V. Danayya and narrated the script in late January 2011 . However Trivikram Srinivas later began Julai ( 2012 ) while Kalyan was working on Gabbar Singh ( 2012 ) and Cameraman Gangatho Rambabu ( 2012 ) . The technical crew of Kalyan 's and Srinivas 's previous collaboration , Jalsa ( 2008 ) , were selected to work on the film . B. V. S. N. Prasad was expected to produce Attarintiki Daredi while Kalyan was expected to allot dates in his schedule from October 2012 . Trivikram Srinivas gave finishing touches to the script in late September 2012 and Reliance Entertainment was confirmed to co @-@ produce . Devi Sri Prasad was selected as the music director and the music sittings were held at Barcelona during the location scout in December 2012 . 
 Attarintiki Daredi was launched on 23 November 2012 at Venkateswara temple in Film Nagar . The film was reported to be on the lines of Nuvvu Naaku <unk> ( 2001 ) for which Trivikram Srinivas wrote the dialogues and the story . Trivikram Srinivas further hinted that the script will depict the Telugu culture and traditions with a strong message . Prasad Murella handled the cinematography and few sequences were shot using a Milo robotic camera which B. V. S. N. Prasad brought in from Mumbai as it was unavailable in Hyderabad . In mid July 2013 , the title was confirmed to be Attarintiki Daredi . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Pawan Kalyan opted for a complete makeover and sported a look resembling the one he sported in his previous films Kushi ( 2001 ) and Jalsa . After Trivikram Srinivas narrated the script to Kalyan , he asked him who would play the role of his <unk> and Trivikram Srinivas replied it would be Nadhiya . Kalyan gave his approval for Srinivas 's selection and Nadhiya was selected before she signed her comeback film in Telugu , Mirchi ( 2013 ) . Trivikram Srinivas narrated the script in a conversation with her over the telephone . After she accepted , he said that he would ask her dates after their schedules were planned . She later revealed that she was scared of being typecast but did the role only on Trivikram Srinivas ' persistence and added that the character ’ s emotions were set quite well . 
 Trivikram Srinivas decided to cast Ileana D 'Cruz as the female lead who worked with him on Jalsa and Julai . Samantha Ruth Prabhu was confirmed as the female lead in late October 2012 which marked her first collaboration with Kalyan . The second female lead was yet to be selected . By the end of December 2012 , most of the films which were in pre @-@ production phase were confirming their female leads . Because of this the production unit decided to begin the shoot without confirming the other heroine . 
 Pranitha Subhash was selected as the second female lead in early January 2013 and was confirmed to play Samantha 's sister . Pranitha called it a lifetime opportunity and said that she would be seen in a " very sweet , girl @-@ next @-@ door character . " Boman Irani made his debut in Telugu with Attarintiki Daredi ; he played Raghunandan , the grandfather of Kalyan 's character . Kota Srinivasa Rao played the role of <unk> Naidu for which he sported a realistic and rugged look . <unk> <unk> was selected for the role of the younger sister of Samantha and Pranitha in April 2013 . 
 Trivikram Srinivas did not cast his regular associate Sunil in the film . Since Sunil 's success of Maryada Ramanna ( 2010 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 2012 ) as a lead actor , Srinivas felt that it would not be fair to make him play a comedian . Rao Ramesh , Mukesh Rishi , Brahmanandam , Ali , M. S. Narayana and Posani Krishna Murali were cast in supporting roles . 
 Mumtaj and Hamsa Nandini were confirmed to make special appearances in the song " Its Time To Party " marking the former 's comeback in Telugu cinema after 12 years after anchor <unk> refused the offer . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 B. V. S. N. Prasad stated during the film 's launch that principal photography would begin in mid @-@ December 2012 . Kalyan searched for new locations in Spain as the story demanded a foreign location and around 30 to 45 days of shooting schedule was planned there . It was the first time Pawan Kalyan went for a location hunt and returned in the last week of December 2012 . Due to unknown reasons , the film 's shoot was postponed to 8 January 2013 in late December 2012 . 
 Shooting finally commenced from 24 January 2013 at a private hotel in Hyderabad . The team planned a new schedule from 4 February 2013 in Pollachi where scenes on Kalyan , Samantha and other support cast were planned to be shot . The schedule was postponed to 15 February 2013 and Trivikram Srinivas continued the shoot in Hyderabad . After shooting for a few days in Hyderabad at a private mall , the planned schedule at Pollachi began from 12 February 2013 . 
 An action sequence featuring Kalyan and other cast members was shot in late February 2013 . The next schedule commenced from 1 March 2013 at a specially erected set at Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad where scenes featuring Kalyan and the other cast members were shot . A few crucial scenes featuring the lead actors were shot there in early April 2013 . Art director <unk> supervised for the special set , which was worth ₹ 30 million . By mid @-@ April 2013 , a major portion of the film was shot there . Kalyan and the film 's unit planned to leave for Spain to shoot important sequences . 
 Scenes featuring the lead cast were shot in the end of April 2013 in a railway station set erected at Ramoji Film City . A new schedule began at Ramoji Film City from 2 May 2013 . That schedule ended on 28 May 2013 . Samantha informed <unk> media that the film 's speaking portions had been completed and that an overseas schedule was remaining . 
 Filming then moved to Europe on 5 June 2013 for a long schedule in which three songs , a few speaking portions and an action sequence were planned to be shot . Kalyan 's introduction scene was shot in Switzerland which cost around ₹ 20 million . The introduction scene , which was also an action sequence , was shot on an island located in Spain using helicopters under the supervision of Peter Hein . Post @-@ production activities were done simultaneously and dubbing for the film 's first half was completed . The team returned from Milan on 2 July 2013 . 
 The song " Its Time to Party " , which primarily features Kalyan , Samantha , Pranitha , Mumtaj and Hamsa Nandini was choreographed by Ganesh and was shot in a pub set erected by Anand Sai at Annapurna 7 Acres Studios . Principal photography wrapped on 14 July 2013 . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Attarintiki Daredi focuses on a young man 's journey trying to convince his grandfather 's estranged daughter to rejoin the family . In its review , Sify felt that the film 's story was a reversal of Nuvvu Naaku <unk> ( 2001 ) and <unk> ( 2008 ) . Kalyan 's character , Gautham , is shown watching a few films , where the protagonist is in disguise trying to win over people who matter to him . In the film , Brahmanandam 's character spoofs the Ridley Scott film , Gladiator ( 2000 ) named Radiator and wins the <unk> awards found by himself after being inspired from the Academy Awards . 
 The mythological tale of Indra seducing Ahalya after disguising as her husband Gautama and the curse cast by Gautama on them is parodied in the film with Brahmanandam playing a key role . Two songs were parodied : one of them being a devotional song " <unk> <unk> " written by the poet <unk> <unk> and composed by Chittoor V. <unk> for the film <unk> ( 1940 ) , and the other an item number " <unk> <unk> " written by <unk> and composed by Devi Sri Prasad for the film Gabbar Singh ( 2012 ) . A scene from the film , popularly known as the " <unk> tree " episode , was based on a similar scene from the 2012 English film A Thousand Words . 
 = = Music = = 
 Devi Sri Prasad composed the soundtrack album which consists of 6 songs . Sri Mani , Ramajogayya Sastry and Prasad himself wrote the lyrics for the soundtrack album , which was marketed by Aditya Music . The album was released on 19 July 2013 in a promotional event at the Shilpakala Vedika with the film 's cast and crew attending the event . The soundtrack album received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Release = = 
 In late April 2013 , Attarintiki Daredi was expected to release on 7 August 2013 . It was then scheduled for a release on 9 August 2013 on the eve of India 's Independence Day . But due to the then @-@ ongoing Telangana movement , the release was put on hold . Later B. V. S. N. Prasad officially announced that the film would release on 9 October 2013 along with Ramayya Vasthavayya ( 2013 ) . But the makers were forced to reschedule the release date to 27 September 2013 after 90 minutes of the footage was leaked onto the internet . On an average , 80 % of the film 's tickets were sold out in all screens for the first three days in Hyderabad . Apart from India , the film released in United States , United Kingdom , Germany , Canada and Dubai . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The theatrical rights in the Nizam region were acquired by Global Cinemas in late April 2013 for a then undisclosed record price , which was revealed later as ₹ 120 million in early June 2013 . My3 Movies announced on 26 April 2013 that they acquired the overseas distribution and DVD rights of the film . Y. Naveen , who financed several overseas distribution firms , acquired this film 's overseas rights on behalf of My3 Movies for ₹ 70 million which , according to Sify , was " a big gamble " . Colours Media acquired the distribution rights in the United Kingdom from My3 Movies in late July 2013 . <unk> Entertainments acquired the theatrical distribution rights in Australia in early August 2013 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Sai Gopal , who assisted Trivikram since Swayamvaram ( 1999 ) , was in @-@ charge of the film 's promotional activities . The first look poster featuring Kalyan in a red shirt and dark cargo pants was unveiled on 13 July 2013 . The first look teaser of 23 seconds was released a day later . Within a day of its release , the video posted by <unk> on YouTube fetched more than 190 @,@ 000 hits and around 6 @,@ 200 likes . As of 16 July 2013 , the teaser fetched over 300 @,@ 000 million hits and about 9 @,@ 000 likes thus setting a record for any Telugu video uploaded on YouTube at that time . By the end of the next day , the teaser was viewed 706 @,@ 927 times and received more than 6 @,@ 000 comments . 
 The theatrical trailer was released on 19 July 2013 to positive reviews . IANS wrote in its trailer review , " High on commercial value , the slick trailer of Attarintiki <unk> is a mix of action , comedy , romance and drama in appropriate proportions . Trivikram hasn 't compromised on anything , including special punch lines for Pawan Kalyan , which he mouths in his signature style with a hint of sarcasm . " Oneindia Entertainment wrote " Attarintiki Daredi appears to be an out @-@ and @-@ out entertainer with an apt tag @-@ line ' celebration of entertainment ' . It is also going to be high in entertainment quotient as some noted comedians <unk> , Srinivas Reddy , Ali tickle the funny bones of the audiences " . 
 The video featuring Kalyan recording the song " <unk> <unk> " was released on 4 August 2013 . The video received positive response and according to a report by The Times of India , Pawan Kalyan 's fans opined that the song composed by Devi Sri Prasad reminded them of the song sung by Kalyan in the film <unk> ( 1999 ) . In late October 2013 , the makers planned to add two more scenes as a promotional stunt to discourage copyright infringement . Six minutes of footage were added to the film this version was screened from 31 October 2013 . 
 = = = Copyright infringement = = = 
 On the night of 22 September 2013 , a 90 @-@ minute piece of footage was leaked online and became viral . B. V. S. N. Prasad filed a complaint the following day against the copyright violation , and sought cyber @-@ protection for Attarintiki Daredi . Because of this incident , the film 's release was delayed to 27 September 2013 . The film 's female lead , Samantha , as well as other celebrities such as Siddharth , Harish Shankar , S. S. Rajamouli , Ram Gopal Varma and <unk> , condemned the unauthorised distribution act . However , police initially suspected that the incident might be a publicity stunt enacted by people who invested in the film . 
 On being informed about the alleged sale of the movie in different electronic formats in the CD and mobile shops in Pedana town , Superintendent of Police J. <unk> Rao deployed a special team , led by Pedana Rural Circle Inspector A. <unk> Raju , to investigate the issue . The police launched a hunt for unlicensed compact discs in the CD shops across the district . CDs and hard disks from video parlours and shops renting CDs in the Krishna district were seized , and some of the shop owners were taken into custody for questioning . Pavan Kalyan fans went out into the streets , with signs containing slogans protesting the piracy . Subsequent to their investigation , the police arrested five people , in addition to production assistant <unk> Arunkumar , and recovered several illegitimate copies of the film on 20 September 2013 . Arunkumar had worked as a production assistant for the films Oosaravelli ( 2011 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 2013 ) , both of which were produced by B. V. S. N. Prasad . 
 <unk> Rao told the media that Arunkumar had given a copy of the DVD to his friend and Hyderabad @-@ based <unk> constable , Katta Ravi , who sent it to his friend , V. Sudheer Kumar , on 14 September 2013 . Pedana @-@ based videographer <unk> Suresh got the DVD from Sudheer Kumar , and later gave it to <unk> Anil Kumar , who owns the Devi Mobiles and Cell repair shop in Pedana . Anil Kumar had uploaded the two @-@ part movie into his system , and sold the 60 @-@ minute part @-@ one of the movie to his customers in different formats . Anil Kumar deleted the original file in his system after learning about the police raids . However , he confessed to the crime during the investigation . Based on the information given by Anil Kumar , a special team led by Machilipatnam DSP K.V. Srinivasa Rao , with the support of the Crime Investigation Department , Hyderabad , arrested the suspects in Hyderabad . The police filed charges on 24 September 2013 , against the five suspects under clauses 63 , 65 and 66 of the Copyright ( Amendment Bill ) 2010 and 429 IPC . 
 Kalyan and Trivikram Srinivas decided to return a significant portion of their remuneration to help Prasad overcome the financial crisis caused by the leak . Samantha returned her entire salary to the producers . Kalyan remained silent during the entire issue , but finally spoke at length about the episode at the " Thank You Meet " of the film on 14 October 2013 . He said that this was a conspiracy and not piracy . He added that he was very well aware of the facts as to who was behind the leak of the film and will not spare anyone and will strike when the time is right . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Television broadcast rights were sold to an unknown channel in mid June 2013 for an amount of ₹ 90 million which happened to be the highest amount that a television channel paid for the telecast rights of a Telugu film till the sale of rights of Aagadu ( 2014 ) to Gemini TV in June 2014 . The film 's television premier was announced in mid December 2013 to be held on 11 January 2014 in MAA TV . The film registered a TRP rating of 19 @.@ 04 which was the highest for any Telugu film till date . The Indian DVD and Blu @-@ ray were marketed by Volga Videos . The overseas DVD and Blu @-@ ray were marketed by Bhavani Videos . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 <unk> Daredi received positive reviews from critics according to International Business Times India who called the film a " perfect family entertainer " in their review roundup . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu praised the film 's climax scene , while also stating that Trivikram Srinivas makes his presence felt before concluding that the film is , " A good dose of fun , tailored for the box office . " Ch . Sushil Rao of The Times of India rated the film 4 out of 5 and wrote " The movie is a worth watch . The reasons : Pawan Kalyan 's comedy , fights composed by Peter Hein , Trivikram Srinivas ' writing skills , Prasad Murella 's cinematography , and Devi Sri Prasad 's music . That there is promise in the movie is a feel one gets right from the opening scenes which are dramatic " . Sify rated the film 4 out of 5 and stated " If you are looking for sheer entertainment , know that Pawan Kalyan and Trivikram have gift packed for you with high dose of comedy . It is entertainment , entertainment and entertainment . Pawan <unk> histrionics , his performances and <unk> handling of the simple story in effective way is what makes <unk> <unk> a big entertainer " . 
 Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment rated the film 4 out of 5 , calling it " a must watch film for the fans of Pawan Kalyan and Trivikram . " Jeevi of <unk> rated the film 4 out of 5 and praised Trivikram Srinivas 's script and added that Kalyan 's performance and Trivikram Srinivas ' story telling skill " makes sure that your heart is touched at times and heartily laugh all the time while watching the movie " . IndiaGlitz rated the film 4 out of 5 and praised Kalyan 's performance in the film 's climax , calling it " an unseen angle " before <unk> that the film " is a treat for the family audience " . 
 In contrast , Sridhar Vivan of Bangalore Mirror rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 and criticised the film 's first half and felt that the " real entertainment " began only after the entry of Brahmanandam 's character . He too praised Kalyan 's performance and the film 's climax and Trivikram Srinivas 's direction . Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 ; she praised the performances of the cast but called Attarintiki Daredi , " a stylish film which does not rise above being a routine family entertainer . " IANS rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote " Unfortunately , Trivikram succumbs to star pressure and churns out a highly disappointing product . At nearly three hours , the film makes you cringe in your seats , especially with the emotional punch it delivers in the climax " . Sandeep <unk> of Deccan Chronicle rated the film 1 @.@ 5 out of 5 and felt that the film was made only for Kalyan 's passionate fans and for others , this film would appear to be " high on style and low on content " . He called Kalyan 's performance as the only " silver lining " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film collected ₹ 335 @.@ 2 million by the end of its three @-@ day first weekend . By the end of its first week , the film collected over ₹ 490 million at the worldwide box office . The film managed to perform well despite facing competition from Ramayya Vasthavayya and collected ₹ 603 @.@ 4 million in two weeks at the worldwide box office . Trade analyst Taran Adarsh reported that till 13 October 2013 , the film collected ₹ 633 @.@ 1 million at worldwide box office . The film collected ₹ 655 million in 19 days at worldwide box office . The film collected ₹ 701 @.@ 8 million in 24 days at the worldwide box office and became the second Telugu film to cross ₹ 700 million after Magadheera ( 2009 ) . It collected ₹ 712 @.@ 4 million at the worldwide box office by the end of the fourth week . The film collected ₹ 733 @.@ 8 million at the worldwide box office in 39 days . The film collected ₹ 733 @.@ 6 million at the worldwide box office in six weeks . The film collected ₹ 739 million at the worldwide box office by the end of its seventh weekend . The film became the highest grossing Telugu film of all time surpassing Magadheera . Attarintiki Daredi collected a worldwide share of ₹ 748 @.@ 8 million and grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 3 — 1 @.@ 87 billion in its lifetime . However , after the four @-@ day run of Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) , it became the second highest grossing Telugu film of all time . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 <unk> Daredi collected ₹ 108 @.@ 9 million on its first day at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions breaking the previous opening day record set by Baadshah . According to Adarsh , the film collected ₹ 107 @.@ 2 million on its first day at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions . He added that the film collected the highest collections amounting to ₹ 32 @.@ 8 million from Nizam region followed by Ceded region with ₹ 21 @.@ 5 million , Guntur district with ₹ 14 million , East area with ₹ 10 @.@ 4 million , Vishakhapatnam district with ₹ 8 @.@ 2 million , West area with ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million , Krishna district with ₹ 7 @.@ 1 million and Nellore district with ₹ 5 @.@ 7 million . According to Adarsh , the film collected ₹ 54 @.@ 7 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions . The film collected ₹ 227 @.@ 1 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions , ₹ 30 million together in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka and ₹ 16 @.@ 6 million in the rest of India by the end of its three @-@ day first weekend taking its worldwide total to ₹ 335 @.@ 2 million . The film collected ₹ 37 @.@ 3 million taking its four @-@ day total in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions to ₹ 259 @.@ 3 million , thereby overtaking the first week totals of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu and Mirchi . 
 By the end of its first week , the film collected ₹ 350 @.@ 5 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions and ₹ 50 million from other states . The film grossed ₹ 10 @.@ 8 million in its first weekend and ₹ 14 @.@ 5 million in its first week with a net collection of ₹ 10 @.@ 5 million and distributor share of approximately ₹ 5 million at Tamil Nadu Box office thus creating a then all @-@ time record for a Telugu film in the state according to trade analyst Sreedhar Pillai who felt that the film 's collections had dropped due to the release of Raja Rani and <unk> <unk> <unk> in the same week . The film earned ₹ 25 million in its first weekend and ₹ 41 @.@ 1 million nett in its first week at Karnataka and also created an all @-@ time record for a Telugu film . Adarsh reported that the Attarintiki Daredi earned ₹ 15 @.@ 8 million in Mumbai and Kerala . The collections dropped as result of protests in <unk> over the bifurcation of the state of Andhra Pradesh including in key areas like Nizam and Ceded . Adarsh reported that till 13 October 2013 , the film collected ₹ 473 @.@ 5 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions . The film was declared a blockbuster at the box office . 
 The film collected over ₹ 13 million on its 19th day making its total in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions cross the ₹ 500 million mark . It stood in the third spot in the list of top 10 highest grossing ( share ) Telugu films in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions preceded by Magadheera and Gabbar Singh . The film crossed the ₹ 200 million mark in the Nizam region and ₹ 90 million in the Ceded region in 20 days . The film collected ₹ 9 @.@ 5 million on its 24th day taking its total in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions to ₹ 546 million , thereby leading to Gabbar Singh dropping to third place in the list of films with the highest distributors ' share in Andhra Pradesh . Gabbar Singh had collected ₹ 508 @.@ 5 million in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions in its lifetime . The film completed its 25 @-@ day run on 21 October 2013 . The film collected ₹ 550 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions , ₹ 52 @.@ 2 million at Karnataka and ₹ 15 million from the rest of the country by the end of its fourth week . The film crossed ₹ 230 million in the Nizam region in its fifth weekend . The film collected ₹ 577 @.@ 3 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions in 39 days . 
 The film collected ₹ 580 @.@ 1 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam regions in six weeks . The film completed a 50 @-@ day run in around 170 theatres on 15 November 2013 . The film completed a 100 @-@ day run in 32 theatres on 4 January 2014 . On the 100th day of its theatrical run , Attarintiki Daredi was screened in four centres in Nizam , eleven in Ceded , one in Vishakhapatnam , four each in Krishna and Guntur , six and two centres in East and West Godavari respectively . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 According to Adarsh , the film collected ₹ 26 @.@ 7 million from paid previews in the United States box office . The film collected more than $ 345 @,@ 000 and grossed more than the other releases of 2013 , Baadshah and Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , at the United States box office . He stated that the film collected $ 429 @,@ 000 from Thursday 's preview in the United States , thereby overtaking the collections of paid previews of Chennai Express ( 2013 ) in the country . Adarsh reported that the film collected $ 495 @,@ 000 on Friday taking its two @-@ day total to $ 924 @,@ 000 which was equivalent to approximately ₹ 50 million . The film collected ₹ 61 @.@ 5 million in the first three days at United States box office . The film collected ₹ 109 @.@ 1 million in its first weekend at the United States box office . According to Adarsh , the film was the third biggest opener in the United States in 2013 after Chennai Express and Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani and was the only Indian film apart from the other two to feature in the list of top 15 openers of 2013 in the country . 
 The film grossed over $ 1 @.@ 5 million within three days overtaking the preview collections of Baadshah in the United States and was expected to cross the $ 2 million mark there . By the end of its fifth weekend , the film collected $ 2 million from the theatres included by the measurement and research company , Rentrak and $ 0 @.@ 3 million from theatres not included by Rentrak at the United States box office taking the film 's total to ₹ 140 million . It collected a total ₹ 60 million from United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , Middle East region , Canada , Singapore and others , taking its total to ₹ 200 million , which made it the highest grossing Telugu film overseas . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Remakes = = 
 The film was remade into Kannada as Ranna in 2014 by Nanda Kishore with Sudeep , <unk> Ram and Haripriya in the lead roles . 
 = Safety Training = 
 " Safety Training " is the twentieth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office . Written by B. J. Novak , who also acts in the show as sales representative Ryan Howard , and directed by Caddyshack and National Lampoon 's Vacation director Harold Ramis , the episode aired in the United States on April 12 , 2007 on NBC . 
 In the episode , Michael attempts to prove life in an office is dangerous after Darryl berates him about the dangers of the warehouse . The attempts lead him to the roof of the building , where he tries to show that depression caused by an office can lead to desperate circumstances . Meanwhile , gambling between the other employees of the office leads Karen to discover that she is still an outsider . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) repeatedly disrupts Darryl Philbin 's ( Craig Robinson ) warehouse safety training session , Lonny Collins ( Patrice O 'Neal ) and Darryl mock the office workers ' safety session in retaliation , claiming that office work does not entail physical danger . Offended by Darryl 's disdain for office safety training , Michael decides to demonstrate the risk of depression and suicide by jumping off the roof , landing on a hidden trampoline . When Michael tests out the trampoline by dropping a watermelon from the roof , it bounces off and hits an office worker 's car , prompting it to be replaced by a bouncy castle hidden from the general view of the parking lot . From the roof of the building , Michael talks dramatically about the dangers of depression . When the bouncy castle is discovered , Jim and Pam realize that Michael is " going to kill himself pretending to kill himself . " The employees collectively talk Michael down from the roof , with Darryl doing most of the talking , to assure Michael that he is brave simply by living as himself . At the end , the car that was hit by the watermelon is revealed to be Stanley 's ( Leslie David Baker ) , who is shocked to see the mess . 
 Meanwhile , the office staff begins betting on various things , from counting the jelly beans in Pam Beesly 's ( Jenna Fischer ) candy dish to whether Creed Bratton ( portrayed by the actor of the same name ) will notice that his apple has been replaced with a potato . Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) loses every bet and realizes that she is still an outsider . Also , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns to the office after several weeks in anger management training , determined to make a fresh start with his co @-@ workers . His attempts to go by the name Drew are unsuccessful , and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decides to shun Andy for three years , although he often " <unk> " him to inform him of Michael 's plans . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Safety Training " was the second episode of the series directed by Harold Ramis . Ramis had previously directed the episode " A Benihana Christmas " earlier in the third season . The episode was the sixth of the series written by B. J. Novak . Novak also acts in the show as Ryan Howard . 
 Brian Baumgartner , who portrays accountant Kevin Malone , stated that while director Harold Ramis didn 't make any major changes in the script of " Safety Training " , his input changed other points of the script . Baumgartner said that " ... our structure and how the show is written is all there and pretty much doesn 't change . Harold ( Ramis ) might have ideas or specific changes that would change a moment . " The hand movement used by Dwight Schrute to " shun " , and then " un @-@ shun " Andy Bernard was improvised by Rainn Wilson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Safety Training " received a 4 @.@ 1 / 11 in the Nielsen ratings among people ages 18 – 49 , meaning that 4 @.@ 1 percent of all people 18 – 49 watched the episode , and 11 percent of all people 18 – 49 watching TV at the time viewed the episode . " Safety Training " received 7 @.@ 7 million viewers overall . 
 The episode was almost universally praised by critics . Abby West of Entertainment Weekly complimented the writing of B.J. Novak in the episode , saying that " This was another gem ... [ Novak ] kept a very nice light touch on the whole love triangle thing , only giving us that one wonderfully uncomfortable moment at Pam 's desk when they were betting on how many jelly beans were in the container . " IGN 's Brian Zoromski rated it 10 out of 10 , making it only one of two third season episodes he deemed a " masterpiece " . He stated that " Another truly brilliant episode of The Office aired this week , with more humor packed into the half @-@ hour than you get in many feature @-@ length comedies . " Zoromski also praised the acting by minor characters , such as Creed Bratton and Mindy Kaling , who portrays customer service representative Kelly Kapoor . 
 BuddyTV Senior Writer Oscar Dahl stated that " What can you say ? The Office is , if anything , only getting better . Last week 's super @-@ sized episode was absolutely spectacular , but tonight 's might have been even better . Dahl went on to say that both storylines of the episode were the main contributors to the success of the episode . In a poll taken by OfficeTally.com , an Office fansite , " Safety Training " was ranked by viewers of the show as the 19th most popular episode of season three . 
 = White @-@ necked rockfowl = 
 The white @-@ necked rockfowl ( Picathartes <unk> ) is a medium @-@ sized bird in the family Picathartidae , with a long neck and tail . Also known as the white @-@ necked picathartes , this passerine is mainly found in rocky forested areas at higher altitudes in West Africa from Guinea to Ghana . Its distribution is patchy , with populations often being isolated from each other . The rockfowl typically chooses to live near streams and inselbergs . It has no recognized subspecies , though some believe that it forms a superspecies with the grey @-@ necked rockfowl . The white @-@ necked rockfowl has greyish @-@ black upperparts and white underparts . Its unusually long , dark brown tail is used for balance , and its thighs are muscular . The head is nearly featherless , with the exposed skin being bright yellow except for two large , circular black patches located just behind the eyes . Though the bird is usually silent , some calls are known . 
 These rockfowl feed primarily on insects , though parents feed small frogs to their young . One feeding strategy involves following Dorylus army ant swarms , feeding on insects flushed by the ants . Rockfowl move through the forest primarily through a series of hops and bounds or short flights in low vegetation . This species rarely flies for long distances . The white @-@ necked rockfowl is monogamous and pairs nest either alone or in the vicinity of other pairs , sometimes in colonies with as many as eight nests . These nests are constructed out of mud formed into a deep cup and are built on rock surfaces , typically in caves . Two eggs are laid twice a year . Though the birds breed in colonies , infanticide is fairly common in this species , with rockfowl attempting to kill the young of other pairs . Nestlings mature in about a month . This bird is long @-@ lived . 
 This species is classified as Vulnerable as its dwindling and fragmented populations are threatened by habitat destruction . Conservation efforts are underway in parts of its range in the form of habitat protection , education efforts , and new laws . Some of the indigenous peoples of Sierra Leone considered the species to be a protector of the home of their ancestral spirits . This rockfowl is considered one of Africa 's most desirable birds by birders and is a symbol of ecotourism across its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first described by Coenraad Jacob Temminck in 1825 from a specimen collected on the Guinean coast . He published his description in the 2nd volume of Nouveau <unk> de <unk> <unk> d 'oiseaux and described it as Corvus <unk> , placing it in the crow genus Corvus . The species name is derived from the Ancient Greek words gymnos " naked " , and <unk> " head " . However , only three years later the bird was removed from the genus Corvus by René Primevère Lesson and placed in its own genus , Picathartes , as it did not share characteristics common to members of Corvus such as a feathered head . This generic name comes from a combination of the Latin genera pica for " magpie " and <unk> for " vulture " . Since its initial description , the picathartes have been placed in more than five different families , including those of crows ( Corvidae ) , starlings ( Sturnidae ) , Old World flycatchers ( Muscicapidae ) , babblers ( <unk> ) and Old World warblers ( Sylviidae ) . Today the white @-@ necked rockfowl and its close relative the grey @-@ necked rockfowl are believed to comprise a unique family , Picathartidae . It has also been suggested though not generally accepted that the two rockfowl represent the remnants of an ancient bird order . Recent DNA analysis has shown that Picathartidae and its closest relatives , southern Africa 's <unk> and southeast Asia 's rail @-@ babbler , form a clade . The analysis suggests that the rockfowl split from the common ancestor of their clade 44 million years ago . It is believed that the ancestor of this clade originated in Australia and spread to Africa . Though the white @-@ necked rockfowl has no subspecies , it is believed to form a superspecies with the grey @-@ necked rockfowl , with plumage and facial pattern being the primary differences between the two species . 
 Common names used for this species include white @-@ necked rockfowl , white @-@ necked picathartes , yellow @-@ headed picathartes , bare @-@ headed rockfowl , and the less frequently used white @-@ necked bald crow . Rockfowl is a reference to the species ' habit of building mud nests on rock surfaces and caves . Picathartes refers to the species ' scientific name . Bald crow is a reference to its featherless head and somewhat crow @-@ like appearance , especially its beak . 
 = = Description = = 
 This rockfowl measures around 38 to 41 cm ( 15 to 16 in ) in length , with its notably long tail contributing about 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) . Adult rockfowl show little sexual dimorphism in plumage and the sexes cannot be told apart by appearance . On the adult , the head , excluding the chin and throat , is completely bare of feathers except for a thin layer of fuzz on the forehead . The head 's skin is bright yellow except for two large , circular patches of black skin located just behind the eye and containing the ear ; only a thin , 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) wide patch of yellow skin on the crown prevents the two black patches from connecting . The black patch has a raised edge and appears to be a distinct part of the face . The eyelid and eyering are a thin line of black surrounding the bird 's large , dark brown eyes . The beak is robust , disproportionately large , and black . This beak can be considered crow @-@ like , is noticeably decurved in the upper mandible , and is about 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long . The bird 's chin and throat are covered in a thin layer of white feathers , and the neck is long and slender . The nape is also covered in white feathers , while the hindneck is nearly bare , revealing the orange @-@ yellow skin . The upper mantle is a solid black , merging into a greyish @-@ black lower mantle . The rockfowl 's thighs are very muscular and aid its partially terrestrial lifestyle . The back , rump , and undertail are a bluish grey , while the tail is a dark brown and tented in shape . The moderately @-@ sized wings are also a dark brown . The underparts are a creamy white and appear their <unk> in the upper breast . In dim light the white @-@ necked rockfowl can appear to be solely black above and white below . The legs are blue and relatively long . Overall the plumage appears to be smooth with long feathers . The adult weighs 200 to 250 g ( 7 @.@ 1 to 8 @.@ 8 oz ) . 
 The nestling is born naked with dark @-@ brown skin above and translucent pink skin below , blind , and with an orange @-@ red gape . After a few days , the gape changes to a bright yellow @-@ orange . After hatching , the head 's skin is all yellow without the black patches of the adult ; these are gained about a week before leaving the nest . An immature rockfowl after its fourth week is very similar to the adult , but its underparts are creamier and <unk> than those of the adult , its neck possesses fewer feathers , and the yellow on the head is paler . Most noticeably , its tail is significantly shorter than that of the adult . 
 Although numerous calls have been recorded , the white @-@ necked rockfowl is normally a silent bird . Its call has been compared to the clucks of a chicken , with clucks of " chuk @-@ chuk @-@ chuk " or " choop @-@ choop @-@ choop " being made at a constant rate of eight notes every five seconds . This call typically lasts for at least a minute . It has been suggested that this call may be a proper song , but more research is required to determine if this is accurate . The rockfowl 's alarm call , one of its more frequent sounds , has been described as a continuous , low @-@ pitched , guttural chatter similar to " ow , ow , ow " . Adults and juveniles have also been known to produce a long @-@ drawn " <unk> " call note . Additionally , fledglings can give a loud , quavering second @-@ long whistle as a contact call . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species is only found in West Africa from Guinea to Ghana . It is locally common in southeastern Guinea , and is widespread in Sierra Leone except for the north and northwest , and in Liberia except for the north and northeast . In Côte d 'Ivoire the species is currently restricted to areas near the Guinean and Liberian border . The bird also lives in Ghana , where it is both local and uncommon in the south central parts of the nation . The white @-@ necked rockfowl 's total range covers approximately 391 @,@ 000 km2 ( 151 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . However , the species occurs in low population densities in patches across this large range . The species does not migrate , though it does disperse widely after the breeding season . 
 This rockfowl lives on steep slopes in both primary and mature secondary forests . These forests are typically covered in rocks and are found in hilly lowland areas up to 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . The white @-@ necked rockfowl often lives near flowing streams and rivers so that it has access to wet mud for nest construction . Colonies are typically found within 100 m ( 330 ft ) of a stream . The species also seems to show a preference for living near inselbergs . Rockfowl are occasionally seen in partly cleared forests and near cities , but this appears to be abnormal . Recent surveys have shown that abandoned rockfowl nests are more likely to be in or near secondary forest . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 This picathartes typically keeps low in the vegetation or on the ground near its nesting grounds . It moves quickly through its forested habitat primarily through a series of hops and bounds , followed by a pause before resuming its movements . It uses its tail for balance while traversing the forest . The rockfowl also flies at a low altitude for short distances between vines and trees , and it rarely flies for long distances . This species can disappear from sight into a mass of creepers or rocks . It is capable of high jumps , sometimes jumping 6 m ( 20 ft ) off the cave floor to its nest while only partly using its wings . 
 It was once thought that the rockfowl rarely ventures far from its breeding grounds ; however , new data suggests that the species has a much broader range than previously thought . Rockfowl have been known to continue roosting on their nests for a period following the breeding season . These birds are normally solitary or in pairs , though sometimes they live in groups of three to five birds . Typically , they silently evade any unusual movements in their forest . However , if these birds know that they have been sighted , they can become quite inquisitive and occasionally approach observers . One of the rockfowl 's displays entails several of the birds in a colony forming a loose circle . Individual rockfowl run at each other , forcing the approached bird to retreat slightly before chasing either the bird that charged it or another in the circle . At intervals during this display a rockfowl leans forward on a branch , tucking its head between its legs and half @-@ spreading its wings , thus revealing its crown to the other rockfowl . It is believed that this behavior shows the intent of the rockfowl to roost in a group , though recent evidence suggests that the display could be involved in breeding . To scratch its head , the bird lifts its foot over its wing . This species is long @-@ lived . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The white @-@ necked rockfowl forages across slopes on mossy , creeper @-@ covered boulders and in trees covered in lianas and hanging mosses . It occasionally forages by hopping across sand by a stream or even in the stream , as evidenced by crab remains in the rockfowl 's droppings . While foraging on the ground , the rockfowl picks up leaves with its bill and tosses them aside . It feeds in mixed @-@ species groups ahead of swarms of Dorylus ants with <unk> , <unk> , and Finsch 's rufous thrushes , picking off insects flushed by the ants , mostly off the ground . The rockfowl has also been observed hopping from the ground and snatching prey midair . 
 The diet is diverse and generalized , enabling the white @-@ necked rockfowl to have a degree of adaptability in collecting food . This rockfowl primarily eats insects , including larval cockroaches , <unk> grasshoppers , earwigs , ants from the genera Pachycondyla and Dorylus , click beetles from the genus <unk> , and termites . Other than insects , it has been observed eating millipedes , centipedes , snails , earthworms , and occasionally small frogs and lizards . When feeding its nestlings , the rockfowl primarily collects earthworms , small frogs , and lizards , with the vertebrates forming most of the biomass fed to the young . In addition , rockfowl are occasionally seen eating plant material , normally from angiosperms or mosses . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The White @-@ necked rockfowl breeds primarily in caves and pairs nest either alone or as part of a small colony . While its courtship behavior is unknown , the species is monogamous and therefore does not breed with rockfowl other than its mate despite earlier suggestions that it bred cooperatively . The White @-@ necked rockfowl has two breeding seasons throughout the year , though the timing of the breeding seasons is determined by the location of the birds and the timing of the wet season , with nesting occurring just before and after the wet season and averaging 127 days apart . The rockfowl reuses its nest , and typically repairs it two to eight weeks prior to laying eggs . Guinean birds breed from July to January , while those in Sierra Leone breed from November to February and from April to October . In Liberia , breeding occurs from September to December and from March to July . Ghana 's rockfowl breed from March to June and September to November . Breeding caves are traditionally deserted while the rockfowl are not breeding , so increased usage by the rockfowl is considered a first sign of breeding . Nesting colonies average two to five nests , although one colony had forty nests . In addition to breeding birds , sometimes non @-@ breeding rockfowl are present . These birds occasionally attempt infanticide to gain access to prime nesting sites or mates . Birds in these colonies often chase each other in circles , even through the treetops , a rare destination for this species . 
 Unusually for a rainforest @-@ dwelling bird , the white @-@ necked rockfowl builds a nest out of mud with varying amounts of plant fibers mixed in . Mud is collected from nearby rivers and streams and is shaped into a strong , thick @-@ walled , and deep cup attached to the cave wall or roof , a cliff , or a large boulder approximately 2 to 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) above the ground . These rocks must be sloped inwards to provide the nest with protection from the rain . Phloem fibers and roots from plants line the inside of the cup . The white @-@ necked rockfowl 's nesting caves normally are populated by wasps , and the wasp nests 2 @-@ to @-@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 @-@ to @-@ 1 @.@ 18 in ) long are often found embedded in the rockfowl 's nests . It is believed that in order to build their nest on the smooth cave walls , rockfowl use the nests of the wasps as a nucleus to build around . Cliff nests are always built at a distance from nearby plants . Both birds work on the construction of the nest , with roles alternating as one bird collects the materials while the other shapes them into the nest . The mud is sometimes swallowed and regurgitated prior to use . While nearly all rockfowl nests are found in caves or on cliffs , there are records of nesting occurring on a riverbank and on a fallen tree trunk . Nests are typically constructed at least 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) apart , but one colony had six nests adjoining each other . Nests also vary widely in size , though they average to be 108 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long , 172 mm ( 6 @.@ 8 in ) wide , and 129 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) deep . It used to be believed that each pair builds two nests , one for breeding and one for roosting ; however , recent surveys have found no evidence of this , with all nests in the colony being used for breeding . 
 One to two eggs , typically two , are laid in each nest a day or two apart . The eggs weigh about 14 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 51 oz ) and have an average size of 25 @.@ 8 by 38 @.@ 3 mm ( 1 @.@ 02 by 1 @.@ 51 in ) . The eggs are a creamy white with dark brown blotches spread across the egg but in higher density near the larger end . Incubation , which begins after the first egg is laid , lasts for 23 to 28 days . The parents take turns incubating their eggs . Hatching typically takes at least 12 hours . The infant rockfowl 's eyes open after nine to eleven days , while feathers begin to grow seven days after hatching . After the young hatch , food is brought to them almost four times an hour . To feed its young , the adult rockfowl clings to the side of its nest while fluttering its wings ; some birds use their tails as a prop underneath the nest to help support themselves . Rockfowl have been known to kill the young of other rockfowl , while nest predation is carried out by cobras of the genus Naja , the Nile monitor , sun squirrels , red @-@ chested goshawks , and Procolobus monkeys . This leads on average to only 0 @.@ 44 nestlings surviving per pair of rockfowl . Due to potential infanticide by other rockfowl , parents protect their nest and vicious fights often occur . Rare among other bird species , this behaviour is prevalent in white @-@ necked rockfowl . Not fully understood , it is thought to occur for the sake of resource competition or sexual selection . The young leave the nest after 23 to 27 days , at which time they resemble the adult rockfowl but with much shorter tails . The young leave the nest by standing on the edge , emitting a piercing whistle , and then gliding down to the ground on spread wings where they are met by an adult bearing insects . Even after leaving the nest , the young return to roost on it with their parents . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 In the lore of Sierra Leone 's indigenous people , the often bizarre rock formations near which the white @-@ necked rockfowl lives were believed to house ancestral spirits . Its residence there led it to be considered a guardian of the formations , leading to a degree of residual respect for the species that persists despite the beliefs that spawned this respect being practically extinct . However , in some regions the rockfowl 's secretive habits and inaccessible habitat have meant it was unknown to the local population . Conversely , migrant Liberian hunters sometimes catch the nestlings for food . Due to this species ' uniqueness it became a symbol for ecotourism and rainforest conservation in the region in the 1990s . The white @-@ necked rockfowl has been depicted on numerous postage stamps from Ghana and Sierra Leone . Due to its strange appearance and behavior and the difficulty in seeing the species , this bird is considered particularly fascinating by birdwatchers . This species is considered to be one of the five most desirable birds in Africa by ornithologists . 
 This species also helped launch Sir David Attenborough 's career in 1954 , when he was the producer on the new television program Zoo Quest . The show 's presenter Jack Lester was required to travel to Africa to record attempts to capture animals for display in zoos , with the focus of the series being on the white @-@ necked rockfowl . However , when he fell ill , Attenborough took his place , which launched him into the limelight and starting his narrating career . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 This species is considered Vulnerable by the IUCN due to its highly fragmented distribution , dwindling population , and habitat destruction . It is considered to be less common and more threatened than the closely related grey @-@ necked rockfowl . The stronghold of the species is in Sierra Leone and southern Guinea , where the bird is still locally common if difficult to locate . It is estimated that only 2 @,@ 500 to 10 @,@ 000 white @-@ necked rockfowl survive , with the population dwindling and spread out over a known 32 sites ; however , most individuals studying this species believe that the population is far fewer than the 10 @,@ 000 maximum . Many of its colonies are currently approaching the minimum population size necessary to guarantee long @-@ term viability against inbreeding . The primary threat is the commercial destruction of its habitat for timber . Although the white @-@ necked rockfowl is capable of withstanding some disturbance of the nearby habitat , as demonstrated by one colony surviving after it was completely surrounded by a cocoa plantation , habitat disturbance is far more likely to negatively impact on breeding success . Most of the remaining colonies in Guinea , Sierra Leone , and Côte d 'Ivoire are on protected land , while Liberia and Ghana 's colonies are mostly unprotected . In part to protect this species , Sierra Leone recently upgraded its protection of the Gola forest by turning it into its second national park , Gola National Park , and has announced that the country intends to work with Liberia to form a trans @-@ national park protecting the Gola rainforest . In return for lost logging rights , Sierra Leone has compensated locals with road and school renovations , additional training for police officers , and construction of churches and a mosque . Liberia has also expressed a desire to expand its national park system , which would help protect the species . In Guinea , the bird 's forests are being logged to provide land for rice farming to help support farmers immigrating from the country 's drier north . 
 Laws exist in Sierra Leone , Liberia , and Ghana to protect this species , but enforcement is minimal . International trading of the white @-@ necked rockfowl is regulated as the bird is currently listed under CITES Appendix I. Additionally , in 2004 BirdLife International drafted an international action plan to provide strategies for protecting this species . This plan focused on surveying the remaining habitat , raising awareness amongst the local populace , and limiting the continued destruction of its habitat . In 2006 , BirdLife International received a US $ 19 @,@ 900 grant from the Disney Wildlife Conservation Fund to help enact this plan . Surveys conducted with this funding have resulted in the discovery of additional populations in Sierra Leone . Additionally , wardens have been trained to protect Sierra Leone 's Western Area Forest Reserve . This plan , coupled with the bird 's appearance and unusual habits , have led it to become a flagship species for habitat conservation across Africa and particularly in its upper Guinean forests . 
 Until 2003 , the species was thought to be extinct in Ghana . Most of the Ghanaian sites from which it is known are active forest reserves , where logging periodically occurs . Outside of the reserves , bush @-@ burning and mining for gold and other metals threaten remaining habitat . Following its rediscovery in Ghana , the Ghana Wildlife Society has begun to survey remaining habitat and implement conservation strategies . 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , collecting this species for display in zoos was a major threat , and in Liberia in particular this practice destroyed several of the bird 's colonies . The rockfowl were captured by the indigenous peoples through the use of traps , while hunters in Guinea , who were already catching rodents and hyraxes at the bird 's nesting colonies , sometimes captured rockfowl at night . In Côte d 'Ivoire specimens were sometimes caught by bat @-@ catchers . Most birds collected from the wild die within 24 hours . Despite over 70 white @-@ necked rockfowl being displayed in zoos during the 1970s , captive breeding was a rare occurrence and no stable captive populations have been formed . Despite this , zoos did have limited success and at least one zoo was able to hand @-@ rear a white @-@ necked rockfowl . As of 2002 , no white @-@ necked rockfowl have existed outside of Africa since 1998 . 
 = Smallpox = 
 Smallpox was an infectious disease caused by either of two virus variants , Variola major and Variola minor . The disease is also known by the Latin names Variola or Variola vera , derived from varius ( " spotted " ) or <unk> ( " pimple " ) . The disease was originally known in English as the " pox " or " red plague " ; the term " smallpox " was first used in Britain in the 15th century to distinguish variola from the " great pox " ( syphilis ) . The last naturally occurring case of smallpox ( Variola minor ) was diagnosed on 26 October 1977 . 
 Infection with smallpox is focused in small blood vessels of the skin and in the mouth and throat before disseminating . In the skin it results in a characteristic maculopapular rash and , later , raised fluid @-@ filled blisters . V. major produced a more serious disease and had an overall mortality rate of 30 – 35 percent . V. minor caused a milder form of disease ( also known as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Cuban itch ) which killed about 1 percent of its victims . Long @-@ term complications of V. major infection included characteristic scars , commonly on the face , which occur in 65 – 85 percent of survivors . Blindness resulting from corneal ulceration and scarring , and limb deformities due to arthritis and osteomyelitis were less common complications , seen in about 2 – 5 percent of cases . 
 Smallpox is believed to have emerged in human populations about 10 @,@ 000 BC . The earliest physical evidence of it is probably the pustular rash on the mummified body of Pharaoh Ramses V of Egypt . The disease killed an estimated 400 @,@ 000 Europeans annually during the closing years of the 18th century ( including five reigning monarchs ) , and was responsible for a third of all blindness . Of all those infected , 20 – 60 percent — and over 80 percent of infected children — died from the disease . Smallpox was responsible for an estimated 300 – 500 million deaths during the 20th century . As recently as 1967 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) estimated that 15 million people contracted the disease and that two million died in that year . 
 After vaccination campaigns throughout the 19th and 20th centuries , the WHO certified the global eradication of smallpox in 1979 . Smallpox is one of two infectious diseases to have been eradicated , the other being rinderpest , which was declared eradicated in 2011 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 There were two clinical forms of smallpox . Variola major was the severe and most common form , with a more extensive rash and higher fever . Variola minor was a less common presentation , and a much less severe disease , with historical death rates of 1 percent or less . Subclinical ( asymptomatic ) infections with variola virus were noted but were not common . In addition , a form called variola sine <unk> ( smallpox without rash ) was seen generally in vaccinated persons . This form was marked by a fever that occurred after the usual incubation period and could be confirmed only by antibody studies or , rarely , by virus isolation . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The incubation period between contraction and the first obvious symptoms of the disease is around 12 days . Once inhaled , variola major virus invades the oropharyngeal ( mouth and throat ) or the respiratory mucosa , migrates to regional lymph nodes , and begins to multiply . In the initial growth phase the virus seems to move from cell to cell , but around the 12th day , lysis of many infected cells occurs and the virus is found in the bloodstream in large numbers ( this is called viremia ) , and a second wave of multiplication occurs in the spleen , bone marrow , and lymph nodes . The initial or prodromal symptoms are similar to other viral diseases such as influenza and the common cold : fever of at least 38 @.@ 3 ° C ( 101 ° F ) , muscle pain , malaise , headache and prostration . As the digestive tract is commonly involved , nausea and vomiting and <unk> often occur . The prodrome , or <unk> stage , usually lasts 2 – 4 days . By days 12 – 15 the first visible lesions — small reddish spots called <unk> — appear on mucous membranes of the mouth , tongue , palate , and throat , and temperature falls to near normal . These lesions rapidly enlarge and rupture , releasing large amounts of virus into the saliva . 
 Smallpox virus preferentially attacks skin cells , causing the characteristic pimples ( called macules ) associated with the disease . A rash develops on the skin 24 to 48 hours after lesions on the mucous membranes appear . Typically the macules first appear on the forehead , then rapidly spread to the whole face , proximal portions of extremities , the trunk , and lastly to distal portions of extremities . The process takes no more than 24 to 36 hours , after which no new lesions appear . At this point variola major infection can take several very different courses , resulting in four types of smallpox disease based on the Rao classification : ordinary , modified , malignant ( or flat ) , and hemorrhagic . Historically , smallpox has an overall fatality rate of about 30 percent ; however , the malignant and hemorrhagic forms are usually fatal . 
 = = = Ordinary = = = 
 Ninety percent or more of smallpox cases among unvaccinated persons were of the ordinary type . In this form of the disease , by the second day of the rash the macules became raised papules . By the third or fourth day the papules filled with an opalescent fluid to become vesicles . This fluid became opaque and turbid within 24 – 48 hours , giving them the appearance of pustules ; however , the so @-@ called pustules were filled with tissue debris , not pus . 
 By the sixth or seventh day , all the skin lesions have become pustules . Between seven and ten days the pustules matured and reached their maximum size . The pustules were sharply raised , typically round , tense , and firm to the touch . The pustules were deeply embedded in the dermis , giving them the feel of a small bead in the skin . Fluid slowly leaked from the pustules , and by the end of the second week the pustules deflated , and started to dry up , forming crusts ( or scabs ) . By day 16 – 20 scabs had formed over all the lesions , which have started to flake off , leaving depigmented scars . 
 Ordinary smallpox generally produced a discrete rash , in which the pustules stood out on the skin separately . The distribution of the rash was densest on the face ; denser on the extremities than on the trunk ; and on the extremities , denser on the distal parts than on the proximal . The palms of the hands and soles of the feet were involved in the majority of cases . Sometimes , the blisters merged into sheets , forming a confluent rash , which began to detach the outer layers of skin from the underlying flesh . Patients with confluent smallpox often remained ill even after scabs have formed over all the lesions . In one case series , the case @-@ fatality rate in confluent smallpox was 62 percent . 
 = = = Modified = = = 
 Referring to the character of the eruption and the rapidity of its development , modified smallpox occurred mostly in previously vaccinated people . In this form the prodromal illness still occurred but may be less severe than in the ordinary type . There is usually no fever during evolution of the rash . The skin lesions tended to be fewer and evolve more quickly , are more superficial , and may not show the uniform characteristic of more typical smallpox . Modified smallpox was rarely , if ever , fatal . This form of variola major is more easily confused with chickenpox . 
 = = = Malignant = = = 
 In malignant @-@ type smallpox ( also called flat smallpox ) the lesions remained almost flush with the skin at the time when raised vesicles form in the ordinary type . It is unknown why some people developed this type . Historically , it accounted for 5 – 10 percent of cases , and the majority ( 72 percent ) were children . Malignant smallpox was accompanied by a severe prodromal phase that lasted 3 – 4 days , prolonged high fever , and severe symptoms of toxemia . The rash on the tongue and palate was extensive . Skin lesions matured slowly and by the seventh or eighth day they were flat and appeared to be buried in the skin . Unlike ordinary @-@ type smallpox , the vesicles contained little fluid , were soft and velvety to the touch , and may have contained hemorrhages . Malignant smallpox was nearly always fatal . 
 = = = Hemorrhagic = = = 
 Hemorrhagic smallpox is a severe form that is accompanied by extensive bleeding into the skin , mucous membranes , and gastrointestinal tract . This form develops in approximately 2 percent of infections and occurred mostly in adults . In hemorrhagic smallpox the skin does not blister , but remains smooth . Instead , bleeding occurs under the skin , making it look charred and black , hence this form of the disease is also known as black pox . 
 In the early , or fulminating form , hemorrhaging appears on the second or third day as sub @-@ conjunctival bleeding turns the whites of the eyes deep red . Hemorrhagic smallpox also produces a dusky erythema , petechiae , and hemorrhages in the spleen , kidney , serosa , muscle , and , rarely , the <unk> , liver , testes , ovaries and bladder . Death often occurs suddenly between the fifth and seventh days of illness , when only a few insignificant skin lesions are present . A later form of the disease occurs in patients who survive for 8 – 10 days . The hemorrhages appear in the early eruptive period , and the rash is flat and does not progress beyond the vesicular stage . Patients in the early stage of disease show a decrease in coagulation factors ( e.g. platelets , prothrombin , and globulin ) and an increase in circulating antithrombin . Patients in the late stage have significant thrombocytopenia ; however , deficiency of coagulation factors is less severe . Some in the late stage also show increased antithrombin . This form of smallpox occurs in anywhere from 3 to 25 percent of fatal cases depending on the virulence of the smallpox strain . Hemorrhagic smallpox is usually fatal . 
 = = Cause = = 
 = = = Pathogens = = = 
 Smallpox is caused by infection with variola virus , which belongs to the genus <unk> , the family <unk> and subfamily <unk> . 
 The date of the appearance of smallpox is not settled . It most likely evolved from a rodent virus between 68 @,@ 000 and 16 @,@ 000 years ago . The wide range of dates is due to the different records used to calibrate the molecular clock . One clade was the variola major strains ( the more clinically severe form of smallpox ) which spread from Asia between 400 and 1 @,@ 600 years ago . A second clade included both <unk> minor ( a phenotypically mild smallpox ) described from the American continents and isolates from West Africa which diverged from an ancestral strain between 1 @,@ 400 and 6 @,@ 300 years before present . This clade further diverged into two subclades at least 800 years ago . A second estimate has placed the separation of variola from <unk> at 3000 – 4000 years ago . This is consistent with archaeological and historical evidence regarding the appearance of smallpox as a human disease which suggests a relatively recent origin . However , if the mutation rate is assumed to be similar to that of the herpesviruses , the divergence date between variola from <unk> has been estimated to be 50 @,@ 000 years ago . While this is consistent with the other published estimates , it suggests that the archaeological and historical evidence is very incomplete . Better estimates of mutation rates in these viruses are needed . 
 Variola is a large brick @-@ shaped virus measuring approximately 302 to 350 nanometers by 244 to 270 nm , with a single linear double stranded DNA genome 186 <unk> pairs ( <unk> ) in size and containing a hairpin loop at each end . The two classic varieties of smallpox are variola major and variola minor . 
 Four orthopoxviruses cause infection in humans : variola , vaccinia , cowpox , and monkeypox . Variola virus infects only humans in nature , although primates and other animals have been infected in a laboratory setting . Vaccinia , cowpox , and monkeypox viruses can infect both humans and other animals in nature . 
 The life cycle of poxviruses is complicated by having multiple infectious forms , with differing mechanisms of cell entry . <unk> are unique among DNA viruses in that they replicate in the cytoplasm of the cell rather than in the nucleus . In order to replicate , poxviruses produce a variety of specialized proteins not produced by other DNA viruses , the most important of which is a viral @-@ associated DNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerase . 
 Both enveloped and <unk> virions are infectious . The viral envelope is made of modified Golgi membranes containing viral @-@ specific polypeptides , including hemagglutinin . Infection with either variola major or variola minor confers immunity against the other . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 Transmission occurs through inhalation of airborne variola virus , usually droplets expressed from the oral , nasal , or pharyngeal mucosa of an infected person . It is transmitted from one person to another primarily through prolonged face @-@ to @-@ face contact with an infected person , usually within a distance of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , but can also be spread through direct contact with infected bodily fluids or contaminated objects ( fomites ) such as bedding or clothing . Rarely , smallpox has been spread by virus carried in the air in enclosed settings such as buildings , buses , and trains . The virus can cross the placenta , but the incidence of congenital smallpox is relatively low . Smallpox is not notably infectious in the prodromal period and viral shedding is usually delayed until the appearance of the rash , which is often accompanied by lesions in the mouth and pharynx . The virus can be transmitted throughout the course of the illness , but is most frequent during the first week of the rash , when most of the skin lesions are intact . <unk> wanes in 7 to 10 days when scabs form over the lesions , but the infected person is contagious until the last smallpox scab falls off . 
 Smallpox is highly contagious , but generally spreads more slowly and less widely than some other viral diseases , perhaps because transmission requires close contact and occurs after the onset of the rash . The overall rate of infection is also affected by the short duration of the infectious stage . In temperate areas , the number of smallpox infections were highest during the winter and spring . In tropical areas , seasonal variation was less evident and the disease was present throughout the year . Age distribution of smallpox infections depends on acquired immunity . Vaccination immunity declines over time and is probably lost within thirty years . Smallpox is not known to be transmitted by insects or animals and there is no asymptomatic carrier state . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The clinical definition of smallpox is an illness with acute onset of fever equal to or greater than 38 @.@ 3 ° C ( 101 ° F ) followed by a rash characterized by firm , deep seated vesicles or pustules in the same stage of development without other apparent cause . If a clinical case is observed , smallpox is confirmed using laboratory tests . 
 Microscopically , poxviruses produce characteristic cytoplasmic inclusions , the most important of which are known as Guarnieri bodies , and are the sites of viral replication . Guarnieri bodies are readily identified in skin biopsies stained with <unk> and <unk> , and appear as pink blobs . They are found in virtually all <unk> infections but the absence of Guarnieri bodies cannot be used to rule out smallpox . The diagnosis of an <unk> infection can also be made rapidly by electron microscopic examination of pustular fluid or scabs . However , all orthopoxviruses exhibit identical brick @-@ shaped virions by electron microscopy . However , if particles with the characteristic morphology of herpesviruses are seen this will eliminate smallpox and other <unk> infections . 
 Definitive laboratory identification of variola virus involves growing the virus on <unk> membrane ( part of a chicken embryo ) and examining the resulting pock lesions under defined temperature conditions . Strains may be characterized by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) and restriction fragment length polymorphism ( <unk> ) analysis . <unk> tests and enzyme linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISA ) , which measure variola virus @-@ specific immunoglobulin and antigen have also been developed to assist in the diagnosis of infection . 
 <unk> was commonly confused with smallpox in the immediate post @-@ eradication era . <unk> and smallpox can be distinguished by several methods . Unlike smallpox , chickenpox does not usually affect the palms and soles . Additionally , chickenpox pustules are of varying size due to variations in the timing of pustule eruption : smallpox pustules are all very nearly the same size since the viral effect progresses more uniformly . A variety of laboratory methods are available for detecting chickenpox in evaluation of suspected smallpox cases . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The earliest procedure used to prevent smallpox was inoculation ( known as variolation after the introduction of smallpox vaccine to avoid possible confusion ) , which likely occurred in India , Africa , and China well before the practice arrived in Europe . However , the idea that inoculation originated in India has been challenged , as few of the ancient Sanskrit medical texts described the process of inoculation . Accounts of inoculation against smallpox in China can be found as early as the late 10th century , and the procedure was widely practiced by the 16th century , during the Ming dynasty . If successful , inoculation produced lasting immunity to smallpox . However , because the person was infected with variola virus , a severe infection could result , and the person could transmit smallpox to others . <unk> had a 0 @.@ 5 – 2 percent mortality rate , considerably less than the 20 – 30 percent mortality rate of the disease . 
 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu observed smallpox inoculation during her stay in the Ottoman Empire , writing detailed accounts of the practice in her letters , and enthusiastically promoted the procedure in England upon her return in 1718 . In 1721 , Cotton Mather and colleagues provoked controversy in Boston by inoculating hundreds . In 1796 , Edward Jenner , a doctor in Berkeley , Gloucestershire , rural England , discovered that immunity to smallpox could be produced by inoculating a person with material from a cowpox lesion . <unk> is a <unk> in the same family as variola . Jenner called the material used for inoculation vaccine , from the root word <unk> , which is Latin for cow . The procedure was much safer than variolation , and did not involve a risk of smallpox transmission . Vaccination to prevent smallpox was soon practiced all over the world . During the 19th century , the cowpox virus used for smallpox vaccination was replaced by vaccinia virus . Vaccinia is in the same family as cowpox and variola , but is genetically distinct from both . The origin of vaccinia virus and how it came to be in the vaccine are not known . 
 The current formulation of smallpox vaccine is a live virus preparation of infectious vaccinia virus . The vaccine is given using a bifurcated ( two @-@ pronged ) needle that is dipped into the vaccine solution . The needle is used to prick the skin ( usually the upper arm ) a number of times in a few seconds . If successful , a red and itchy bump develops at the vaccine site in three or four days . In the first week , the bump becomes a large blister ( called a " <unk> vesicle " ) which fills with pus , and begins to drain . During the second week , the blister begins to dry up and a scab forms . The scab falls off in the third week , leaving a small scar . 
 The antibodies induced by vaccinia vaccine are cross @-@ protective for other orthopoxviruses , such as monkeypox , cowpox , and variola ( smallpox ) viruses . Neutralizing antibodies are detectable 10 days after first @-@ time vaccination , and seven days after <unk> . Historically , the vaccine has been effective in preventing smallpox infection in 95 percent of those vaccinated . Smallpox vaccination provides a high level of immunity for three to five years and decreasing immunity thereafter . If a person is vaccinated again later , immunity lasts even longer . Studies of smallpox cases in Europe in the 1950s and 1960s demonstrated that the fatality rate among persons vaccinated less than 10 years before exposure was 1 @.@ 3 percent ; it was 7 percent among those vaccinated 11 to 20 years prior , and 11 percent among those vaccinated 20 or more years prior to infection . By contrast , 52 percent of unvaccinated persons died . 
 There are side effects and risks associated with the smallpox vaccine . In the past , about 1 out of 1 @,@ 000 people vaccinated for the first time experienced serious , but non @-@ life @-@ threatening , reactions , including toxic or allergic reaction at the site of the vaccination ( erythema multiforme ) , spread of the vaccinia virus to other parts of the body , and to other individuals . Potentially life @-@ threatening reactions occurred in 14 to 500 people out of every 1 million people vaccinated for the first time . Based on past experience , it is estimated that 1 or 2 people in 1 million ( 0 @.@ <unk> percent ) who receive the vaccine may die as a result , most often the result of <unk> encephalitis or severe necrosis in the area of vaccination ( called progressive vaccinia ) . 
 Given these risks , as smallpox became effectively eradicated and the number of naturally occurring cases fell below the number of vaccine @-@ induced illnesses and deaths , routine childhood vaccination was discontinued in the United States in 1972 , and was abandoned in most European countries in the early 1970s . Routine vaccination of health care workers was discontinued in the U.S. in 1976 , and among military recruits in 1990 ( although military personnel deploying to the Middle East and Korea still receive the vaccination ) . By 1986 , routine vaccination had ceased in all countries . It is now primarily recommended for laboratory workers at risk for occupational exposure . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Smallpox vaccination within three days of exposure will prevent or significantly lessen the severity of smallpox symptoms in the vast majority of people . Vaccination four to seven days after exposure can offer some protection from disease or may modify the severity of disease . Other than vaccination , treatment of smallpox is primarily supportive , such as wound care and infection control , fluid therapy , and possible ventilator assistance . Flat and hemorrhagic types of smallpox are treated with the same therapies used to treat shock , such as fluid resuscitation . People with semi @-@ confluent and confluent types of smallpox may have therapeutic issues similar to patients with extensive skin burns . 
 No drug is currently approved for the treatment of smallpox . However , antiviral treatments have improved since the last large smallpox epidemics , and studies suggest that the antiviral drug <unk> might be useful as a therapeutic agent . The drug must be administered intravenously , however , and may cause serious kidney toxicity . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The overall case @-@ fatality rate for ordinary @-@ type smallpox is about 30 percent , but varies by pock distribution : ordinary type @-@ confluent is fatal about 50 – 75 percent of the time , ordinary @-@ type semi @-@ confluent about 25 – 50 percent of the time , in cases where the rash is discrete the case @-@ fatality rate is less than 10 percent . The overall fatality rate for children younger than 1 year of age is 40 – 50 percent . Hemorrhagic and flat types have the highest fatality rates . The fatality rate for flat @-@ type is 90 percent or greater and nearly 100 percent is observed in cases of hemorrhagic smallpox . The case @-@ fatality rate for variola minor is 1 percent or less . There is no evidence of chronic or recurrent infection with variola virus . 
 In fatal cases of ordinary smallpox , death usually occurs between the tenth and sixteenth days of the illness . The cause of death from smallpox is not clear , but the infection is now known to involve multiple organs . Circulating immune complexes , overwhelming viremia , or an uncontrolled immune response may be contributing factors . In early hemorrhagic smallpox , death occurs suddenly about six days after the fever develops . Cause of death in hemorrhagic cases involved heart failure , sometimes accompanied by pulmonary edema . In late hemorrhagic cases , high and sustained viremia , severe platelet loss and poor immune response were often cited as causes of death . In flat smallpox modes of death are similar to those in burns , with loss of fluid , protein and electrolytes beyond the capacity of the body to replace or acquire , and fulminating sepsis . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Complications of smallpox arise most commonly in the respiratory system and range from simple bronchitis to fatal pneumonia . Respiratory complications tend to develop on about the eighth day of the illness and can be either viral or bacterial in origin . Secondary bacterial infection of the skin is a relatively uncommon complication of smallpox . When this occurs , the fever usually remains elevated . 
 Other complications include encephalitis ( 1 in 500 patients ) , which is more common in adults and may cause temporary disability ; permanent pitted scars , most notably on the face ; and complications involving the eyes ( 2 percent of all cases ) . <unk> can form on the eyelid , conjunctiva , and cornea , leading to complications such as conjunctivitis , keratitis , corneal ulcer , <unk> , <unk> , and optic atrophy . Blindness results in approximately 35 percent to 40 percent of eyes affected with keratitis and corneal ulcer . Hemorrhagic smallpox can cause <unk> and retinal hemorrhages . In 2 to 5 percent of young children with smallpox , virions reach the joints and bone , causing osteomyelitis <unk> . Lesions are symmetrical , most common in the elbows , tibia , and fibula , and characteristically cause separation of an <unk> and marked periosteal reactions . Swollen joints limit movement , and arthritis may lead to limb deformities , ankylosis , malformed bones , flail joints , and stubby fingers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Disease emergence = = = 
 The earliest credible clinical evidence of smallpox is found in the smallpox @-@ like disease in medical writings from ancient India ( as early as 1500 BC ) , Egyptian mummy of Ramses V who died more than 3000 years ago ( 1145 BC ) and China ( 1122 BC ) . It has been speculated that Egyptian traders brought smallpox to India during the 1st millennium BC , where it remained as an endemic human disease for at least 2000 years . Smallpox was probably introduced into China during the 1st century AD from the southwest , and in the 6th century was carried from China to Japan . In Japan , the epidemic of 735 – 737 is believed to have killed as much as one @-@ third of the population . At least seven religious deities have been specifically dedicated to smallpox , such as the god <unk> in the Yoruba religion . In India , the Hindu goddess of smallpox , Sitala Mata , was worshiped in temples throughout the country . 
 The timing of the arrival of smallpox in Europe and south @-@ western Asia is less clear . Smallpox is not clearly described in either the Old or New Testaments of the Bible or in the literature of the Greeks or Romans . While some have identified the Plague of Athens — which was said to have originated in " Ethiopia " and Egypt — or the plague that lifted Carthage 's 396 BC siege of Syracuse with smallpox , many scholars agree it is very unlikely such a serious disease as variola major would have escaped being described by Hippocrates if it had existed in the Mediterranean region during his lifetime . While the Antonine Plague that swept through the Roman Empire in AD 165 – 180 may have been caused by smallpox , Saint <unk> of Rheims became the patron saint of smallpox victims for having supposedly survived a bout in 450 , and Saint Gregory of Tours recorded a similar outbreak in France and Italy in 580 , the first use of the term variola ; other historians speculate that Arab armies first carried smallpox from Africa into Southwestern Europe during the 7th and 8th centuries . In the 9th century the Persian physician , Rhazes , provided one of the most definitive descriptions of smallpox and was the first to differentiate smallpox from measles and chickenpox in his Kitab fi al @-@ <unk> wa @-@ al @-@ <unk> ( The Book of Smallpox and Measles ) . During the Middle Ages , smallpox made periodic incursions into Europe but did not become established there until the population increased and population movement became more active during the era of the Crusades . By the 16th century smallpox had become well established across most of Europe . With its introduction into populated areas in India , China and Europe , smallpox affected mainly children , with periodic epidemics that killed as many as 30 percent of those infected . The settled existence of smallpox in Europe was of particular historical importance , since successive waves of exploration and colonization by Europeans tended to spread the disease to other parts of the world . By the 16th century it had become an important cause of morbidity and mortality throughout much of the world . 
 There are no credible descriptions of smallpox @-@ like disease in the Americas before the westward exploration by Europeans in the 15th century AD . Smallpox was introduced into the Caribbean island of Hispaniola in 1509 , and into the mainland in 1520 , when Spanish settlers from Hispaniola arrived in Mexico bringing smallpox with them . Smallpox devastated the native Amerindian population and was an important factor in the conquest of the Aztecs and the Incas by the Spaniards . Settlement of the east coast of North America in 1633 in Plymouth , Massachusetts was also accompanied by devastating outbreaks of smallpox among Native American populations , and subsequently among the native @-@ born colonists . Case fatality rates during outbreaks in Native American populations were as high as 80 – 90 % . Smallpox was introduced into Australia in 1789 and again in 1829 . Although the disease was never endemic on the continent , it was the principal cause of death in Aboriginal populations between 1780 and 1870 . 
 By the mid @-@ 18th century smallpox was a major endemic disease everywhere in the world except in Australia and in several small islands . In Europe smallpox was a leading cause of death in the 18th century , killing an estimated 400 @,@ 000 Europeans each year . Up to 10 percent of Swedish infants died of smallpox each year , and the death rate of infants in Russia may have been even higher . The widespread use of variolation in a few countries , notably Great Britain , its North American colonies , and China , somewhat reduced the impact of smallpox among the wealthy classes during the latter part of the 18th century , but a real reduction in its incidence did not occur until vaccination became a common practice toward the end of the 19th century . Improved vaccines and the practice of re @-@ vaccination led to a substantial reduction in cases in Europe and North America , but smallpox remained almost unchecked everywhere else in the world . In the United States and South Africa a much milder form of smallpox , variola minor , was recognized just before the close of the 19th century . By the mid @-@ 20th century variola minor occurred along with variola major , in varying proportions , in many parts of Africa . Patients with variola minor experience only a mild systemic illness , are often <unk> throughout the course of the disease , and are therefore able to more easily spread disease . Infection with v. minor induces immunity against the more deadly variola major form . Thus as v. minor spread all over the USA , into Canada , the South American countries and Great Britain it became the dominant form of smallpox , further reducing mortality rates . 
 = = = Eradication = = = 
 The English physician Edward Jenner demonstrated the effectiveness of cowpox to protect humans from smallpox in 1796 , after which various attempts were made to eliminate smallpox on a regional scale . The introduction of the vaccine to the New World took place in Trinity , Newfoundland in 1800 by Dr. John Clinch , boyhood friend and medical colleague of Jenner . As early as 1803 , the Spanish Crown organized the <unk> expedition to transport the vaccine to the Spanish colonies in the Americas and the Philippines , and establish mass vaccination programs there . The U.S. Congress passed the Vaccine Act of 1813 to ensure that safe smallpox vaccine would be available to the American public . By about 1817 , a very solid state vaccination program existed in the Dutch East Indies . In British India a program was launched to propagate smallpox vaccination , through Indian vaccinators , under the supervision of European officials . Nevertheless , British vaccination efforts in India , and in Burma in particular , were hampered by stubborn indigenous preference for inoculation and distrust of vaccination , despite tough legislation , improvements in the local efficacy of the vaccine and vaccine preservative , and education efforts . By 1832 , the federal government of the United States established a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans . In 1842 , the United Kingdom banned inoculation , later progressing to mandatory vaccination . The British government introduced compulsory smallpox vaccination by an Act of Parliament in 1853 . In the United States , from 1843 to 1855 first Massachusetts , and then other states required smallpox vaccination . Although some disliked these measures , coordinated efforts against smallpox went on , and the disease continued to diminish in the wealthy countries . By 1897 , smallpox had largely been eliminated from the United States . In Northern Europe a number of countries had eliminated smallpox by 1900 , and by 1914 , the incidence in most industrialized countries had decreased to comparatively low levels . Vaccination continued in industrialized countries , until the mid to late 1970s as protection against reintroduction . Australia and New Zealand are two notable exceptions ; neither experienced endemic smallpox and never vaccinated widely , relying instead on protection by distance and strict quarantines . 
 The first hemisphere @-@ wide effort to eradicate smallpox was made in 1950 by the Pan American Health Organization . The campaign was successful in eliminating smallpox from all American countries except Argentina , Brazil , Colombia , and Ecuador . In 1958 Professor Viktor Zhdanov , Deputy Minister of Health for the USSR , called on the World Health Assembly to undertake a global initiative to eradicate smallpox . The proposal ( Resolution <unk> ) was accepted in 1959 . At this point , 2 million people were dying from smallpox every year . Overall , however , the progress towards eradication was disappointing , especially in Africa and in the Indian subcontinent . In 1966 an international team , the Smallpox Eradication Unit , was formed under the leadership of an American , Donald Henderson . In 1967 , the World Health Organization intensified the global smallpox eradication by contributing $ 2 @.@ 4 million annually to the effort , and adopted the new disease surveillance method promoted by Czech epidemiologist Karel Raška . 
 In the early 1950s an estimated 50 million cases of smallpox occurred in the world each year . To eradicate smallpox , each outbreak had to be stopped from spreading , by isolation of cases and vaccination of everyone who lived close by . This process is known as " ring vaccination " . The key to this strategy was the monitoring of cases in a community ( known as surveillance ) and containment . The initial problem the WHO team faced was inadequate reporting of smallpox cases , as many cases did not come to the attention of the authorities . The fact that humans are the only reservoir for smallpox infection , and that carriers did not exist , played a significant role in the eradication of smallpox . The WHO established a network of consultants who assisted countries in setting up surveillance and containment activities . Early on , donations of vaccine were provided primarily by the Soviet Union and the United States , but by 1973 , more than 80 percent of all vaccine was produced in developing countries . 
 The last major European outbreak of smallpox was in 1972 in Yugoslavia , after a pilgrim from Kosovo returned from the Middle East , where he had contracted the virus . The epidemic infected 175 people , causing 35 deaths . Authorities declared martial law , enforced quarantine , and undertook widespread re @-@ vaccination of the population , enlisting the help of the WHO . In two months , the outbreak was over . Prior to this , there had been a smallpox outbreak in May – July 1963 in Stockholm , Sweden , brought from the Far East by a Swedish sailor ; this had been dealt with by quarantine measures and vaccination of the local population . 
 By the end of 1975 , smallpox persisted only in the Horn of Africa . Conditions were very difficult in Ethiopia and Somalia , where there were few roads . Civil war , famine , and refugees made the task even more difficult . An intensive surveillance and containment and vaccination program was undertaken in these countries in early and mid @-@ 1977 , under the direction of Australian microbiologist Frank Fenner . As the campaign neared its goal , Fenner and his team played an important role in verifying eradication . The last naturally occurring case of indigenous smallpox ( Variola minor ) was diagnosed in Ali <unk> <unk> , a hospital cook in <unk> , Somalia , on 26 October 1977 . The last naturally occurring case of the more deadly Variola major had been detected in October 1975 in a two @-@ year @-@ old Bangladeshi girl , <unk> Banu . 
 The global eradication of smallpox was certified , based on intense verification activities in countries , by a commission of eminent scientists on 9 December 1979 and subsequently endorsed by the World Health Assembly on 8 May 1980 . The first two sentences of the resolution read : 
 Having considered the development and results of the global program on smallpox eradication initiated by WHO in 1958 and intensified since 1967 … Declares solemnly that the world and its peoples have won freedom from smallpox , which was a most devastating disease sweeping in epidemic form through many countries since earliest time , leaving death , blindness and disfigurement in its wake and which only a decade ago was rampant in Africa , Asia and South America . 
 = = = Post @-@ eradication = = = 
 The last cases of smallpox in the world occurred in an outbreak of two cases ( one of which was fatal ) in Birmingham , UK in 1978 . A medical photographer , Janet Parker , contracted the disease at the University of Birmingham Medical School and died on September 11 , 1978 , after which Professor Henry Bedson , the scientist responsible for smallpox research at the university , committed suicide . All known stocks of smallpox were subsequently destroyed or transferred to two WHO @-@ designated reference laboratories with BSL @-@ 4 facilities — the United States ' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Russia 's State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR . 
 WHO first recommended destruction of the virus in 1986 and later set the date of destruction to be 30 December 1993 . This was postponed to 30 June 1999 . Due to resistance from the U.S. and Russia , in 2002 the World Health Assembly agreed to permit the temporary retention of the virus stocks for specific research purposes . Destroying existing stocks would reduce the risk involved with ongoing smallpox research ; the stocks are not needed to respond to a smallpox outbreak . Some scientists have argued that the stocks may be useful in developing new vaccines , antiviral drugs , and diagnostic tests ; however , a 2010 review by a team of public health experts appointed by WHO concluded that no essential public health purpose is served by the U.S. and Russia continuing to retain virus stocks . The latter view is frequently supported in the scientific community , particularly among veterans of the WHO Smallpox Eradication Program . 
 In March 2004 smallpox scabs were found tucked inside an envelope in a book on Civil War medicine in Santa Fe , New Mexico . The envelope was labeled as containing scabs from a vaccination and gave scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention an opportunity to study the history of smallpox vaccination in the U.S. 
 In July 2014 several vials of smallpox were discovered in an FDA laboratory at the National Institutes of Health location in Bethesda , Maryland . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Biological warfare = = = 
 The British used smallpox as a biological warfare agent at the Siege of Fort Pitt during the French and Indian Wars ( 1754 – 1763 ) against France and its Native American allies . The actual use of smallpox had official sanction . British officers , including the top British commanding generals , ordered , sanctioned , paid for and conducted the use of smallpox against the Native Americans . As described by historians , " there is no doubt that British military authorities approved of attempts to spread smallpox among the enemy " , and " it was deliberate British policy to infect the indians with smallpox " . On June 24 , 1763 , William Trent , a local trader and commander of the Fort Pitt militia , wrote , " Out of our regard for them , we gave them two Blankets and an Handkerchief out of the Small Pox Hospital . I hope it will have the desired effect . " The effectiveness of this effort to broadcast the disease is unknown . There are also accounts that smallpox was used as a weapon during the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) . 
 According to a theory put forward in Journal of Australian Studies ( JAS ) by an independent researcher , in 1789 , British marines used smallpox against indigenous tribes in New South Wales . This occasion was also discussed earlier in Bulletin of the History of Medicine and by David Day in his book Claiming a Continent : A New History of Australia . Prior to the JAS article this theory was disputed by some academics . Jack Carmody claimed the cause of the outbreak in question was more likely due to chickenpox , which at the time was sometimes identified as a mild form of smallpox . While it was noted that , in the 8 @-@ month voyage of the First Fleet and the following 14 months there were no reports of smallpox amongst the colonists and that as smallpox has an incubation period of 10 – 12 days it is unlikely it was present in the first fleet , it is now known that the likely source was bottles of smallpox virus possessed by First Fleet surgeons and there actually was a report of smallpox amongst the colonists - a seaman , Jefferies . More information is at : First Fleet Smallpox . 
 During World War II , scientists from the United Kingdom , United States and Japan ( Unit 731 of the imperial Japanese army ) were involved in research into producing a biological weapon from smallpox . Plans of large scale production were never carried through as they considered that the weapon would not be very effective due to the wide @-@ scale availability of a vaccine . 
 In 1947 the Soviet Union established a smallpox weapons factory in the city of <unk> , 75 km to the northeast of Moscow . An outbreak of weaponized smallpox occurred during testing at a facility on an island in the Aral Sea in 1971 . General Prof. Peter <unk> , former Chief Sanitary Physician of the Soviet Army and a senior researcher within the Soviet program of biological weapons , described the incident : 
 On <unk> Island in the Aral Sea , the strongest recipes of smallpox were tested . Suddenly I was informed that there were mysterious cases of mortalities in Aralsk . A research ship of the Aral fleet came to within 15 km of the island ( it was forbidden to come any closer than 40 km ) . The lab technician of this ship took samples of plankton twice a day from the top deck . The smallpox formulation — 400 <unk> of which was exploded on the island — " got her " and she became infected . After returning home to Aralsk , she infected several people including children . All of them died . I suspected the reason for this and called the Chief of General Staff of Ministry of Defense and requested to forbid the stop of the Alma @-@ Ata — Moscow train in Aralsk . As a result , the epidemic around the country was prevented . I called Andropov , who at that time was Chief of KGB , and informed him of the exclusive recipe of smallpox obtained on <unk> Island . 
 Others contend that the first patient may have contracted the disease while visiting <unk> or Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ <unk> , two cities where the boat docked . 
 Responding to international pressures , in 1991 the Soviet government allowed a joint <unk> inspection team to tour four of its main weapons facilities at <unk> . The inspectors were met with evasion and denials from the Soviet scientists , and were eventually ordered out of the facility . In 1992 Soviet defector Ken Alibek alleged that the Soviet bioweapons program at <unk> had produced a large stockpile — as much as twenty tons — of weaponized smallpox ( possibly engineered to resist vaccines , Alibek further alleged ) , along with refrigerated warheads to deliver it . Alibek 's stories about the former Soviet program 's smallpox activities have never been independently verified . 
 In 1997 , the Russian government announced that all of its remaining smallpox samples would be moved to the Vector Institute in <unk> . With the breakup of the Soviet Union and unemployment of many of the weapons program 's scientists , U.S. government officials have expressed concern that smallpox and the expertise to weaponize it may have become available to other governments or terrorist groups who might wish to use virus as means of biological warfare . Specific allegations made against Iraq in this respect , however , proved to be mistaken . 
 Concern has been expressed by some that artificial gene synthesis could be used to recreate the virus from existing digital genomes , for use in biological warfare . Insertion of the synthesized smallpox DNA into existing related pox viruses could theoretically be used to recreate the virus . The first step to mitigating this risk , it has been suggested , should be to destroy the remaining virus stocks so as to enable unequivocal criminalization of any possession of the virus . 
 = = = Notable cases = = = 
 Famous historical figures who contracted smallpox include Lakota Chief Sitting Bull , Ramses V of Egypt , the Kangxi Emperor ( survived ) , Shunzhi Emperor and <unk> Emperor ( refer to the official history ) of China , Date Masamune of Japan ( who lost an eye to the disease ) . <unk> , the 10th <unk> ( ruler ) of the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan , died of smallpox in 1520 , shortly after its introduction to the Americas , and the Incan emperor <unk> Capac died of it in 1527 . More recent public figures include Guru Har Krishan , 8th Guru of the Sikhs , in 1664 , Peter II of Russia in 1730 ( died ) , George Washington ( survived ) , king Louis XV in 1774 ( died ) and Maximilian III Joseph , Elector of Bavaria in 1777 . 
 Prominent families throughout the world often had several people infected by and / or perish from the disease . For example , several relatives of Henry VIII survived the disease but were scarred by it . These include his sister Margaret , Queen of Scotland , his fourth wife , Anne of Cleves , and his two daughters : Mary I of England in 1527 and Elizabeth I of England in 1562 ( as an adult she would often try to disguise the pockmarks with heavy makeup ) . His great @-@ niece , Mary , Queen of Scots , contracted the disease as a child but had no visible scarring . 
 In Europe , deaths from smallpox often changed dynastic succession . The only surviving son of Henry VIII , Edward VI , died from complications shortly after apparently recovering from the disease , thereby nullifying Henry 's efforts to ensure a male successor to the throne ( his two immediate successors were both women , who had both had it and survived ) . Louis XV of France succeeded his great @-@ grandfather Louis XIV through a series of deaths of smallpox or measles among those earlier in the succession line . He himself died of the disease in 1774 . William III lost his mother to the disease when he was only ten years old in 1660 , and named his uncle Charles as legal guardian : her death from smallpox would indirectly spark a chain of events that would eventually lead to the permanent ousting of the Stuart line from the British throne . William III 's wife , Mary II of England , died from smallpox as well . 
 In Russia , Peter II of Russia died of the disease at 15 years of age . Also , prior to becoming Russian Emperor , Peter III caught the virus and suffered greatly from it . He was left scarred and disfigured . His wife , Catherine the Great , was spared but fear of the virus clearly had its effects on her . She feared for her son and heir Pavel 's safety so much that she made sure that large crowds were kept at bay and sought to isolate him . Eventually , she decided to have herself inoculated by a Scottish doctor , Thomas Dimsdale . While this was considered a controversial method at the time , she succeeded . Her son Pavel was later inoculated as well . Catherine then sought to have inoculations throughout her empire stating : " My objective was , through my example , to save from death the multitude of my subjects who , not knowing the value of this technique , and frightened of it , were left in danger . " By 1800 , approximately 2 million inoculations were administered in the Russian Empire . 
 In China , the Qing Dynasty had extensive protocols to protect Manchus from Peking 's endemic smallpox . 
 U.S. Presidents George Washington , Andrew Jackson , and Abraham Lincoln all contracted and recovered from the disease . Washington became infected with smallpox on a visit to Barbados in 1751 . Jackson developed the illness after being taken prisoner by the British during the American Revolution , and though he recovered , his brother Robert did not . Lincoln contracted the disease during his Presidency , possibly from his son Tad , and was quarantined shortly after giving the Gettysburg address in 1863 . 
 Famous theologian Jonathan Edwards died of smallpox in 1758 following an inoculation . 
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin fell ill with smallpox at the age of seven . His face was badly scarred by the disease . He later had photographs retouched to make his pockmarks less apparent . 
 Hungarian poet Ferenc <unk> , who wrote the Hungarian national anthem , lost his right eye to smallpox . 
 = = = Tradition and religion = = = 
 In the face of the devastation of smallpox , various smallpox gods and goddesses have been worshipped throughout parts of the Old World , for example in China and in India . In China , the smallpox goddess was referred to as T ’ ou @-@ Shen Niang @-@ Niang . Chinese believers actively worked to appease the goddess and pray for her mercy , by such measures as referring to smallpox pustules as " beautiful flowers " as a euphemism intended to avert offending the goddess , for example . In a related New Year 's Eve custom it was prescribed that the children of the house wear ugly masks while sleeping , so as to conceal any beauty and thereby avoid attracting the goddess , who would be passing through sometime that night . If a case of smallpox did occur , shrines would be set up in the homes of the victims , to be worshipped and offered to as the disease ran its course . If the victim recovered , the shrines were removed and carried away in a special paper chair or boat for burning . If the patient did not recover , the shrine was destroyed and cursed , so as to expel the goddess from the house . 
 India ’ s first records of smallpox can be found in a medical book that dates back to A.D. 400 . This book describes a disease that sounds exceptionally like smallpox . India , like China , created a goddess in response to its exposure to smallpox . The Hindu goddess <unk> was both worshipped and feared during her reign . It was believed that this goddess was both evil and kind and had the ability to inflict victims when angered , as well as calm the fevers of the already afflicted . Portraits of the goddess show her holding a broom in her right hand to continue to move the disease and a pot of cool water in the other hand in an attempt to soothe victims . Shrines were created where many India natives , both healthy and not , went to worship and attempt to protect themselves from this disease . Some Indian women , in an attempt to ward off <unk> , placed plates of cooling foods and pots of water on the roofs of their homes . 
 In cultures that did not recognize a smallpox deity , there was often nonetheless a belief in smallpox demons , who were accordingly blamed for the disease . Such beliefs were prominent in Japan , Europe , Africa , and other parts of the world . Nearly all cultures who believed in the demon also believed that it was afraid of the color red . This led to the invention of so @-@ called red treatment , where victims and their rooms would be decorated in red . The practice spread to Europe in the 12th century and was practiced by ( among others ) Charles V of France and Elizabeth I of England . Afforded scientific credibility through the studies by <unk> showing that red light reduced scarring , this belief persisted even until the 1930s . 
 = SS Mauna Loa = 
 SS Mauna Loa was a steam @-@ powered cargo ship of Matson Navigation Company that was sunk in the bombing of Darwin in February 1942 . She was christened SS West Conob in 1919 and renamed SS Golden Eagle in 1928 . At the time of her completion in 1919 , the ship was inspected by the United States Navy for possible use as USS West Conob ( ID @-@ 4033 ) but was neither taken into the Navy nor ever commissioned . 
 West Conob was built in 1919 for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , part of the West series of ships — steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States for the World War I war effort — and was the 14th ship built at Los Angeles Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company in San Pedro , California . She initially sailed for the Pacific Mail Steamship Company and circumnavigated the globe twice by 1921 . She began sailing to South America for Swayne & Hoyt Lines in 1925 , and then , to Australia and New Zealand . When Swayne & Hoyt 's operation was taken over by the Oceanic and Oriental Navigation Company a few years later , she sailed under the name Golden Eagle until 1934 , when she was taken over by the Matson Navigation Company for service between Hawaii and the U.S. mainland and renamed Mauna Loa , after the large shield volcano on the Island of Hawaii . 
 Shortly before the United States ' entry into World War II , Mauna Loa was chartered by the United States Department of War to carry supplies to the Philippines . The ship was part of an aborted attempt to reinforce Allied forces under attack by the Japanese on Timor in mid @-@ February 1942 . After the return of her convoy to Darwin , Northern Territory , Mauna Loa was one of eight ships sunk in Darwin Harbour in the first Japanese bombing attack on the Australian mainland on 19 February . The remains of her wreck and her cargo are a dive site in the harbor . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. Some 40 West ships were built by Los Angeles Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company of Los Angeles , all given names that began with the word West . West Conob ( Los Angeles Shipbuilding yard number 14 ) was completed in May 1919 . 
 West Conob was 5 @,@ 899 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 410 feet 1 inch ( 124 @.@ 99 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet 6 inches ( 16 @.@ 61 m ) abeam . She had a steel hull and a deadweight tonnage of 8 @,@ 600 DWT . Sources do not give West Conob 's other hull characteristics , but West Grama , a sister ship also built at Los Angeles Shipbuilding had a displacement of 12 @,@ 225 t with a mean draft of 24 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) , and a hold 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) deep . 
 West Conob 's power plant consisted of a single triple @-@ expansion reciprocating steam engine with cylinders of 28 ½ , 47 , and 78 inches ( 72 , 120 , and 200 cm ) with a 48 @-@ inch ( 120 cm ) stroke . She was outfitted with three Foster water @-@ tube boilers , each with a heating area of 4 @,@ 150 square feet ( 386 m2 ) and containing 52 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) and 827 2 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) tubes . Her boilers were heated by mechanical oil burners fed by two pumps , each 6 by 4 by 6 inches ( 15 × 10 × 15 cm ) with a capacity of 30 U.S. gallons ( 110 L ) per minute . Fully loaded , the ship could hold 6 @,@ 359 barrels ( 1 @,@ 011 @.@ 0 m3 ) of fuel oil . West Conob 's single screw propeller was 17 feet 1 inch ( 5 @.@ 21 m ) in diameter with a 15 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 4 @.@ 65 m ) pitch and a developed area of 102 square feet ( 9 @.@ 5 m2 ) . The ship was designed to travel at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ) , and averaged 11 @.@ 1 knots ( 20 @.@ 6 km / h ) during her first voyage in June 1919 . 
 = = Career = = 
 After completion , West Conob was inspected by the 12th Naval District of the United States Navy for possible naval service and was assigned the identification number of 4033 . Had she been commissioned , she would have been known as USS West Conob ( ID @-@ 4033 ) , but the Navy neither took over the ship nor commissioned her . 
 Little information on the first years of West Conob 's career is found in sources . But it is known that she was operated by the Pacific Mail Steamship Company on Pacific routes . The ship departed Los Angeles on her maiden voyage to Hong Kong , making her way to San Francisco . West Conob departed from there on 13 June 1919 for Honolulu , where she arrived eight days later . After refueling at Honolulu , she headed to Hong Kong , and from there , retraced her route to return to San Francisco . Details of later voyages are not available , but by mid @-@ April 1921 , West Conob had completed two circumnavigations without needing to stop for repairs . At that time , the USSB allocated West Conob for service to Genoa . 
 In December 1925 , West Conob was allocated to Swayne & Hoyt Lines for service to the east coast of South America . By mid @-@ 1926 , West Conob was sailing for Swayne & Hoyt 's American @-@ Australian @-@ Orient Line when she was reported in the Los Angeles Times as sailing to New Zealand with 350 @,@ 000 square feet ( 33 @,@ 000 m2 ) of wallboard . 
 In October 1927 , the Los Angeles Times reported on the impending sale of West Conob and 18 other Swayne & Holt ships to a San Francisco financier . The ship later became a part of the fleet of the Oceanic and Oriental Navigation Company , a joint venture between Oceanic @-@ Matson , a subsidiary of Matson Navigation Company , and the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company , established to take over operation of transpacific routes that had been managed for the USSB by Swayne & Holt Lines . Some time after March 1928 , the ship was renamed Golden Eagle , the name under which she operated for the next six years . Golden Eagle was sailing for Oceanic and Oriental from Los Angeles to Australia in March 1930 , when the Los Angeles Times reported that she had sailed with 6 @,@ 700 long tons ( 6 @,@ 800 t ) of case oil and 200 long tons ( 200 t ) of general merchandise . 
 In March 1934 , Matson began a new " sugar , molasses and pineapple service " from Hawaii to San Francisco , Los Angeles , and either Philadelphia or New York , featuring Golden Eagle and three other cargo ships . In May , after returning from New York on her first voyage in the new service , Golden Eagle entered drydock at Los Angeles for general repairs and repainting . She emerged in Matson livery and with the new name of Mauna Loa . She sailed on her maiden voyage under her new name to Honolulu with 4 @,@ 500 long tons ( 4 @,@ 600 t ) of general cargo in late May . Mauna Loa continued on the Hawaii – California – Philadelphia / New York service , occasionally making extra voyages from Los Angeles to Honolulu when dictated by cargo bookings . One such extra voyage occurred in February 1936 when she carried almost a full load of building materials for family dwellings in Hawaii . 
 In August 1936 , Mauna Loa diverted to respond to a distress call issued by the <unk> Pacific Queen some 700 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) southwest of Los Angeles . Pacific Queen had sailed from San Diego in July with a crew of 32 — most of whom were Sea Scouts — and had been missing for two weeks . Mauna Loa 's crew provided required supplies for the sailing vessel and her radioed messages prompted the United States Coast Guard to recall all of its vessels actively searching for Pacific Queen . 
 On 18 November 1941 , the War Department chartered Mauna Loa and seven other ships to carry supplies to the Philippines . Even though details of the charters were deemed confidential , the names of all eight ships were published in the Los Angeles Times two days later . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Less than three weeks after Mauna Loa 's charter , the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor propelled the United States into World War II . Mauna Loa 's movements over the next three months are unknown , but by mid @-@ February 1942 , she had made her way to Darwin , Northern Territory , Australia . 
 Japanese forces — advancing down the Malay Barrier , the notional Allied line of defense that ran down the Malayan Peninsula through Singapore and the southernmost islands of the Dutch East Indies — had reached the island of Timor by mid February . In order to prevent the fall of that island to the Japanese , which would give them a base within 400 miles ( 640 km ) of Darwin , the Allies assembled a joint American @-@ Australian force to reinforce the Australian Sparrow Force and Royal Dutch East Indies Army forces defending Timor . 
 The American cruiser Houston and destroyer Peary , and the Australian sloops Swan and Warrego , led Mauna Loa and three other civilian ships out of Darwin Harbour at about 03 : 00 on 15 February heading for Koepang with relief intended for Timor . Mauna Loa , loaded with 500 men , and United States Army transport ship Meigs carried an Australian infantry battalion and an antitank unit between them . The British refrigerated cargo ship Tulagi and the American cargo ship Portmar carried the 148th Field Artillery Regiment of the Idaho National Guard between them . 
 The ships were spotted by a Japanese Kawanishi H6K " Mavis " four @-@ engined flying boat that tailed the convoy at 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) . When Captain Albert H. Rooks of Houston requested air cover for the convoy , a lone Curtiss P @-@ 40 responded and engaged the Mavis , with each plane managing to shoot down the other . At around 09 : 00 the next day , another Mavis began trailing the convoy and at 11 : 00 , 36 land @-@ based Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 21 " Sally " twin @-@ engine bombers and ten seaplanes attacked in two waves . Houston , the primary target of the bombers , unleashed all of her available antiaircraft fire with neither bombs nor Houston 's fire being effective . In the second wave , from the southwest and after the ships had scattered , Houston shot down seven of forty @-@ four planes and repelled the attacking aircraft . Houston 's 900 rounds fired in the 45 @-@ minute attack resembled a " sheet of flame " , according to witnesses . The only casualties during the attack were from one near miss on Mauna Loa ; 1 crewman and 1 passenger were killed and 18 men were wounded in the attack . The convoy was ordered back to Darwin when word that Koepang had fallen to the Japanese was received ; she arrived back in Darwin on 18 February . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 On 19 February 1942 , the Japanese carrier striking force , consisting of aircraft carriers Akagi , Kaga , Hiryu , and Soryu under the command of Admiral Chuichi Nagumo , launched 189 planes to attack Darwin . The carrier planes rendezvoused with 54 land @-@ based bombers from <unk> and Ambon . 
 At the time of the raid the Mauna Loa and Meigs had unloaded troops and moved to anchorages with the force 's equipment and ammunition aboard with Neptuna and Zealandia unloading ammunition at the docks that were the first target of high altitude bombers . Both ships at the dock were hit with Neptuna exploding . After a second wave of bombers , concentrating on the airport , came waves of dive bombers that for two hours concentrated on ships in the harbor . 
 During the attack , Mauna Loa quickly sank after she was hit by two bombs that landed in an open hatch . None of her 37 @-@ man crew or 7 passengers was injured . Along with Mauna Loa , two other American ships , destroyer Peary and Army transport Meigs , were sunk . In addition to the many other ships that were damaged , five Commonwealth ships were sunk , including two Australian passenger ships in use as troopships , Neptuna and Zealandia . The total death toll for the attack was around 250 ; of the total , 157 died on ships . 
 What remains of Mauna Loa lies in Darwin Harbour at position 12 ° 29 @.@ 86 ′ S 130 ° 49 @.@ 16 ′ E at a depth of 60 feet ( 18 m ) , and is a dive site . Military trucks , Bren Gun Carriers , a Harley @-@ Davidson motorcycle , and many rounds of <unk> and .50 @-@ caliber ammunition are among the pieces of Mauna Loa 's cargo that still lie strewn about the wreck . 
 = Captive Pursuit = 
 " Captive Pursuit " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . The episode was written by executive producer Michael Piller and Jill Sherman Donner , and was directed by Corey Allen . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , Tosk ( Scott MacDonald ) arrives on the station and befriends Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) , but is soon pursued by the Hunter ( Gerrit Graham ) , who follows him through the wormhole . 
 Scott MacDonald would later appear in several further roles in the franchise as well as a recurring character during season three of Star Trek : Enterprise . Graham , who appears in a guest role as the Hunter , had previously been considered for the main cast role of Odo . Michael Westmore designed the make @-@ up for Tosk to resemble an alligator ; his initial design for the Hunters was changed for budgetary reasons . The episode was praised by the cast and crew , and received a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 , placing it as one of the four most watched episodes of the first season . Critical reception was mostly positive , with critics approving of Meaney and MacDonald 's performances , but disliking the formulaic nature of the plot . The episode won an Emmy Award for best make @-@ up for a series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A damaged , unidentified vessel from the Gamma Quadrant docks at Deep Space Nine for repairs . Its reptilian pilot , identified only as Tosk ( Scott MacDonald ) , is the first known life @-@ form from the Gamma Quadrant to visit the station . Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) suspects Tosk is running from something , due to evidence of weapons fire on his vessel . O 'Brien befriends Tosk and tries to help him repair his ship . However , Tosk attempts to steal from a weapons locker and is put in a holding cell by Security Chief Odo ( René Auberjonois ) . 
 Uniformed aliens arrive in the Alpha Quadrant through the wormhole , beam onto the DS9 promenade , and start a phaser battle with a team led by Commander Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) . The aliens fight their way into the brig where Tosk is being held . Sisko , O 'Brien and Odo enter the room as one of the aliens , the Hunter ( Gerrit Graham ) removes his helmet and expresses his disappointment to Tosk for capturing him alive . He commands Sisko to lower the forcefield and release Tosk , but Sisko refuses . They discuss the issue and the Hunter agrees to place the Bajoran Wormhole out of bounds for future hunts . As much as he detests this practice , Sisko believes that under the Prime Directive he must release Tosk to the aliens . 
 After talking to Quark ( Armin Shimerman ) in his bar , O 'Brien realises that he can change the rules of the hunt before Tosk is taken away by the Hunters . He lies to Odo and convinces him to release Tosk into his care , claiming it is a Starfleet , not a Bajoran matter . O 'Brien escorts the Hunter and Tosk to an airlock , but the Chief has it rigged to overload , knocking out the Hunter , allowing O 'Brien to help Tosk escape . In Ops , Sisko is informed about the situation and tells Odo to pursue the duo at a leisurely pace , giving O 'Brien time to help Tosk escape the station with the Hunters in pursuit . Later , an angry Sisko reprimands O 'Brien for his actions ; the Chief expresses his surprise at not being apprehended immediately by Odo . Sisko claims that he must have slipped up and gives O 'Brien a wry smile . 
 = = Production = = 
 Originally titled " A Matter of Breeding " , director Corey Allen said the episode intended to move away from the " squeaky clean " plots of Star Trek : The Next Generation . After the franchise 's creator Gene Roddenberry banned disagreements between characters in The Next Generation , this became one of the main elements that the producers wanted to include in the new series . In the episode , this was shown by O 'Brien releasing Tosk , but originally , during the teaser segment at the beginning , it was intended to show <unk> girl Miss Sarda propositioning Commander Sisko . " We had long conversations on that and ultimately came down on the conservative side , but we 'd never even had that kind of conference on TNG " , Allen explained . Executive producer Michael Piller wrote the episode with writer Jill Sherman Donner , who had previous credits on television shows such as Magnum P.I. 
 Michael Westmore designed the make @-@ up in the episode , drawing inspiration from an alligator he saw in National Geographic magazine to create Tosk 's appearance . The Hunters were initially intended to appear more alien @-@ like , with steam rising out of their masks as they opened to reveal a demonic face with huge eyes and scaly skin . However , due to budgetary restraints , the original costume and make @-@ up plans were scrapped and the description was revised to become " a rather mundane humanoid face , not far off human . " The transporter effect used by the Hunters was inspired by the science fiction film Metropolis ( 1927 ) , specifically by the scene in which the robot Maria undergoes a transformation . 
 " Captive Pursuit " marked the first appearance in the Star Trek franchise for both Scott MacDonald and Gerrit Graham . MacDonald appeared a week later in The Next Generation episode " Face of the Enemy " as Subcommander N <unk> . He would also appear in the DS9 episode " Hippocratic Oath " and the Star Trek : Voyager pilot " Caretaker " . In Star Trek : Enterprise , he was cast in the recurring role of the Xindi @-@ Reptilian antagonist <unk> Dolim through the third season . Graham was once considered , along with René Auberjonois and Andrew Robinson , for the role of Odo , which went to Auberjonois . Robinson was later cast as Elim Garak . Graham later gained the role of Quinn , the second Q in Voyager , in the episode " Death Wish " . 
 The episode was positively received by the cast and crew . Meaney called " Captive Pursuit " a " classic Star Trek story " and praised MacDonald 's performance , naming the episode his favourite of the first season . Michael Piller said it was one of his favourite episodes of the season , while Rick Berman said it was his favourite out of the first six episodes of the series and noted that the connection between Tosk and O 'Brien was " charming " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Captive Pursuit " was first released in broadcast syndication on January 31 , 1993 . It received a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 percent , placing third in its timeslot . This was the fourth highest rated episode of the season , behind " Emissary " , " Past Prologue " and " A Man Alone " . It won the Emmy Award for outstanding individual achievement in make @-@ up for a series . 
 Writing for Tor.com , Keith DeCandido praised " Captive Pursuit " despite , in his opinion , the weakness of the first season of DS9 prior to the episode " Duet " . DeCandido noted that " Captive Pursuit " was a good Prime Directive themed episode with interesting alien cultures . He described Colm Meaney as " magnificent " , and said that Scott MacDonald gave a " superb performance " . DeCandido gave the episode a rating of 7 out of 10 , calling it a " good , solid , well @-@ put @-@ together episode anchored by two excellent performances . " 
 Zack Handlen , in his review for The A.V. Club , said that the episode was formulaic , lacked substance , and was simply designed to give Meaney something to do . He praised the dynamic between Meaney and MacDonald , but said that " while not a classic , [ the episode was ] entertaining enough " and it helped to set up O 'Brien 's character as one to balance the complexity of some of the newer characters introduced on the show . 
 The first home media release of the episode was on VHS cassette in the United States on September 10 , 1996 . It was part of the initial launch of cassettes by Paramount Home Video which saw the first six episodes released and was on a single episode cassette . It was released on DVD as part of the season one box set on June 3 , 2003 . 
 = Blown Away ( song ) = 
 " Blown Away " is a song by American recording artist Carrie Underwood , taken from her fourth studio album of the same name ( 2012 ) . The song served as the album 's second single on July 9 , 2012 through Arista Nashville . Written by Chris Tompkins and Josh Kear , who previously wrote Underwood 's single " Before He Cheats " ( 2007 ) , " Blown Away " is a country pop song with lyrics addressing the story of a daughter locking herself in a storm cellar while her alcoholic father is passed out on the couch in the path of a tornado . Producer Mark Bright drew inspiration from 1980s music . 
 Upon its release , " Blown Away " was met with positive reviews from music critics , who considered it to be the musical highlight of the album . The song 's content and production received particular praise , as critics felt it confirmed the album 's darker mood which Underwood had mentioned prior to its release . Commercially , " Blown Away " was successful . In the United States , it became her 13th number one hit on the Billboard Country Airplay chart , and also reached number 20 on the Hot 100 . It also charted in Canada and the United Kingdom . It won several awards , including two Grammy Awards , for Best Country Song and Best Country Solo Performance . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Randee St Nicholas . Underwood said that when she heard first the song , she already had ideas of a possible video for it . She wanted it to be a dark Wizard of Oz in 2012 . It earned her an award for Video of the Year at the 2013 CMT Music Awards . The video was nominated for Music Video of the Year at the 2013 Country Music Association Awards . Underwood has performed " Blown Away " in a number of live appearances , including at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards , the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , and two years in a row at the Country Music Association Awards . It was also performed as the encore of the Blown Away Tour ( 2012 – 13 ) . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 After Underwood 's Play On Tour wrapped in December 2010 , she started to work on her fourth studio album , which was then untitled . Sony Music Nashville chairman / CEO Gary Overton said that the singer " took nearly a year to compile and record the songs . " Songwriters Chris Tompkins and Josh Kear , who previously wrote " Before He Cheats " for Underwood 's debut album , Some Hearts ( 2005 ) , worked on " Blown Away " initially without a specific artist in mind . At first , they built the drums and the string parts that of the introduction and verses . Tompkins started playing his keyboard to find sound effects for the introduction , and ended up using one that was a thunderstorm . " I think that 's what kind of threw us into it . We just started writing it , " he said . The songwriters then came up with the first verse of the song : " Dry lighting cracks across the skies / Those storm clouds gather in her eyes / Her daddy was a mean old mister / Momma was an angel in the ground / The weatherman called for a twister / She prayed blow it down . " Kear commented that it was not the duo 's intent or goal to make it a dark , revenge @-@ themed song . As they wrote the pre @-@ chorus line " not enough rain in Oklahoma " , both knew that it was a Carrie Underwood song , as the singer is from that state . " We knew if we stuck with that lyric [ " Oklahoma " — which is Carrie 's home state ] it was Carrie 's song or maybe no one would ever record it , " Kear commented . After the theme of the song had been established , the songwriters wanted to " dig up as much drama as [ they ] could . " Lyrically , " Blown Away " tells the story of a daughter locking herself in a storm cellar while her alcoholic father is passed out on the couch in the path of a tornado . Underwood revealed that " Blown Away " was the song that defined the direction of the album , and recalled the first time she heard the demo : 
 " I listened to it on my crappy computer speakers and then I had to go find my headphones because as soon as I listened to a few bars , I had to listen more closely and I got chills . I remember where I was when I heard it and called my manager , Ann , and I was like , ' Do not let anyone else have this song ! It ’ s my song . ' In talking to Chris and Josh about it , they [ told me ] , ' We said we 're either writing a song for Carrie Underwood or this song is never going to see the light of day . ' It made me feel so good that they were thinking of me when they wrote it . " 
 As noted by interviewer Kurt Wolff , " the melody and overall sound of the song also stand out as something fresh and very different . " Tompkins explained to Wolff that " Blown Away " was an " attempt at ' melodic pop ' that was ' unique ' yet still ' country . ' " Tompkins also commented that " Blown Away " is " not even mine and Josh ’ s song anymore ; it 's [ Carrie 's ] song now . She 's completely claimed it . The song is Carrie . It 's not even a song that had a chance of being pitched to anybody else . It 's a completely different type of song for Carrie . She 's got a lot of pop elements , and I listen to a lot of pop , but I listen to everything from Randy Newman to Mozart to Rihanna to Steely Dan . I think all that stuff shows up in my music , and I think it showed up in ' Blown Away . ' " The final version of the song was produced by Mark Bright , who drew inspiration from 1980s music . Underwood recalled Bright adding an effect to her vocals similar to the ones used in Def Leppard songs : " That was a big thing with [ the band ] , all of that hollow vocal sound . And I liked it . " Bright used a similar effect on " See You Again " , another song from Blown Away . Melodically , " Blown Away " is written in the key of A minor , and is set in the common time with a tempo of 134 beats per minute . The song follows the sequence of Am - C - G as its chord progression , and Underwood 's voice spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of E5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Blown Away " received generally positive reviews from music critics . A reviewer for Billboard thought that Mark Bright 's " brooding , atmospheric " production and Underwood 's vocal performance " elevate this cinematic tune to an instant classic . " They further commented , " When the girl shuts herself in the storm cellar , leaving her alcoholic father passed out on the couch in the path of a twister , you can almost feel the wind . " Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Mikael Wood thought that the song confirmed the description of the album as " a turn toward darkness from a singer who first topped the country chart with ' Jesus , Take the Wheel ' . " USA Today columnist Brian Mansfield thought the song 's " synthesizers , strings sounds , vocal overdubs and echoing guitars " combined dramatically , creating a " neo @-@ 80s feel - think an Oklahoma version of the Eurythmics . " " Blown Away " received a five @-@ star rating from Billy Dukes of Taste of Country , who called it " dangerous , but irresistible . " He also praised Underwood for recording darker material than her previous singles . Also giving it five stars , Bobby Peacock of Roughstock called it " more grandiose " than Underwood 's previous efforts , also saying that it " makes itself known by sounding like absolutely nothing else on radio . " Chris Richards of The Washington Post gave the song a mixed review , deeming the lyrics as " gripping " , but negatively comparing the instrumentation to the work of Taylor Swift . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Following the release of the album , " Blown Away " debuted at number 22 on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs chart , with 66 @,@ 000 units sold . It eventually peaked at number 15 , staying at the chart for a total of 35 weeks . On the main Hot 100 chart , " Blown Away " peaked at number 20 and spent 22 weeks on the chart ; it was ranked the 70th biggest song of 2012 there overall . On the week of September 6 , 2012 , the song became Underwood 's 16th top ten single on the Country Airplay component chart , a record among women in the tally 's 68 @-@ year history according to Billboard . The following month , on the week of October 15 , it reached the top spot , becoming the singer 's 13th number one . It stayed there for a second week , making Underwood the only female vocalist of 2012 to achieve three weeks at number one on the chart , as previous single " Good Girl " had peaked at the same position . The song was certified three @-@ times Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on August 10 , 2015 . As of February 2016 , " Blown Away " has sold 2 @,@ 819 @,@ 000 digital units in the United States . 
 " Blown Away " also peaked at number one in Canada Country chart , number 27 in Canadian Hot 100 , and is Underwood 's first song to chart in the United Kingdom , reaching number 155 , despite not having a proper release in the country . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Blown Away " was directed by Randee St. Nicholas and produced by Brandon <unk> for Randee St. Nicholas Photography . Underwood said that when she heard first the song , she already had ideas of a possible video for it , and wanted it to be a dark Wizard of Oz in 2012 . The singer deemed it " a visual song . You listen to it and you can see everything that is happening . It 's so dramatic . I 'm not a drama person , but when you can make a movie in song form in three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes , it 's surreal . " A sneak peek of the video was released on June 11 , 2012 . The music video premiered worldwide on July 30 , during a 24 @-@ hour exclusive window domestically and internationally on E ! News at 7 and 11 : 30 p.m. ET / PT and on the homepage of E ! Online . Prior to the E ! premiere , Underwood held a private screening of the video with country radio station <unk> for over 200 of their listeners in San Antonio , Texas . 
 The video begins with a girl ( a young Underwood ) studying at home . Her abusive father arrives and asks her if she needs help . She declines his offer and starts gathering her things to leave the room , however ; as she stands up , he grabs her arm . She manages to pull away and leave . Underwood stated that this scene had no script . She and the actor acted it out the way they thought it might have happened . Underwood revealed that she left the filming location with bruises on her <unk> " I had finger marks on my arm when I left at the end of the day , so I was like , ' Wow . ' ... It was intense . I wasn 't just imagining it , it was really intense . " As the video continues , the girl is seen standing in the middle of a cemetery , walking around and staring at the clouds as a thunderstorm forms in the sky . She runs back to her house through an old , destroyed yellow @-@ brick road , similar to the one of Wizard of Oz . She enters the house to see her father sleeping on the couch , holding a bottle of alcohol . She sits next to him , recalling the times he let his drunkenness and anger get out of hand . She tries to wake him up but fails . She realizes that he has passed out . She looks through the window and notices the thunderstorm getting worse , so she leaves her father and runs to the cellar alone to protect herself . She 's seen lying in an old bed and crying , as she hears the tornado coming closer , with her father still passed out . The next day , there are no traces of the house , and she calmly walks away . 
 Regarding the Wizard of Oz references , Underwood commented that " it was all about having subtle references , " such as the plaid shirt and red shoes she wore on the video . When asked if her aim was to generate controversy with the storyline , the singer said that it was not what she were aiming for at all , adding : " I try to stay away from controversy in any form or fashion . It was just such a great story and such a mini @-@ movie , listening to the song , and we really wanted to do it justice in the video . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Underwood performed " Blown Away " on American Idol on May 3 , 2012 , the week of the album 's release . Amy Sciarretto of Taste of Country summarized the performance , writing , " Underwood was elevated on steps as she performed , with storm clouds roaring on the screens behind her . She was bathed in light as smoke billowed at feet . " The same month , she performed the song at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards , dressed in a long , red gown . The singer also performed it at the 2012 Country Music Association Awards . Throughout the performance , wind machines were used while confetti flew through the air . In 2013 , Underwood performed " Blown Away " again at the same award show , this time in a medley with " Good Girl " , " See You Again " and " Two Black Cadillacs " , representing the ending of the Blown Away era . The same year , she performed an acoustic version of the song during the 55th Annual Grammy Awards . " Blown Away " was performed as the encore of Underwood 's Blown Away Tour ( 2012 – 13 ) , along with " I Know You Won 't " . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Ender 's Game = 
 Ender 's Game is a 1985 military science fiction novel by American author Orson Scott Card . Set in Earth 's future , the novel presents an imperiled mankind after two conflicts with the " buggers " , an insectoid alien species . In preparation for an anticipated third invasion , children , including the novel 's protagonist , Ender Wiggin , are trained from a very young age through increasingly difficult games including some in zero gravity , where Ender 's tactical genius is revealed . 
 The book originated as the short story " Ender 's Game " , published in the August 1977 issue of Analog Science Fiction and Fact . Elaborating on characters and plot lines depicted in the novel , Card later wrote additional books to form the Ender 's Game series . Card released an updated version of Ender 's Game in 1991 , changing some political facts to reflect the times more accurately ; e.g. , to include the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War . 
 Reception of the book has generally been positive . It has also become suggested reading for many military organizations , including the United States Marine Corps . Ender 's Game won the 1985 Nebula Award for best novel and the 1986 Hugo Award for best novel . Its sequels , Speaker for the Dead , <unk> , Children of the Mind and Ender in Exile , follow Ender 's subsequent travels to many different worlds in the galaxy . In addition , the later novella A War of Gifts and novel Ender 's Shadow take place during the same time period as the original . 
 A film adaptation of the same name written for the screen and directed by Gavin Hood and starring Asa Butterfield as Ender was released in October 2013 . Card co @-@ produced the film . It has also been adapted into two comic series . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Humanity , having begun to explore the Universe and master interplanetary spaceflight , encounters an alien race dubbed the " buggers " . The discovery of a bugger forward base in the asteroid Eros leads to war between the species and the destruction of a bugger colonizing force . The battle to recapture Eros results in the discovery of advanced alien technology , including gravity manipulation . Political conflicts on Earth between three ruling parties , the Hegemon , <unk> , and Strategos , are put aside in the face of the threat from the buggers . Ostensibly in preparation for the expected third invasion , an International Fleet ( I.F. ) is established , with headquarters on Eros . Increasingly advanced starships are built and secretly launched to attack the buggers ' home worlds . To develop commanders capable of defeating the much larger bugger forces , the I.F. creates a crash training program for children with the best strategic minds , the Battle School . 
 Protagonist Andrew " Ender " Wiggin is one of the school 's trainees . He has a close bond with his sister Valentine ; but fears his brother Peter , a highly intelligent sociopath . The I.F. remove Ender 's monitoring device , seemingly ending his chances of Battle School , and he gets teased by a fellow student , Stilson . Ender beats up Stilson before the fight is broken up ; unknown to Ender , the fight was fatal to Stilson . When explaining his actions to I.F. Colonel Hyrum Graff , Ender states his belief that , by showing superiority now , he has prevented future struggle . Graff , on hearing of this , offers Ender a place in the Battle School , situated in Earth 's orbit , where Graff quickly isolates Ender from the other cadets . 
 The cadets participate in competitive war simulations in zero gravity , where Ender 's innovations overwhelm his opponents . Graff promotes Ender to a new army composed of raw recruits , but Ender 's success continues . He forms bonds of friendship , loyalty and trust with several of his current and former squad members . A jealous commander of another army , Bonzo Madrid , compels him to fight outside the simulation , and Ender unknowingly kills him . 
 On Earth , Peter Wiggin uses a global communication system to post political essays under the pseudonym " Locke " , hoping to establish himself as a respected orator and thence as a powerful politician . Valentine , despite not trusting Peter , publishes alongside him as " Demosthenes " . Their essays are soon taken seriously by the government . Though Graff is told their true identities , he recommends that it be kept a secret , because their writings are politically useful . 
 Ender , now ten years old , is promoted to Command School on Eros , skipping several years of training . After some preliminary battles in the simulator , he is introduced to a former war hero , Mazer Rackham . From now on , while believing them to be simulations controlled by Mazer , Ender directs real human spacecraft against bugger fleets via an instantaneous communicator . As the skirmishes become harder , he is joined by some of his friends from the Battle School as sub @-@ commanders . Despite this , Ender becomes depressed by the battles , his isolation , and by the way Mazer treats him . 
 When told that he is facing his final test , Ender finds his fleet far outnumbered by the buggers surrounding their queens ' homeworld . Hoping to earn himself expulsion from the school for his ruthlessness , he sacrifices his entire fleet to launch a Molecular Detachment Device . The Device destroys the planet and the surrounding bugger fleet . Mazer informs Ender that he has been fighting real battles and not simulations , and that Ender has won the war . Ender becomes more depressed on learning this and of the deaths of Stilson and Bonzo . 
 When he recovers , he learns that , at the end of the bugger war , Earth 's powers fought among themselves . He stays on Eros as his friends return home and colonists venture to other worlds , using Eros as a way station . Among the first colonists is Valentine , who apologizes that Ender can never return to Earth , where he would become dangerous as used by Peter and other politicians . Instead , Ender joins the colony program to populate one of the buggers ' former worlds . There , he discovers the dormant egg of a bugger queen , who reveals that the buggers had initially assumed humans were a non @-@ sentient race , for want of collective consciousness , but realized their mistake too late , and requests that Ender take the egg to a new planet to colonize . 
 Ender takes the egg and , with information from the Queen , writes The Hive Queen under the alias " Speaker for the Dead " . Peter , now the leader of Earth and seventy @-@ seven with a failing heart , requests Ender to write a book about him , which Ender titles Hegemon . The combined works create a new type of funeral , in which the Speaker for the Dead tells the whole and unapologetic story of the deceased , adopted by many on Earth and its colonies . In the end , Ender and Valentine board a series of starships and visit many worlds , looking for a safe place to establish the unborn Hive Queen . 
 = = Creation and inspiration = = 
 The original novelette " Ender 's Game " provides a small snapshot of Ender 's experiences in Battle School and Command School ; the full @-@ length novel encompasses more of Ender 's life before , during , and after the war , and also contains some chapters describing the political exploits of his older siblings back on Earth . In a commentary track for the 20th Anniversary audiobook edition of the novel , as well as in the 1991 Author 's Definitive Edition , Card stated that Ender 's Game was written specifically to establish the character of Ender for his role of the Speaker in Speaker for the Dead , the outline for which he had written before <unk> Ender 's Game . In his 1991 introduction to the novel , Card discussed the influence of Isaac Asimov 's Foundation series on the novelette and novel . Historian Bruce Catton 's work on the American Civil War also influenced Card heavily . 
 Ender 's Game was the first science @-@ fiction novel published entirely online , when it appeared on Delphi a year before print publication . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critics received Ender 's Game well . The novel won the Nebula Award for best novel in 1985 , and the Hugo Award for best novel in 1986 , considered the two most prestigious awards in science fiction . Ender 's Game was also nominated for a Locus Award in 1986 . In 1999 , it placed No. 59 on the reader 's list of Modern Library 100 Best Novels . It was also honored with a spot on American Library Association 's " 100 Best Books for Teens . " In 2008 , the novel , along with Ender 's Shadow , won the Margaret A. Edwards Award , which honors an author and specific works by that author for lifetime contribution to young adult literature . Ender 's Game was included in Damien Broderick 's book Science Fiction : The 101 Best Novels 1985 – <unk> York Times writer Gerald Jonas asserts that the novel 's plot summary resembles a " grade Z , made @-@ for @-@ television , science @-@ fiction rip @-@ off movie " , but says that Card develops the elements well despite this " unpromising material " . Jonas further praises the development of the character Ender Wiggin : " Alternately likable and insufferable , he is a convincing little Napoleon in short pants . " 
 The novel has received negative criticism for violence and its justification . Elaine Radford 's review , " Ender and Hitler : Sympathy for the Superman " , posits that Ender Wiggin is an intentional reference by Card to Adolf Hitler and criticizes the violence in the novel , particularly at the hands of the protagonist . Card responded to Radford 's criticisms in Fantasy Review , the same publication . Radford 's criticisms are echoed in John Kessel 's essay " Creating the Innocent Killer : Ender 's Game , Intention , and Morality " , wherein Kessel states : " Ender gets to strike out at his enemies and still remain morally clean . Nothing is his fault . " Noah Berlatsky makes similar claims in his analysis of the relationship between colonization and science fiction , where he describes how Ender 's Game is in part a justification of " Western expansion and genocide . " 
 The U.S. Marine Corps Professional Reading List makes the novel recommended reading at several lower ranks , and again at Officer Candidate / Midshipman . The book was placed on the reading list by Captain John F. Schmitt , author of <unk> @-@ 1 ( Fleet Marine Fighting Manual , on maneuver doctrine ) for " provid [ ing ] useful allegories to explain why militaries do what they do in a particularly effective shorthand way . " In introducing the novel for use in leadership training , Marine Corps University 's Lejeune program opines that it offers " lessons in training methodology , leadership , and ethics as well [ .... ] Ender 's Game has been a stalwart item on the Marine Corps Reading List since its inception . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The weeks ending June 9 , August 18 , September 8 , September 15 , November 3 , November 10 , November 17 , and November 24 , 2013 , the novel was No. 1 on the New York Times ' Best Sellers List of Paperback Mass @-@ Market Fiction . 
 = = Revisions = = 
 In 1991 , Card made several minor changes to reflect the political climates of the time , including the decline of the Soviet Union . In the afterword of Ender in Exile , Card stated that many of the details in chapter 15 of Ender 's Game were modified for use in the subsequent novels and short stories . In order to more closely match the other material , Card has rewritten chapter 15 , and plans to offer a revised edition of the book . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 2011 , Summit Entertainment financed and coordinated the film 's development and served as its distributor . Gavin Hood directed the film , which lasts 1 hour and 54 minutes . Filming began in New Orleans , Louisiana , on February 27 , 2012 , and was released on November 1 , 2013 ( USA ) . A movie preview trailer was released in May 2013 and a second trailer was released later that year . 
 Card has called Ender 's Game " unfilmable " , " because everything takes place in Ender 's head " , and refused to sign a film deal unless he could ensure that the film was " true to the story " . Of the film that he eventually agreed to , Card said it was " the best that good people could do with a story they really cared about and believed in " , and while warning fans not to expect a completely faithful adaptation , called the film " damn good " . 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 Ender 's Game : Battle Room was a planned digitally distributed video game for all viable downloadable platforms . It was under development by Chair Entertainment , which also developed the Xbox Live Arcade games Undertow and Shadow Complex . Chair had sold the licensing of Empire to Card , which became a best @-@ selling novel . Little was revealed about the game , save its setting in the Ender universe and that it would have focused on the Battle Room . 
 In December , 2010 , it was announced that the video game development had stopped and the project put on indefinite hold . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 Marvel Comics and Orson Scott Card announced on April 19 , 2008 , that they would be publishing a limited series adaptation of Ender 's Game as the first in a comic series that would adapt all of Card 's Ender 's Game novels . Card was quoted as saying that it is the first step in moving the story to a visual medium . The first five @-@ issue series , titled Ender 's Game : Battle School , was written by Christopher Yost , while the second five @-@ issue series , Ender 's Shadow : Battle School , was written by Mike Carey . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Ender 's Game Alive : The Full Cast <unk> , is an audio drama written by Orson Scott Card , based on the Ender 's Game novel . At over seven hours in length , this retelling of Ender 's Game hints at story lines from " Teacher 's Pest " , " The Polish Boy " , " The Gold Bug " , Ender 's Shadow , Shadow of the Hegemon , Shadow of the Giant , Shadows in Flight , Earth Unaware , and Speaker for the Dead , and gives new insight into the beginnings of Ender 's <unk> connection with the Hive Queen . 
 Ender 's Game Alive is directed by Gabrielle de <unk> , produced by Stefan Rudnicki at <unk> Media , published by Audible.com , and performed by a cast of over 30 voice actors playing over 100 roles . 
 = = Translations = = 
 Ender 's Game has been translated into 34 languages : 
 = HMS Imogen ( D44 ) = 
 HMS Imogen was a I @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 , the ship enforced the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides as part of the Mediterranean Fleet . After the start of the Second World War the ship was transferred to Home Fleet and participated in the Norwegian Campaign in April 1940 . Imogen sank two German submarines before her own sinking following an accidental collision in July 1940 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The I @-@ class ships were improved versions of the preceding H @-@ class . They displaced 1 @,@ 370 long tons ( 1 @,@ 390 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 888 long tons ( 1 @,@ 918 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . They were powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The turbines developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . Imogen carried a maximum of 455 long tons ( 462 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ships ' complement was 145 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . The I class was fitted with two above @-@ water quintuple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rack and two throwers were fitted ; 16 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 30 October 1935 from Hawthorn Leslie at Hebburn under the 1935 Naval Programme . She was laid down on 18 January 1936 , launched on 30 December 1936 , as the seventh Royal Navy ship to carry this name , and completed on 2 June 1937 , at a contract price of £ 256 @,@ 917 , excluding items supplied by Admiralty such as armaments and communications equipment . Imogen was assigned to the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning and was initially based in Malta . Transferred to Gibraltar , she patrolled Spanish waters enforcing the policies of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee during 1938 . The ship was given a brief refit in Malta from 17 October – 28 November 1938 and another at Sheerness Dockyard in August 1939 . 
 Imogen returned to the Mediterranean on 3 September , but was transferred to the Western Approaches Command for convoy escort duties two days later when Italy did not enter the war . Together with the entire 3rd Destroyer Flotilla , the ship was transferred to the Home Fleet in October . Together with her sister Ilex , she sank the German submarine U @-@ 42 on 13 October after the submarine attempted to sink the freighter SS <unk> . Whilst escorting the merchant ship to Barry , Imogen rescued survivors from the ships Louisiane and Bretagne . She was refitted at Liverpool between 20 October and 7 November and then rejoined Home Fleet . The following month , the ship came to the aid of the torpedoed battleship Barham off the Butt of Lewis on 28 December . 
 With her sister Inglefield and the destroyer Escort , Imogen sank U @-@ 63 after it had been spotted by the British submarine Rorqual on 25 February 1940 . During the Norwegian Campaign , the ship searched unsuccessfully for German ships , escorted ships of Home Fleet and troopships carrying Norwegian Army units from Kirkenes and Alta to <unk> in mid @-@ April . In mid @-@ June , she escorted the aircraft carrier Illustrious to Bermuda to work up . Off Duncansby Head during the night of 16 July , Imogen collided with the light cruiser Glasgow in thick fog whilst bound for Scapa Flow . She was badly damaged , caught fire , and sank at position 58 ° 34 ′ N 02 ° 54 ′ W. Glasgow rescued 10 officers and 125 enlisted men , but 19 men were killed in the collision . 
 = Gun Court = 
 The Gun Court is the branch of the Jamaican judicial system that tries criminal cases involving firearms . The Court was established by Parliament in 1974 to combat rising gun violence , and empowered to try suspects in camera , without a jury . The Supreme Court , Circuit Courts , and Resident Magistrate 's Courts function as Gun Courts whenever they hear firearms cases . There is also a Western Regional Gun Court in Montego Bay . Those convicted by the Gun Court are imprisoned in a dedicated prison compound at South Camp in Kingston . Until 1999 , the Gun Court sessions were also held in the same facility . 
 The long sentences of the Gun Court and its restrictions on the rights of the accused have given rise to constitutional challenges , some of which have been appealed to the Privy Council in London . These cases have resulted in some modifications to the court , but have upheld it on the whole . The Gun Court system has also been the target of criticism because of its lengthy delay in hearing cases , and the continuing rise in gun violence since its adoption . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1970s , Jamaica experienced a rise in violence associated with criminal gangs and political polarization between supporters of the People 's National Party and the Jamaica Labour Party . After a rash of killings of lawyers and businessmen in 1974 , the government of Michael Manley attempted to restore order by granting broad new law enforcement powers in the Suppression of Crime Act and the Gun Court Act . The Suppression of Crime Act allowed the police and the military to work together in a novel way to disarm the people : soldiers sealed off entire neighbourhoods , and policemen systematically searched the houses inside for weapons without requiring a warrant . The goal was to expedite and improve enforcement of the 1967 Firearms Act , which imposed licensing requirements on ownership and possession of guns and ammunition , and prohibited automatic weapons entirely . Firearm licences in Jamaica require a background check , inspection and payment of a yearly fee , and can make legal gun ownership difficult for ordinary citizens . The new judicial procedures of the Gun Court Act were designed to ensure that firearms violations would be tried quickly and harshly punished . 
 Prime Minister Michael Manley expressed his determination to take stronger action against firearms , predicting that " It will be a long war . No country can win a war against crime overnight , but we shall win . By the time we have finished with them , Jamaican gunmen will be sorry they ever heard of a thing called a gun . " In order to win this war , Manley believed it necessary to fully disarm the public : " There is no place in this society for the gun , now or ever . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The Gun Court Act and the Suppression of Crime Act were passed in special simultaneous sessions of the Senate and House of Representatives , and immediately signed into law by Governor @-@ General Florizel <unk> on 1 April 1974 . The new court had several extraordinary features . Most trials were to be conducted in camera , without a jury and closed to the public and the press , in order to avoid problems of intimidation of witnesses and jurors . There was no provision for bail , either pre @-@ trial or during appeal , since all defendants were considered dangerous . Most offences carried a single , mandatory sentence : indefinite imprisonment with hard labour . A convicted offender could be released only upon special decision of the Governor @-@ General , advised by an appointed review board . 
 = = = Legal challenges and amendments = = = 
 The unusual features of the Gun Court have faced legal challenges , some of which have forced amendment of the Gun Court Act . The case Hinds et al. v. the Queen was an early test case for the new court . Four men , Moses Hinds , Henry Martin , Elkanah Hutchinson , and Samuel Thomas , had been arrested and convicted by the Gun Court in 1974 for possession of firearms and ammunition without a licence . They appealed their sentences to Jamaica 's highest appellate court , the Court of Appeals , which initially declined to hear the case . However , they were allowed to apply to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London , which agreed to review the legality of the Gun Court system . 
 The Constitution of Jamaica reserves certain serious crimes to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and its divisions . The Gun Court Act had established the Full Court division , with resident magistrates presiding , to try major firearms offences . The Privy Council held that this provision of the Act improperly encroached on the jurisdiction reserved for the Supreme Court , and that the Full Court division was therefore unconstitutional . This fault was remedied in 1976 by replacing the Full Court division with a new High Court division , presided over by a single Supreme Court justice . The Privy Council also found that the institution of an appointed review board to determine the length of sentences was contrary to the doctrine of separation of powers fundamental to the Westminster system of government . According to this principle , sentencing in each particular case is a function of the judiciary , and cannot be assigned to any other body . The 1976 amendment eliminated the review board entirely , leaving life imprisonment without review as the only possible sentence . 
 Another case , Trevor Stone v. the Queen , challenged the denial of jury trial for most gun offences . It was argued that trial by jury is a fundamental and constitutional right guaranteed by tradition in English common law . The Jamaican Court of Appeals rejected this argument in a decision written by Court President Ira <unk> Rowe in 1980 . The court noted that the written Constitution adopted by Jamaica upon independence guaranteed certain rights to criminal defendants , but omitted trial by jury . This case confirmed the Gun Court 's power to try all non @-@ capital cases before judges alone . 
 The case of Herbert Bell v. Director of Public Prosecutions , concerning the right to a speedy trial , reached the Privy Council in 1983 . The defendant had been held awaiting trial for several years , but the state ultimately failed to present any evidence or witnesses . When he was again arrested on the same firearms charges , he filed suit arguing that the Gun Court had violated his constitutional rights through unreasonable delay . The Privy Council agreed , ruling that even when prevailing local standards were taken into account , Bell 's trial had been excessively delayed through no fault of his own . 
 The Gun Court Amendment Act of 1983 allowed Resident Magistrates to grant pre @-@ trial bail , and to decide whether to keep firearms cases in the Resident Magistrate 's Court or to send them to the High Court division of the Gun Court . Judges were given the power to set sentences other than life imprisonment . Cases involving defendants under 14 years old were directed to juvenile courts , instead of being heard by the ordinary Gun Court , and many young convicts serving indefinite sentences were released . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Divisions = = = 
 The Gun Court has three divisions : the Resident Magistrate 's Division , the High Court Division , and the Circuit Court Division . The three divisions differ in their jurisdictions and procedures . When someone is charged with a firearm violation , whether by unlicensed possession alone or by use of a gun in commission of a crime , the case is ordinarily sent to the High Court Division . These cases are tried in camera by a justice of the Supreme Court of Jamaica , without a jury . The exceptions are charges of murder and treason . As capital offences , these require a jury trial . Charges of murder or treason using firearms are given preliminary investigation by a single resident magistrate in the Resident Magistrate 's Division of the Gun Court , in camera . They are then sent to the Gun Court 's Circuit Court Division . A Supreme Court justice presides over a jury trial , " exercising the jurisdiction of a Circuit Court . " The Circuit Court Division therefore differs from the other divisions of the Gun Court in practicing jury trial . 
 The Gun Court Act originally instituted a Full Court Division , in which cases were to be heard by a panel of three Resident Magistrates . This was replaced by the High Court Division after the Privy Council struck down the Full Court Division in the Hinds case , as judges of the lower levels of the judiciary were not empowered by the Constitution to try serious offences . 
 = = = Western Regional Gun Court = = = 
 In 1999 , Parliament established a Western Regional Gun Court with its own Resident Magistrate 's , High Court , and Circuit Court divisions , in parallel with the jurisdictions and powers of the central Gun Court divisions . Cases arising in four western parishes , Hanover , Trelawny , Saint James , and Westmoreland , are heard in the Regional Court . The Regional Gun Court sits in Montego Bay , in the court facilities of the St. James Resident Magistrate 's Court . The regional court has been a success , avoiding the chronic backlogs that affect the central Gun Court . 
 = = = South Camp compound = = = 
 At the establishment of the new court in 1974 , the Manley administration quickly build a new Gun Court compound ( 17 ° 59 ′ 5 ″ N 76 ° 46 ′ 43 ″ W ) at South Camp Road , Kingston , with both court and prison facilities . The Gun Court Prison was defended by guard towers and barbed wire , earning it the nickname of " Jamaica 's Stalag 17 , " and the walls were painted bright red " to show that it [ is ] dread . " It held 320 inmates in 1986 . The courtrooms housed the High Court and Resident Magistrate 's divisions of the Gun Court until 1999 , when they were converted to a " Peace Centre " dedicated to pursuing community mediation of disputes . The High Court division now sits in the Supreme Court building , and the Resident Magistrate 's division sits in the Half Way Tree Courthouse . The prison itself remains in operation as the South Camp Adult Correctional Centre , housing inmates convicted by the Gun Court . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The Gun Court has faced criticism on several fronts , most notably for its departure from traditional practices , for its large backlog of cases , and for the continuing escalation in gun violence since its institution . 
 At the time of the 1976 amendments to the Act , the Jamaican Bar Association protested against the lack of jury trials and the harsh mandatory sentences . According to a report in the Virgin Islands Daily News , the Association 's Bar Council objected to the possibility that children as young as 12 could be imprisoned for life , without release or appeal , for small offences such as being found with used ammunition . The abrogation of jury trial has also been criticized by attorney and law professor David Rowe , the son of the Appeals Court justice who wrote the decision in the Stone case upholding the practice . Rowe argues that the common @-@ law right to a jury trial is implied in the Constitutional provision for " a fair hearing within a reasonable time , by an independent and impartial court established by law , " concluding that the Constitution had been " shorn of its most potent and ancient safeguard , trial by jury . " 
 The 1993 County Report on Human Rights Practices in Jamaica from the United States Department of State noted the denial of a " fair public trial " and alleged that Gun Court trials observe " less rigorous rules of evidence than in regular court proceedings . " The Canadian Bar Association 's Jamaican Justice System Reform Task Force , in its preliminary recommendations , noted that the Gun Court is overloaded , that defendants are not well represented , and Crown attorneys are often inexperienced . The report recommended that trials no longer be held in camera , and that cases be moved to the ordinary Circuit Court to relieve the overburdened Gun Court . It did not take issue with non @-@ jury trials , suggesting that the same practice might be used in more types of cases for greater efficiency . 
 Although the Gun Court was intended to expedite cases , bringing defendants to trial within seven days , defendants now often wait several years . The backlog was nearing 1000 cases in 1998 , and in the 2003 @-@ 2004 court year , the High Court division carried forward 3 @,@ 367 cases already on the docket , added 613 new cases , and concluded 462 . Senior Resident Magistrate Glenn Brown expressed dissatisfaction with the public prosecutors for taking too long to prepare cases , often because of difficulty in finding and bringing witnesses . Brown noted that " Seventy per cent of the persons who are before the courts have been here for an inordinately long period of time - three to four years . " 
 The Gun Court system has been put forth by gun ownership advocates as an example of a failed regime of gun control . In an essay in the National Review in 2001 , Dave Kopel argued that " [ t ] he Gun Court took guns only out of the hands of Jamaica 's law @-@ abiding , leaving them at the mercy of the criminals and the state . " John R. Lott has argued that " gun @-@ control laws have failed to deliver as promised , " noting that the murder rate in Jamaica was lower before the introduction of stricter gun control : it rose from 11 @.@ 5 to 19 @.@ 5 per 100 @,@ 000 between 1973 and 1977 , and reached 41 @.@ 7 per 100 @,@ 000 in 1980 . By 2007 the rate had risen to 1 @,@ 574 murders in the calendar year , or 59 per 100 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 = = Gun Court in music = = 
 Several Jamaican musicians have sung about the Gun Court , including Junior Reed ( Gun Court , 1993 ) and the dance hall artist Ranking Joe , whose first single release was " Gun Court Law " in 1974 . The reggae musician Jah Cure released his first album , Free Jah 's Cure , from Tower Street Prison in 2000 after having been convicted before the Gun Court in 1998 . Jah Cure continued to deny the charges of illegal firearms , rape , and robbery , and he attracted widespread support for his release , including " Free Jah Cure " campaigns and petition drives , until his release in 2007 . 
 The French singer Bernard <unk> sings about Gun Court in the song Stand the Ghetto released in 1980 . He says , in French " pour le <unk> dans ta <unk> , t 'es <unk> à Gun Court " ( because of the gun in your pocket , you are stuck at Gun Court ) . 
 = Chien @-@ Shiung Wu = 
 Chien @-@ Shiung Wu ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> , May 31 , 1912 – February 16 , 1997 ) was a Chinese American experimental physicist who made significant contributions in the field of nuclear physics . Wu worked on the Manhattan Project , where she helped develop the process for separating uranium metal into uranium @-@ 235 and uranium @-@ 238 isotopes by gaseous diffusion . She is best known for conducting the Wu experiment , which contradicted the hypothetical law of conservation of parity . This discovery resulted in her colleagues Tsung @-@ Dao Lee and Chen @-@ Ning Yang winning the 1957 Nobel Prize in physics , and also earned Wu the inaugural Wolf Prize in Physics in 1978 . Her expertise in experimental physics evoked comparisons to Marie Curie . Her nicknames include " the First Lady of Physics " , " the Chinese Madame Curie " , and the " Queen of Nuclear Research " . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Chien @-@ Shiung Wu was born in the town of Liuhe in <unk> , Jiangsu province , China , on May 31 , 1912 , the second of three children of Wu Zhong @-@ Yi ( <unk> ) and Fan Fu @-@ Hua . The family custom was that children of this generation had Chien as the first character of their forename , followed by the characters in the phrase Ying @-@ Shiung @-@ Hao @-@ Jie , which means " heroes and outstanding figures " . Accordingly , she had an older brother , Chien @-@ Ying , and a younger brother , Chien @-@ Hao . Wu and her father were extremely close and he encouraged her interests passionately , creating an environment where she was surrounded by books , magazines , and newspapers . 
 Wu received her elementary school education at Ming De School , a school for girls founded by her father . She left her hometown in 1923 at the age of 11 to go to the Suzhou Women 's Normal School No. 2 . This was a boarding school with classes for teacher training as well as for regular high school . Admission to teacher training was more competitive , as it did not charge for tuition or board , and guaranteed a job on graduation . Although her family could have afforded to pay , Wu chose the more competitive option , and was ranked ninth among around 10 @,@ 000 applicants . 
 In 1929 Wu graduated at the top of her class , and was admitted to the National Central University in Nanjing . According to the governmental regulations of the time , teacher @-@ training college students wanting to move on to the universities needed to serve as schoolteachers for one year . In Wu 's case , this was only nominally enforced . She went to teach at the Public School of China in Shanghai , the president of which at the time was the philosopher Hu Shih , whose class she took . 
 From 1930 to 1934 , Wu studied at the National Central University ( later renamed Nanjing University and reinstated in Taiwan ) , first in mathematics , but later transferring to physics . She became involved in student politics . Relations between China and Japan were tense at this time , and students were urging the government to take a stronger line with Japan . Wu was elected as one of the student leaders by her colleagues because they felt that since she was one of the top students at the university , her involvement would be forgiven , or at least overlooked , by the authorities . That being the case , she was careful not to neglect her studies . She led protests that included a sit @-@ in at the Presidential Palace in Nanjing , where the students were met by Chiang Kai @-@ shek . 
 For two years after graduation , she did graduate @-@ level study in physics and worked as an assistant at the Zhejiang University . She became a researcher at the Institute of Physics of the Academia Sinica . Her supervisor was Professor Gu Jing @-@ Wei , who had earned her PhD abroad at the University of Michigan , and encouraged Wu to do the same . Wu was accepted by the University of Michigan , and her uncle , Wu Zhou @-@ Zhi , provided the necessary funds . She embarked for the United States with a female friend , Dong <unk> @-@ Fen ( <unk> ) , a chemist from <unk> , on the SS President Hoover in August 1936 . Her parents and uncle saw her off . She would never see her parents again . 
 = = Berkeley = = 
 The two women arrived in San Francisco , where Wu 's plans for graduate study changed after visiting the University of California , Berkeley . She met physicist Luke Chia @-@ Liu Yuan , a grandson of Yuan Shikai , the first President of the Republic of China and self @-@ proclaimed Emperor of China . Yuan showed her the Radiation Laboratory , where the director was Ernest O. Lawrence , who would soon win the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1939 for his invention of the cyclotron particle accelerator . 
 Wu heard that at Michigan women were not even allowed to use the front entrance , and decided that she would prefer to study at Berkeley . Yuan took her to see Raymond T. Birge , the head of the physics department , and he offered Wu a place in the graduate school despite the fact that the academic year had already commenced . Wu then abandoned her plans to study at Michigan and enrolled at Berkeley . Her Berkeley classmates included Robert R. Wilson and George Volkoff ; her friends included Ursula Schaefer , a history student who chose to remain in the United States rather than return to Nazi Germany , and Margaret Lewis , an American post @-@ doctoral student . Wu applied for a scholarship at the end of her first year , but there was prejudice against Asian students , and Wu and Yuan were instead offered a readership with a lower stipend . Yuan then applied for , and secured , a scholarship at Caltech . 
 Wu made rapid progress in her education and her research . Although Lawrence was officially her supervisor , she also worked closely with Emilio Segrè . Her thesis had two separate parts . The first was on bremsstrahlung , the electromagnetic radiation produced by the deceleration of a charged particle when deflected by another charged particle , typically an electron by an atomic nucleus . She investigated this using beta @-@ emitting phosphorus @-@ 32 , a radioactive isotope easily produced in the cyclotron that Lawrence and his brother John H. Lawrence were evaluating for use in cancer treatment and as a radioactive tracer . This marked Wu 's first work with beta decay , a subject on which she would become an authority . The second part of the thesis was about the production of radioactive isotopes of xenon produced by the nuclear fission of uranium with the 37 @-@ inch and 60 @-@ inch cyclotrons at the Radiation Laboratory . She completed her Ph.D. in June 1940 , but in spite of Lawrence and Segrè 's recommendations , she could not secure a position at a university , so she remained at the Radiation Laboratory as a post @-@ doctoral fellow . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Wu and Yuan were married at the home of Robert Millikan , Yuan 's academic supervisor and the President of Caltech , on May 30 , 1942 . Neither the bride 's nor the groom 's families were able to attend due to the outbreak of the Pacific War . Wu and Yuan moved to the East Coast of the United States , where Wu became a faculty member at Smith College , a prestigious private women 's college in Northampton , Massachusetts , while Yuan worked on radar for RCA . She found the job frustrating , as her duties involved teaching only , and there was no opportunity for research . She appealed to Lawrence , who wrote letters of recommendation to a number of universities . Smith responded by making Wu an associate professor , and increasing her salary . She accepted a job from Princeton University in New Jersey as an instructor for Naval officers . 
 In March 1944 , Wu joined the Manhattan Project 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories at Columbia University . She lived in dormitory there , returning to Princeton on the weekends . The role of the SAM Laboratories , headed by Harold Urey , was to support the Manhattan Project 's gaseous diffusion ( K @-@ 25 ) program for uranium enrichment . Wu worked alongside James Rainwater in a group led by William W. Havens , Jr . , whose task was to develop radiation detector instrumentation . 
 In September 1944 , Wu was contacted by the Manhattan District Engineer , Colonel Kenneth Nichols . The newly commissioned B Reactor at the Hanford Site had run into an unexpected problem , starting up and shutting down at regular intervals . John Archibald Wheeler suspected that a fission product , xenon @-@ 135 , with a half @-@ life of 9 @.@ 4 hours , was the culprit , and might be a neutron poison . Segrè then remembered the work that Wu had done at Berkeley on the radioactive isotopes of xenon . The paper on the subject was still unpublished , but Wu and Nichols went to her dorm room , and collected the typewritten draft prepared for the Physical Review . Xenon @-@ 135 was indeed the culprit ; it turned out to have an unexpectedly large neutron absorption cross @-@ section . 
 After the end of the war in August 1945 , Wu accepted an offer of a position as an associate research professor at Columbia . Communication with China was restored , and Wu received a letter from her family , but plans to visit China were disrupted by the Chinese Civil War , and the birth in 1947 of a son , Vincent Yuan ( <unk> ) , who would grow up to become a physicist like his parents . In 1949 , Yuan joined the Brookhaven National Laboratory , and the family moved to Long Island . After the communists came to power in China that year , Wu 's father wrote urging her not to return . Since her passport had been issued by the Kuomintang government , she found it difficult to travel abroad . This eventually led to her decision to take out US citizenship in 1954 . She would remain at Columbia for the rest of her career . She became an associate professor in 1952 , a full professor in 1958 , and the Michael I. Pupin Professor of Physics in 1973 . Her students called her the Dragon Lady , after the character of that name in the comic strip Terry and the Pirates . 
 = = Beta decay and the conservation of parity = = 
 In her post @-@ war research , Wu continued to investigate beta decay . Enrico Fermi had published his theory of Beta decay in 1934 , but an experiment by Luis Walter Alvarez had produced results at variance with the theory . Wu set out to repeat the experiment and verify the result . She suspected that the problem was that a thick and uneven film of copper sulphate ( <unk> 
 4 ) was being used as a copper @-@ 64 beta ray source , which was causing the emitted electrons to lose energy . To get around this , she adapted an older form of spectrometer , a <unk> spectrometer . She added detergent to the copper sulphate to produce a thin and even film . She was then able to demonstrate that the discrepancies observed were the result of experimental error ; her results were consistent with Fermi 's theory . 
 At Columbia Wu knew the Chinese @-@ born theoretical physicist Tsung @-@ Dao Lee personally . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Lee and another Chinese theoretical physicist , Chen Ning Yang , grew to question a hypothetical law of elementary particle physics , the " law of conservation of parity " . One example highlighting the problem was the puzzle of the theta and tau particles , two apparently different charged , strange mesons . They were so similar that they would ordinarily be considered to be the same particle ; but different decay modes resulting in two different parity states were observed , suggesting that Θ + and τ + were different particles , if parity is conserved : 
 Lee and Yang 's research into existing experimental results convinced them that parity was conserved for electromagnetic interactions and for the strong interaction . For this reason , scientists had expected that it would also be true for the weak interaction , but it had not been tested , and Lee and Yang 's theoretical studies showed that it might not hold true for the weak interaction . Lee and Yang worked out a pencil @-@ and @-@ paper design of an experiment for testing conservation of parity in the laboratory . Lee then turned to Wu for her expertise in choosing and then working out the hardware manufacture , set @-@ up , and laboratory procedures for carrying out this experiment . 
 Wu chose to do this by taking a sample of radioactive cobalt @-@ 60 and cooling it to cryogenic temperatures with liquid gases . Cobalt @-@ 60 is an isotope that decays by beta particle emission , and Wu was also an expert on beta decay . The extremely low temperatures were needed to reduce the amount of thermal vibration of the cobalt atoms to practically nil . Also , Wu needed to apply a constant and uniform magnetic field across the sample of cobalt @-@ 60 in order to cause the spin axes of the atomic nuclei to line up in the same direction . For this cryogenic work , she needed the facilities of the National Bureau of Standards and its expertise in working with liquid gases , and traveled to its headquarters in Maryland with her equipment to carry out the experiments . 
 Lee and Yang 's theoretical calculations predicted that the beta particles from the cobalt @-@ 60 atoms would be emitted asymmetrically and the hypothetical " law of conservation of parity " was invalid . Wu 's experiment showed that this is indeed the case : parity is not conserved under the weak nuclear interactions . Θ + and τ + are indeed the same particle , which is today known as a kaon , K + . This result was soon confirmed by her colleagues at Columbia University in different experiments , and as soon as all of these results were published — in two different research papers in the same issue of the same physics journal — the results were also confirmed at many other laboratories and in many different experiments . 
 The discovery of parity violation was a major contribution to particle physics and the development of the Standard Model . In recognition of their theoretical work , Lee and Yang were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1963 , Wu investigated and confirmed the Conserved Vector Current hypothesis of Richard Feynman and Murray Gell @-@ Mann . Another milestone on the road to the Standard Model , it postulated a universal form of Fermi 's beta decay model . Her demonstration that parity was not conserved brought other assumptions that physicists had made about the weak interaction into question . If parity is not conserved in weak force interaction , what about charge conjugation ? This was an effect that held true for electromagnetism , gravity and the strong interaction , so it had been assumed that it would hold for the weak interaction too . Wu conducted a series of experiments on double beta decay in a salt mine under Lake Erie that proved that charge conjugation was not conserved either . 
 Another important experiment carried out by Wu was the confirmation of the E. M. L. Pryce and John Clive Ward 's calculations on the correlation of the quantum polarizations of two photons propagating in opposite directions . This was the first experimental confirmation of quantum results relevant to a pair of entangled photons as applicable to the Einstein @-@ Podolsky @-@ Rosen ( EPR ) paradox . Wu later conducted research into the molecular changes in the deformation of <unk> that cause sickle @-@ cell disease . She also did research on magnetism , and on the Mössbauer effect during the 1960s . She wrote a textbook with Steven Moszkowski , Beta Decay , which was published in 1966 , and became a standard reference on the subject . 
 Wu 's older brother died in 1958 , her father in 1959 and her mother in 1962 . At that time the United States government had severe restrictions on its citizens ' ability to travel abroad , so she was not permitted to visit China to attend their funerals . She saw her uncle Wu Zhou @-@ Zhi and younger brother Wu Chien @-@ Hao again on a trip to Hong Kong in 1965 . After the 1972 Nixon visit to China , relations between the two countries improved , and she was able to visit China again in 1973 . By this time her uncle and brother had perished in the Cultural Revolution , and the tombs of her parents had been destroyed . She was greeted by Chou En @-@ Lai , who personally apologized for the destruction of the tombs . After this , she returned to China a number of times . 
 In later life , Wu became more outspoken . She protested the imprisonment in Taiwan of relatives of physicist <unk> Huang in 1959 , and of the journalist Lei Chen in 1960 . In 1964 , she spoke out against gender discrimination at a symposium at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . " I wonder " , she asked her audience , " whether the tiny atoms and nuclei , or the mathematical symbols , or the DNA molecules have any preference for either masculine or feminine treatment . " When men referred to her as Professor Yuan , she immediately corrected them and told them that she was Professor Wu . In 1975 , Robert Serber , the new chairman of the Physics Department Columbia University , adjusted her pay to make it equal to that of her male counterparts . She protested the crackdown in China that followed the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 . 
 Wu retired in 1981 , and became a professor emerita . She died on February 16 , 1997 , in New York City at the age of 84 after suffering a stroke . An ambulance rushed her to St. Luke 's – Roosevelt Hospital Center but she was pronounced dead on arrival . She was survived by her husband and son . In accordance with her wishes , her ashes were buried in the courtyard of the Ming De School that her father had founded , and that she had attended as a girl . 
 = = Honors , awards and distinctions = = 
 Elected a fellow of the American Physical Society ( 1948 ) 
 Elected a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences ( 1958 ) 
 First woman with an honorary doctorate from Princeton University ( 1958 ) 
 Achievement Award , American Association of University Women ( 1959 ) 
 Research Corporation Award ( 1959 ) 
 John Price Wetherill Medal , The Franklin Institute ( 1962 ) 
 American Association of University Women Woman of the Year Award ( 1962 ) 
 Comstock Prize in Physics , National Academy of Sciences ( 1964 ) 
 Chi @-@ Tsin Achievement Award , Chi @-@ Tsin Culture Foundation ( 1965 ) 
 Honorary Fellow Royal Society of Edinburgh ( 1969 ) 
 Scientist of the Year Award , Industrial Research Magazine ( 1974 ) 
 Tom W. Bonner Prize , American Physical Society ( 1975 ) 
 First female President of the American Physical Society ( 1975 ) 
 National Medal of Science ( 1975 ) 
 First person selected to receive the Wolf Prize in Physics ( 1978 ) 
 Ellis Island Medal of Honor ( 1986 ) 
 First living scientist to have an asteroid ( <unk> Wu Chien @-@ Shiung ) named after her ( 1990 ) 
 Pupin Medal ( 1991 ) 
 Elected one of the first foreign academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences ( 1994 ) 
 = The Cockroaches = 
 The Cockroaches are an Australian pub rock group active throughout the 1980s . The band was founded in 1979 by the Field brothers − Paul ( lead vocals ) , John ( rhythm guitar , vocals ) , and Anthony Field ( lead guitar , vocals ) − and Tony Henry on drums and Joseph Hallion on saxophone . They were joined in 1981 by Jeff Fatt on keyboards . In 1986 they signed with an independent label , Regular Records , which issued their first three albums , including The Cockroaches ( March 1987 ) , which peaked at No. 9 on the Australian Kent Music Report Albums Chart ; it sold 70 @,@ 000 copies and was certified platinum by their label . The album spawned the single " She 's the One " , which became the band 's biggest hit when it peaked at No. 9 on the Kent Music Report Singles Chart in April 1987 . In 1988 , The Daily Telegraph declared The Cockroaches , who played over 300 gigs a year , the " Hardest Working Rock 'n'Roll Band " in the country . 
 The Cockroaches released their third album , Positive , in June 1991 and left their label by the end of that year . In March 1994 they issued their fourth album , St. Patrick 's Day 10am , on their own Roach Records . Australian musicologist Glenn A. Baker described their sound as " rangy , loose @-@ limbed , good @-@ natured , energetic , self @-@ effacing , intuitive , harmonic , melodic , enduring , soused and fiercely frantic " . 
 In September 1988 , the band were promoting their second album , Fingertips , when Paul 's infant daughter died of SIDS . Although devastated , the group continued with a lower profile , and Anthony left to resume his university studies yet returned periodically to record their later studio albums . Early in 1991 Anthony and Fatt founded a children 's music group , The Wiggles . The Cockroaches alumni served as musical and performing support for the new group ; John wrote much of their music , Paul became their manager , and Henry performed with them . The Wiggles used many of The Cockroaches ' business practices and reworked some of their songs into the children 's music genre . 
 Members of The Cockroaches have pursued other music careers with John and Paul forming The Field Brothers , John forming his own band called the John Field Band and writing plays and musicals , and Henry being a session musician . A compilation album , Hey Let 's Go – The Best of the Cockroaches was released by Festival Records in 1999 , and they were due to stage two reunion shows in June 2014 , to mark the release of Hey Let 's Go , a greatest hits album . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The Cockroaches ( also called " The <unk> " ) were founded in 1979 by the Field brothers ( Paul on lead vocals , John on rhythm guitar and vocals , and Anthony ( or " Tony " ) on lead guitar and vocals ) , while they were students at St. Joseph 's College , a Sydney boarding school . According to Paul Field , the Field brothers grew @-@ up in a large family , with seven children . The brothers were each born one year apart , so they were very close . Paul said that he and all their siblings were taught music from a young age . Religion was an important part of their family as well ; their entire family were involved in their local Catholic parish , which included playing music for services . 
 Other founders of The Cockroaches were Tony Henry on drums and Joseph Hallion on saxophone ; they were joined by Bruce Hatfield on bass guitar by mid @-@ 1980 . After Paul introduced his brothers to The Rolling Stones , the band took their name from an obscure alias used by Keith Richards during the 1960s because , according to Anthony Field , " it sounded kind of punkish and that scene was blossoming in Sydney at the time " . Australian rock historian Ian McFarlane called the band 's name " a fitting choice , due mostly to the good @-@ time R & B material that The Cockroaches played during their formative years " . One of their first gigs was at their school ; Paul convinced the Marist Brothers , who ran St. Joseph 's , to allow a charge for the performance . Their proceeds were " donated to ' the missions ' " . Paul booked their initial performances at local pubs , which , despite some of the member 's under @-@ age status , allowed them to perform . Anthony later said , " It was insane , it was fantastic . It was frightening . We didn 't realise our playing was so rudimentary , but it didn 't matter ... Our inadequacies were made up by our spirit " . According to band member Daniel Fallon , The Cockroaches honed their craft as they performed on stage . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 By early 1980 , The Cockroaches began writing their own music as well as covering various 1960s rock ' n ' roll artists , especially The Rolling Stones . In July 1980 , they issued their debut single , " I Want a Leather Jacket " , on the Refugee Records label . The song was written by Paul , was produced by Greg Owens and the band , and was recorded at their school and at Studio B in Bondi . According to Australian musicologist , Glenn A. Baker , the track provided " the aura of a rockabilly band ... [ but ] they have always been much closer in style to the original cocky , bluesy , strident Stones " . When they recorded their second single , " Bingo Bango " in June 1981 , Hatfield had been replaced by Geoff O <unk> on bass guitar . This song was written by John and Anthony , was produced by Owens and was recorded at <unk> @-@ Willa Studios . By August of that year Jeff Fatt had joined on keyboards and Phil Robinson became their bass guitarist . According to Anthony , Fatt had been a member of " a seminal Sydney rockabilly band called the <unk> " , and had joined " to fight boredom " . They had hired Fatt and his brother to manage their sound system during gigs . Anthony declared this began " a beautiful three @-@ decade relationship that has made him a very wealthy man " . Their early road manager was Graham Kennedy , former guitarist @-@ vocalist for the hard rock band , Finch . 
 According to Anthony , Paul was " a picture of professional efficiency " , whereas John , one of the top Under @-@ 19 New South Wales cricketers , was the showman of the group . John 's performances on @-@ stage built The Cockroaches ' reputation for being a party @-@ band , even though alcohol and drug use was not part of their personal lifestyles . Paul , who returned to St Andrews as a teacher , noted about the band 's early days , " We had a good following around the <unk> , pubs and colleges . We had a reputation as a good live act " . Anthony credited Paul and John for the band 's reputation . He described Paul as " very serious , straight up and down and a really solid rock singer " who was known for his jumps and acrobatics on stage , and John as carefree , charismatic , a talented pop music writer , and a natural leader of both the band and their audience . Paul reported that the 1980s was an vibrant time for local music in Sydney , and that the group gained additional exposure by performing on TV shows like Simon Townsend and Hey , Hey it 's Saturday . Their success forced Paul to give up teaching to devote his energies on touring full @-@ time . 
 The group released five further singles on a range of labels : EMI , Phantom , <unk> , and Possum Records . One of these , " See You in Spain " , with <unk> , appeared on the Australian Kent Music Report Singles Chart Top 100 in July 1984 . " See You in Spain " was written by Fatt , Robinson and John ; it was produced by Robert Moss at Emerald City Studios . In 1986 , The Cockroaches signed with an independent label , Regular Records , and were distributed by Festival Records . By that time , Phil Carson had replaced Robinson as their bass guitarist . 
 = = = Rise to success = = = 
 The group 's first single with Regular , " Wait Up " ( September 1986 ) , reached No. 28 on the Kent Music Report Singles Chart and No. 13 in the Sydney charts . 
 The band 's debut album , The Cockroaches was released in March 1987 and featured Robinson on bass guitar . The album was produced by Charles Fisher , who had worked with other artists such as Radio Birdman , Hoodoo Gurus , Martin Plaza ; one track was produced by Roy Nicholson . Other singles included : " She 's the One " , which appeared on the charts in January ; " Some Kind of Girl " , in May ; and " Double Shot ( Of My Baby 's Love ) " , a cover version of the 1964 single by Dick Holler & the Holidays ) in August . The album sold 10 @,@ 000 in its first 10 days after its release , reached No. 9 on the Kent Music Report Albums Chart , and in 1988 , was awarded a platinum certification by their record label for sales of 70 @,@ 000 copies . " She 's the One " became the band 's biggest hit when it peaked at No. 9 in April 1987 . " Some Kind of Girl " and " Double Shot ( Of My Baby 's Love ) " also made the Top 40 . Peter Mackie replaced Carson during 1987 . Phillip McIntyre of Texas and the Big Beat Radio website described Mackie 's time with The Cockroaches as " [ h ] is most successful period as a player " . 
 According to Anthony , in the late 1980s , the group averaged over 300 gigs a year throughout Australia . They performed at town halls , concert halls , Bachelor and Spinster ( B & S ) balls , parties , and pubs ; and were " one of the biggest crowd @-@ drawing groups in Australia " . They toured with Mental As Anything , the Hoodoo Gurus , and INXS . In 1988 , The Daily Telegraph surveyed booking agencies and determined that The Cockroaches were the " Hardest Working Rock 'n'Roll Band in the Country " . Australian musicologist Ian McFarlane described The Cockroaches as " an in @-@ demand pub band [ that built ] a sweaty , frenzied atmosphere with good old @-@ fashioned showmanship and unpretentious , energetic rock <unk> " . Paul said that the group " rode the last wave of the pub rock era " . Anthony claimed they were " shunned " by the major record companies in Australia . Even after their debut album was certified gold , they remained independent : they organised their own shows and paid expenses from their own accounts . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 The Cockroaches recorded their second album , Fingertips , in 1988 . Fisher producing the album with Festival , at Alberts Digital Studios in Trafalgar . The album peaked at No. 32 on the ARIA Albums Chart . The line @-@ up consisted of the three Field Brothers , Fatt , Henry and Mackie . According to Anthony , they were disappointed with the album and regretted giving over much of its sound to the producers , but toured heavily to promote it . Fingertips produced their next four singles , including " Hey What Now ! " – written by John – which reached the Top 40 . The group appeared at the World Expo 88 in May 1988 , before a crowd of 92 @,@ 000 attendees . In September that year , while the band were touring for the album , Paul Field 's eight @-@ month @-@ old daughter , Bernadette , died of SIDS . Paul recalled , " Nothing was the same after [ my daughter 's death ] , it crushed me and left us all wounded " . Anthony left the group to return to Macquarie University and continue his studies early childhood education , but Paul returned to performing " in order to feed his family , sometimes with some of the original band members , other times not " . Early in 1989 , The Cockroaches toured in Australia with Mental As Anything , also produced by the Regular label . 
 The group recorded a third album , Positive , which came out in June 1991 . It was produced by Mark Moffatt , who had also worked with Mental As Anything and Jenny Morris . The album produced three singles , including the gospel @-@ flavoured track , " Hope " ( August 1990 ) , " I Must Have Been Blind " ( May 1991 ) , and a cover of the Brenda Lee song , " Here Comes That Feeling " ( August 1991 ) . Their version of the Brenda Lee song was featured in the 1990 film , The Crossing , starring Russell Crowe and Danielle Spencer . According to McFarlane , " By the end of the year ... The Cockroaches as a band concept had run its course " . However , journalist Glenn A. Baker , in the liner notes for the group 's March 1994 album , St. Patrick 's Day 10am , states , " The Cockroaches never went away , they just keep playing , very much in the mode of their earlier days " . He also declared , " The sound of the <unk> seems to embody all of the basic concepts of rock 'n'roll as we 've always known and loved it . Its rangy , loose @-@ limbed , good @-@ natured , energetic , self @-@ effacing , intuitive , harmonic , melodic , enduring , soused and fiercely frantic " . The performers for the album were : the three Field brothers ; Fatt on Hammond organ , keyboards and cow noises ; Henry on drums and <unk> ; Mackie on bass guitar and backing vocals ; with additional backing vocals by Jane <unk> , Greg Truman and Steve Pomfrett . It was recorded at the Tracking Station and Noisegate Studios , was mixed by Pomfrett and John , was engineered by Pomfrett , and was produced by the band . 
 In November 1999 Festival Records issued a compilation album , Hey Let 's Go – The Best of the Cockroaches , which included a newly recorded track , " Something Good This Way Comes " . 
 = = Afterwards and The Wiggles = = 
 In early 1991 , Anthony Field founded The Wiggles , a children 's music group , with fellow university students Murray Cook and Greg Page , Phillip Wilcher ( from Macquarie University 's music department ) and The Cockroaches ' band mate , Jeff Fatt . In July , they issued their debut album , The Wiggles , which was dedicated to Paul Field 's daughter and sold 70 @,@ 000 copies . The Wiggles went on to become " a global powerhouse in children 's entertainment " . They used former The Cockroaches ' members for musical and performing support : Paul , John , and Henry ( The Wiggles ' character Henry the Octopus was named after him ) performed with them on their CDs , DVDs , and stage shows . John helped them write many of their songs . Many early The Wiggles ' songs were The Cockroaches ' tunes reworked to fit the genre of children 's music . According to Anthony , " The Wiggles music isn 't all that far removed from what we did in The Cockroaches , just a different subject matter ... The Cockroaches sing about girls and love and stuff like that ; The Wiggles sing about hot potatoes and cold spaghetti " . Paul worked for James Roland Wood , Chief Judge at Common Law , for three years after the band stopped regularly performing and during The Wiggles ' formation , which he said gave Anthony time to develop his new band alone , without much input from his brothers . In the mid @-@ 1990s , Paul became The Wiggles ' talent manager . 
 In addition to his work with The Wiggles , John founded The John Field Band , an eight @-@ piece covers band with John on lead vocals , Bernadette <unk> on lead vocals ( later replaced by Bronwyn Mulcahy ) , Dom Lindsay on trumpet , former Cockroaches member Dan Fallon on tenor saxophone , Roy <unk> on trombone , Mark <unk> on piano , Matt Morrison on drums , and Chris Lupton on bass guitar . John wrote the musicals Evie and The Birdman ( July 2001 ) and Who Loves Me . 
 Since 2006 , Tony Henry has been a manager in the student services office at International College of Management , Sydney and has performed drums for The Wiggles ' recordings . As a session musician Henry has worked for Ross Wilson , Slim Dusty , Crowded House and Mental As Anything . As of 2008 , Peter Mackie has recorded three solo albums : What – Me Sing ? ! ( 2001 ) , Late Starter ( 2003 ) , and The Spinning Man ( 2006 ) . 
 On 29 January 2005 , The Cockroaches reunited for a one @-@ time performance at the Hills for Hope concert as a benefit for the Boxing Day Tsunami survivors . Also on the roster were The Greg Page Band , Mental As Anything and Hush . In 2011 , Paul and John Field founded The Field Brothers as a duo and recorded their debut album , 1964 . Some of The Cockroaches ' songs were re @-@ recorded as country songs , including " She 's Some Kind of Girl " , " Rely on Me " , and " Permanently Single " . The album included duets with other country music artists : Troy Cassar @-@ Daley , Shane Nicholson , Amber Lawrence , and Dianna Corcoran . 
 = = 2014 reunion = = 
 The band , with its original line @-@ up , reunited for two shows in June 2014 at RSL clubs in Sydney . Hey Let 's Go ! , a new greatest hits album covering their 1984 – 94 material , is set for release on 13 June through ABC / Universal . The album , along with the group 's entire catalogue , will be released digitally . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Current Members 
 Paul Field – lead vocals ( 1979 – present ) 
 John Field – rhythm guitar , vocals ( 1979 – present ) 
 Anthony " Tony " Field – lead guitar , vocals ( 1979 – 1988 , 1991 , 1994 , 2014 @-@ present ) 
 Tony Henry – drums ( 1979 – present ) 
 Jeff Fatt – keyboards ( 1981 – 1988 , 1991 , 1994 , 2014 @-@ present ) 
 Phil Robinson – bass guitar ( 1981 – present ) 
 Peter Mackie – bass guitar ( 1988 – present ) 
 Former Members 
 Paul <unk> – bass guitar ( 1979 – 1981 ) 
 Joseph Hallion – saxophone ( 1979 – 1985 ) 
 Bruce Hatfield – bass guitar ( 1980 ) 
 Geoff O <unk> – bass guitar ( 1981 ) 
 Phil Carson – bass guitar ( 1986 – 1987 ) 
 Phil Carson – bass guitar ( 1986 – 1987 ) 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Stephen Jay Gould = 
 Stephen Jay Gould ( / <unk> / ; September 10 , 1941 – May 20 , 2002 ) was an American paleontologist , evolutionary biologist , and historian of science . He was also one of the most influential and widely read writers of popular science of his generation . Gould spent most of his career teaching at Harvard University and working at the American Museum of Natural History in New York . In 1996 Gould was also hired as the Vincent Astor Visiting Research Professor of Biology at New York University , where he divided his time teaching there and at Harvard . 
 Gould 's most significant contribution to evolutionary biology was the theory of punctuated equilibrium , which he developed with Niles Eldredge in 1972 . The theory proposes that most evolution is characterized by long periods of evolutionary stability , which is infrequently punctuated by swift periods of branching evolution . The theory was contrasted against phyletic gradualism , the popular idea that evolutionary change is marked by a pattern of smooth and continuous change in the fossil record . 
 Most of Gould 's empirical research was based on the land snail genera <unk> and Cerion . He also contributed to evolutionary developmental biology , and has received wide praise for his book Ontogeny and Phylogeny . In evolutionary theory he opposed strict <unk> , sociobiology as applied to humans , and evolutionary psychology . He campaigned against creationism and proposed that science and religion should be considered two distinct fields ( or " magisteria " ) whose authorities do not overlap . 
 Gould was known by the general public mainly from his 300 popular essays in the magazine Natural History , and his books written for both the specialist and non @-@ specialist . In April 2000 , the US Library of Congress named him a " Living Legend " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Stephen Jay Gould was born and raised in the community of Bayside , a neighborhood of the northeastern section of Queens in New York City . His father Leonard was a court stenographer and a Navy veteran of World War II . His mother Eleanor was an artist whose parents were Jewish immigrants living and working in the city 's Garment District . When Gould was five years old his father took him to the Hall of Dinosaurs in the American Museum of Natural History , where he first encountered Tyrannosaurus rex . " I had no idea there were such things — I was awestruck , " Gould once recalled . It was in that moment that he decided to become a paleontologist . 
 Raised in a secular Jewish home , Gould did not formally practice religion and preferred to be called an agnostic . When asked directly if he was an agnostic in Skeptic magazine , he responded : 
 " If you absolutely forced me to bet on the existence of a conventional anthropomorphic deity , of course I 'd bet no . But , basically , Huxley was right when he said that agnosticism is the only honorable position because we really cannot know . And that 's right . I 'd be real surprised if there turned out to be a conventional God . " 
 Though he " had been brought up by a Marxist father " he stated that his father 's politics were " very different " from his own . In describing his own political views , he has said they " tend to the left of center . " According to Gould the most influential political books he read were C. Wright Mills ' The Power Elite and the political writings of Noam Chomsky . 
 While attending Antioch College in the early 1960s , Gould was active in the civil rights movement and often campaigned for social justice . When he attended the University of Leeds as a visiting undergraduate , he organized weekly demonstrations outside a Bradford dance hall which refused to admit Blacks . Gould continued these demonstrations until the policy was revoked . Throughout his career and writings , he spoke out against cultural oppression in all its forms , especially what he saw as the pseudoscience used in the service of racism and sexism . 
 Interspersed throughout his scientific essays for Natural History magazine , Gould frequently referred to his <unk> interests and pastimes . As a boy he collected baseball cards and remained a New York Yankees fan throughout his life . As an adult he was fond of science fiction movies , but often deplored their poor storytelling and presentation of science . His other interests included singing baritone in the Boston Cecilia , and he was a great aficionado of Gilbert and Sullivan operas . He collected rare antiquarian books , possessed an enthusiasm for architecture , and enjoyed city walks . He often traveled to Europe , and spoke French , German , Russian , and Italian . He sometimes alluded ruefully to his tendency to put on weight . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Gould married artist Deborah Lee on October 3 , 1965 . Gould met Lee while they were students together at Antioch College . They had two sons , Jesse and Ethan , and were married for 30 years . His second marriage in 1995 was to artist and sculptor Rhonda Roland Shearer . 
 = = = First bout of cancer = = = 
 In July 1982 , Gould was diagnosed with peritoneal mesothelioma , a deadly form of cancer affecting the abdominal lining and frequently found in people who have been exposed to asbestos or rock dust . After a difficult two @-@ year recovery , Gould published a column for Discover magazine entitled , " The Median Isn 't the Message " , which discusses his stunned reaction to discovering that , " mesothelioma is incurable , with a median mortality of only eight months after discovery . " He then describes the true significance behind this number , and his relief upon realizing that statistical averages are merely useful abstractions , and by themselves do not encompass the full range of variation . 
 The median is the halfway point , which means that 50 % of people will die before eight months , but the other half will live longer , potentially much longer . He then needed to determine where his personal characteristics placed him within this range . Given that the cancer was detected early , he was young , optimistic , and had the best treatments available , Gould reasoned that he should be in the favorable half of the upper statistical range . After an experimental treatment of radiation , chemotherapy , and surgery , Gould made a full recovery , and his column became a source of comfort for many cancer patients . 
 Gould was also an advocate of medical cannabis . When undergoing his cancer treatments he smoked marijuana to help alleviate the long periods of intense and uncontrollable nausea . According to Gould , the drug had a " most important effect " on his eventual recovery . He later complained that he could not understand how " any humane person would withhold such a beneficial substance from people in such great need simply because others use it for different purposes . " On August 5 , 1998 Gould 's testimony assisted in the successful lawsuit of HIV activist Jim <unk> , who sued the Government of Canada for the right to cultivate , possess , and use marijuana for medical purposes . 
 = = = Final illness and death = = = 
 Gould survived for 20 years until another cancer ended his life . Gould died on May 20 , 2002 , from a metastatic adenocarcinoma of the lung , a form of cancer which had spread to his brain , liver , and spleen . This cancer was unrelated to his abdominal cancer . He died in his home " in a bed set up in the library of his SoHo loft , surrounded by his wife Rhonda , his mother Eleanor , and the many books he loved . " 
 = = Scientific career = = 
 Gould began his higher education at Antioch College , graduating with a double major in geology and philosophy in 1963 . During this time , he also studied at the University of Leeds in the United Kingdom . After completing graduate work at Columbia University in 1967 under the guidance of Norman Newell , he was immediately hired by Harvard University where he worked until the end of his life ( 1967 – 2002 ) . In 1973 , Harvard promoted him to professor of geology and curator of invertebrate paleontology at the institution 's Museum of Comparative Zoology . 
 In 1982 Harvard awarded him the title of Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology . The following year , 1983 , he was awarded a fellowship at the American Association for the Advancement of Science , where he later served as president ( 1999 – 2001 ) . The AAAS news release cited his " numerous contributions to both scientific progress and the public understanding of science . " He also served as president of the Paleontological Society ( 1985 – 1986 ) and of the Society for the Study of Evolution ( 1990 – 1991 ) . 
 In 1989 Gould was elected into the body of the National Academy of Sciences . Through 1996 – 2002 Gould was Vincent Astor Visiting Research Professor of Biology at New York University . In 2001 , the American Humanist Association named him the Humanist of the Year for his lifetime of work . In 2008 , he was posthumously awarded the Darwin @-@ Wallace Medal , along with 12 other recipients . ( Until 2008 , this medal had been awarded every 50 years by the Linnean Society of London . ) 
 = = = Punctuated equilibrium = = = 
 Early in his career , Gould and Niles Eldredge developed the theory of punctuated equilibrium , according to which evolutionary change occurs relatively rapidly , alternating with longer periods of relative evolutionary stability . Although Gould coined the term " punctuated equilibria " , the idea was first presented in Eldredge 's doctoral dissertation on Devonian trilobites and in an article published the previous year on allopatric speciation . According to Gould , punctuated equilibrium revised a key pillar " in the central logic of Darwinian theory . " 
 Some evolutionary biologists have argued that while punctuated equilibrium was " of great interest to biology generally , " it merely modified neo @-@ Darwinism in a manner that was fully compatible with what had been known before . Comparisons were made to George Gaylord Simpson 's work in Tempo and Mode in Evolution ( 1941 ) , which describes the paleontological record as being characterized by mostly gradual change ( <unk> ) , but also included slow ( <unk> ) or rapid ( <unk> ) rates of evolution . Other biologists emphasize the theoretical novelty of punctuated equilibrium , and argued that evolutionary stasis had been " unexpected by most evolutionary biologists " and " had a major impact on paleontology and evolutionary biology . " Some critics jokingly referred to the theory of punctuated equilibrium as " evolution by jerks " , which prompted Gould to describe phyletic gradualism as " evolution by creeps . " 
 = = = Evolutionary developmental biology = = = 
 Gould made significant contributions to evolutionary developmental biology , especially in his work Ontogeny and Phylogeny . In this book he emphasized the process of heterochrony , which encompasses two distinct processes : neoteny and terminal additions . Neoteny is the process where ontogeny is slowed down and the organism does not reach the end of its development . Terminal addition is the process by which an organism adds to its development by speeding and shortening earlier stages in the developmental process . Gould 's influence in the field of evolutionary developmental biology continues to be seen in such areas as the study of evolution of feathers . 
 = = = <unk> and sociobiology = = = 
 Gould was a champion of biological constraints , internal limitations upon developmental pathways , as well as other non @-@ <unk> forces in evolution . Rather than direct adaptations , he considered many higher functions of the human brain to be the unintended side consequence of natural selection . To describe such co @-@ opted features , he coined the term exaptation with paleontologist Elisabeth Vrba . Gould believed this feature of human mentality undermines an essential premise of human sociobiology and evolutionary psychology . 
 = = = = Against " Sociobiology " = = = = 
 In 1975 , Gould 's Harvard colleague E. O. Wilson introduced his analysis of animal behavior ( including human behavior ) based on a sociobiological framework that suggested that many social behaviors have a strong evolutionary basis . In response , Gould , Richard Lewontin , and others from the Boston area wrote the subsequently well @-@ referenced letter to The New York Review of Books entitled , " Against ' Sociobiology ' " . This open letter criticized Wilson 's notion of a " deterministic view of human society and human action . " 
 But Gould did not rule out sociobiological explanations for many aspects of animal behavior , and later wrote : " <unk> have broadened their range of selective stories by invoking concepts of inclusive fitness and kin selection to solve ( successfully I think ) the vexatious problem of altruism — previously the greatest stumbling block to a Darwinian theory of social behavior ... Here sociobiology has had and will continue to have success . And here I wish it well . For it represents an extension of basic Darwinism to a realm where it should apply . " 
