 = = = = Spandrels and the Panglossian Paradigm = = = = 
 With Richard Lewontin , Gould wrote an influential 1979 paper entitled , " The Spandrels of San Marco and the <unk> paradigm " , which introduced the architectural term " spandrel " into evolutionary biology . In architecture , a spandrel is a curved area of masonry which exists between arches supporting a dome . Spandrels , also called pendentives in this context , are found particularly in Gothic churches . 
 When visiting Venice in 1978 , Gould noted that the spandrels of the San Marco cathedral , while quite beautiful , were not spaces planned by the architect . Rather the spaces arise as " necessary architectural byproducts of mounting a dome on rounded arches . " Gould and Lewontin thus defined " spandrels " in the evolutionary biology context , to mean any biological feature of an organism that arises as a necessary side consequence of other features , which is not directly selected for by natural selection . Proposed examples include the " masculinized genitalia in female hyenas , <unk> use of an umbilicus as a brooding chamber by snails , the shoulder hump of the giant Irish deer , and several key features of human mentality . " 
 In Voltaire 's Candide , Dr. Pangloss is portrayed as a clueless scholar who , despite the evidence , insists that " all is for the best in this best of all possible worlds " . Gould and Lewontin asserted that it is Panglossian for evolutionary biologists to view all traits as atomized things that had been naturally selected for , and criticised biologists for not granting theoretical space to other causes , such as phyletic and developmental constraints . The relative frequency of spandrels , so defined , versus adaptive features in nature , remains a controversial topic in evolutionary biology . An illustrative example of Gould 's approach can be found in Elisabeth Lloyd 's case study suggesting that the female orgasm is a by @-@ product of shared developmental pathways . Gould also wrote on this topic in his essay " Male <unk> and Clitoral Ripples " , prompted by Lloyd 's earlier work . 
 = = = Evolutionary progress = = = 
 Gould favored the argument that evolution has no inherent drive towards long @-@ term " progress " . <unk> commentaries often portray evolution as a ladder of progress , leading towards bigger , faster , and smarter organisms , the assumption being that evolution is somehow driving organisms to get more complex and ultimately more like humankind . Gould argued that evolution 's drive was not towards complexity , but towards diversification . Because life is constrained to begin with a simple starting point ( like bacteria ) , any diversity resulting from this start , by random walk , will have a skewed distribution and therefore be perceived to move in the direction of higher complexity . But life , Gould argued , can also easily adapt towards simplification , as is often the case with parasites . 
 In a review of Full House , Richard Dawkins approved of Gould 's general argument , but suggested that he saw evidence of a " tendency for lineages to improve cumulatively their adaptive fit to their particular way of life , by increasing the numbers of features which combine together in adaptive complexes . ... By this definition , adaptive evolution is not just incidentally progressive , it is deeply , dyed @-@ in @-@ the @-@ wool , indispensably progressive . " 
 = = = Cladistics = = = 
 Gould never embraced cladistics as a method of investigating evolutionary lineages and process , possibly because he was concerned that such investigations would lead to neglect of the details in historical biology , which he considered all @-@ important . In the early 1990s this led him into a debate with Derek Briggs , who had begun to apply quantitative cladistic techniques to the Burgess Shale fossils , about the methods to be used in interpreting these fossils . Around this time cladistics rapidly became the dominant method of classification in evolutionary biology . Inexpensive but increasingly powerful personal computers made it possible to process large quantities of data about organisms and their characteristics . Around the same time the development of effective polymerase chain reaction techniques made it possible to apply cladistic methods of analysis to biochemical and genetic features as well . 
 = = = Technical work on land snails = = = 
 Most of Gould 's empirical research pertained to land snails . He focused his early work on the Bermudian genus <unk> , while his later work concentrated on the West Indian genus Cerion . According to Gould " Cerion is the land snail of maximal diversity in form throughout the entire world . There are 600 described species of this single genus . In fact , they 're not really species , they all interbreed , but the names exist to express a real phenomenon which is this incredible morphological diversity . Some are shaped like golf balls , some are shaped like pencils . ... Now my main subject is the evolution of form , and the problem of how it is that you can get this diversity amid so little genetic difference , so far as we can tell , is a very interesting one . And if we could solve this we 'd learn something general about the evolution of form . " 
 Given Cerion 's extensive geographic diversity , Gould later lamented that if Christopher Columbus had only cataloged a single Cerion it would have ended the scholarly debate about which island Columbus had first set foot on in America . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Gould is one of the most frequently cited scientists in the field of evolutionary theory . His 1979 " spandrels " paper has been cited more than 5 @,@ 000 times . In Paleobiology — the flagship journal of his own speciality — only Charles Darwin and George Gaylord Simpson have been cited more often . Gould was also a considerably respected historian of science . Historian Ronald Numbers has been quoted as saying : " I can 't say much about Gould 's strengths as a scientist , but for a long time I 've regarded him as the second most influential historian of science ( next to Thomas Kuhn ) . " 
 = = = The Structure of Evolutionary Theory = = = 
 Shortly before his death , Gould published The Structure of Evolutionary Theory ( 2002 ) , a long treatise recapitulating his version of modern evolutionary theory . In the film Beauty and Consolation Gould remarked , " In a couple of years I will be able to gather in one volume my view of how evolution works . It is to me a great consolation because it represents the putting together of a lifetime of thinking into one source . That book will never be particularly widely read . It 's going to be far too long , and it 's only for a few thousand professionals — very different from my popular science writings — but it is of greater consolation to me because it is a chance to put into one place a whole way of thinking about evolution that I 've struggled with all my life . " 
 = = = As a public figure = = = 
 Gould became widely known through his popular essays on evolution in the Natural History magazine . His essays were published in a series titled This View of Life ( a phrase from the concluding paragraph of Charles Darwin 's Origin of Species ) starting from January 1974 and ended in January 2001 , amounting to a continuous publication of 300 essays . Many of his essays were reprinted in collected volumes that became bestselling books such as Ever Since Darwin and The Panda 's Thumb , Hen 's Teeth and Horse 's Toes , and The Flamingo 's Smile . 
 A passionate advocate of evolutionary theory , Gould wrote prolifically on the subject , trying to communicate his understanding of contemporary evolutionary biology to a wide audience . A recurring theme in his writings is the history and development of pre @-@ evolutionary and evolutionary thought . He was also an enthusiastic baseball fan and sabermetrician ( analyst of baseball statistics ) , and made frequent reference to the sport in his essays . Many of his baseball essays were anthologized in his posthumously published book Triumph and Tragedy in <unk> ( 2003 ) . 
 Although a proud Darwinist , Gould 's emphasis was less gradualist and reductionist than most neo @-@ Darwinists . He fiercely opposed many aspects of sociobiology and its intellectual descendant evolutionary psychology . He devoted considerable time to fighting against creationism , creation science , and intelligent design . Most notably , Gould provided expert testimony against the equal @-@ time creationism law in McLean v. Arkansas . Gould later developed the term " non @-@ overlapping magisteria " ( NOMA ) to describe how , in his view , science and religion could not comment on each other 's realm . Gould went on to develop this idea in some detail , particularly in the books Rocks of Ages ( 1999 ) and The Hedgehog , the Fox , and the Magister 's Pox ( 2003 ) . In a 1982 essay for Natural History Gould wrote : 
 Our failure to discern a universal good does not record any lack of insight or ingenuity , but merely demonstrates that nature contains no moral messages framed in human terms . Morality is a subject for philosophers , theologians , students of the humanities , indeed for all thinking people . The answers will not be read passively from nature ; they do not , and cannot , arise from the data of science . The factual state of the world does not teach us how we , with our powers for good and evil , should alter or preserve it in the most ethical manner . 
 The anti @-@ evolution petition A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism spawned the National Center for Science Education 's pro @-@ evolution counterpart Project Steve , which is named in Gould 's honor . 
 Gould also became a noted public face of science , often appearing on television . In 1984 Gould received his own NOVA special on PBS . Other appearances included interviews on CNN 's Crossfire , NBC 's The Today Show , and regular appearances on the Charlie Rose show . Gould was also a guest in all seven episodes of the Dutch talk series A Glorious Accident , in which he appeared with his close friend Oliver Sacks . 
 Gould was featured prominently as a guest in Ken Burns 's PBS documentary Baseball , as well as PBS 's Evolution series . Gould was also on the Board of Advisers to the influential Children 's Television Workshop television show 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 Contact , where he made frequent guest appearances . 
 In 1997 he voiced a cartoon version of himself on the television series The Simpsons . In the episode " Lisa the Skeptic " , Lisa finds a skeleton that many people believe is an apocalyptic angel . Lisa contacts Gould and asks him to test the skeleton 's DNA . The fossil is discovered to be a marketing gimmick for a new mall . During production the only phrase Gould objected to was a line in the script that introduced him as the " world 's most brilliant paleontologist " . In 2002 the show paid tribute to Gould after his death , dedicating the season 13 finale to his memory . Gould had died two days before the episode aired . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Gould received many accolades for his scholarly work and popular expositions of natural history , but a number of biologists felt his public presentations were out of step with mainstream evolutionary thinking . The public debates between Gould 's supporters and detractors have been so quarrelsome that they have been dubbed " The Darwin Wars " by several commentators . 
 John Maynard Smith , an eminent British evolutionary biologist , was among Gould 's strongest critics . Maynard Smith thought that Gould misjudged the vital role of adaptation in biology , and was critical of Gould 's acceptance of species selection as a major component of biological evolution . In a review of Daniel Dennett 's book Darwin 's Dangerous Idea , Maynard Smith wrote that Gould " is giving non @-@ biologists a largely false picture of the state of evolutionary theory . " But Maynard Smith has not been consistently negative , writing in a review of The Panda 's Thumb that " Stephen Gould is the best writer of popular science now active ... Often he infuriates me , but I hope he will go right on writing essays like these . " Maynard Smith was also among those who welcomed Gould 's reinvigoration of evolutionary paleontology . 
 One reason for criticism was that Gould appeared to be presenting his ideas as a revolutionary way of understanding evolution , and argued for the importance of mechanisms other than natural selection , mechanisms which he believed had been ignored by many professional evolutionists . As a result , many non @-@ specialists sometimes inferred from his early writings that Darwinian explanations had been proven to be unscientific ( which Gould never tried to imply ) . Along with many other researchers in the field , Gould 's works were sometimes deliberately taken out of context by creationists as " proof " that scientists no longer understood how organisms evolved . Gould himself corrected some of these misinterpretations and distortions of his writings in later works . 
 As documented by Kim <unk> in his book Dawkins vs. Gould , Gould disagreed with Richard Dawkins about the importance of gene selection in evolution . Dawkins argued that evolution is best understood as competition among genes ( or replicators ) , while Gould advocated the importance of multi @-@ level selection , including selection amongst genes , cell lineages , organisms , <unk> , species , and clades . 
 Dawkins also said that Gould deliberately played down the difference between rapid gradualism and <unk> in his theory of punctuated equilibrium . Criticism of Gould and his theory of punctuated equilibrium can be found in Dawkins 's The Blind Watchmaker and Unweaving the Rainbow , as well as a chapter in Dennett 's Darwin 's Dangerous Idea . 
 = = = Cambrian fauna = = = 
 Gould 's interpretation of the Cambrian Burgess Shale fossils in his book Wonderful Life emphasized the striking morphological disparity ( or " weirdness " ) of the Burgess Shale fauna , and the role of chance in determining which members of this fauna survived and flourished . He used the Cambrian fauna as an example of the role of contingency in the broader pattern of evolution . 
 His view was criticized by Simon Conway Morris in his 1998 book The Crucible of Creation . Conway Morris stressed those members of the Cambrian fauna that resemble modern taxa . He also promoted convergent evolution as a mechanism producing similar forms in similar environmental circumstances , and argued in a subsequent book that the appearance of human @-@ like animals is likely . Paleontologist Richard Fortey noted that prior to the release of Wonderful Life , Conway Morris shared many of Gould 's sentiments and views . It was only after publication of Wonderful Life that Conway Morris revised his interpretation and adopted a more progressive stance towards the history of life . 
 Paleontologists Derek Briggs and Richard Fortey have also argued that much of the Cambrian fauna may be regarded as stem groups of living taxa , though this is still a subject of intense research and debate , and the relationship of many Cambrian taxa to modern phyla has not been established in the eyes of many palaeontologists . 
 Richard Dawkins also disagreed with Gould 's view that new phyla suddenly appeared in the Cambrian fauna , arguing : 
 The extreme <unk> view — certainly the view inspired by his rhetoric , though it is hard to tell from his own words whether he literally holds it himself — is radically different from and utterly incompatible with the standard neo @-@ Darwinian model . ... For a new body plan — a new phylum — to spring into existence , what actually has to happen on the ground is that a child is born which suddenly , out of the blue , is as different from its parents as a snail is from an earthworm . No zoologist who thinks through the implications , not even the most ardent <unk> , has ever supported any such notion . 
 = = = Opposition to sociobiology and evolutionary psychology = = = 
 Gould also had a long @-@ running public feud with E. O. Wilson and other evolutionary biologists concerning the disciplines of human sociobiology and evolutionary psychology , both of which Gould and Lewontin opposed , but which Richard Dawkins , Daniel Dennett , and Steven Pinker advocated . These debates reached their climax in the 1970s , and included strong opposition from groups like the Sociobiology Study Group and Science for the People . Pinker accuses Gould , Lewontin , and other opponents of evolutionary psychology of being " radical scientists " , whose stance on human nature is influenced by politics rather than science . Gould stated that he made " no attribution of motive in Wilson 's or anyone else 's case " but cautioned that all human beings are influenced , especially unconsciously , by our personal expectations and biases . He wrote : 
 I grew up in a family with a tradition of participation in campaigns for social justice , and I was active , as a student , in the civil rights movement at a time of great excitement and success in the early 1960s . Scholars are often wary of citing such commitments . … [ but ] it is dangerous for a scholar even to imagine that he might attain complete neutrality , for then one stops being vigilant about personal preferences and their influences — and then one truly falls victim to the dictates of prejudice . Objectivity must be operationally defined as fair treatment of data , not absence of preference . 
 Gould 's primary criticism held that human sociobiological explanations lacked evidential support , and argued that adaptive behaviors are frequently assumed to be genetic for no other reason than their supposed universality , or their adaptive nature . Gould emphasized that adaptive behaviors can be passed on through culture as well , and either hypothesis is equally plausible . Gould did not deny the relevance of biology to human nature , but reframed the debate as " biological potentiality vs. biological determinism . " Gould stated that the human brain allows for a wide range of behaviors . Its flexibility " permits us to be aggressive or peaceful , dominant or submissive , spiteful or generous … Violence , sexism , and general nastiness are biological since they represent one subset of a possible range of behaviors . But peacefulness , equality , and kindness are just as biological — and we may see their influence increase if we can create social structures that permit them to flourish . " 
 = = = The Mismeasure of Man = = = 
 Gould was the author of The Mismeasure of Man ( 1981 ) , a history and inquiry of <unk> and intelligence testing , generating perhaps the greatest controversy of all his books and receiving both widespread praise and extensive criticism , including claims of misrepresentation . Gould investigated the methods of nineteenth century <unk> , as well as the history of psychological testing . Gould claimed that both theories developed from an unfounded belief in biological determinism , the view that " social and economic differences between human groups — primarily races , classes , and sexes — arise from inherited , inborn distinctions and that society , in this sense , is an accurate reflection of biology . " The book was reprinted in 1996 with the addition of a new foreword and a critical review of The Bell Curve . 
 In 2011 , a study conducted by six anthropologists reanalyzed Gould 's claim that Samuel Morton unconsciously manipulated his skull measurements , and concluded that Gould 's analysis was poorly supported and incorrect . They praised Gould for his " staunch opposition to racism " but concluded , " we find that Morton 's initial reputation as the objectivist of his era was well @-@ deserved . " Ralph Holloway , one of the co @-@ authors of the study , commented , " I just didn 't trust Gould . ... I had the feeling that his ideological stance was supreme . When the 1996 version of ' The Mismeasure of Man ' came and he never even bothered to mention Michael 's study , I just felt he was a charlatan . " 
 The group 's paper was reviewed in the journal Nature , which recommended a degree of caution , and notes that " because they couldn 't measure all the skulls , they do not know whether the average cranial capacities that Morton reported represent his sample accurately . " The journal stated that Gould 's opposition to racism may have biased his interpretation of Morton 's data , but also noted that " Lewis and his colleagues have their own motivations . Several in the group have an association with the University of Pennsylvania , and have an interest in seeing the valuable but understudied skull collection freed from the stigma of bias . " 
 The group 's paper was critically reviewed in the journal Evolution & Development by philosopher of science Michael Weisberg , also of the University of Pennsylvania . Weisberg argues that " most of Gould 's arguments against Morton are sound . Although Gould made some errors and overstated his case in a number of places , he provided prima facia evidence , as yet <unk> , that Morton did indeed <unk> his skulls in ways that conformed to 19th century racial biases . " Biologists and philosophers Jonathan Kaplan , Massimo <unk> , and Joshua Banta also published a critique of the groups 's paper , arguing that many of its claims were misleading and the re @-@ measurements were " completely irrelevant to an evaluation of Gould 's published analysis . " They also argue that both Morton and Gould 's statistical methods on which skulls to include and which to exclude , and how they computed averages , " were both inappropriate . " 
 = = Non @-@ overlapping magisteria = = 
 In his book Rocks of Ages ( 1999 ) , Gould put forward what he described as " a blessedly simple and entirely conventional resolution to ... the supposed conflict between science and religion . " He defines the term magisterium as " a domain where one form of teaching holds the appropriate tools for meaningful discourse and resolution . " The non @-@ overlapping magisteria ( NOMA ) principle therefore divides the magisterium of science to cover " the empirical realm : what the Universe is made of ( fact ) and why does it work in this way ( theory ) . The magisterium of religion extends over questions of ultimate meaning and moral value . These two magisteria do not overlap , nor do they encompass all inquiry . " He suggests that " NOMA enjoys strong and fully explicit support , even from the primary cultural stereotypes of hard @-@ line traditionalism " and that NOMA is " a sound position of general consensus , established by long struggle among people of goodwill in both magisteria . " 
 However , this view has not been without criticism . For example , in his book The God Delusion , Richard Dawkins argues that the division between religion and science is not as simple as Gould claims , as few religions exist without claiming the existence of miracles , which " by definition , violate the principles of science . " Dawkins also opposes the idea that religion has anything meaningful to say about ethics and values , and therefore has no authority to claim a magisterium of its own . He goes on to say that he believes Gould is disingenuous in much of what he says in Rocks of Ages . Similarly , humanist philosopher Paul Kurtz argues that Gould was wrong to posit that science has nothing to say about questions of ethics . In fact , Kurtz claims that science is a much better method than religion for determining moral principles . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Gould 's publications were numerous . One review of his publications between 1965 and 2000 noted 479 peer @-@ reviewed papers , 22 books , 300 essays , and 101 " major " book reviews . A select number of his papers are listed online . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 The following is a list of books either written or edited by Stephen Jay Gould , including those published posthumously , after his death in 2002 . While some books have been republished at later dates , by multiple publishers , the list below comprises the original publisher and publishing date . 
 = 1978 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1978 Atlantic hurricane season was the last Atlantic hurricane season to use an all @-@ female naming list . The hurricane season officially began on June 1 , and ended on November 30 . It was an above average season due to a subsiding El Niño . The first storm , a subtropical storm , developed unusually early – on January 18 – and dissipated five days later without causing any damage . At the end of July and early August , short @-@ lived Tropical Storm Amelia caused extensive flooding in Texas after dropping as much as 48 in ( 1 @,@ 200 mm ) of rain . There were 33 deaths and $ 110 million ( 1978 USD ) in damage . Tropical Storm Bess and Hurricane Cora resulted in only minor land impacts , while the latter was attributed to one fatality . 
 Later in August , Tropical Storm Debra produced widespread effects , though damage was also relatively minor . Hurricane Ella became the northernmost Category 4 hurricane while located at 38 ° N , and lashed the East Coast of the United States and Atlantic Canada with gusty winds and rip currents . Hurricanes Flossie and Kendra as well as Tropical Storms Hope , Irma , and Juliet caused minimal land impacts as a tropical cyclone . However , the precursor to Hurricane Kendra caused flooding in Puerto Rico . Hurricane Greta brought strong winds , high tides , and flooding to Central America , particularly Belize and Honduras . Greta resulted in about $ 25 million in damage and at least five fatalities . Overall , the storms of this season collectively caused $ 191 million in damage and 42 fatalities . Hurricane Greta crossed into the eastern pacific and was renamed Olivia . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1978 . Although 24 tropical cyclones developed , only twelve of them reached tropical storm intensity , which is slightly above the 1966 @-@ 2009 average of 11 @.@ 3 named storms per season . Of the twelve tropical storms , five of them strengthened into a hurricane , which is slightly below the 1966 @-@ 2009 average of 6 @.@ 2 . Two of the five hurricane became major hurricanes , which is Category 3 or greater on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Three tropical storms and two hurricanes made landfall during the season and caused at least 41 fatalities and $ 135 million . Additionally , the precursor to Hurricane Kendra brought flooding to Puerto Rico , with $ 6 million in damage and one death . The season officially ended on November 30 , 1978 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began very early , with the development of a subtropical storm on January 18 . It dissipated about five days later . However , the next tropical cyclone , an unnumbered depression , did not develop until June 21 . In July , there were two systems , including an unnumbered tropical depression and Tropical Storm Amelia . Seven tropical cyclones formed in August , including Tropical Depression Four and tropical storms Bess and Debra and hurricanes Cora and Ella . There were also seven system in September – tropical depressions Eight , Nine , and Twelve , Tropical Storm Hope , and hurricanes Flossie and Greta . During the month of October , there were five tropical cyclones , with two unnumbered tropical depressions , tropical storms Irma and Juliet , and Hurricane Kendra . There was another unnumbered tropical depression in November , which dissipated on November 5 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 63 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Subtropical Storm One = = = 
 In the middle of January , an upper @-@ level trough in the westerlies spawned a surface low pressure area to the east @-@ northeast of the Lesser Antilles to the south of the subtropical ridge . Isolated from the detrimental effects of the westerlies , it was initially non @-@ tropical in nature and intensified through a baroclinic energy source , or one that derives energy from the interaction of cold and warm air . Convection increased slightly despite cool sea surface temperatures of around 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) . At 1200 UTC on January 18 , it organized into a subtropical depression about 1 @,@ 725 mi ( 2 @,@ 776 km ) east @-@ northeast of Puerto Rico while moving in a general westward track , which it would maintain for much of its duration . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initiated Dvorak classifications on the cyclone at 0000 UTC on January 19 , assessing a Dvorak number of T2.5 , suggesting both tropical and subtropical characteristics . On the same day , the pressure gradient between the storm and the ridge produced gale force winds . By early on January 20 , the storm maintained minimal convection near its center , with its primary rainband revolved cyclonically around its well @-@ defined center . Later that day , the storm strengthened into a subtropical storm and attained peak winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , supported by both ship and Hurricane Hunters reports . 
 Late on January 21 , the outer rainbands to the south and east of the center began diminishing , which began a weakening trend after the storm maintained peak winds for about 36 hours . At around that time , the cyclone was moving west @-@ southwestward , and within 72 hours was forecast by one hurricane forecast model to be located over Hispaniola . By midday on January 22 , the winds decreased to below gale force after the convection dissipated near the center . Subsequently it turned more to the west away from land , and by January 23 the circulation degenerated into a remnant trough about 185 mi ( 298 km ) north of the Lesser Antilles . The storm was one of six tropical or subtropical cyclones on record in the month of January , and one of four to have formed in the month . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Amelia = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on July 19 . The wave did not develop significantly while crossing the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea . The disturbance then entered an area of the Gulf of Mexico that was conducive to tropical cyclogenesis and became a tropical depression while located about 30 mi ( 48 km ) south of Brownsville , Texas on July 30 . Despite its proximity to land , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Amelia on July 31 and peaked with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Around that time , Amelia made landfall near Port Isabel , Texas . Later on July 31 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated early the following day . 
 Amelia affected the Texas coast for two days , causing several shipping incidents and minor damage in Corpus Christi and South Padre Island . While active , there were no deaths linked to the storm . However , the biggest impact from the storm followed its dissipation , when its remnants contributed to record rainfall totals over the state . The state , already suffering from a previous drought , believed that the rain would help alleviate the conditions . However , the dry ground aided the flooding from the storm . The rainfall caused several rivers and creeks to flood , especially around the Texas Hill Country and northern Texas , leading to severe damage . Overall , Amelia caused 33 fatalities with an estimated $ 110 million in damages . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bess = = = 
 A low pressure area developed in Georgia along a dissipating cold front on August 1 . The system detached from the cold front and drifted southwestward , reaching northeastern Gulf of Mexico on August 3 . Satellite imagery , buoys , and reconnaissance aircraft flights indicated that by August 5 , the system likely acquired a closed circulation . Thus , the National Hurricane Center estimated that a tropical depression developed in the central Gulf of Mexico at 1200 UTC that day . On August 6 , a reconnaissance flight into the depression resulted in an upgrade to Tropical Storm Bess , while located about 250 mi ( 400 km ) southeast of Brownsville , Texas . The storm had initially headed west @-@ southwestward at 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) , before moving southwestward at nearly the same speed . 
 At 1200 UTC on August 7 , Bess attained its minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . Thereafter , Bess began to turn nearly due southward under the influence of a high pressure area over southern Texas . Later on August 7 , the storm reached its maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Early on August 8 , Bess made landfall near Nautla , Veracruz , at the same intensity and then rapidly dissipated inland . In Tuxpan , Veracruz and Tampico , Tamaulipas , sustained winds reached only 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) . The storm also produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 12 @.@ 04 in ( 306 mm ) in La Estrella . However , no flooding occurred and no damage or fatalities were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Cora = = = 
 A disturbance exited the west coast of Africa on August 4 and developed into a tropical depression about three days later , while located well east of the Lesser Antilles . On August 8 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cora . The storm moved at an unusually high forward speed for a cyclone in the Atlantic Ocean in August , and intensified into a hurricane later that day . The hurricane was upgraded into a hurricane based solely on satellite photography , the second time this occurred . Early on August 9 , it peaked with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Around 0000 UTC the next day , Cora weakened to a tropical storm while west @-@ southwestward . The storm made landfall on Grenada on August 11 , while weakening to a tropical depression . Cora weakened further to a tropical depression , before losing its circulation and degenerating into a tropical wave on August 12 . The remnant crossed over Central America into the Pacific Ocean , where it regenerated into Hurricane Kristy . 
 Cora was an unusual cyclone , maintaining an unusually low latitude in the Atlantic in August at high speeds . While passing through the Lesser Antilles , gusty winds and light rainfall in Barbados and Saint Lucia . In the latter , a person died after stepping on a high tension power line that was downed in Castries . Approximately two to four percent of trees on the island were toppled . Cora was also responsible for altering weather conditions in Presque Isle , Maine , allowing for a takeoff of the historical flight of the Double Eagle II hot air balloon . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Debra = = = 
 A low @-@ pressure area that developed over southeast Florida and an area of convection near the Yucatán Peninsula merged and resulted in the formation of a tropical depression over the southern Gulf of Mexico on August 26 . Tacking west @-@ northwestward around a high pressure ridge , the depression gradually intensified began and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Debra on August 28 . Debra turned to the north and reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) on August 29 , shortly before making landfall in southwestern Louisiana . It was a disorganized storm , with most of the convection located to the east of the center . The system weakened rapidly and dissipated over Arkansas on August 29 , though its remnants continued into the Ohio Valley . 
 One person died while attempting to evacuate an oil rig to the south of Cameron , Louisiana . Damage caused by Debra was considered minimal . In Louisiana , rainfall peaked at 10 @.@ 81 in ( 275 mm ) in Freshwater Bayou . However , no flooding was reported . Wind impacts were light and mainly limited to down trees and damage to roofs in Lake Charles and New Orleans . The storm spawned several tornadoes in Arkansas , Mississippi , Louisiana , Tennessee , and Texas . In Mississippi , a tornado in Crystal Springs destroyed three mobile homes and a house , killing one person and seriously injuring another . 
 = = = Hurricane Ella = = = 
 A cold front spawned a tropical disturbance near Bermuda , which became a tropical depression on August 30 . The depression strengthened , and by early on August 31 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Ella . Ship reports indicated that Ella became a hurricane later that day . Further significant intensification occurred , and the storm reached a preliminary peak intensity of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . A short @-@ wave trough over the Eastern United States caused Ella to decelerate and turn north . Simultaneously , dry air diminished convection on September 2 , which in turn resulted in weakening . Eventually , another trough forced Ella to re @-@ curve northeastward , thereby remaining well offshore the East Coast of the United States . 
 The storm then re @-@ intensified and by 1200 UTC on September 4 , Ella peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Thereafter , Ella rapidly weakened as it passed offshore Atlantic Canada , before being absorbed by an extratropical storm while located more than 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) northeast of St. John 's on September 5 . Ella threatened to pass within 50 mi ( 80 km ) of North Carolina . Because of this , a hurricane watch being issued for the Outer Banks of North Carolina during Labor Day Weekend , resulting in a significant drop in tourism occurred . However , because the storm veered northeastward , little effects other than 5 to 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 7 m ) waves , minor beach erosion , and light winds in coastal portions of North Carolina . In Newfoundland , Ella produced rainfall amounts reaching 2 @.@ 39 in ( 61 mm ) and wind gusts up to 71 mph ( 114 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Flossie = = = 
 A tropical wave passed westward across Dakar , Senegal on August 31 and entered the Atlantic Ocean later that day . Convection markedly increased over the next few days and by 0000 UTC on September 4 , the wave developed into a tropical depression while located about midway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles . Later that day , the Hong Kong Merchant reported tropical storm force winds , thus the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Flossie . It initially tracked northwestward at 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) and minimal strengthening occurred , possibly due to rapid forward speeds . On September 5 , the storm curved westward , until turning north on September 7 . A high pressure area transitioned into a trough , causing Flossie to re @-@ curve northeastward and generating strong upper @-@ level winds . 
 On September 8 , Flossie was downgraded to a tropical depression . After the trough began weakening , favorable conditions returned , allowing Flossie to re @-@ strengthen into a tropical storm on September 10 . Flossie then decelerated and became nearly stationary on September 12 . Around that time , the storm was upgraded to a hurricane . Further intensification continued , and Flossie peaked with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) early on September 13 . The storm began turned nearly due northward and began weakening . Flossie accelerated to the northeast and eventually transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) north of the Azores on September 15 . The strong extratropical cyclone brought winds as high as 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) to Fair Isle , Great Britain . 
 = = = Hurricane Greta = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression near Trinidad on September 13 . By the following day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Greta . It headed westward to west @-@ northwestward across the Caribbean Sea and slowly intensified , becoming a hurricane on September 16 . The rate of intensification increased as Greta was approaching the northwestern Caribbean Sea . Greta briefly peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 947 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) , while brushing northeastern Honduras . Although the storm remained offshore , land interaction caused significant weakening . On September 19 , Greta made landfall in Stann Creek District , Belize with winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) . The storm rapidly weakened inland over Central America , but survived its passage and eventually became Hurricane Olivia in the Eastern Pacific Ocean . 
 Early in its duration , Greta produced heavy rainfall in the Netherlands Antilles . With a similar path to Hurricane Fifi four years prior , Greta threatened to reproduce the devastating effects of the catastrophic storm ; however , damage and loss of life was significantly less than feared . In Honduras , about 1 @,@ 200 homes were damaged , about half of which in towns along the coastline . The storm damaged about 75 % of the houses on Roatán along the offshore Bay Islands , and there was one death in the country . In the Belize Barrier Reef , Greta downed trees and produced high waves , while on the mainland , there was minimal flooding despite a high storm surge . In Dangriga where it made landfall , the hurricane damaged or destroyed 125 houses and the primary hospital . In Belize City , a tornado flipped over a truck and damaged four houses . Damage in Belize was estimated at $ 25 million , and there were four deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hope = = = 
 A mid @-@ tropospheric low pressure area developed over the Southeastern United States on September 10 . The system developed into a subtropical depression early on September 12 , while located about 75 mi ( 121 km ) east of St. Augustine , Florida . Over the next few days , the depression tracked east @-@ northeastward to eastward . While strengthening into a subtropical storm on September 15 , it passed just north of Bermuda , but produced only 1 @.@ 07 in ( 27 mm ) of rain on the island . The storm then made a brief dip to the east @-@ southeast , before resuming its east @-@ northeastward course on September 16 . Beginning on the following day , satellite imagery indicated that the system was acquiring tropical characteristics . As a result , it was reclassified as Tropical Storm Hope at 0600 UTC on September 17 . 
 Because Hope remained out of range of reconnaissance aircraft flights , the National Hurricane Center relied on ships and satellite estimates . After becoming a tropical cyclone , Hope began to accelerate while slowly intensifying . Satellite estimates at 1200 UTC on September 19 indicated that the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 987 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , recorded by the S.S. <unk> Mann . While located hundreds of miles north of the Azores on September 20 , the storm turned northward and began crossing into sea surface temperatures of 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) . By 1200 UTC on September 21 , Hope transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and was absorbed by another extratropical storm while situated about 220 mi ( 350 km ) south of Reykjavík , Iceland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Irma = = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Irma were from a subtropical depression that formed about 500 mi ( 800 km ) south of the Azores on October 2 . During the next two days , thunderstorm activity gradually increased around the circulation center as the storm drifted northward . On October 2 , the storm had taken the appearance of a tropical storm on satellite photographs , and upper @-@ level anticyclonic flow over the center of the storm was evident on satellite time @-@ lapse movies . By the afternoon of October 4 , the system had acquired the characteristics of a tropical storm and was named Irma ; gale @-@ force winds extended 150 mi ( 240 km ) from the center of circulation . 
 Six hours after being named , Irma reached its peak intensity of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . On October 5 , Irma turned towards the north @-@ northeast and passed about midway between the central and western Azores . Shortly thereafter , Irma became less organized , and that evening was absorbed into an approaching cold front , about 450 mi ( 720 km ) northeast of the Azores . Although Irma passed near parts of the western and central Azores with gale @-@ force winds in some areas , no reports of damage or casualties caused by Irma were received . Several nearby ships reported winds around 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . It was noted that heavy rains may have occurred on some of the mountainous islands as Irma passed . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Juliet = = = 
 A weak tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 30 . The wave moved west @-@ northwestward and was centered well east of the Leeward Islands on October 6 , when satellite imagery indicated that deep convection became much more concentrated . The following day , ship reports noted that a closed circulation was developing . The system was classified as a tropical depression beginning at 1800 UTC on October 7 , while located about 600 mi ( 970 km ) east of Puerto Rico . Around midday on October 8 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Juliet . 
 After peaking with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) early on October 9 , Juliet passed north of Puerto Rico . The storm brought light rainfall to the island , peaking at 4 @.@ 51 in ( 115 mm ) at Toro Negro Plant . The storm then accelerated and curved northwestward , northward , and then northeastward . On October 11 , Juliet merged with a frontal zone , while located west @-@ southwest of Bermuda . Later that day , the remnants moved across the island and produced up to 3 in ( 76 mm ) of rainfall . 
 = = = Hurricane Kendra = = = 
 In late October , a tropical wave and an area of disturbed weather combined in the northwestern Caribbean , before crossing Puerto Rico . The system moved northwest and by late on October 28 , it became a tropical depression while located about 80 miles ( 130 km ) north of Mayaguana in The Bahamas . Early on the following day , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Kendra . The storm quickly intensified while moving either north or north @-@ northwestward and became a hurricane late on October 29 . After peaking with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) on October 30 , Kendra weakened significantly to a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tropical storm in only 12 hours . Kendra continued north @-@ northeastward or northeastward , before being absorbed by an extratropical cyclone while located west @-@ northwest of Bermuda early on November 1 . 
 The precursor system dropped rainfall across much of southern Puerto Rico was at least 7 in ( 180 mm ) , with a peak at 20 @.@ 43 in ( 519 mm ) in Pico del Este . Mudslides and flooding from the heavy precipitation left many roads impassable , washed out or collapsed several bridges , and caused considerable damage to agriculture , especially livestock . Additionally , one fatality occurred and 1 @,@ 710 families fled their homes for shelters . Damage in Puerto Rico reached $ 6 million . A high @-@ pressure area and Kendra combined produced strong winds and abnormally high tides along the East Coast of the United States , though no damage was reported . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the 12 other tropical cyclones , there were several tropical depressions that developed during the season . The first of which formed over the central Gulf of Mexico on June 21 . The depression moved northeastward toward Florida and strengthened slightly . It dissipated by late on June 22 . Another tropical depression developed about 175 mi ( 282 km ) southwest of Porto Novo , Cape Verde on July 10 . The system moved generally westward and intensified into a strong tropical depression , before dissipating two days later . Tropical Depression Four formed about 465 mi ( 748 km ) east of Barbados on August 7 . It tracked westward without significantly intensifying , and passed through the Windward Islands over Bequia on the following day . The depression continued westward and passed near Aruba on August 9 . It eventually traversed the Caribbean Sea , and made landfall to the south of Bluefields , Nicaragua on August 11 . The depression dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 A tropical depression formed in the central Gulf of Mexico on August 9 . The storm moved northward and struck southeastern Plaquemines Parish , Louisiana before dissipating the next day . By August 30 , another depression developed in the north @-@ central Gulf of Mexico . The system tracked generally eastward and avoided landfall . It dissipated around midday on September 1 . Tropical Depression Eight developed over western Senegal around 1200 UTC on September 3 . The depression initially headed west @-@ southwestward and soon entered the Atlantic Ocean . Between late on September 4 and early on September 5 , the system passed south of Cape Verde . Later that day , the storm began curving west @-@ northwestward . By early on September 7 , it was heading northwestward and then turned to the north @-@ northwest the next day . The depression moved northward between September 9 and September 10 , before re @-@ curving to the northeast . It dissipated about 440 mi ( 710 km ) of Flores Island in the Azores around midday on September 11 . 
 At 1200 UTC on September 8 , Tropical Depression Nine developed over the west @-@ central Gulf of Mexico . Moving generally westward , the depression made landfall south of La Pesca , Tamaulipas , around midday on September 10 . The system rapidly weakened inland and dissipated later that day . Another tropical depression formed over western Senegal on September 18 . It moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean before curving west @-@ northwestward about three days later . On September 25 , the depression moved northwestward and then northward by September 28 . It dissipated about 550 mi ( 890 km ) east @-@ northeast of Bermuda at 1200 UTC the following day . The next tropical depression developed in the Gulf of Mexico just offshore Campeche on September 21 . Moving west @-@ northwestward , the depression made landfall near Tampico on September 23 , shortly before dissipating . 
 A tropical depression formed at 1200 UTC on October 13 , while located about 55 mi ( 89 km ) north of Corvo Island in the Azores . The depression initially moved south @-@ southwestward , before curving southwestward by the following day . It then turned west @-@ northwestward on October 15 . Late the next day , the depression turned abruptly northward . The system dissipated about 500 mi ( 800 km ) west @-@ northwest of Flores Island . The next tropical depression developed at 1200 UTC on October 26 , while located about 490 mi ( 790 km ) south @-@ southwest of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . It moved generally westward and dissipated about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and the west coast of Africa on October 29 . The final tropical depression of the season formed about 265 mi ( 426 km ) northeast of North Abaco in the Bahamas on November 3 . Moving north @-@ northeastward , the depression turned northeastward by the next day . It dissipated about 275 mi ( 443 km ) east of Virginia Beach , Virginia on November 5 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic basin in 1978 . Storms were named Amelia , Bess , Cora , Flossie , Hope , Irma and Juliet for the first time in 1978 . This was the last year that only female names were used for Atlantic hurricanes . The name Greta was retired after the 1978 season . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in 1978 and their landfall ( s ) , if any . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still storm @-@ related . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low . 
 = New York State Route 118 = 
 New York State Route 118 ( NY 118 ) is a north – south state highway that extends for 10 @.@ 71 miles ( 17 @.@ 24 km ) in <unk> New York in the United States . Much of the highway is located within Westchester County ; however , a small portion of the route near the northern terminus is situated in Putnam County . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 100 in the town of Yorktown . Its northern terminus is at a junction with U.S. Route 6 ( US 6 ) in the town of Carmel . NY 118 passes through the hamlets of Yorktown Heights and Amawalk , where it overlaps with US 202 and NY 35 . The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it was initially routed on the portion of modern NY 100 and US 202 between the New Croton Reservoir and Croton Falls . It was moved onto its current alignment to Croton Lake in the late 1930s , but the easternmost piece was designated as an extension of NY 129 to a traffic circle in the hamlet of Pines Bridge . This section became a piece of NY 118 by 1969 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 118 begins at an intersection with NY 100 north of Croton Lake in the town of Yorktown . It heads westward as Saw Mill River Road , following the northern edge of the reservoir for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to an intersection with NY 129 . Here , the northern lake perimeter road becomes Croton Dam Road and continues west as NY 129 while Saw Mill River Road and NY 118 turn northward , passes through mostly residential areas as it heads toward the hamlet of Yorktown Heights . In the center of the hamlet , NY 118 enters a large commercial district based around NY 118 's junction with NY 35 and US 202 . 
 NY 118 joins US 202 and NY 35 here , forming a three @-@ way overlap that extends northeasterly into the town of Somers . At the hamlet of Amawalk , NY 35 splits off to the east on Amawalk Road while US 202 and NY 118 continue northeastward along the western edge of the Amawalk Reservoir on Tomahawk Street . The overlap between US 202 and NY 118 ends at the northern edge of the reservoir , at which point US 202 leaves to the east on <unk> Road . NY 118 , meanwhile , continues northward through residential neighborhoods into Putnam County . Just past the county line , NY 118 makes a 90 @-@ degree turn to the west onto Baldwin Place Road , then crossing the Putnam County Rail @-@ Trail . The route ends 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) later at an intersection with US 6 in the Carmel hamlet of Baldwin Place . 
 = = History = = 
 The roadways that makeup NY 118 through Westchester and Putnam counties was taken over and constructed between 1903 and 1907 . The first two segments , unsigned State Highway 148 ( SH 148 ) , which was NY 118 between a point north of NY 129 to Allan Avenue in Yorktown Heights along with a segment along the New Croton Reservoir and SH 149 , which went from Allan Avenue all the way to US 6 in Baldwin Place , were both contracted for improvement on June 16 , 1903 . The contract on SH 148 , 3 @.@ 48 miles ( 5 @.@ 60 km ) long , was completed August 5 , 1905 at the cost of $ 34 @,@ 272 @.@ 91 ( equivalent to $ 870 thousand in 2016 ) , half paid by the state . The contract on SH 149 , 6 @.@ 62 miles ( 10 @.@ 65 km ) long , cost $ 51 @,@ 232 @.@ 71 ( 1905 USD ) and was completed on October 28 , 1904 . The other portion of NY 118 , SH 405 , made up part of NY 100 , was contracted on September 20 , 1907 at the cost of $ 17 @,@ 605 ( equivalent to $ 447 thousand in 2016 ) . This portion of NY 118 and NY 100 was completed and accepted into the state highway system on November 21 , 1908 . 
 NY 118 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it did not initially follow any of its modern alignment . Instead , NY 118 headed northeastward from its current southern terminus on modern NY 100 and US 202 to a terminus at NY 22 in Croton Falls while all of what is now NY 118 was part of NY 100 . At the time , NY 100 continued north along Baldwin Place Road and Myrtle Avenue to meet then @-@ US 6 near Mahopac Falls . In June 1934 , the portion of NY 118 between Somers and Croton Falls became concurrent to US 202 , a new interstate route extending from Delaware to Maine . The alignments of NY 100 and NY 118 north of New Croton Reservoir were flipped c . 1939 , placing NY 118 on its modern alignment . NY 118 initially continued north to NY 6N over NY 100 's original alignment ; however , this extension was eliminated in the mid @-@ 1940s . With the flip , NY 118 terminated at a junction with NY 129 in Croton Lake , while the latter extended to a traffic circle with NY 100 in the hamlet of Pines Bridge . This alignment remained until 1969 , when the route was extended over the easternmost piece of NY 129 to end at the traffic circle with NY 100 . The traffic circle in Pines Bridge was removed between 1988 and 1991 and replaced with a three @-@ way intersection between the two routes . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 2010 ACC Championship Game = 
 The 2010 ACC Championship Game was a college football game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Florida State Seminoles . The game , sponsored by Dr. Pepper , was the final regular @-@ season contest of the 2010 college football season for the Atlantic Coast Conference . Virginia Tech defeated Florida State , winning the Atlantic Coast Conference football championship , 44 – 33 . 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies were selected to represent the Coastal Division by virtue of an undefeated ( 8 – 0 ) record in conference play and a 10 – 2 record overall . Representing the Atlantic Division was Florida State , which had a 9 – 3 record ( 6 – 2 ACC ) . The game was a rematch of the inaugural ACC Championship Game , won 27 – 22 by Florida State in 2005 . 
 The game was held at Bank of America Stadium in Charlotte , North Carolina on December 4 , 2010 . Charlotte was chosen after poor attendance at the game 's previous locations ( Tampa , Florida and Jacksonville , Florida ) led conference officials to seek a location closer to the conference 's geographic center . The 2010 championship was the first to be played in Charlotte , and the game will return to the city in 2011 . 
 The 2010 game began slowly , as Florida State scored only a field goal on its opening possession and Virginia Tech was held scoreless on its first try . On the second play of Florida State 's second possession , Virginia Tech defender Jeron Gouveia @-@ Winslow intercepted a pass by Florida state quarterback E. J. Manuel and returned it for a touchdown , giving the Hokies a 7 – 3 lead . They did not relinquish the advantage the rest of the game . The teams traded field goals and touchdowns through the remainder of the first and second quarters and entered halftime with Tech leading 21 – 17 . In the third quarter , Tech scored 14 points to Florida State 's seven , establishing the winning margin . In the final quarter , each team scored nine points , and the Hokies won with the most points ever scored by one team in an ACC championship game . In recognition of his winning performance , Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor was named the game 's most valuable player . 
 By winning , Virginia Tech earned a spot in the 2011 Orange Bowl football game , and Florida State was selected for the 2010 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . Several players that participated in the 2010 ACC Championship Game were picked in the 2011 NFL Draft . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 The ACC Championship Game matches the winners of the Coastal and Atlantic divisions of the Atlantic Coast Conference . In the early 2000s , the league underwent an expansion to add three former Big East members : Miami and Virginia Tech in 2004 , and Boston College in 2005 . With the addition of a twelfth team , the ACC was allowed to hold a conference championship game under National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) rules . 
 The inaugural 2005 game featured a Florida State win over Virginia Tech , 27 – 22 . In 2006 , two different teams made their first appearances in the game , which was held in Jacksonville , Florida . Wake Forest defeated Georgia Tech , 9 – 6 . In 2007 , one team new to the championship game and championship @-@ game veteran featured in the contest as Virginia Tech faced off against Boston College . The game resulted in a 30 – 16 Virginia Tech victory . The 2008 game saw a rematch of the previous year , as Virginia Tech again defeated Boston College , 30 – 12 . In 2009 , Georgia Tech defeated Clemson , 39 – 34 , in a matchup of two newcomers to the championship game . 
 = = = Site selection = = = 
 Before the 2007 game , cities other than Jacksonville ( site of the 2007 ACC Championship Game ) presented their plans to be the site of the 2008 ACC Championship Game . After poor attendance in the ACC Championship Game at Jacksonville for the second straight year , ACC officials and representatives of the conference 's member schools elected not to extend the Gator Bowl Association 's contract to manage and host the game for another year . On December 12 , less than two weeks after Jacksonville had hosted the 2007 ACC Championship Game , the ACC announced that Tampa , Florida would host the game in 2008 and 2009 and Charlotte , North Carolina would host the game in 2010 and 2011 . 
 The cities were chosen based on bids presented to the ACC and its member schools . Each city requested and was granted a two @-@ year contract . Tampa was chosen as the site of the 2008 game because Charlotte was scheduled to hold the annual convention of the Association for Career and Technical Education at the same time as the game , and adequate hotel space would not be ready in time for the two events . Because of this , Charlotte 's two @-@ year span of hosting the game was pushed back to 2010 . 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Before the beginning of the 2010 college football season , the annual poll by media members who cover ACC football predicted Florida State would win the Atlantic Division and Virginia Tech would win the Coastal Division . Florida State received 78 of a possible 98 first @-@ place votes in its division , while Virginia Tech received 62 . In a vote to predict the ACC champion , Virginia Tech received 50 votes from 98 possible . Florida State received 26 votes , and all other teams received a combined 20 . 
 Immediately after the preseason poll , however , speculation began as to whether regular @-@ season parity would render the prediction irrelevant . Before the 2010 season , the poll had predicted the ACC winner correctly only once in the championship game era . In the Coastal Division , this speculation was groundless , as Virginia Tech 's undefeated season rendered any other winner impossible . In the Atlantic Division , the situation was much different . As late as the second week of November , four of the six division teams were in contention for the division title . These candidates were whittled to three with two weeks remaining in the regular season , then to two in the final week . During that week , NC State traveled to Maryland . If NC State had won , it would have been the Atlantic Division winner by virtue of a tie @-@ breaking win against Florida State . Instead , NC State lost 38 – 31 , and Florida State earned a bid to the championship game . 
 = = = = Virginia Tech = = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies entered the 2010 season after a 2009 campaign that saw the team finish 10 – 3 , including a season @-@ ending win in the 2009 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl against the Tennessee Volunteers . Because of that season @-@ ending victory and the Hokies ' general good performance during the 2009 season , Virginia Tech was ranked No. 10 in preseason national polling . The Hokies ' first game of the season was a nationally televised contest against then @-@ No. 3 Boise State at FedEx Field near Washington , D.C .. Because the game was the first of the season to feature two top @-@ 10 teams , it received large amounts of media coverage . During the game , Virginia Tech fell behind 17 – 0 in the first quarter , but rallied to take a 21 – 20 lead early in the third quarter . The two teams traded the lead , alternating scoring drives until Boise State scored a touchdown with 1 : 06 remaining . Virginia Tech was unable to reply one final time , and Boise State earned a 33 – 30 victory . 
 The close loss discouraged the Virginia Tech players , who then had only five days to prepare for their next opponent , lightly regarded James Madison University . At Lane Stadium , Virginia Tech 's home field , James Madison upset the heavily favored Hokies , 21 – 16 . The loss was only the second time in college football history that a team ranked nationally was defeated by a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision . In the wake of the loss , Virginia Tech fell from No. 13 to out of the polls entirely . 
 Following the loss , seniors on the football team held a players @-@ only meeting in an effort to rally the team . Players later recalled that meeting as the turning point in the team 's season . The next week , Virginia Tech earned its first win of the season , a 49 – 27 victory over East Carolina in Lane Stadium . The Hokies followed that by traveling to Boston College for a 19 – 0 win , their first shutout since 2006 . 
 The two victories were the start of a winning streak that saw the Hokies complete the regular season without another loss . Following Boston College , they defeated No. 23 NC State in its home stadium , 41 – 30 . They defeated nonconference opponent Central Michigan , then beat conference opponent Wake Forest and re @-@ entered the polls at No. 25 . Their position in the polls climbed with each opponent they defeated . They beat Duke as the No. 25 team , Georgia Tech as the No. 23 team , North Carolina as the No. 20 team and No. 23 Miami as the No. 16 team . The Miami victory clinched Tech the division championship and a slot in the ACC championship game , but the Hokies still won their final previously scheduled game , the annual Commonwealth Cup rivalry against Virginia . 
 = = = = Florida State = = = = 
 Florida State began 2010 after a 7 – 6 record in 2009 that ended with a 33 – 21 win against West Virginia in the 2010 Gator Bowl . Florida State also began the year under a new head coach . Bobby Bowden , who retired after 57 years as a head coach , 34 at Florida State and 33 consecutive winning seasons , was replaced by Jimbo Fisher . Immediately before the 2010 season began , Bowden claimed he had been pushed out as head coach , causing a stir before Florida State 's first game . 
 For its opening game , Florida State faced the lightly regarded Samford Bulldogs and defeated them 59 – 6 . In its second game , No. 17 Florida State faced a tougher challenge as it traveled to Norman , Oklahoma to play the No. 10 @-@ ranked Oklahoma Sooners . The Seminoles were defeated 47 – 17 , in their third @-@ worst loss since 1991 . Florida State rebounded from the loss to defeat Brigham Young University , 34 – 10 , then opened the ACC season by defeating Wake Forest , Virginia , in @-@ state rival Miami and Boston College in succession . 
 On October 28 , Florida State traveled to Raleigh , North Carolina to play NC State . Despite leading 21 – 7 at halftime , Florida State allowed NC State to rally and win the game , 28 – 24 . NC State 's win gave it a one @-@ game lead and a tiebreaker against the Seminoles in the Atlantic Division . The following week , Florida State again lost , this time to North Carolina , a Coastal Division opponent . The same week , NC State lost to Clemson , bringing Florida State even with NC State in the divisional standings . NC State still held the tiebreaker , however . 
 With three weeks remaining in the regular season and two other Atlantic Division teams also with one loss , there were 120 possible scenarios for the four tied teams . On Nov. 13 , Florida State defeated Clemson 16 – 13 , eliminating one of the four tied teams from contention for the divisional championship . The following week , Florida State defeated Maryland , 30 – 16 , eliminating another contender . The divisional championship came down to the final week . Because Florida State was playing nonconference rival Florida , the division was decided by the matchup between NC State and Maryland . Hours after Florida State defeated Florida 31 – 7 , NC State lost to Maryland , giving Florida State the Atlantic Division championship and a bid to the ACC Championship Game . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Following the last week of regularly scheduled conference games , both teams moved up in the national college football polls . Florida State , which had been ranked No. 22 in the BCS Poll , No. 22 in the AP Poll , and No. 21 in the Coaches ' Poll , rose to No. 21 in the BCS , No. 20 in the AP Poll , and No. 20 in the Coaches ' Poll . Virginia Tech , which had been ranked 16th in the BCS , 13th in the AP Poll and 14th in the Coaches ' Poll before the final week of the regular season , climbed to 15th in the BCS , 11th in the AP Poll and 11th in the Coaches ' Poll . Spread bettors predicted Virginia Tech would win the game . Various betting organizations favored the Hokies by four or 4 @.@ 5 points . The matchup was a repeat of the inaugural ACC Championship game , and according to observers , the Seminoles ' presence appeared to mark a resurgence for Florida State , which performed below expectations in the final years of Bowden 's tenure . For Virginia Tech , there were hopes of breaking a trend of losing to Florida State . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer was 1 – 8 against Florida State , and the Hokies overall were 11 – 22 – 1 against the Seminoles . 
 = = = Attendance concerns = = = 
 After two years of poor attendance at ACC championship games in Tampa , Florida , organizers hoped moving the game to Charlotte , closer to the geographic center of the conference , would result in improved ticket sales . That hypothesis was borne out as early public sales approached 28 @,@ 000 tickets before the participating teams were officially announced . After the announcement , each school sold its allotment of 10 @,@ 000 tickets , and the more than 50 @,@ 000 publicly available tickets were purchased at a rapid pace . ACC officials and Charlotte boosters each said they were satisfied with the pace and quantity of ticket sales . 
 = = = Florida State offense = = = 
 During the 2010 season , Florida State senior quarterback Christian Ponder completed 62 @.@ 2 percent of his passes for a total of 2 @,@ 038 yards , and Florida State head coach Jimbo Fisher called him " one of the great Florida State quarterbacks of all time . " Despite this endorsement , Ponder 's participation in the ACC Championship was in doubt because of injured elbow fascia sustained in the Seminoles ' game against Boston College . The issue remained in doubt until the day of the ACC Championship , when coach Fisher announced that sophomore quarterback E. J. Manuel , who had led the Seminoles against Clemson was given the start . 
 Protecting both quarterbacks was a strong offensive line anchored by All @-@ American guard Rodney Hudson , a two @-@ time winner of the Jacobs Blocking Trophy , a four @-@ time recipient of all @-@ conference honors and a finalist for the Outland Trophy . Hudson and the offensive line also protected Florida State 's running backs . Foremost among these was sophomore Chris Thompson , who led the team with 687 rushing yards . Thompson was predicted to start the ACC Championship game because of his performance in the regular season and because fellow running backs Ty Jones and Jermaine Thomas were injured . Taken together , Florida State 's offense was 52nd in total offense , accumulating 391 yards per game . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's offense was centered on quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who was named ACC Player of the Year on December 1 . Taylor threw 20 touchdown passes , had only four interceptions and completed 60 @.@ 2 percent of his passes . He also rushed for 613 yards , a figure that included several " game @-@ changing " runs . Alongside Taylor , the Hokies boasted three strong running backs : David Wilson , Ryan Williams and Darren Evans . Wilson had 573 rushing yards , 509 return yards , 165 receiving yards and nine touchdowns despite being an underclassman . The Hokies led the ACC in scoring , averaging 34 @.@ 8 points per game , and were 38th in the nation in total offense ( 409 yards per game ) . 
 = = = Florida State defense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's offensive line was particularly concerned with containing Florida State sophomore defensive end Brandon Jenkins , who was tied for third in the nation in sacks ( 12 ) and 15th in tackles for loss ( 18 @.@ 5 ) . On the other half of the defensive line , defensive end Markus White recorded seven sacks during the regular season . In total , Florida State 's defense was No. 1 in college football in terms of sacks ( 43 ) and 15th in tackles for loss ( 7 @.@ 2 per game ) . Florida State placed a priority on containing Tyrod Taylor and preventing him from scrambling for extra yardage . The Seminoles were 39th nationally in total defense , allowing an average of 341 yards per game . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense was less statistically successful in 2010 than it had been in previous years , but the Hokies still led the nation in turnover margin , forcing 16 more turnovers than they gave away . Sophomore cornerback Jayron Hosley , a first @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection , led the nation in interceptions with eight , while Davon Morgan and Rashad Carmichael each had four . Tech 's defense ranked 10th in the red zone , seven spots ahead of the Seminoles ' defense in that respect . In total defense , the Hokies were 42nd , permitting an average of 349 yards per game . In scoring defense , Tech was third in the ACC , permitting 17 @.@ 9 points per game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2010 ACC Championship Game kicked off on December 4 , 2010 at 7 : 52 pm EST at Bank of America Stadium in Charlotte , North Carolina . At kickoff , the weather was overcast with light rain and a temperature of 36 ° F ( 2 ° C ) , " dreary and chilly " , according to The Associated Press . The wind was from the east at 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . The number of tickets sold was 72 @,@ 379 , slightly less than capacity , and despite the chilly temperatures , early turnstile figures reported more than 60 @,@ 000 people in attendance . The game was televised in the United States by ESPN , and Sean McDonough , Matt Millen and Heather Cox were the announcers . The game also appeared on ESPN 3D , and was broadcast on that channel by Joe <unk> , Tim Brown and Ray Bentley . Approximately 3 @.@ 047 million people watched the game , earning the broadcast a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 8 . That figure was the second @-@ lowest ever for an ACC Championship Game , but 13 % more than the previous year 's rating of 1 @.@ 6 , the record low . The game 's referee was Brad Allen , the umpire was Jim <unk> and the lineman was Art Hardin . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech won the ceremonial pregame coin toss to determine first possession and decided to kick off to Florida State . Kickoff returner Lonnie Pryor mishandled the football , but quickly recovered the loose ball and carried it to the Florida State 33 @-@ yard line , where the Seminoles began their first offensive drive . On the first play of the game , quarterback E. J. Manuel completed a 29 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Taiwan <unk> , driving the Seminoles into Virginia Tech 's defensive half . A short rush and a subsequent 12 @-@ yard pass gave Florida State a first down near the Virginia Tech 20 @-@ yard line . Short rushes pushed Florida State 's offense inside the Virginia Tech red zone , but the Seminoles were unable to gain another first down . Placekicker Dustin Hopkins came on the field and kicked a 32 @-@ yard field goal , giving Florida State a 3 – 0 lead with 11 : 43 remaining in the quarter . 
 Virginia Tech 's first possession began at its 20 @-@ yard line after a touchback . The Hokies advanced the ball into Florida State with a series of rushing plays , then lost yardage and punted from their 47 @-@ yard line . Florida State recovered the kick at its 15 @-@ yard line and began its second possession . On the second play of the drive , Seminoles quarterback attempted a pass , but the ball was intercepted by Virginia Tech defender Jeron Gouveia @-@ Winslow , who ran it 24 yards into the end zone for Virginia Tech 's first touchdown . The score gave Tech a 7 – 3 lead with 8 : 54 remaining in the quarter . 
 Florida State received the post @-@ score kickoff , then went three @-@ and @-@ out . Virginia Tech recovered the kick at its 35 @-@ yard line , and began a drive that needed only three plays to score a touchdown . The key effort was a 51 @-@ yard sprint by running back Darren Evans , which advanced the ball to the Florida State 9 @-@ yard line . The score and extra point pushed Tech 's lead to 14 – 3 with 4 : 37 remaining . Florida State responded with a quick touchdown drive of its own . From its 32 @-@ yard line , the Seminoles needed only six plays , three of them passes from E. J. Manuel , to reach the end zone . The score with 1 : 52 remaining trimmed Tech 's lead to 14 – 10 at the 1 : 52 mark . As the quarter came to an end , Virginia Tech received the post @-@ score kickoff and advanced the ball to its 22 @-@ yard line before the final seconds ticked off the clock and the first quarter ended with Tech leading 14 – 10 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Virginia Tech in possession of the ball and facing a third and nine at its 22 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor completed a 28 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Danny Coale for a first down at the 50 @-@ yard line . Tech continued to advance down the field , and eight plays later , Taylor completed a 19 @-@ yard pass to Jarret Boykin for the Hokies ' third touchdown of the game . The drive consumed 13 plays and covered 91 yards in 6 : 25 , and Tech gained a 21 – 10 lead with 10 : 28 remaining before halftime . 
 Following the touchdown , Virginia Tech kicked the ball off to Florida State , and after a short return , the Seminoles ' offense took the field at their 22 @-@ yard line . Florida State then embarked upon a 10 @-@ play , 78 @-@ yard drive that resulted in a touchdown with 5 : 40 remaining in the quarter . During the drive , Florida State converted two third downs and Manuel completed passes of 12 yards , 14 yards and 25 yards . 
 Tech 's Jayron Hosley returned Florida State 's subsequent kickoff to the Tech 35 @-@ yard line , where the Hokies ' offense returned to the field . Tech advanced the ball with short rushes , gaining two first downs via quarterback sneaks from Taylor . The Hokies advanced as far as the Florida State 44 @-@ yard line , but Florida State sacked Taylor twice , denying the Hokies another first down . Tech ran down the clock , then punted with 42 seconds remaining in the first half . Rather than attempt to score in the final seconds , Florida State kneeled on the ball and let the first half end with Tech leading , 21 – 17 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Florida State received the ball to begin the game , Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the second half . Running back David Wilson returned the opening kickoff to the Tech 21 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies ' offense began the first drive of the second half . The first play of the quarter was a 14 @-@ yard pass from Taylor to Coale , beginning a seven @-@ play , 67 @-@ yard drive resulting in a touchdown . The culminating play of the drive was a 45 @-@ yard pass from Taylor to Coale for the touchdown , which extended Tech 's lead to 11 points , 28 – 17 , at the 11 : 24 mark of the quarter . 
 After the kickoff , Florida State went three @-@ and @-@ out and punted back to Virginia Tech . The Hokies began their second possession of the quarter at their 39 @-@ yard line and started the drive with five consecutive running plays , advancing 28 yards in the process . Tech then switched to its passing offense , throwing four consecutive passes . Three were complete , and the final one , a 21 @-@ yard toss from Taylor to Wilson , ended with the running back carrying the ball into the end zone . The score capped a nine @-@ play , 61 @-@ yard drive that grew the Hokies ' advantage to 18 points , 35 – 17 . 
 Florida State 's offense returned to the field with 4 : 35 remaining and needing to score rapidly in order to make up the 18 @-@ point deficit , the game 's largest . The Seminoles began their drive with their passing offense , trying three passes in four plays . Quarterback Manuel completed two of those three pass attempts , gaining 37 yards and advancing deep into Virginia Tech territory . A pass interference penalty against Virginia Tech advanced the Seminoles to the Tech 11 @-@ yard line , and three rushing plays later , running back Ty Jones crossed the goal line for a touchdown . The score came with 1 : 40 remaining in the quarter and brought the score to 35 – 24 . 
 Florida State kicked off following the score , and Tech 's offense began work from its 18 @-@ yard line . Though quarterback Taylor was sacked on the first play of the drive , the Hokies recovered the lost yardage and gained a first down with the final play of the quarter . With one quarter remaining in the game , Tech held a 35 – 24 lead . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech began the quarter with a first down at its 29 @-@ yard line . After Williams carried the ball for a four @-@ yard gain , Taylor completed a 14 @-@ yard pass to Andre Smith for a first down at the Tech 47 @-@ yard line . Two plays gained only one yard , then Taylor completed a 46 @-@ yard throw to Coale for a first down at the Florida State 6 @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Taylor ran five yards into the end zone , finishing an 11 @-@ play , 82 @-@ yard drive that spanned two quarters . Tech increased its margin to 41 – 24 , but as Virginia Tech attempted the extra point , Florida State 's Nigel Bradham disrupted and blocked the kick . Bradham scooped up the loose ball and returned it the length of the field to the opposite end zone for an unusual defensive two @-@ point conversion . 
 The conversion brought the score to 41 – 26 with 11 : 29 remaining in the game . Florida State received the post @-@ touchdown kickoff , then benefited from a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty against Virginia Tech . Three subsequent plays failed to gain another first down , however , and on fourth down , a pass by Manuel was intercepted by Virginia Tech 's Davon Morgan and returned to the Florida State 34 @-@ yard line . With 9 : 29 remaining , Virginia Tech 's offense entered the game . The Hokies went three @-@ and @-@ out , but capitalized on the good starting field position by kicking a 43 @-@ yard field goal that increased their lead to 44 – 26 . 
 Florida State 's offense began work from its 36 @-@ yard line , but ran four plays without gaining a first down and turned the ball over on downs . Virginia Tech , whose offense began at the Florida State 45 @-@ yard line , proceeded to run down the clock . In eight plays , Tech advanced 21 yards and drained 3 : 22 , then turned the ball over on downs at the Seminole 26 @-@ yard line . Florida State 's offense entered the game one final time and conducted a 12 @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive that ended with a 20 @-@ yard pass from Manuel to running back Chris Thompson for a touchdown . The score and subsequent extra point made the score 44 – 33 , but only seven seconds remained in the game . The Seminoles attempted an onside kick in an attempt to have another opportunity for offense , but the Hokies recovered the kick and proceeded to run out the final seconds , earning a 44 – 33 victory . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance as the game 's winning quarterback , Tyrod Taylor was named the game 's most valuable player . He completed 18 of his 28 pass attempts for 263 yards and three touchdowns . The three touchdowns gave him 23 for the season , setting a Virginia Tech single @-@ season mark . The three touchdowns also tied the record for the most in an ACC Championship Game . Taylor also carried the ball 11 times for 24 yards and one touchdown . Taylor 's MVP award was his second , and he became the first player to win the honor multiple times . On the opposite side of the ball , Florida State quarterback E. J. Manuel had a better completion percentage , completing 23 of his 31 passes for 288 yards and one touchdown . He also ran the ball 11 times for nine yards . 
 Virginia Tech wide receiver Danny Coale 's 143 receiving yards were a career high and set a championship @-@ game record . Many of those receiving yards came on third down and were a reason why Tech converted 13 of its 17 third @-@ down opportunities , setting another championship @-@ game record . Florida State 's leading receiver was wide receiver Taiwan <unk> , who had six catches for 79 yards . Close behind was wide receiver Willie <unk> , who had three receptions for 73 yards . All of <unk> 's receptions came in the first half , setting a record for receiving yards in an ACC Championship Game half . 
 On the ground , Virginia Tech running back Darren Evans led all rushers with 69 yards on six carries . In total , Virginia Tech had 179 rushing yards ; three players had more rushing yards than the leading rusher on Florida State , running back Ty Jones , who had 24 yards . Jones also had three rushing touchdowns , becoming the first Florida State player to rush for three touchdowns since Oct. 4 , 2008 . He also was the second player ever to rush for three touchdowns in an ACC Championship Game . 
 Among defensive players , Florida State safety Nick Moody had 12 tackles , the most in the game . Virginia Tech 's leading defensive player was safety Eddie Whitley , who had nine tackles and two pass breakups . Tech 's Davon Morgan and Jeron Gouveia @-@ Winslow were responsible for the only turnovers in the game ; each had one interception . Gouveia @-@ Winslow ’ s 24 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown was the second such score in an ACC Championship Game . On the opposite side of the ball , Nigel Bradham 's defensive two @-@ point conversion was only the fifth in all of college football during the 2010 season . Florida State received no penalties during the game , and Virginia Tech received only four . The four penalties were the fewest in an ACC Championship Game . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's win in the ACC Championship Game , its first against Florida State in postseason play , brought it to an 11 – 2 record , while Florida State 's loss dropped it to a 9 – 4 record . Virginia Tech became the first team in college football history to win 11 consecutive games after losing its first two of the season , and it was the first team in conference history to defeat nine different ACC teams in one season . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer became only the second coach in ACC history to win four conference titles in seven years . The first to do so was Florida State 's Bobby Bowden . Both teams ' standings in the national polls were affected by the game . In the BCS poll , the Seminoles fell from 21st to out of the poll , while Virginia Tech rose from 15th to 13th . In the AP Poll , Tech rose to 12th , while Florida State fell to 23rd . 
 As a reward for winning the ACC Championship , the Hokies received a position in the 2011 Orange Bowl , a Bowl Championship Series game . Virginia Tech 's opponent in that game was the Stanford Cardinal , from the Pac @-@ 12 Conference . In that game , a blowout in favor of the Cardinal , Stanford defeated Virginia Tech 40 – 12 . Florida State , meanwhile , was selected to participate in the 2010 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl against South Carolina . In that game , held New Year 's Eve , the Seminoles defeated South Carolina , 26 – 17 . 
 Several players from each team participated in all @-@ star games following their teams ' respective bowl games . Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor and center Beau Warren played in the East @-@ West Shrine Game , Florida State quarterback Christian Ponder and offensive lineman Rodney Hudson played in the 2011 Senior Bowl . In that game , Ponder , who had been held out of the ACC Championship Game and underwent elbow surgery , guided the South team to victory by throwing two touchdown passes . The two games were a final chance to impress National Football League scouts before the 2011 NFL Draft , which began April 28 . 
 Florida State had three players selected in the draft , including Ponder , who was taken with the 12th overall selection , making him the first participant from the 2010 ACC Championship Game to be picked . Florida State 's two other selections were offensive lineman Rodney Hudson ( 55th overall ) and defensive end Markus White ( 224th ) . Virginia Tech likewise had three players selected : Ryan Williams ( 38th ) , Rashad Carmichael ( 127th ) , and Tyrod Taylor ( 180th ) . 
 = Elegy ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Elegy " is the twenty @-@ second episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by John Shiban and directed by James Charleston . The episode aired in the United States on May 4 , 1997 on the Fox network . It is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Elegy " earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 6 and was seen by 17 @.@ 1 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from televisions critics ; the performance of lead actress Gillian Anderson was especially praised . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully track a series of murders that lead to a home for the mentally ill and a clue that makes no sense : each victim has appeared as an apparition in the area where their body was found along with the words " She is me " . Furthermore , the episode continues the storyline that concerns Scully 's battle with cancer . 
 Shiban was inspired to write the episode based on an incident that involved his wife 's father potentially seeing other beings in a room when he was dying . Shiban was also inspired by the 1975 film One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . The series sought out a bowling alley for the opening scenes , but many establishments in Vancouver , Canada were reluctant to yield over two @-@ thirds of their space as well as close down for three days . Eventually , the Thunderbird Bowling Centre was chosen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Angie <unk> ( Alex Bruhanski ) , the owner of a bowling alley , tells one of his employees , an autistic man named Harold Spuller ( Steven M. Porter ) , to go home for the evening . Shortly thereafter , Angie discovers a badly @-@ injured blond girl wedged inside of the automated <unk> . The girl attempts to speak , but no words come out of her mouth . Angie notices police in a nearby parking lot and rushes outside to get help . He realizes a crowd has gathered around the dead body of the same girl he saw only moments earlier in the bowling alley . Angie relates his bizarre tale to Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Mulder suspects that Angie encountered the dead girl 's ghost ; three similar encounters , and three similar murders , were reported in the area in as many weeks . The agents discover the words , " She is me " written on the bowling lane where Angie saw the spirit , but its meaning remains a mystery . 
 Detective Hudak ( Daniel Kamin ) tells Mulder and Scully that an anonymous caller phoned 911 with a message regarding Penny Timmons , one of the killer 's victims . The caller claimed that Timmons ' last words were " She is me . " Hudak notes , however , that the victim 's larynx was severed , making it impossible for her to utter dying words . The agents trace the source of the 911 call to a payphone at the New Horizon Psychiatric Center . Mulder notices one of the patients , Harold Spuller , avoiding his gaze . After viewing photographs of the murder victims , Scully comes to the conclusion that Spuller fits the killer 's profile : a compulsive person consumed with the desire to organize , clean and reorder . Scully uses a rest room to attend to a nose bleed . There she encounters the spirit of another blond girl . Moments later , Mulder tells her that the body of yet another victim was found nearby . 
 Later , Mulder discovers Harold in a room accessible from the bowling alley . The walls of the room are covered with score sheets , including those of the victims . Mulder realizes that Harold met each of the murdered women at the bowling alley . Suddenly , Harold lapses into a strange seizure . From his point of view , he sees Angie 's ghost standing behind Mulder . He rushes out of the room and makes his way to the bowling alley , where Angie lies dead , the victim of a heart attack . Mulder tells Scully that every person who saw the apparitions was about to die , implying that Harold may be next . Scully , who also saw a victim 's ghost , is struck by the implication . 
 Harold is transported back to the psychiatric center where he is tormented by Nurse Innes ( Nancy Fish ) . Later , Mulder finds Innes lying on the floor , half @-@ conscious . Innes claims Harold went berserk and attacked her . One of the other patients , Chuck Forsch , tells Scully that Nurse Innes was trying to poison Harold . Scully slowly realizes that Innes , not Harold , was responsible for the murders . When Innes attacks Scully with a scalpel , Scully draws her weapon and fires , striking her in the shoulder . While summarizing the case with Mulder , Scully explains that Innes had been ingesting Harold 's medication , triggering violent and unpredictable behavior . Scully hypothesizes that Innes committed the murders in order to destroy the love Harold felt towards the young women . Later , Harold 's body is discovered in a nearby alley , the apparent victim of respiratory failure . Scully , however , suspects that Harold died from what Innes took away from him . Scully admits to Mulder that she saw the ghost of the fourth victim shortly after she was murdered . Later , Scully sees Harold 's spirit sitting in the back seat of her car . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Elegy " was written by John Shiban and directed by James Charleston . The episode was inspired by an event that happened when Shiban and his future wife were visiting her father in the hospital . According to Shiban , he was very near death and kept looking around the room , even though there were only two visitors with him . Eventually , he asked his daughter how many people were in the room . When his daughter revealed that there were only two people with him , he kept looking around the room . Shiban was inspired by the idea that " a dying person might be able to look through the cracks [ … ] into the next world " . He developed a premise revolving around a " haunted bowling alley " because " it just seemed right " . 
 The character of Harold Spuller was inspired by Shiban 's enjoyment of the 1975 film One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . In fact , Spuller 's friend Chuck Forsch is played by Sydney <unk> , who appeared in One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest as one of Jack Nicholson 's fellow patients . Steven M. Porter , who portrayed Spuller , was invited to audition for the show by writer Frank Spotnitz . According to Porter , after the audition he felt that he had " either made a great impression or a complete fool of myself " . Many of the gestures that Porter used in the episode were inspired by his appearance in a play called Asylum . 
 The series sought out a bowling alley for the opening scenes , but many were reluctant to yield over two @-@ thirds of their space as well as close down for three days . Eventually , the Thunderbird Bowling Centre was chosen . The series was allowed to film at the location under the condition that the bowling surfaces were preserved . Due to this , the production staff was forced to either wear bowling shoes or wear makeshift " paper <unk> " on their feet . In between camera set ups , Duchovny and director Charleston bowled several games . Duchovny later joked that after the episode , he " realized how old " he was because he felt sore from all the bowling . He joked , " when you get sore from bowling , it 's time to start thinking about your life and where it 's going . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Elegy " premiered on the Fox network on May 4 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 6 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . " Elegy " was seen by 17 @.@ 1 million viewers on first broadcast . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five and called it " terrific " . They applauded Shiban 's script , noting that it focused on " greater attention to the relationship between Mulder and Scully " , rather than the X @-@ File itself . The two called the shot where Scully sees the apparition in the bathroom " one of the most chilling things the series has offered this year " , and noted that the part with Scully conferring with her counselor " is the highlight of the season " . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Elegy " three stars out of four , writing that the X @-@ File part of the episode " falls apart by the end " but that the installment is saved by " the emotional impact of Scully " . Vitaris praised the acting of the cast , and especially lauded Anderson 's performance , noting that she conveyed " the shock and confusion at witnessing the frightening sight of the ghostly girl with a cut throat " . 
 Not all reviews were as positive . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " and called it " alternately deeply moving and really , really stupid " . His main criticism of the episode was the it portrayed mental illness in a manner that was " offensive at worst and just plain idiotic at best " . Furthermore , he derided the " magical mentally handicapped person " trope as " cringe @-@ worthy " and cliche . VanDerWerff , however , wrote that the episode was saved largely due to the " beautiful little scenes that let you see the weight of everything Scully 's been carrying around her " . 
 = Nicole Esdaile = 
 Nicole Esdaile ( born 1 June 1987 ) is an Australian goalball player and is classified as a B2 competitor . She took up the sport in 1999 , and made her national team debut in 2010 . Subsequently , she has competed at the 2010 Goalball World Championships , 2011 IBSA Africa Oceania Goalball Regional Champions and 2011 IBSA Goalball World Cup . She was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in goalball . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Esdaile was born on 1 June 1987 , and has a visual disability called <unk> albinism . 
 = = Goalball = = 
 Esdaile is a goalball player , and is classified as a B2 competitor . Her introduction to the sport was in primary school in 1999 . She has continuously played it since then . 
 Esdaile made her national team debut in 2010 at the Goalball World Championships . In a game against Greece , she scored a goal immediately following a penalty . As a member of the 2011 team , she finished sixth at the IBSA Goalball World Cup . Her team made it the quarter finals before losing to Russia 3 @-@ 6 . Her team then met the Spain women 's national goalball team to try to earn a spot in the fifth / sixth place match . Australia walked away 8 @-@ 7 victors , but lost the fifth / sixth place match to the Israel women 's national goalball team 6 @-@ 8 . She was with the team during the 2011 IBSA Africa Oceania Goalball Regional Champions , which served as the Paralympic qualifying tournament . In her first game against New Zealand , her team won 11 @-@ 4 after leading 7 @-@ 1 at the half . She scored three goals in the team 's victory . She also played in a match against Germany , and in the final match against New Zealand women 's national goalball team , which Australia won , with Esdaile scoring a pair of goals . 
 Esdaile was a named a member of the Aussie Belles that was going to the 2012 Summer Paralympics . That the team qualified for the Games came as a surprise , as the Australian Paralympic Committee head been working on player development with the idea of qualifying for the 2016 Summer Paralympics . An Australian team had not participated since the 2000 Summer Paralympics , when they earned an automatic selection as hosts , and the team finished last in the competition . The country has not medalled in the event since 1976 . Going into the Paralympics , the team was ranked eighth in the world . In the 2012 Summer Paralympics tournament , the Belles played games against Japan , Canada , the United States and Sweden . They lost every game , and did not advance to the finals . Esdaile was the team 's lead scorer , with four goals . 
 = Freedom for the Thought That We Hate = 
 Freedom for the Thought That We Hate : A Biography of the First Amendment is a 2007 non @-@ fiction book by journalist Anthony Lewis about freedom of speech , freedom of the press , freedom of thought , and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . The book starts by quoting the First Amendment , which prohibits the U.S. Congress from creating legislation which limits free speech or freedom of the press . Lewis traces the evolution of civil liberties in the U.S. through key historical events . He provides an overview of important free speech case law , including U.S. Supreme Court opinions in Schenck v. United States ( 1919 ) , Whitney v. California ( 1927 ) , United States v. Schwimmer ( 1929 ) , New York Times Co. v. Sullivan ( 1964 ) , and New York Times Co. v. United States ( 1971 ) . 
 The title of the book is drawn from the dissenting opinion by Supreme Court Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr. in United States v. Schwimmer . Holmes wrote that " if there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls for attachment than any other , it is the principle of free thought — not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the thought that we hate . " Lewis warns the reader against the potential for government to take advantage of periods of fear and upheaval in a post @-@ 9 / 11 society to suppress freedom of speech and criticism by citizens . 
 The book was positively received by reviewers , including Jeffrey Rosen in The New York Times , Richard H. Fallon in Harvard Magazine , Nat Hentoff , two National Book Critics Circle members , and Kirkus Reviews . Jeremy Waldron commented on the work for The New York Review of Books and criticized Lewis ' stance towards freedom of speech with respect to hate speech . Waldron elaborated on this criticism in his book The Harm in Hate Speech ( 2012 ) , in which he devoted a chapter to Lewis ' book . This prompted a critical analysis of both works in The New York Review of Books in June 2012 by former Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Freedom for the Thought That We Hate analyzes the value of freedom of speech and presents an overview of the historical development of rights afforded by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . Its title derives from Justice Holmes ' admonition , in his dissenting opinion in United States v. Schwimmer ( 1929 ) , that the First Amendment 's guarantees are most worthy of protection in times of fear and upheaval , when calls for suppression of dissent are most strident and superficially appealing . Holmes wrote that " if there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls for attachment than any other , it is the principle of free thought — not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the thought that we hate . " 
 The book starts by quoting the First Amendment , which prohibits the U.S. Congress from creating legislation that limits free speech or freedom of the press . The author analyzes the impact of this clause and refers to the writer of the United States Constitution , James Madison , who believed that freedom of the press would serve as a form of separation of powers to the government . Lewis writes that an expansive respect for freedom of speech informs the reader as to why citizens should object to governmental attempts to block the media from reporting about the causes of a controversial war . Lewis warns that , in a state in which controversial views are not allowed to be spoken , citizens and reporters merely serve as advocates for the state itself . He recounts key historic events in which fear led to overreaching acts by the government , particularly from the executive branch . The author gives background on the century @-@ long process by which the U.S. judicial system began defending publishers and writers from attempts at suppression of speech by the government . 
 In 1798 , the federal government , under President John Adams , passed the Alien and Sedition Acts , which deemed " any false , scandalous and malicious writing or writings against the government of the United States " a criminal act . The Alien and Sedition Acts were used for political impact against members of the Republican Party in order to punish them for criticizing the government . Thomas Jefferson was elected the next president in 1800 ; Lewis cites this as an example of the American public 's dissatisfaction with Adams ' actions against freedom of speech . After taking office in 1801 , Jefferson issued pardons to those convicted under the Alien and Sedition Acts . Lewis interprets later historical events as affronts to freedom of speech , including the Sedition Act of 1918 which effectively outlawed criticism of the government 's conduct of WW I ; and the McCarran Internal Security Act and Smith Act , which were used to imprison American communists who where critical of the government during the McCarthy era . 
 During World War I , with increased fear among the American public and attempts at suppression of criticism by the government , the First Amendment was given wider examination in the U.S. Supreme Court . Lewis writes that Associate Justices Louis Brandeis and Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr . , began to interpret broader support for freedom of speech imparted by the First Amendment . Holmes wrote in the case of Schenck v. United States that freedom of speech must be defended except for situations in which " substantive evils " are caused through a " clear and present danger " arising from such speech . The author reflects on his view of speech in the face of imminent danger in an age of terrorism . He writes that the U.S. Constitution permits suppression of speech in situations of impending violence , and cautions use of the law to suppress expressive acts including burning a flag or using offensive slang terms . Lewis asserts that punitive measures can be taken against speech which incites terrorism to a group of people willing to commit such acts . 
 The book recounts an opinion written by Brandeis and joined by Holmes in the 1927 case of Whitney v. California which further developed the notion of the power of the people to speak out . Brandeis and Holmes emphasized the value of liberty , and identified the most dangerous factor to freedom as an apathetic society averse to voicing their opinions in public . 
 In the 1964 Supreme Court case of New York Times Co. v. Sullivan , the court ruled that speech about issues of public impact should be unrestricted , vigorous and public , even if such discussion communicates extreme negative criticism of public servants and members of government . Lewis praises this decision , and writes that it laid the groundwork for a press more able to perform investigative journalism concerning controversies , including the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam War . He cites the New York Times Co. v. Sullivan decision as an example of " <unk> " philosophy towards freedom of speech espoused by James Madison . The author examines the 1971 U.S. Supreme Court case of New York Times Co. v. United States , and endorses the court 's decision , which allowed the press to publish classified material relating to the Vietnam War . 
 The author questions the actions of the media with respect to privacy . He observes that public expectations regarding morality and what constitutes an impermissible violation of the right to privacy has changed over time . Lewis cites the dissenting opinion by Brandeis in Olmstead v. United States , which supported a right to privacy . 
 Lewis warns that , during periods of heightened anxiety , the free speech rights of Americans are at greater risk : " there will always be authorities who try to make their own lives more comfortable by suppressing critical comment . " He concludes that the evolution of interpretation of the rights afforded by the First Amendment has created stronger support for freedom of speech . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The book 's central theme is a warning that , in times of strife and increased fear , there is a danger of repression and suppression of dissent by those in government who seek to limit freedom of speech . In an interview with the author , Deborah Solomon of The New York Times Magazine wrote that American politics has frequently used fear to justify repression . Lewis pointed out to Solomon that , under the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 , individuals who protested against President Woodrow Wilson 's sending of soldiers to Russia were tried and given a twenty @-@ year jail sentence . The author explained that his motivation for writing the book was to recognize the unparalleled civil liberties in the U.S. , including freedom of speech and freedom of the press . He identified reductions in freedoms of citizens as a result of governmental action taken after the September 11 attacks . 
 Freedom for the Thought That We Hate discusses the capability and liberty of citizens to criticize their government . Lewis asserts that the U.S. has the most unreserved speech of any nation . Law professor Jeremy Waldron gave the example of his ability to criticize the president or call the vice president and Secretary of Defense war criminals , without fear of retribution from law enforcement for such statements . The book contrasts present @-@ day free speech liberties afforded to Americans and those possessed by citizens in earlier centuries . The author argues that the scope of civil liberties in the U.S. has increased over time owing to a desire for freedom among its people being held as an integral value . Lewis observes in contemporary application of the law , presidents are the subject of satire and denunciation . He notes that it is unlikely a vociferous critic would face a jail sentence simply for voicing such criticism . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Freedom for the Thought That We Hate was first published by Basic Books , a member of the Perseus Books Group , in New York in 2007 , with the subtitle , A Biography of the First Amendment . For just the second printing , in both New York and London in 2008 , the book 's subtitle was simplified to Tales of the First Amendment . That change was reverted for the remaining printings , including the paperback edition in 2009 and a large print edition in 2010 . E @-@ book versions were released for the first , third and fourth printings ; an audiobook was released with the second printing , and re @-@ released with the fourth . The book has also been translated into Chinese , and was published in Beijing in 2010 . 
 The book was positively received by critics . Jeffrey Rosen , who reviewed the book for The New York Times , was surprised by the author 's departure from traditional civil libertarian views . Rosen pointed out that Lewis did not support absolute protection for journalists from breaking confidentiality with their anonymous sources , even in situations involving criminal acts . Nat Hentoff called the book an engrossing and accessible survey of the First Amendment . Kirkus Reviews considered the book an excellent chronological account of the First Amendment , subsequent legislation , and case law . 
 Richard H. Fallon reviewed the book for Harvard Magazine , and characterized Freedom for the Thought That We Hate as a clear and captivating background education to U.S. freedom of speech legislation . Fallon praised the author 's ability to weave descriptions of historical events into an entertaining account . Robyn <unk> of the St. Petersburg Times wrote that Lewis aptly summarized the development of the U.S. Constitution 's protections of freedom of speech and of the press . She observed that the book forcefully presented the author 's admiration of brave judges who had helped to develop interpretation of the U.S. Constitution 's protections of the rights of freedom of expression as a defense against censorship . 
 Writing for the Hartford Courant , Bill Williams stated that the book should be mandatory reading for high school and college students . Anne Phillips wrote in her review for The News @-@ Gazette that the book is a concise and well @-@ written description of the conflicts the country faces when grappling with the notions of freedom of expression , free speech , and freedom of the press . Writing for The Christian Science Monitor , Chuck <unk> noted that the author helps readers understand the importance of freedom of speech in a democracy , especially during a period of military conflict when there is increased controversy over the appropriateness of dissent and open dialogue . 
 Jeremy Waldron reviewed the book for The New York Review of Books , and was critical of Lewis ' broad stance towards freedom of speech with respect to hate speech . Waldron later elaborated this position in his 2012 book The Harm in Hate Speech , in which he devoted an entire chapter to Lewis ' book . Waldron emphasized that the problem with an expansive view of free speech is not the harm of hateful thoughts , but rather the negative impact resulting from widespread publication of the thoughts . He questioned whether children of racial groups criticized by widely published hate speech would be able to succeed in such an environment . Former U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens analyzed The Harm in Hate Speech and discussed Freedom for the Thought That We Hate , in a review for The New York Review of Books . Justice Stevens recounted Lewis ' argument that an acceptance of hate speech is necessary , because attempts to regulate it would cause encroachment upon expression of controversial viewpoints . He pointed out that Lewis and Waldron agreed that Americans have more freedom of speech than citizens of any other country . In his review , Stevens cited the 2011 decision in Snyder v. Phelps as evidence that the majority of the U.S. Supreme Court supported the right of the people to express hateful views on matters of public importance . Stevens concluded that , although Waldron was unsuccessful in convincing him that legislators should ban all hate speech , The Harm in Hate Speech did persuade him that government leaders should refrain from using such language themselves . 
 = Edinburgh town walls = 
 There have been several town walls around Edinburgh , Scotland , since the 12th century . Some form of wall probably existed from the foundation of the royal burgh in around 1125 , though the first building is recorded in the mid @-@ 15th century , when the King 's Wall was constructed . In the 16th century the more extensive Flodden Wall was erected , following the Scots ' defeat at the Battle of Flodden in 1513 . This was extended by the Telfer Wall in the early 17th century . The walls had a number of gates , known as ports , the most important being the Netherbow Port , which stood halfway down the Royal Mile . This gave access from the Canongate which was , at that time , a separate burgh . 
 The walls never proved very successful as defensive structures , and were easily breached on more than one occasion . They served more as a means of controlling trade and taxing goods , and as a deterrent to smugglers . Throughout their history , the town walls of Edinburgh have served better in their role as a trade barrier than as a defensive one . By the mid 18th century , the walls had outlived both their defensive and trade purposes , and demolition of sections of the wall began . The Netherbow Port was pulled down in 1764 , and demolition continued into the 19th century . Today , a number of sections of the three successive walls survive , although none of the ports remain . 
 = = Background = = 
 Edinburgh was formally established as a royal burgh by King David I of Scotland around 1125 . This gave the town the privilege of holding a market , and the ability to raise money by taxing goods coming into the burgh for sale . It is probable , therefore , that some form of boundary was constructed around this time , although it may have been a timber palisade or ditch , rather than a stone wall . 
 To the north of Edinburgh lay the marshy Nor Loch , formed in the early 15th century in the depression where Princes Street Gardens are now laid out . This natural defence was augmented by the steep slope up to the northern edge of the Old Town . Edinburgh Castle , on its rocky outcrop , defended the western approach . Walls were therefore needed primarily on the south and east sides of the burgh . 
 Early records mention a west gate in 1180 , a south gate in 1214 , and the Netherbow Port in 1369 . In 1362 the <unk> Tower was built beneath the north wall of the castle , protecting the castle 's water supply , and defending the approach along the south shore of the Nor Loch . 
 = = King 's Wall = = 
 The King 's Wall is first recorded in 1427 , in a title deed which refers to the wall as the property boundary . In 1450 , King James II issued a charter permitting the burgesses of Edinburgh to defend their town , as follows : 
 In a further royal charter of 28 April 1472 , King James III ordered the demolition of houses built on or outside the King 's Wall , which were hampering efforts to strengthen the defences . Edinburgh was thus one of only three Scottish towns to have medieval stone walls , the others being Stirling and Perth , though other towns had earth walls or palisades . 
 The wall ran along the south side of the Royal Mile , above the Cowgate , from the slope of the Castle Hill in the west , almost as far as the modern St Mary 's Street in the east , where it turned to cross the Royal Mile . In all , the King 's Wall enclosed a space no larger than 0 @.@ 8 by 0 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 by 0 @.@ 25 mi ) . The alignment of the wall was irregular , as existing property boundaries or walls were reinforced to form a defence . The early wall had two ports : the Upper Bow or Over @-@ Bow , in the vicinity of what is now Victoria Street , and the Nether Bow , on the Royal Mile near Fountain Close , which was located near around 46 metres ( 151 ft ) further west than the later structure . In addition , posterns ( side gates ) were provided , for example at Gray 's Close . 
 = = Flodden Wall = = 
 In 1513 , King James IV led an invasion of northern England in support of the French and the Auld Alliance . On 9 September , the Scots met the English at the Battle of Flodden , and were heavily defeated , with King James killed on the field . An English invasion was widely expected , and in Edinburgh it was resolved to build a new town wall . However , the new wall was also an opportunity to control smuggling into the burgh , and the town council accordingly decided to extend the wall south to take in the Grassmarket and Cowgate areas of the burgh . Construction began the following year , but was not completed until 1560 . Work started at the western end , and the final section was the stretch from Leith Wynd to the Nor Loch , incorporating the New Port . The cost of this last work was £ 4 / 10s Scots per rood ( one rood = six ells or 5 @.@ 6 metres ) for the wall , plus 40s per rood for the battlements . 
 The Flodden Wall , as it became known , was generally around 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) thick and up to 7 @.@ 3 metres ( 24 ft ) high . The Flodden Wall began at the south side of the castle , running south across the west end of the Grassmarket , where the West Port was located , and continued uphill along the Vennel . A watch @-@ tower or bastion survives at this , the south @-@ west extent of the wall . It then ran east , wrapping around Greyfriars Kirkyard , to the Bristo Port and the Potterow Port , both located in the vicinity of the National Museum of Scotland . Continuing east , the wall passed the Kirk o ' Field , where the Old College now stands , and ran along Drummond Street , turning north at the Pleasance to enclose the former Blackfriars Monastery . The Cowgate Port was located at the foot of the Pleasance , and the wall then ran up the line of St Mary 's Street , where it was formed by strengthening existing walls rather than new walling , to the Netherbow Port , which stood across the Royal Mile . The wall continued north to the Nor Loch , since replaced by Waverley railway station , terminating at the New Port . The Flodden Wall enclosed an area of just under 57 hectares ( 140 acres ) , and remained the limit of the burgh until the 18th century . Contained within this area , in 1560 , was a population of around 10 @,@ 000 . 
 There were six ports in the Flodden Wall . Anti @-@ clockwise from the castle they were : 
 West Port , built 1514 at the west end of the Grassmarket , where the modern street of West Port is today , and giving access to Wester <unk> ; 
 Bristo Port ( Greyfriars Port , Society Port ) , built around 1515 on Bristo Street , close to Greyfriars Kirk and the Society of Brewers ; 
 <unk> Port ( Kirk o ' Field Port ) , at the head of Horse Wynd near the Kirk o ' Field , giving access to Easter <unk> ; 
 Cowgate Port ( Soo @-@ gate , Blackfriars Port ) , on the Cowgate near the Blackfriars Monastery , the access to the Grassmarket from the east ; 
 Netherbow Port , on the Royal Mile ; 
 New Port ( St Andrew 's Port ) , at the foot of <unk> 's Wynd beneath the modern North Bridge , giving access north to Leith . 
 Besides , there were a number of small posterns . The heads and limbs of executed criminals were regularly displayed above the ports . Of the six ports , the Netherbow was the only one which took the form of a large fortified gateway . Repairs to the Netherbow are recorded in 1538 , and a drawing of 1544 shows the Netherbow as a wide arched gate flanked by two round towers . In 1571 , the gateway between the towers was rebuilt , and a central clock tower was added above the gateway , topped by an octagonal stone spire . This structure was repaired in the early 17th century . 
 = = = Military action = = = 
 Although the expected English invasion never materialised after Flodden , the 16th century was a turbulent period in Scotland . In 1544 the Earl of Hertford led an English force into Scotland during the War of the Rough Wooing . On 6 May , having captured Leith , Hertford 's men , under the command of Sir Christopher Morris , blew open the Netherbow Port with their artillery . The town was burned over the following three days , " so that neither within the walls nor in the suburbs was left any one house unburnt " . 
 Further disturbances took place during the troubled reign of Mary , Queen of Scots ( 1542 – 1567 ) , and its aftermath . In 1558 the Protestant Lords of the Congregation marched on Edinburgh against the Catholic French Regent , Mary of Guise , and were able to take control of the town without difficulty , despite the guards posted at the city gate . Following the forced abdication of Queen Mary , Scotland 's nobility was divided between her supporters , and those of the infant King James VI , represented by a series of regents . Edinburgh was held for the Queen by William Kirkcaldy of Grange , and in May 1571 the town was besieged by the Regent 's forces under James Douglas , 4th Earl of Morton . Repairs were made to the walls , and the Netherbow was barricaded . Nearby houses were pulled down to improve defences , and the siege gun Mons Meg was employed to batter houses outside the wall which were being used by snipers . Unable to make any headway , the besiegers withdrew on 20 May . 
 Again the defences were strengthened in September , in advance of a second siege which began on 16 October . By this stage only ten per cent of Edinburgh 's inhabitants remained in the city . The besiegers under Regent Mar had only seven guns , and while they did manage to breach the Flodden Wall , the inner defences were too strong for an assault . By 21 October the siege was once again lifted . A blockade of the town was continued until July 1572 when a truce was agreed . Grange retreated into the castle and handed over the town to the Regent 's party . The siege of Edinburgh Castle continued until May 1573 , when it was finally reduced by a battery of guns shipped from England . 
 = = Telfer Wall = = 
 In 1618 the town council bought 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) of land to the west of Greyfriars Kirk , which was enclosed between 1628 and 1636 by the Telfer Wall . Most of this land was subsequently sold to the charitable George Heriot 's Trust , and is now occupied by George Heriot 's School . The rubble @-@ built wall ran south from the Flodden Tower in the Vennel to Lauriston Place ; it then turned east , running as far as Bristo Street , where it returned north to the Bristo Port in the Flodden Wall . The Telfer Wall was named after its master mason , John <unk> . 
 = = Later history and demolition = = 
 By the 17th century the King 's Wall had been almost completely absorbed within later buildings , although it is briefly mentioned in the " Extent Roll " , a town survey of 1635 , and limited sections appear on James Gordon of Rothiemay 's map of 1647 . The mason John Mylne and the wright ( carpenter ) John Scott strengthened the Flodden and Telfer walls and constructed artillery emplacements in 1650 . Further emplacements were built by Captain Theodore Dury in 1715 , in response to the Jacobite rising of that year . In 1736 , the lynching of Captain John Porteous by an Edinburgh mob led the British Government in London to impose sanctions on the town . Porteous , Captain of the Town Guard , had been convicted of murder following the shooting of spectators at a public hanging , but following a reprieve , a mob broke into the Tolbooth Jail and executed him . The initial demand by the House of Lords was for the demolition of the Netherbow Port , although this was resisted by the town , and commuted to a fine by the House of Commons . When the town was threatened by the Jacobite rising of 1745 , a company of volunteer citizens was raised for the defence of the city , and the mathematics professor Colin Maclaurin advised on improvements to the walls . However , as Bonnie Prince Charlie 's troops approached , the town was undermanned and the walls undefended . On the morning of 17 September , a group of Highlanders under Donald Cameron of Lochiel rushed the Netherbow Port as the gates were opened , and Edinburgh was captured without a fight . 
 <unk> began soon after the withdrawal of the Jacobite threat in 1746 . The bastions of the Telfer Wall along Lauriston Place were demolished in 1762 , as they were obstructing traffic . The Netherbow survived until 1764 , when it too was removed as an obstruction . The West Port and the Potterow Port were removed in the 1780s . By now , the New Town was under construction , and although smuggling of goods through the city walls was still being punished , complaints about the <unk> of the guards were widely circulated . The Old College of the University of Edinburgh ( constructed from 1789 ) , and then the Royal Museum of Scotland ( constructed from 1861 ) , were built over sections of the wall around the Potterow Port . Forrest Road was laid out in the 1840s , resulting in the loss of another section of the Telfer Wall . During construction works around the Advocates ' Library and Parliament House in 1832 and 1845 , fragments of walling were uncovered , which were attributed to the King 's Wall . Two sections of the increasingly neglected town wall collapsed in the mid @-@ 1850s . In 1854 , a large portion of wall ( 20 feet high and 3 – 4 feet thick ) , and the embankment against which it was built fell into Leith Wynd between the High Street and Calton Road . A week later the Dean of Guild ordered the removal of a 150 feet stretch of the wall from that location . In 1856 , a lightning strike appears to have been the cause of the collapse of a 40 to 50 feet stretch of the wall enclosing Greyfriars Kirkyard . 
 = = Surviving fragments = = 
 Nothing remains of Edinburgh 's earliest enclosures , and very little of the King 's Wall survives , although parts are probably incorporated in later buildings . A section of walling in Tweeddale Court , on the south side of the Royal Mile , may represent part of the eastern wall . 
 This was exposed , identified and recognised as a fortified wall , initially by two labourers working on the renovation and restoration of the old Oliver & Boyd publishers in 1983 . Subsequently this was confirmed by archaeologists and planners and it was not demolished as consented . The height ( 6 metres ( 20 ft ) ) , and lack of openings suggest a defensive purpose . Walling in Castle Wynd , north of the Grassmarket , has also been identified with the King 's Wall . In 1973 , archaeological excavations on the site now occupied by the Radisson Hotel , south of the Royal Mile , uncovered a fragment of wall , which was thought likely to be the King 's Wall . There was also evidence of a house adjacent , which had been demolished sometime in the 15th century , presumably in response to James III 's order of 1472 . 
 Four sections of the Flodden Wall survive : to the north and south of the Grassmarket ; in Greyfriars Kirkyard ; and along Drummond Street and the Pleasance . North of the Grassmarket the wall runs alongside Granny 's Green Steps and has been incorporated into later buildings , including the former Greyfriars Mission Kirk . A line of granite paving across the Grassmarket marks the line of the wall where it was uncovered during construction work in 2008 . In the Vennel the last remaining bastion of the town walls survives . The Flodden Tower , as it is sometimes known , comprises two remaining walls with a total length of 17 @.@ 2 metres ( 56 ft ) , pierced by <unk> gunloops and a 19th @-@ century window . Sections of the Flodden Wall can be seen within Greyfriars Kirkyard , adorned with 16th and 17th century tombstones . At the junction of Forrest Road and Bristo Street a line of cobbles and a narrow gap in the later buildings mark the line of the wall . The longest section is in Drummond Street and the Pleasance , where it originally enclosed the Blackfriars Monastery . At the corner of the wall a blocked archway is probably the entrance to a demolished bastion . The site of the Netherbow is marked with an outline of brass blocks at the junction of the Royal Mile and St Mary 's Street . 
 There are two remaining sections of the Telfer Wall . The first runs along Heriot Place from the Flodden Tower , and forms the west boundary of George Heriot 's School . The wall along Lauriston Place was demolished in 1762 , as the bastions were obstructing traffic . The only remaining section is that forming the south wall of Greyfriars Kirkyard . An inscription on the building at the corner of Teviot Place and Bristo Street reads " 1513 Site of Town Wall " , although it was the 17th @-@ century Telfer Wall , not the earlier Flodden Wall , which stood on this spot . 
 The majority of the surviving sections are listed buildings , while three sections are further protected as scheduled ancient monuments : the Flodden Wall at Granny 's Green ; the Flodden and Telfer Walls at the Vennel and Heriot Place ; and the Flodden Wall at Drummond Place and Pleasance . The walls also form part of the Edinburgh Old Town World Heritage Site . 
 = = Location = = 
 = Bill Cosby in advertising = 
 American comedian Bill Cosby was a popular spokesperson for advertising from the 1960s – before his first starring television role – until the early 2000s . He started with White Owl cigars , and later endorsed Jell @-@ O pudding and gelatin , Coca @-@ Cola ( including New Coke ) , Texas Instruments , E. F. Hutton & Co . , Kodak , and the 1990 United States Census . As of 2002 , Cosby held the record for being the longest @-@ serving celebrity spokesperson for a product , through his work with Jell @-@ O. In 2011 , he won the President 's Award for Contributions to Advertising from the Advertising Hall of Fame . 
 Cosby was one of the first black people to appear in the United States as an advertising spokesperson . He was known for his appeal to white consumers in the second half of the 20th century , in an industry seen as slow to accept diversity . In spite of making contradictory soft drink pitches and endorsing a disgraced financial company , he continued to be considered effective and believable . In the 1980s , studies found Cosby the " most familiar " and " most persuasive " spokesperson , to the point where Cosby attributed his wealth to these contracts , as opposed to his television series . However , in 2014 , allegations of sexual assault significantly damaged Cosby 's public image ; public opinion polling following the news placed him near the bottom of a list of 3 @,@ 000 personalities , when rated on trust and effectiveness . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Anthony <unk> , director of public relations at Coca @-@ Cola , told Black Enterprise magazine in 1981 that the " three most believable personalities are God , Walter Cronkite , and Bill Cosby . " At the peak of his advertising career in the mid @-@ 1980s , Cosby had a Q Score of 70 , meaning that 70 percent of those responding to a survey of 1 @,@ 000 United States residents thought highly of him , thus deeming him the most familiar and persuasive endorser . In 2003 , industry publication Advertising Age said that " during [ Cosby 's ] 14 @-@ year reign over the ad industry 's public approval index [ he had only been surpassed by ] the Pope . In 2012 , the separate Celebrity DBI index listed Cosby as second most @-@ trusted celebrity on a list of celebrities people pay attention to on television , behind Morgan Freeman . 
 Professionally , Coca @-@ Cola advertising director John Bergin considered Cosby the company 's " greatest weapon " ; he said , " magic happens when the camera starts . " His enthusiasm was tempered on a personal level , finding him " inconceivably arrogant " and mentioned " blow @-@ ups " on the set . 
 One biographer of Cosby , Linda <unk> , said , " Cosby comes across as a father figure , a teacher , and a friend " in his advertisements . William Turner , in 1982 the marketing manager for Texas Instruments ' consumer products group , said Cosby " represents comfort , and people trust him " . In 2014 , one educator asked for comment said he remembered Cosby as a " black male authority figure , one of those people who folks that don 't live on the edges of the country think of as a good black guy ; they trust that guy " . In 1988 , a representative for Kodak said Cosby had become " synonymous with quality products and quality services " . Ebony agreed , saying Cosby has the advantage of being able to be selective . Cosby said his belief in their product is an attribute , stating , " if I presented a Bill Cosby who didn 't care , their sales would stop right there on the screen . Obviously , I could never do that . Once I believe in the product I aim to sell it , and that 's what I think I do better than anybody " . 
 An article in Black Enterprise said part of Cosby 's mystique is " that he can endorse a number of products and still retain credibility in each individual sell " . Shortly after being signed by Coca @-@ Cola , Cosby appeared at a bottlers ' convention . He refused to drink the bottle of Coke he carried on stage , saying , " I 'm waiting for all the Jell @-@ O pudding I ate to settle " . Cosby said that in childhood , he experienced " periods of addiction " to Coca Cola , consuming fifteen bottles by 2 pm . 
 = = Career in advertising = = 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 The American advertising industry was initially reluctant to use black spokespeople for fear of angering white customers . The Nat King Cole Show ( 1956 @-@ 1957 ) , the first nationally @-@ syndicated U.S. television series to be hosted by an African American , never found a national sponsor ; after its cancellation Cole said , " Madison Avenue is afraid of the dark " . 
 Cosby 's first advertisement was for White Owl cigars . He liked their slogan , " We 're going to get you " , so he had his agent Norman Brokaw of William Morris Agency inquire about Cosby becoming their spokesperson . Cosby had appeared several times on the late @-@ night talk program The Tonight Show , a signifier of success in American comedy , although his television series I Spy had yet to debut . Cosby later said there were no commercials " with a black person holding something , buying a product , so the absence of pictures , in retrospect , said a lot " . Despite the stigma among advertisers around using a black spokesperson , sales of the product rose . According to an entry in Ad Age Encyclopedia , the public acceptance of Cosby and Robert Culp appearing as equals on I Spy made it possible for advertisers to show black people and white people together in their commercials . 
 The Bill Cosby Radio Program , which debuted in 1968 , was sponsored by The Coca @-@ Cola Company . The series was syndicated to over 200 radio stations by McCann Erickson , Coca @-@ Cola 's advertising agency . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1974 , Cosby began promoting Jell @-@ O pudding for General Foods . Cosby said comedian Jack Benny , whose program the brand sponsored , was the only previous spokesman for Jell @-@ O , but Kate Smith , Lucille Ball , and Andy Griffith have also pitched the brand . In previous campaigns since the brand 's launch in 1902 , it was targeted towards parents rather than to children , a practice from which the company departed in 2001 . Cosby 's early commercials were unscripted , but later were written by comedy writers . Cosby disagreed with the writers , who wanted to say the food was for when you were " hungry " ; Cosby thought there was not enough substance to satisfy hunger and wanted to use the word " appetite " . In 1979 , General Foods introduced Pudding Pops , the company 's first frozen dessert product . With Cosby as spokesperson , it sold US $ 100 million its first year . After introducing <unk> Pops and frozen Fruit Bars , the company 's frozen desserts sales reached $ 300 million . Cosby was engaged to promote the flagging Jell @-@ O gelatin product line in the mid @-@ 1980s , when General Foods introduced a <unk> Jell @-@ O product called " <unk> " . Sales increased seven percent during the first year of the promotion . 
 Cosby appeared in commercials for Coca @-@ Cola 's 1979 campaign , " Coke and a Smile , " and made a guest appearance at the Great Get @-@ Together , a major bottlers ' convention held that year . This campaign continued into 1981 . 
 His work in this decade was well received . Advertising Age named Cosby the top advertising personality of 1978 . In 1999 , Advertising Age magazine named Cosby 's 1975 Jell @-@ O commercials , which they called " Bill Cosby with kids " , the 92nd best advertising campaign of all time . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Black Enterprise magazine found that Cosby was one of only a very few African Americans who could command among the highest fees paid for advertising spokespeople . The 1981 feature also highlighted how rare it was for African Americans to be hired for a complete campaign , as opposed to a single advertisement , despite an overall increase in opportunities . Cosby 's agents told the magazine he had earned at least $ 3 million in current advertising contracts – about one @-@ fifth of his income – the rest of which he earned from live performances . 
 Cosby returned as Coca @-@ Cola 's spokesperson in its 1982 " Coke Is It " campaign , a series of commercials mocking the Pepsi Challenge . One advertisement in this series showed a Pepsi vending machine to mock the brand , which author Mark <unk> called " unthinkable " . Another said Pepsi Challenge commercials were misleading because they never showed anyone choosing Coke . John Bergin , who directed the series of commercials , personally disliked Cosby but said his presence in Coca @-@ Cola advertising ended the first Pepsi Challenge campaign in 1983 . 
 In mid @-@ 1982 , Cosby was hired by Texas Instruments to appear in television advertisements for the company 's TI @-@ 99 / 4A home computer . He was to be paid $ 1 million a year for the campaign . The company touted Cosby 's education and rapport with adults and children . The campaign was aimed at parents , rather than children , as was the campaign for the Commodore 64 . Cosby was the face of a mystery rebate program , offering reimbursements of between $ 3 and $ 1 @,@ 000 . J. Fred <unk> , who was head of Texas Instruments ' home computer operation in 1983 , scrapped Cosby 's advertisements to focus on the product 's educational value . Radio Shack vice @-@ president of marketing David Beckerman said , " A celebrity draws attention to the product . Even if we had President Reagan on our ads , we wouldn 't sell any more computers . A product sells itself . A celebrity causes indirect sales . " Cosby , along with entrepreneur James Bruce Llewellyn , bought stock in a Philadelphia Coca @-@ Cola bottler in 1983 as part of the company 's push to increase African American participation in the company . This was , in part , a response to pressure by Jesse Jackson 's PUSH campaign . 
 At the height of the Cola Wars , marketer Sergio <unk> persuaded Coca @-@ Cola executives to create and air commercials with Cosby praising Coke for being less sweet than Pepsi , which was aired only in areas where sales of Pepsi were dominant . One commercial from the series features Cosby " <unk> an icky frown " and describing Pepsi as " gooey " . These advertisements were broadcast from October 1984 ; Coca @-@ Cola 's independently owned bottlers demanded the commercials were run in their markets as well . <unk> said despite the upcoming contradiction , the ads were the first boost to Coke 's image in years . Coca @-@ Cola was simultaneously testing possible new variations of its soft drink and decided it would sell more product if it used a sweeter formula . Once New Coke was launched , Pepsi prepared its public response to the change ; among its talking points for journalists writing about New Coke was to " Ask them about those Bill Cosby ads " . One of a new series of Coke advertisements showed Cosby dressed in a toga ; this campaign was described as unconvincing . Coca @-@ Cola faced a widespread public backlash , internal dissent , and ultimately the original drink recipe returned as " Coca @-@ Cola Classic " . In the days following the reversal , an editorial cartoon featured Cosby pouring a can of Pepsi into a can of Coke . Marcio Moreira , a McCann Erickson creative executive behind the New Coke introduction , said in 2011 that the decision to hire Cosby was not made until other commercials were being edited . 
 The Cosby Show debuted in 1984 , becoming " TV 's biggest hit in the 1980s " and reviving both the sitcom genre and NBC . Before the series premiere , Cosby told reporters his income from commercials for Coke , Ford , and , his Las Vegas shows , had made him financially secure . At some point before 1985 , Cosby featured in advertisements for Bird 's Eye frozen foods . 
 In 1986 , Cosby 's only contract was with Jell @-@ O , but by the end of the year he had added two more endorsements . By August , Cosby began promoting E. F. Hutton & Co. with a series of print and television advertisements , and comedy concerts . The company had been accused of fraud and needed a spokesperson who was well @-@ liked . Soon after Cosby 's commercials aired , the company merged with Morgan Stanley Smith Barney . In late December , he added J. Walter Thompson agency account Kodak <unk> System photographic processing system to his list . The estimated $ 10 million contract included commercials featuring Cosby to run in print , on television , as point of sale , and in promotional programs . 
 Coca @-@ Cola purchased Columbia Pictures in 1982 . In 1987 , Columbia decided revenues from its spy comedy Leonard Part 6 ( 1987 ) would offset its losses on ' Ishtar ( 1987 ) . Leading up to release , Columbia announced it would spend $ 12 million on " synergies " with the film , taking into account the success of Cosby 's television series and record sales for his parenting book , Fatherhood . Promotions included posters , spy cameras , point of sale <unk> of Cosby , and a contest to win Porsche cars . Cosby , who acted in and produced the film , was initially supportive of it , but close to the release date he publicly distanced himself from it . The film failed , with a net loss of $ 33 million . 
 In the 1980s , Cosby also appeared in public service announcements . To increase black participation in the 1990 United States Census , the bureau recruited Cosby , Magic Johnson , Alfre Woodard , and Miss America <unk> Turner as spokespeople . 
 = = = 1990s to 2010s = = = 
 Cosby continued to be a Jell @-@ O spokesman through the 1990s . He was present for the lighting of the brand 's first billboard in New York 's Times Square in 1998 . In 1999 , Cosby 's 25th year as spokesman for Jell @-@ O , was also the final year he appeared in its advertising . The company distributed 120 @,@ 000 copies of his picture book series , Little Bill , into American public libraries . Despite the transitions of advertising agencies and the 1989 merger of General Foods into Kraft , Cosby remained with Jell @-@ O. He appeared at the Utah State Senate in 2001 to designate Jell @-@ O the official state snack , and made a promotional visit to the Jell @-@ O Gallery in 2004 . In 2010 , Cosby returned to Jell @-@ O as executive producer for the company 's " Hello Jell @-@ O " campaign . In return , the brand sponsored his weekly web show <unk> , a children 's interview series similar to Kids Say the <unk> Things . As of 2002 , Cosby 's time with Jell @-@ O was considered the longest @-@ standing celebrity endorsement in American advertising history . 
 At the Advertising Hall of Fame induction ceremonies on March 30 , 2011 , Cosby was the first winner of the American Advertising Federation 's President 's Award for Contributions to Advertising , for special achievements in the field . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 In 1973 , The Village Voice writer Terry Guerin said Cosby was past his prime . Among the reasons , " making spokesman commercials for such established heels as White Owl cigars and Pan American airlines . He has evolved into a kind of self @-@ parodying sap , the kind of flagrant , perpetual <unk> Sammy Davis has always been " . " The Noble Cos , " a 1986 satirical editorial by Edward Sorel for The Nation , was written in Cosby 's imagined voice . It echoed the comments of other authors that Cosby had become out @-@ of @-@ touch with lower @-@ class African Americans . In response to this sentiment , Cosby said in 1997 , " So this buddy says , ' I didn 't mind your commercials for Jello , Del Monte , Ford cars ... Ideal Toys , or Coca @-@ Cola , although Coke does do business in South Africa ... But , Bill , why do commercials for those crooks at E. F. Hutton ? ' My buddy didn 't understand my commercials improve race relations . Y 'see , by showing that a black man can be just as money @-@ hungry as a white man ... I 'm proving that all men are brothers . " 
 In 1981 , Cosby told Black Enterprise magazine : 
 In this business , many of us are well paid but we are not all that wealthy . You may read ' X @-@ number of dollar goes to so and so , ' but remember , everybody takes a cut – the lawyer , the agent , the publicist . If a company comes along and says ' We 'd like you to talk about how much you enjoy wearing this warm @-@ up suit , ' and the money is right , I 'm going to do it . Jell @-@ O was a dessert in my house when I was a kid . My mom served Del Monte fruit cocktail when I was growing up . They want to pay me to say I eat these products , well , I eat them . I came out of a lower economic area , and this is money . This is a business ... show business . A great deal of our careers depends on keeping ourselves in the public eye . I think performers should take advantage of commercial offers if they 're satisfied with the product . 
 = = = Sexual assault and rape allegations = = = 
 In October 2014 , a stand @-@ up comedy routine by Hannibal Buress , addressing allegations of rape against Cosby , went viral on YouTube . On November 10 , Cosby posted a message requesting meme images , using a hashtag of # <unk> , on his Twitter feed . Many of the images posted in response related to the allegations , which were fresh in the respondents ' minds . After numerous women came forward as victims of Cosby 's alleged actions , a television special and a series in development were cancelled . Cosby refused to address the situation ; his lawyer said such actions would dignify " decade @-@ old , discredited " allegations . Many media outlets commented on the way such actions clashed with his image as " America 's Dad " . One of the accusers felt nobody would believe her claims at the time of the alleged incident , given Cosby 's status in advertising . Joan <unk> told the media that Cosby was " Mr America ; Mr Jello , as I called him " . 
 The publicity surrounding the allegations had a drastic effect on Cosby 's reputation , as seen in the following drop in his ratings . In March 2013 , Cosby had a 76 @.@ 3 rating on the Davie @-@ Brown Index , a rating of the public perceptions of roughly 3500 personalities published by Omnicom Group company The Marketing Arm , placing him as the third most @-@ trusted celebrity , behind Morgan Freeman and Dr. Mehmet Oz . By November 19 , this had fallen to 57 @.@ 1 , placing him at either the <unk> spot or <unk> , depending on the source . The same company 's separate rating on who consumers view as an " effective product spokesperson " saw Cosby drop to <unk> spot ; at one point , he had been 5th . Awareness of Cosby increased from 63rd to 51st . The Marketing Arm warns about misinterpreting the ratings fall ; it said 900 celebrities were within the margin of error for Cosby 's rating . At the time of the accusations , E @-@ Poll Market Research had not updated its scores ; a Q Score for Cosby was not expected until 2015 . The executive vice @-@ president of Q Scores Co. said polling in the midst of a scandal would likely overstate the score 's longterm effects . All three companies ' scores are updated at different intervals , meaning they are not directly comparable . Jell @-@ O was relatively unaffected on social media by allegations against Cosby . The brand was mentioned in one percent of posts about Cosby , which was considered low . Still , negative connections continued , including by rapper Eminem in a freestyle rap , and an article by Food Drink and Franchise magazine pointed out moments in commercials that were awkward in retrospect . 
 = No. 3 Elementary Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 3 Elementary Flying Training School ( No. 3 EFTS ) was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) pilot training unit that operated during World War II . It was one of twelve elementary flying training schools employed by the RAAF to provide introductory flight instruction to new pilots as part of Australia 's contribution to the Empire Air Training Scheme . No. 3 EFTS was established in January 1940 at Essendon , Victoria , and initially included a significant proportion of civilian staff and private aircraft ; by mid @-@ year these had been largely integrated into the military . The school was disbanded in May 1942 , its aircraft and instructional staff having been transferred to No. 11 Elementary Flying School at Benalla . 
 = = History = = 
 Flying instruction in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) underwent major changes following the outbreak of World War II , in response to a vast increase in the number of aircrew volunteers and the commencement of Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . The Air Force 's pre @-@ war pilot training facility , No. 1 Flying Training School at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , was supplanted in 1940 – 41 by twelve elementary flying training schools ( EFTS ) and eight service flying training schools ( SFTS ) . The EFTS provided a twelve @-@ week introductory flying course to personnel who had graduated from one of the RAAF 's initial training schools . Flying training was undertaken in two stages : the first involved four weeks of instruction ( including ten hours of flying ) , which were used to determine trainees ' suitability to become pilots . Those that passed this grading process then received a further eight weeks of training ( including 65 hours of flying ) at the EFTS . Pilots who successfully completed this course were posted to an SFTS in either Australia or Canada for the next stage of their instruction as military aviators . 
 No. 3 Elementary Flying Training School ( No. 3 EFTS ) was formed at Essendon , Victoria , on 2 January 1940 , and came under the control of Southern Area Command . Its inaugural commanding officer was Squadron Leader Roy King , a fighter ace credited with 26 victories in the Australian Flying Corps during World War I. Essendon aerodrome had been established in 1921 , and was home to several private aviation clubs and schools including the Royal Victorian Aero Club , ANA Flying School , and Victoria & Interstate Airways Ltd . It was the airfield 's position as the hub of civilian flight instruction in Victoria that led to it becoming the base for the third flying school the RAAF raised during World War II . The same principle was followed in establishing No. 1 EFTS at Parafield , South Australia , No. 2 EFTS at Archerfield , Queensland , and No. 4 EFTS at Mascot , New South Wales . 
 The first training courses at No. 3 EFTS were not conducted by RAAF instructors under the auspices of EATS but by Essendon 's civil organisations under government contract . The training aircraft were privately owned de Havilland Tiger Moths and Gipsy Moths . All air cadets were subject to RAAF discipline , and the school 's training program was directed by Squadron Leader King . The initial intake of sixteen students arrived on 8 January 1940 , and received eight weeks of instruction that finished on 4 March ; all but one of the trainees had prior flying experience , and the course was accident @-@ free . The next student intake at No. 3 EFTS arrived on 5 February 1940 . The school 's inaugural EATS course commenced in May . Overall student numbers at this time were reported as being 48 , while staff totalled 50 . The second EATS course began in July . By this time , Essendon 's civilian presence had effectively been absorbed by the military organisation ; privately owned aircraft were taken over by the RAAF , which had also begun employing its own aircraft , the first being a Gipsy Moth that arrived in March . Training accidents were frequent , particularly during landings , but did not result in any fatalities . 
 Clyde Fenton , known for his exploits as a flying doctor in the Northern Territory before being commissioned as a pilot in the RAAF , served as an instructor at No. 3 EFTS from mid @-@ 1940 to early 1942 . King was posted to command No. 5 EFTS at Narromine , New South Wales , in December 1940 . By this time No. 3 EFTS was reported as having graduated 200 pilots in the eight flying training courses it had run since its formation . One of its graduates was Nicky Barr , who become a fighter ace in the North African Campaign with twelve victories to his credit . No. 3 EFTS began operating a ground @-@ based Link Trainer on 17 February 1941 . The school started flying the recently introduced CAC Wackett Trainer in August 1941 , but the type proved troublesome , delaying the training program . From September to November 1941 , a detachment of personnel from No. 11 EFTS also utilised training facilities at Essendon , after their home aerodrome at Benalla had been inundated by heavy rain . No. 3 EFTS 's instructors , students and Wackett Trainers were transferred to No. 11 EFTS during April 1942 , and the Essendon school was disbanded on 1 May . 
 = Superman in film = 
 The fictional character Superman , an American comic book superhero in DC Comics publications , has appeared in movies almost since his inception . He debuted in cinemas in a series of animated shorts beginning in 1941 , and then starred in two movie serials in 1948 and 1950 . An independent studio , Lippert Pictures , released the first Superman feature film , Superman and the Mole Men , starring George Reeves , in 1951 . 
 Ilya and Alexander Salkind and Pierre Spengler purchased the Superman film rights in 1974 . After numerous scripts , Richard Donner was hired to direct the film , filming Superman ( 1978 ) and Superman II ( 1980 ) simultaneously . Donner had already shot eighty percent of Superman II with Christopher Reeve before it was decided to finish shooting the first film . The Salkinds fired Donner after Superman 's release , and commissioned Richard Lester as the director to finish Superman II . Lester also returned for Superman III ( 1983 ) , and the Salkinds further produced the 1984 spin @-@ off Supergirl before selling the rights to Cannon Films , resulting in the critically panned Superman IV : The Quest for Peace ( 1987 ) . Ilya Salkind commissioned a fifth Superman script before Warner Bros. acquired the rights entirely in 1993 . 
 Over the course of eleven years Warner Bros. would develop and then cancel Tim Burton 's Superman Lives , which would have starred Nicolas Cage , Wolfgang Petersen 's Batman vs. Superman , and the J. J. Abrams scripted Superman : Flyby , which went between directors Joseph " McG " Nichols and Brett Ratner . The studio hired Bryan Singer to take over the franchise in 2004 , releasing Superman Returns in 2006 , which starred newcomer Brandon Routh . Donner 's director 's cut for Superman II was also released that year . Despite positive reviews , Warner Bros. was disappointed with the financial performance of Superman Returns , and canceled Singer 's proposed sequel . The studio nearly went in production of a Justice League film with George Miller directing and D. J. Cotrona as Superman , but it was shelved in 2008 and the film series was rebooted in 2013 with Man of Steel , directed by Zack Snyder and produced by Christopher Nolan . Henry Cavill reprised the role of Superman in 2016 with Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = Early films and serials = = 
 = = = Paramount cartoon shorts = = = 
 Superman first appeared in cinemas in a series of 17 theatrical animated shorts from between 1941 and 1943 . They were released by Paramount Pictures . Of those seventeen , nine were produced by Fleischer Studios and further eight by its successor , Famous Studios . 
 = = = Film serials = = = 
 The first appearances of Superman in live @-@ action film were in two serials for Columbia Pictures : Superman in 1948 and Atom Man vs. Superman in 1950 , both starring Kirk Alyn and Noel Neill . 
 = = = Superman and the Mole Men ( 1951 ) = = = 
 Superman and the Mole Men is a 1951 superhero film starring George Reeves as Superman and Phyllis Coates as Lois Lane . The film was produced by Barney <unk> and directed by Lee <unk> with the original screenplay by Richard Fielding ( a pseudonym for Robert Maxwell and Whitney Ellsworth ) . Shot on a low budget , it served as a trial run for the syndicated TV series Adventures of Superman , for which it became a pilot two @-@ part episode titled " The Unknown People " . 
 = = Christopher Reeve series ( 1978 – 1987 ) = = 
 = = = Superman ( 1978 ) = = = 
 In 1973 , producer Ilya Salkind convinced his father Alexander to buy the rights to Superman . They hired Mario Puzo to pen a two @-@ film script , and negotiated with Steven Spielberg to direct , though Alexander Salkind rejected him as Jaws went over budget . Marlon Brando and Gene Hackman signed on to play Jor @-@ El and Lex Luthor respectively , and Guy Hamilton was hired to direct . However , Brando was faced with an obscenity lawsuit in Italy over Last Tango in Paris , and Hamilton was unable to shoot in England as he had violated his tax payments . The Salkinds hired Richard Donner to direct the film . Donner hired Tom Mankiewicz to polish the script , giving it a serious feel with Christ @-@ like overtones . Christopher Reeve was cast as Superman , having initially failed to impress the Salkinds before bulking up . Brando meanwhile , despite spending less than two weeks on the shoot , and not even reading the script until then , earned $ 3 @.@ 7 million up front , plus 11 @.@ 75 % of the gross profits from the film . The film was a success both critically and commercially , being released during the Christmas season of 1978 ; it did not have much competition , leading the producers to believe that this was one factor in the film 's success . 
 = = = Superman II ( 1980 ) = = = 
 Shooting of the two films was marred by Donner 's bad relationship with the Salkinds , with Richard Lester acting as mediator . With the film going over @-@ budget , the filmmakers decided to temporarily cease production of II and move that film 's climax into the first film . Despite Superman 's success , Donner did not return to finish Superman II , and it was completed with Lester , who gave the film a more tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek tone . The Salkinds also cut Brando for financial reasons , while John Williams quit as composer due to turning his attention to other projects . Superman II was another financial and critical success , despite stiff competition with Raiders of the Lost Ark in the same year . In 2006 , after receiving many requests for his own version of Superman II , Richard Donner and producer Michael Thau produced their own cut of the film and released it on November 28 , 2006 . The new version of the film received positive response from critics and the stars of the original film . 
 = = = Superman III ( 1983 ) = = = 
 For the third installment , Ilya Salkind wrote a treatment that expanded the film 's scope to a cosmic scale , introducing the villains Brainiac and Mr. Mxyzptlk , as well as Supergirl . The original outline featured a father @-@ daughter relationship between Brainiac and Supergirl , and a romance between Superman and Supergirl , even though the two are cousins in the comics . Warner Bros. rejected it and created their own Superman III film that co @-@ starred Richard Pryor as computer wizard Gus Gorman , who under the manipulation of a millionaire magnate , creates a form of Kryptonite that turns the Man of Steel into an evil self . The retooled script pared Brainiac down into the film 's evil " ultimate computer " . Despite the film 's success , fans were disappointed with the film , in particular with Pryor 's performance diluting the serious tone of the previous films , as well as controversy over the depiction of the evil Superman . Salkind 's rejected proposal was later released online in 2007 . 
 = = = Supergirl ( 1984 ) = = = 
 Upon gaining the rights for the film Superman , Alexander Salkind and his son , Ilya Salkind , also purchased the rights to the character of Superman 's cousin Supergirl . Supergirl was released in 1984 as a spin @-@ off of the Reeve films ; Reeve was slated to have a cameo but he ultimately backed out of the production . It stars Helen Slater in her first motion picture in the title role , while Faye Dunaway ( who received top billing ) played the primary villain , Selena ; the film also featured Marc McClure reprising his role as Jimmy Olsen . Even though the film performed poorly at the box office , Helen Slater was nominated for a Saturn Award . 
 = = = Superman IV : The Quest for Peace ( 1987 ) = = = 
 Cannon Films picked up an option for a fourth Superman / Reeve film , with Reeve reprising the role due to his interest in the film 's topic regarding nuclear weapons . However , Cannon decided to cut the budget of Superman IV : The Quest for Peace from $ 35 million to $ 15 million , with poor special effects and heavy re @-@ editing leading to the film 's poor reception . Warner Bros. decided to give the franchise a break following the negative reception of the last two Superman films . 
 = = Abandoned and cancelled projects = = 
 = = = Superman V = = = 
 Before the failure of Superman IV : The Quest for Peace , Cannon Films considered producing a fifth film with Albert Pyun as director . Cannon 's bankruptcy resulted in the film rights reverting to Ilya and Alexander Salkind . Ilya Salkind wrote the story for Superman V ( also known as Superman : The New Movie ) with Superboy writers Cary Bates and Mark Jones in the early @-@ 1990s . The story had Superman dying and resurrecting in the shrunken , bottled Krypton city of Kandor . The premise of Superman 's death and rebirth coincidentally predated " The Death of Superman " . Salkind , Bates and Jones developed two drafts of the script , with Christopher Reeve set to reprise the title role . 
 = = = Superman Reborn = = = 
 With the success of " The Death of Superman " comic book storyline , Warner Bros. purchased the film rights of Superman from the Salkinds in early 1993 , handing the project to producer Jon Peters . The studio did not want to use Superman : The New Movie , and Peters hired Jonathan Lemkin to write a new script . Warner Bros. instructed Lemkin to write the new Superman film for mainstream audiences , a style for the MTV Generation of the 1990s . The additional family film approach would add to Superman 's toyetic appeal , similar to Batman Forever . Major toy companies insisted on seeing Lemkin 's screenplay before the deadline of the 1993 American International Toy Fair . 
 Lemkin 's script , titled Superman Reborn , featured Lois Lane and Clark Kent with relationship troubles , and Superman 's battle with Doomsday . When Superman professes his love to Lois , his life force jumps between them , just as he dies , giving Lois a virgin birth . Their child , who grows 21 @-@ years @-@ old in three weeks , becomes the resurrected Superman and saves the world . Warner Bros. did not like the script because of the similar underlying themes with Bruce Wayne 's obligations of heroism found in Batman Forever . 
 Peters hired Gregory Poirier to rewrite the script . <unk> 's December 1995 script had Brainiac creating Doomsday , infused with " Kryptonite blood " . Superman has romance problems with Lois Lane and visits a psychiatrist before he is killed by Doomsday . An alien named Cadmus , a victim of Brainiac , steals his corpse . Superman is resurrected and teams with Cadmus to defeat Brainiac . Powerless , Superman wears a robotic suit that mimics his old powers until he can learn to use his powers again on his own , which , according to the script , are a mental discipline called " Phin @-@ <unk> " , a concept similar to The Force . Other villains included Parasite and Silver Banshee . Poirier 's script impressed Warner Bros. , but Kevin Smith was hired to rewrite . Smith thought Poirier 's script did not respect the Superman mythos properly , and referred to it in An Evening with Kevin Smith as being " like the Batman TV show version of a Superman movie ; very campy . " 
 = = = Superman Lives = = = 
 Kevin Smith pitched Peters his story outline in August 1996 , and was allowed to write the screenplay under certain conditions : Peters wanted Superman to wear an all @-@ black suit , and also did not want Superman to fly , arguing that Superman would " look like an overgrown Boy Scout . " Smith wrote Superman flying as " a red @-@ and @-@ blue blur in flight , creating a sonic boom every time he flew . " Peters also wanted Superman to fight a giant spider for the climactic showdown . Smith accepted the terms , realizing that he was being hired to execute a preordained idea . Smith was also forced to write a scene involving Brainiac fighting a polar bear at the Fortress of Solitude , as Peters felt there were not enough action scenes in the first draft . The Star Wars 20th anniversary re @-@ release in theaters also prompted Peters to commission a " space dog " that Brainiac could present to Luthor purely for merchandising appeal and toy sales . Peters also insisted that Brainiac 's robot assistant L @-@ Ron was to be voiced by Dwight Ewell , calling the character , " a gay R2 @-@ D2 with attitude . " 
 Smith 's draft , now titled Superman Lives , had Brainiac sending Doomsday to kill Superman , as well as blocking out the sun to make Superman powerless , as Superman is fueled by sunlight . Brainiac teams up with Lex Luthor , but Superman is resurrected by a Kryptonian robot , the Eradicator . Brainiac wishes to possess the Eradicator and its technology . Powerless , the resurrected Superman is sheathed in a robotic suit formed from the Eradicator itself until his powers return , courtesy of sunbeams , and defeats Brainiac . Smith 's casting choices included Ben Affleck as Clark Kent / Superman , Linda Fiorentino as Lois Lane , Jack Nicholson as Lex Luthor , Famke Janssen as Mercy , John Mahoney as Perry White , David Hyde Pierce as the Eradicator , Jason Lee as Brainiac and Jason Mewes as Jimmy Olsen . 
 Robert Rodriguez was offered the chance to direct , but turned down the offer due to his commitment on The Faculty , despite liking Smith 's script . Smith originally suggested Tim Burton to direct his script , and Burton signed on with a pay @-@ or @-@ play contract of $ 5 million . Warner Bros. originally planned on a theatrical release date for summer 1998 , the 60th anniversary of the character 's debut in Action Comics . Nicolas Cage , a comic book fan , signed on as Superman with a $ 20 million pay @-@ or @-@ play contract , believing he could " re @-@ conceive the character . " Peters felt Cage could " convince audiences he [ Superman ] came from outer space . " Burton explained Cage 's casting would be " the first time you would believe that nobody could recognize Clark Kent as Superman , he [ Cage ] could physically change his persona . " Kevin Spacey was approached for the role of Lex Luthor , while Christopher Walken was Burton 's choice for Brainiac , a role also considered for Jim Carrey and Gary Oldman . Sandra Bullock , Courteney Cox and Julianne Moore had been approached for Lois Lane , while Chris Rock was cast as Jimmy Olsen . Michael Keaton confirmed his involvement , but when asked if he would be reprising his role as Batman from Burton 's Batman films , he would only reply , " Not exactly . " Industrial Light & Magic was set for work on special effects . 
 Filming was originally set to begin in early 1998 . In June 1997 , Superman Lives entered pre @-@ production , with an art department employed under production designer Rick Heinrichs . Burton hired Wesley Strick to rewrite Smith 's script . Smith was disappointed , stating , " The studio was happy with what I was doing . Then Tim Burton got involved , and when he signed his pay @-@ or @-@ play deal , he turned around and said he wanted to do his version of Superman . So who is Warner Bros. going back to ? The guy who made Clerks , or the guy who made them half a billion dollars on Batman ? " When Strick read Smith 's script , he was annoyed with the fact that " Superman was accompanied / shadowed by someone / something called the Eradicator . " He also felt that " Brainiac 's evil plot of launching a disk in space to block out the sun and make Superman powerless was reminiscent of an episode of The Simpsons , with Mr. Burns doing the Brainiac role . " However , after reading The Death and Return of Superman , Strick was able to understand some of the elements of Smith 's script . Strick 's rewrite featured Superman as an existentialist , thinking of himself to be an outsider on Earth . Superman is threatened by Brainiac and Lex Luthor , who later amalgamate into " <unk> , " described by Strick as " a <unk> / scary mega @-@ villain . " Superman is later resurrected by the power of ' K , ' a natural force representing the spirit of Krypton , as he defeats <unk> . 
 Art designer Sylvain Despretz claimed the art department was assigned to create something that had little or nothing to do with the Superman comic book , and also explained that Peters " would bring kids in , who would rate the drawings on the wall as if they were evaluating the toy possibilities . It was basically a toy show ! " Peters saw a cover of National Geographic , containing a picture of a skull , going to art department workers , telling them he wanted the design for Brainiac 's space ship to have the same image . Burton gave Despretz a concept drawing for Brainiac , which Despretz claims was " a cone with a round ball on top , and something that looked like an emaciated skull inside . Imagine you take Merlin 's hat , and you stick a fish bowl on top , with a skull in it . " Concept artist Rolf Mohr said in an interview he designed a suit for the Eradicator for a planned scene in which it transforms into a flying vehicle . 
 Burton chose Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania as his primary filming location for Metropolis , while sound stages were reserved but start dates for filming were pushed back . A minor piece of the Krypton set was constructed but then destroyed , and Cage had even attended a costume fitting . The studio was also considering changing the title Superman Lives back to Superman Reborn . Deeming Wesley Strick 's script too expensive , Warner Bros. enlisted the help of Dan Gilroy to rewrite it into something more economically feasible . Gilroy lowered the $ 190 million budget set by Strick 's draft to $ 100 million . However , the studio was still less willing to fast track production , due to financial reasons with other film properties , having Gilroy turn in two drafts . Ultimately , Warner Bros. chose to put the film on hold in April 1998 , and Burton left to direct Sleepy Hollow . At this point in production , $ 30 million was spent , with nothing to show for it . Burton , citing various differences with Peters and the studio , said , " I basically wasted a year . A year is a long time to be working with somebody that you don 't really want to be working with . " 
 Disappointed by the lack of progress on the film 's production , aspiring screenwriter / comic book fan Alex Ford was able to have a script of his ( titled Superman : The Man of Steel ) accepted at the studio 's offices in September 1998 . Ford pitched his idea for a film series consisting of seven installments , and his approach impressed Warner Bros. and Peters , though he was later given a farewell due to creative differences . Ford said , " I can tell you they don 't know much about comics . Their audience isn 't you and me who pay $ 7 @.@ 00 . It 's for the parents who spend $ 60 on toys and lunchboxes . It is a business , and what 's more important , the $ 150 million at the box office or the $ 600 million in merchandising ? " 
 With Gilroy 's script , Peters offered the director 's position to Ralph Zondag , Michael Bay , Shekhar Kapur and Martin Campbell though they all turned down the offer . Brett Ratner turned down the option in favor of The Family Man . Simon West and Stephen Norrington were reportedly top contenders as well . In June 1999 , William Wisher , Jr. was hired to write a new script , and Cage assisted on story elements . Cage dropped out of the project in June 2000 , while Wisher turned in a new script in August 2000 , reported to have contained similar elements with The Matrix . In October 2000 , veteran comic book creator Keith Giffen pitched a 17 @-@ page story treatment with Lobo as the antagonist , but the studio did not proceed . Oliver Stone was then approached to direct Wisher 's script , but declined , while in April 2001 , Paul Attanasio was hired to start on a new script , earning a salary of $ 1 @.@ 7 million . Peters offered Will Smith the role of Superman , but the actor turned it down over ethnicity concerns . The film 's backstory was covered in the 2015 documentary film The Death of " Superman Lives " : What Happened ? . 
 = = = Batman vs. Superman ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Although it was widely reported that McG had become attached to Attanasio 's script , in February 2002 , J. J. Abrams was hired to write a new screenplay . It would ignore " The Death of Superman " storyline , and instead , it would reboot the film series with an origin story , going under the title of Superman : Flyby . The project had gone as far as being greenlit , but McG dropped out in favor of Charlie 's Angels : Full Throttle . The studio approached Wolfgang Petersen to direct Abrams ' script ; however , in August 2001 , Andrew Kevin Walker pitched Warner Bros. an idea titled Batman vs. Superman , attaching Petersen as director . Abrams ' script was put on hold , while Akiva Goldsman was hired to rewrite Walker 's draft which was codenamed Asylum . 
 Goldsman 's draft , dated June 21 , 2002 , introduced Bruce Wayne attempting to shake all of the demons in his life after his five @-@ year retirement from crimefighting . Dick Grayson , Alfred Pennyworth , and Commissioner Gordon are all dead . Meanwhile , Clark Kent is down on his luck and in despair after his divorce from Lois Lane . Clark serves as Bruce 's best man at his wedding to the beautiful and lovely Elizabeth Miller . After Elizabeth is killed by the Joker at the honeymoon , Bruce is forced to don the Batsuit once more , tangling a plot which involves Lex Luthor , while Clark begins a romance with Lana Lang in Smallville and tries to pull Bruce back . In return , Bruce blames Clark for her death , and the two go against one another . Part of the script took place in Smallville , where Clark goes into exile with Lana Lang . However , Lex Luthor is held to be responsible for the entire plot of Batman and Superman destroying each other . The two decide to team up and stop Luthor . Christian Bale , who was being considered for the lead in Darren Aronofsky 's Batman : Year one adaptation at the time , was simultaneously approached by Peterson for the Superman role . Peterson confirmed in a 2010 interview the only other actor he approached for Superman was Josh Hartnett . Warner Bros. canceled development to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects after Abrams submitted another draft for Superman : Flyby . Christopher Nolan would later cast Bale as Batman the following year in Batman Begins . In the opening scene of I Am Legend , a large banner displays the Superman symbol within the Batman symbol in Times Square . It is meant as an in @-@ joke by writer Akiva Goldsman , who wrote scripts for Batman vs. Superman and I Am Legend . 
 = = = Superman : Flyby = = = 
 Turning in his script in July 2002 , J. J. Abrams ' Superman : Flyby was an origin story that included Krypton besieged by a civil war between Jor @-@ El and his corrupt brother , Kata @-@ Zor . Before Kata @-@ Zor sentences Jor @-@ El to prison , Kal @-@ El is launched to Earth to fulfill a prophecy . Adopted by Jonathan and Martha Kent , he forms a romance with Lois Lane in the Daily Planet . However , Lois is more concerned with exposing Lex Luthor , written as a government agent obsessed with UFO phenomena . Clark reveals himself to the world as Superman , bringing Kata @-@ Zor 's son , Ty @-@ Zor , and three other Kryptonians to Earth . Superman is defeated and killed , and visits Jor @-@ El ( who committed suicide on Krypton while in prison ) in Kryptonian heaven . Resurrected , he returns to Earth and defeats the four Kryptonians . The script ends with Superman flying off to Krypton in a spaceship . 
 Brett Ratner was hired to direct in September 2002 , originally expressing an interest in casting an unknown for the lead role , while filming was to start sometime in late 2003 . Christopher Reeve joined as project consultant , citing Tom Welling , who portrayed the teenage Clark Kent in Smallville , as an ideal candidate . Reeve added " the character is more important than the actor who plays him , because it is an enduring mythology . It definitely should be an unknown . " Ratner approached Josh Hartnett , Jude Law , Paul Walker and Brendan Fraser for Superman , but conceded that finding a famous actor for the title role had proven difficult because of contractual obligations to appear in sequels . " No star wants to sign that , but as much as I 've told Jude and Josh my vision for the movie , I 've warned them of the consequences of being Superman . They 'll live this character for 10 years because I 'm telling one story over three movies and plan to direct all three if the first is as successful as everyone suspects . " Hartnett in particular was offered $ 100 million for a three @-@ picture deal . Walker explained that " I could have made a <unk> dollars on that franchise . I could probably have bought my own fleet of jets or my own island . You know what ? I don 't need it . " Fraser turned it down out of fear of typecasting . David Boreanaz , Victor Webster and Ashton Kutcher auditioned , along with Keri Russell as Lois Lane , but Kutcher decided not to pursue the role , citing scheduling conflicts with That ' 70s Show , the Superman curse and fear of typecasting , while Boreanaz had to back out due to obligations with Angel . James Marsden stated in a 2006 interview that at one point he was approached by Ratner . Although it was never formally announced , Matt Bomer confirmed he was in the running for the lead role , being Ratner 's preferred choice at the time . Bomer would later voice the character in the 2013 animated film Superman : Unbound . Amy Adams had also auditioned for Lois Lane , and would eventually win the role eight years later when she was cast in Man of Steel . 
 Superman : Flyby was being met with a budget exceeding $ 200 million , not including money spent on Superman Reborn , Superman Lives , and Batman vs. Superman , but Warner Bros. was still adamant for a summer 2004 release date . Christopher Walken was in negotiations for Perry White , while Ratner wanted to cast Anthony Hopkins as Jor @-@ El , and Ralph Fiennes as Lex Luthor , two of his cast members in Red Dragon . Joel Edgerton turned down a chance to audition as Superman in favor of the villain Ty @-@ Zor , before Ratner dropped out of the project in March 2003 , blaming casting delays , and aggressive feuds with producer Jon Peters . 
 McG returned as director in 2003 , while Fraser continued to express interest , but had fears of typecasting . ESC Entertainment was hired for visual effects work , with Kim <unk> as visual effects supervisor and Stan Winston designing a certain " prototype suit " . McG approached Shia LaBeouf for Jimmy Olsen , with an interest to cast an unknown for Superman , Scarlett Johansson as Lois Lane and Johnny Depp for Lex Luthor . The director confirmed in a 2012 interview that Robert Downey , Jr. had been cast as Lex Luthor . Neal H. Moritz and Gilbert Adler were set to produce the film . McG also commissioned Josh Schwartz to rewrite the Abrams script . He wanted to shoot in Canada , which would have cost $ 25 million more than WB 's preferred Australian locale . McG also shot test footage with several candidates , including Jason Behr , Henry Cavill , Jared Padalecki , and Michael Cassidy before leaving , blaming budgetary concerns and filming locations . He opted to shoot in New York City and Canada , but Warner Bros. wanted Sydney , Australia . McG felt " it was inappropriate to try to capture the heart of America on another continent . " He later admitted it was his fear of flying . Abrams lobbied for the chance to direct his script , but Warner Bros. replaced McG with Bryan Singer in July 2004 , resulting in Superman Returns . 
 = = Superman Returns ( 2006 ) = = 
 Following the departure of Ratner and McG , Bryan Singer , who was said to be a childhood fan of Richard Donner 's film , was approached by Warner Bros. He accepted , abandoning two films already in pre @-@ production , X @-@ Men : The Last Stand ( which , coincidentally , would come to be directed by Ratner ) and a remake of Logan 's Run . The film uses the events of Superman and , to less of a degree , Superman II as backstory , while completely ignoring the events of Superman III and Superman IV : The Quest for Peace . Singer 's story tells of Superman 's return to Earth following a five @-@ year search for survivors of Krypton . He discovers that in his absence Lois Lane has given birth to a son and become engaged . Singer chose to follow Donner 's lead by casting relatively unknown Brandon Routh as Superman , who resembled Christopher Reeve somewhat , and more high profile actors in supporting roles , such as Kevin Spacey as Lex Luthor . Singer brought his entire crew from X2 to work on the film . Via digitally @-@ enhanced archive footage , the late Marlon Brando appeared in the film as Jor @-@ El . Superman Returns received positive reviews and grossed approximately $ 391 million worldwide . 
 In February 2006 , four months before the release of Superman Returns , Warner Bros. announced a summer 2009 theatrical release date for a sequel , with Bryan Singer returning as director . Brandon Routh , Kate Bosworth , Kevin Spacey , Sam Huntington , Frank Langella , and Tristan Lake Leabu were expected to reprise their roles , however , with the release of Superman Returns in July 2006 , Warner Bros. was hesitant on moving forward with development . Warner Bros. President Alan F. Horn explained that Superman Returns was a very successful film , but that it " should have done $ 500 million worldwide . We should have had perhaps a little more action to satisfy the young male crowd . " Singer reacted incredulously to the studio complaints , saying , " That movie made $ 400 million ! I don 't know what constitutes under @-@ performing these days ... " Filming was supposed to start in March 2008 ; no screenplay was ever written , but Singer would have titled it Man of Steel , with an interest in Darkseid as the main villain . Singer stressed that it would have been more action @-@ packed than Superman <unk> while writer Michael Dougherty was interested in using Brainiac . " In my mind , if the Kryptonians really were a space @-@ faring race ... it would only make sense that there would 've been colonies and off @-@ planet missions ... other Kryptonians making their way to Earth seemed like a pretty big one . It wouldn 't necessarily be evil right off the bat . That 's too easy and cliché ... I think it 'd be interesting to see how these other Kryptonians show up , land and have all these powers and [ have to learn ] how to adapt to them . " 
 Warner Bros. commissioned husband and wife duo Michele and Kieran Mulroney to write a script for a Justice League film in February 2007 , halting development for the Superman Returns sequel . The Justice League script was submitted to Warner Bros. the following June , which prompted the studio to immediately fast track production . Singer went on to film Valkyrie the following month , and George Miller signed to direct Justice League : Mortal in September 2007 . The script would have featured a different Superman in a separate continuity from Singer 's film ; Routh was not approached to reprise his role for Justice League : Mortal , which ended up going to D. J. Cotrona . The film nearly went into production in March 2008 , but the Australian Film Commission denied Warner Bros. their 40 percent tax rebate and <unk> 's options eventually expired . With Justice League : Mortal canceled , Singer renewed his interest in the Superman sequel that same month , stating that it was in early development . Paul Levitz , president of DC Comics , still expected Routh to reprise the title role , but Routh 's contract for a sequel expired in 2009 . " Superman Returns didn 't quite work as a film in the way that we wanted it to , " Warner Bros. President of Production Jeff Robinov admitted in August 2008 . " It didn 't position the character the way he needed to be positioned . Had Superman worked in 2006 , we would have had a movie for Christmas of this year or 2009 . Now the plan is just to reintroduce Superman without regard to a Batman and Superman movie at all . " 
 = = DC Extended Universe = = 
 = = = Man of Steel ( 2013 ) = = = 
 In June 2008 , Warner Bros. took pitches from comic book writers , screenwriters and directors on how to restart the Superman film series . During story discussions for The Dark Knight Rises in 2008 , David S. Goyer , aware that Warner Bros. was planning a Superman reboot , told Christopher Nolan his idea on how to present Superman in a modern context . Impressed with Goyer 's concept , Nolan pitched the idea to the studio in February 2010 , who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of The Dark Knight . Nolan admired Singer 's work on Superman Returns for its connection to Richard Donner 's version , and previously used the 1978 film as casting inspiration for Batman Begins . Zack Snyder was hired as the film 's director in October 2010 . Principal photography started in August 2011 in West Chicago , Illinois , before moving to Vancouver and Plano , Illinois . The film stars Henry Cavill as Clark Kent / Kal @-@ El / Superman , Amy Adams as Lois Lane , Michael Shannon as General Zod , Diane Lane as Martha Kent , Kevin Costner as Jonathan Kent , Laurence Fishburne as Perry White , and Russell Crowe as Jor @-@ El . 
 = = = Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( 2016 ) = = = 
 David S. Goyer and Zack Snyder are set to write and direct a sequel to Man of Steel , respectively . Christopher Nolan is also expected to return as producer , albeit in a lesser role than he had in the first film . On June 16 , 2013 , The Wall Street Journal reported that the studio is possibly planning to release the sequel in 2014 . Warner Bros. announced that Superman and Batman will unite in a new film which will be the follow @-@ up to Man of Steel , set for release in 2015 . Goyer stated at the Superman 75th Anniversary Panel at 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , that Batman and Superman would face off , and titles under consideration are Superman Vs Batman and Batman Vs Superman . On August 22 , 2013 , it was announced that Ben Affleck was cast as Batman . On December 4 , 2013 , it was reported that Gal Gadot was cast as Wonder Woman . 
 On January 17 , 2014 , it was announced that the film had been delayed from its original July 17 , 2015 release date to March 25 , 2016 , in order to give the filmmakers " time to realize fully their vision , given the complex visual nature of the story " . On January 31 , 2014 , Jesse Eisenberg and Jeremy Irons were cast as Lex Luthor and Alfred Pennyworth , respectively . In an official press release , Snyder described the casting of Eisenberg as Luthor by stating , " Having Jesse in the role allows us to explore that interesting dynamic , and also take the character in some new and unexpected directions . " 
 = = = Justice League ( 2017 ) = = = 
 Shortly after filming had finished for Man of Steel , Warner Bros hired Will Beall to script a new Justice League film in June 2012 . With the release of Man of Steel in June 2013 , Goyer was hired to write a new Justice League script , with the Beall draft being scrapped . In April 2014 , it was announced that Zack Snyder would also be directing Goyer 's Justice League script . Warner Bros. was reportedly courting Chris Terrio to rewrite Justice League the following July , after having been impressed with his rewrite of Batman v Superman . In October 2014 , Warner Bros. announced the film would be released in two parts as the fifth and ninth installments of the shared universe , with Part One releasing in 2017 , and Part Two in 2019 . Snyder will direct both films with Henry Cavill set to reprise his role as Superman . 
 = = = Untitled Man of Steel sequel ( TBA ) = = = 
 In October 2014 , a Man of Steel sequel was announced with an intended release between 2016 and 2020 . In August 2015 , Jon <unk> revealed to DC Movie News on the Popcorn Network that the studio are rumored to have George Miller as the director for the sequel . On June 2016 , Russel Crowe <unk> that a Man of Steel trilogy was originally planned before it was scrapped due the announcement of Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 This table only includes characters which have appeared / appearing in multiple films . 
 A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film , or that the character 's presence in the film has not yet been announced . 
 A V indicates a voice @-@ only role . 
 A C indicates a cameo role . 
 A P indicates an appearance through photograph ( s ) . 
 A Y indicates a role as a younger version of the character . 
 A O indicates a role as an older version of the character . 
 A A indicates an appearance through <unk> footage , stills or audio . 
 A Marc McClure reprised his role as Jimmy Olsen for Supergirl . 
 B The corpse of the now @-@ deceased General Zod also appears in the film in a crucial role , however , Michael Shannon did not film any scenes for the film and his corpse was created using the physique of fitness model Greg Plitt and a head @-@ shot of Shannon . 
 = = = Non @-@ recurring characters = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 indicates that the film in the series is currently playing 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 = = Franchise collections = = 
 The initial four Superman films were released previously on VHS , and throughout the film series ' history , three box sets of the films have been released by Warner Bros. The first occurred on May 1 , 2001 , when The Complete Superman Collection was released both on DVD and VHS , containing that year 's DVD / home video releases of Superman , Superman II , Superman III , and Superman IV . The set was valued at US $ 49 @.@ 99 for the DVD release and US $ 29 @.@ 99 for the VHS release , and received positive reviews . 
 The four Christopher Reeve films were again released on November 28 , 2006 , in new DVD releases to coincide with Superman Returns , also released in that year . Superman was released in a four @-@ disc ' special edition ' similar to Superman II , which was released in a two @-@ disc special edition . Both Superman III and IV were released in single disc ' deluxe editions ' , and all four releases were available together in The Christopher Reeve Superman Collection , an 8 @-@ disc set that was valued at US $ 79 @.@ 92 . Like the 2001 set before it , The Christopher Reeve Superman Collection received positive reviews . 
 Also on November 28 , 2006 , a 14 @-@ disc DVD box set titled Superman Ultimate Collector 's Edition was released , containing Superman , Superman II , Superman II : The Richard Donner Cut , Superman III , Superman IV , Superman Returns , and Look , Up in the Sky : The Amazing Story of Superman , among other releases . All contents of the set were housed within a tin case . The set was valued at US $ 99 @.@ 92 , and received extremely positive reviews when first released . However , after only a day on the market , Warner Bros. announced that there were two errors discovered within the set . The first was that the 2 @.@ 0 audio track on Superman , was instead the 5 @.@ 1 audio track already on the disc . The second was that the Superman III disc was not the 2006 deluxe edition as advertised , but the 2001 release instead . The set was soon recalled , and Warner Bros. offered a toll @-@ free number to replace the faulty discs for people who had already purchased the set . Due to popular demand , a corrected set was released and Superman Ultimate Collector 's Edition returned to store shelves on May 29 , 2007 . 
 On October 14 , 2008 , another Christopher Reeve Superman film collection was released , entitled Superman : 4 Film Favorites , containing all four films , but with far less bonus material than previous sets . The collection was a 2 @-@ disc DVD @-@ 18 set that included the first disc of both special editions from the 2006 release and both deluxe editions . 
 On April 1 , 2011 , it was announced that the entire Superman anthology would be making its way to Blu @-@ ray for the first time . The anthology box set was released on June 7 , 2011 . 
 = Northwest Airlines Flight 421 = 
 Northwest Airlines Flight 421 was a domestic scheduled passenger flight from Chicago , Illinois to Minneapolis , Minnesota that crashed on 29 August 1948 . The Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 aircraft , operated by Northwest Airlines , suffered structural failure in its left wing and crashed approximately 4 @.@ 1 miles ( 6 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of Winona , Minnesota , approximately 95 miles ( 153 km ) southeast of Minneapolis . A Civil Aeronautics Board investigation determined that the crash was caused by fatigue cracks in the wings of the aircraft , and recommended lower speeds and frequent inspections of all Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 aircraft . All 33 passengers and four crewmembers on board were killed . The crash was the first loss of a Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 , and remains the worst accident involving a Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Flight 421 was served by a Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 aircraft was operated by Northwest Airlines . It was just under a year old , and had accumulated a total airtime of 1321 hours starting in 1947 . The flight was piloted by Captain Robert L. Johnson , 30 , who had 5 @,@ 502 hours of flying time . The copilot was David F. Brenner , 27 , with 2 @,@ 380 hours of flight time . 
 The aircraft departed Chicago at 3 : 50 PM , CST , carrying 33 passengers , four crewmembers , 800 US gallons ( 3 @,@ 000 l ; 670 imp gal ) of fuel , and 1 @,@ 038 pounds ( 471 kg ) of baggage . Weather reports received prior to departure indicated relatively clear conditions with a few scattered rain showers en route in the vicinity of La Crosse , Wisconsin and Rochester , Minnesota . The flight progressed normally as the aircraft reached its planned altitude of 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) and made its way across Wisconsin . At 4 : 55 PM , the aircraft reported its position over La Crosse , Wisconsin , approximately 125 miles ( 201 km ) southeast of Minneapolis . The aircraft received permission to begin its descent , and descended to 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) at 4 : 59 PM . 
 = = Crash = = 
 The last communication made with the flight was a 4 : 59 PM report from the pilot that the aircraft had passed the 7 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) altitude level . The pilot sounded calm , and made no indication that the aircraft was experiencing any mechanical trouble . 
 Between 4 : 45 PM and 5 : 00 PM , a number of people in the area of Winona , Minnesota were observing a thunderstorm approaching from the northwest . These people told the Civil Aeronautics Board that the storm was increasing in intensity , and they observed increasing amounts of thunder and lightning . The aircraft continued on course in the direction of Winona , where it encountered the thunderstorm . The aircraft was seen flying below the clouds before entering the roll cloud , or leading edge of the thunderstorm . This was the last reported sighting of the aircraft ; seconds later , local observers saw pieces of the aircraft falling from the sky . 
 An off @-@ duty Northwest Airlines pilot who observed the crash told newspapers that he believed that the airliner had been struck by lightning . Some local farmers said that the plane seemed to barrel roll , but also observed that while there was significant rainfall , winds were relatively light . 
 In its Aug. 30 , 1948 edition , The New York Times reported : 
 The crash occurred on <unk> Ridge , between Winona and Fountain City , Wis . , on the Wisconsin side of the Mississippi . 
 Parts of the wreckage were found in swamplands along the river . A few bits also landed in a ballpark at Winona , seven miles south of the crash scene . A Mr. <unk> , Gordon Closway , executive editor of The Winona Republican @-@ Herald , and William White , a reporter for the paper , were among the first to reach the wreckage . 
 Mr. Closway said he counted ten dead in the plane . One was a woman still holding a baby in her arms . The body of the pilot , Capt. Robert Johnson of St. Paul , was still in the nose of the ship , Mr. Closway said . 
 = = Investigation and follow @-@ up = = 
 The aircraft crashed on a forested bluff on the Wisconsin side of the Mississippi River , between Winona and Fountain City , Wisconsin . The aircraft was torn into four large pieces , with numerous deposits of smaller wreckage . The large sections were located in a straight line with a bearing of 335 degrees , approximating the intended flight path . These large sections were the fuselage , tail assembly , outer left wing , and the inner left wing . 
 The mangled bodies of all 37 deceased were located within the wrecked fuselage that had rolled into a deep ravine . The sides of the ravine were so steep that rescuers formed a human chain to carry the passengers ' remains 150 feet ( 46 m ) up the rocky crevice . Horse @-@ drawn farm wagons loaded with human remains made their perilous way down the bluff . Contemporary news reports estimated that as many as 20 @,@ 000 people came to see the crash scene and render aid . 
 Civil Aeronautics Board investigators concluded that the outer portion of the wing had detached from the rest of the wing . The investigation revealed a fatigue crack 7 / 8 inch long and 3 / 32 inch deep at the point of detachment . Similar cracks were found on the wing root fittings of another Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 aircraft that flew the same flight path through the same storm shortly after Flight 421 . October inspections of three other Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 aircraft revealed identical fatigue cracks in similar locations . 
 The CAB report concluded : 
 [ D ] ue to the high local stress concentrations of this particular design of the attachment fitting , fatigue cracks had developed in the attachment fitting which so weakened the structure as to cause failure of the complete outer wing panel under the stress of the severe turbulence encountered in the thunderstorm . 
 The investigation determined that a spar on the front left of the wing separated , quickly followed by the lower rear spar and the connections which attached the outer wing to the center section . The loss of the left wing caused the aircraft to roll left , whereupon the fuselage and the right horizontal stabilizer collided with the separated wing . The initial separation was caused either by a wind gust in excess of operating velocity , or a similar lower velocity gust after the material had become fatigued . 
 The Board also recommended frequent inspections of wing root fittings for the development of fatigue cracks , increasing the thickness of the portion of the wing attached to the fuselage , and reduction of operating speeds by 10 % . 
 In April 1949 , Northwest Airlines sued the Glenn L. Martin Company , manufacturers of the Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 , for $ 725 @,@ 000 . The lawsuit claimed that the company had sold the airline five defective aircraft , including the aircraft lost in Flight 421 . Glenn Martin , president of the aircraft manufacturing corporation , dismissed the lawsuit as a mere formality , a bit of meaningless legal maneuvering to appease disagreeing insurance companies . 
 Flight 421 was the first hull loss of a Martin 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 . It remains the deadliest accident involving the 2 @-@ 0 @-@ 2 . It was Northwest Airlines 's worst air disaster at the time , and the first accident in over a billion miles of flight . 
 = The Holy Bible ( album ) = 
 The Holy Bible is the third studio album by Welsh alternative rock band Manic Street Preachers . It was released on 29 August 1994 by record label Epic . At the time the album was written and recorded , lyricist and rhythm guitarist Richey Edwards was struggling with severe depression , alcohol abuse , self @-@ harm and anorexia nervosa , and its contents are considered by many sources to reflect his mental state . The songs focus on themes relating to politics and human suffering . The Holy Bible was the band 's last album released before Edwards ' disappearance on 1 February 1995 . 
 Although it reached number 6 on the UK Albums Chart , initially , global sales were disappointing compared to previous albums and the record did not chart in mainland Europe or North America . It was promoted with tours and festival appearances in the UK , Ireland , Germany , Portugal , the Netherlands and Thailand – in part without Edwards . The Holy Bible has sold over half million copies worldwide as of 2014 and over the years it received significant critical acclaim . The album has been featured and listed highly on lists of the best albums of all time by British music publications such as Melody Maker , NME and Q. 
 = = Recording = = 
 According to drummer Sean Moore , the band felt they had been " going a bit astray " with their previous album , 1993 's Gold Against the Soul , and so the approach to the follow @-@ up was for the band to go back to their " grass roots " and rediscover " a little bit of Britishness that we lacked " . Singer and guitarist James Dean Bradfield recalls the band feeling they had become " a bit too <unk> [ ... ] we had lost our direction " . The band stopped listening to American rock music and returned to influences that had inspired them when they first formed , including Magazine , Wire , Skids , PiL , Gang of Four and Joy Division . 
 Epic Records had proposed that the album be recorded in Barbados , but the band had wanted to avoid what Bradfield called " all that decadent rockstar rubbish " . It was bassist Nicky Wire 's idea , says Bradfield , that the band " should not use everything at its disposal " in recording the album . Instead , recording began with sound engineer Alex Silva at the low @-@ rent , " absolutely tiny " Sound Space Studios in Cardiff . The album was mixed by Mark Freegard , who had previously worked with The Breeders . " She Is Suffering " was produced by Steve Brown . The recording took four weeks . 
 Bradfield has described the recording of the album as preventing him from having a social life and Alex Silva attributes the break @-@ up of his relationship with his girlfriend at the time to the long hours involved in the recording . Guitarist Richey Edwards attended recording sessions but would , according to Wire , " collapse on the <unk> and have a snooze " while the other band members did all the recording . He was drinking heavily and frequently crying . " Inevitably " , says Bradfield , " the day would start with a ' <unk> ! ' ; the sound of a can opening . " 
 The album was constructed with " academic discipline " , according to Bradfield , with the band working to headings and structures " so each song is like an essay " . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Whereas lyric @-@ writing on the two previous albums was split fairly evenly between Richey Edwards and Nicky Wire , the lyrics on The Holy Bible were 70 @-@ 75 % written by Edwards , according to James Dean Bradfield . At the time of the album 's 10th anniversary reissue Wire claimed to be largely responsible for " This Is Yesterday " and " Ifwhiteamericatoldthetruthforonedayit 'sworldwouldfallapart " , contributing only titles to some of the other songs . However , on later <unk> his notebooks , Wire was surprised to find he had contributed more lyrics than he had previously remembered , having also written significant portions of " Of Walking Abortion " and " Mausoleum " and a number of lines from " Faster " , now believing himself to be responsible for around 30 % of the words on the album . 
 The album 's lyrics deal with subjects including prostitution , American consumerism , British imperialism , freedom of speech , the Holocaust , self @-@ starvation , serial killers , the death penalty , political revolution , childhood , fascism and suicide . According to Q : " the tone of the album is by turns bleak , angry and resigned " . The same magazine commented in 1994 that " even a cursory glance at the titles will confirm that this is not the new Gloria Estefan album " . 
 Sean Moore has described the content of the lyrics as being " as far as Richey 's character could go " . According to Bradfield : " Some of the lyrics confused me . Some [ ... ] were voyeuristic and some were coming from personal experience [ ... ] I remember getting the lyrics to ' Yes ' and thinking ' You crazy fucker , how do I write music for this ? ' " . Critic Simon Price notes that the potential radio @-@ friendliness of the song is undermined by its focus on the subject of prostitution and the recurrence of sexual swearing in the lyric . 
 Interviewed at the time of the album 's release , Nicky Wire said that the track " Ifwhiteamericatoldthetruthforonedayit 'sworldwouldfallapart " [ sic ] was " not a completely anti @-@ American song " , but instead was about " how the most empty culture in the world can dominate in such a total sense " . " Of Walking Abortion " is about right @-@ wing totalitarianism , of which Wire commented : " there 's a worm in human nature that makes us want to be dominated " . " Archives of Pain " , dealing with the glorification of serial killers and seemingly advocating capital punishment , he said " was the song that me and Richey worried about most [ ... ] the song isn 't a right wing statement , it 's just against this fascination with people who kill " . Later in 1994 , Bradfield described the song as " one of the most important things we 've done " but said it was also " very right @-@ wing " and " miscalculated " . 
 Wire described " Revol " as being about Edwards ' idea that " relationships in politics , and relationships in general , are failures " . " P.C.P. " , he said , was about how " PC followers take up the idea of being liberal but end up being quite the opposite " . He said that he was " completely confused " by " Faster " ( most of which he had written ) , although Edwards had told him that it was about self @-@ abuse . 
 " Mausoleum " and " The Intense Humming of Evil " , Wire said , were both inspired by visits by the band to former concentration camps at Dachau and Belsen . A first draft of the latter song had been considered insufficiently judgemental by Bradfield , who had asked for a re @-@ write ( " you can 't be ambivalent about the Holocaust " ) . 
 According to Wire , " Die in the Summertime " and " 4st 7lb " were " pretty obviously about Richey 's state of mind " . However , Edwards attested that the former song is actually about a pensioner wanting to die with memories of childhood in his mind . 4 stone 7 pounds ( 29 kg ) is the weight below which death is reputed to become medically unavoidable for <unk> . 
 " This Is Yesterday " , according to Wire , is " about how people always look back to their youth and look on it as a glorious period " . 
 Wire and Bradfield have both expressed a disliking for the lyrics to the song " She Is Suffering " , Wire saying it suffers from " man @-@ coming @-@ to @-@ the @-@ rescue syndrome " . According to Edwards , the " she " in the song title is desire : " In other Bibles and Holy Books no truth is possible until you empty yourself of desire " . 
 = = = = Use of dialogue samples = = = = 
 Several tracks on the album are also complemented by samples of dialogue , in keeping with the themes of the songs themselves , as follows : 
 " Yes " contains dialogue from the 1993 documentary Hookers , Hustlers , Pimps and their Johns , by Beeban Kidron , about the prostitution trade . 
 " Ifwhiteamericatoldthetruthforonedayit 'sworldwouldfallapart " begins with a TV trailer for GOP TV 's Rising Tide show . 
 " Of Walking Abortion " begins with an extract from an interview with Hubert Selby , Jr . 
 " Archives of Pain " begins with the words of the mother of one of serial killer Peter Sutcliffe 's victims from a TV report on his trial . 
 " 4st 7lb " begins with dialogue from the 1994 documentary about anorexia , <unk> 's Story , by Jeremy Llewelyn @-@ Jones about <unk> Neville @-@ Lister . 
 " Mausoleum " features a quotation from an interview with J. G. Ballard explaining his motivation for writing the novel Crash . 
 " Faster " begins with dialogue from the 1984 film adaptation of George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , spoken by John Hurt . 
 " The Intense Humming of Evil " begins with an extract from a report on the Nuremberg Trials . 
 " P.C.P. " ends with dialogue spoken by Albert Finney from Peter Yates ' The Dresser . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Musically , The Holy Bible marks a shift from the modern rock sound of their first two albums , Generation Terrorists and Gold Against the Soul . It was described as alternative rock , hard rock , punk rock , post @-@ punk , and gothic rock , with influences from British punk , new wave , industrial and art rock . During the recording of the album , the band was mainly influenced by post @-@ punk bands such as Wire , Public Image Ltd , and Joy Division , and their new sound drew comparisons to similar artists such as Magazine , Siouxsie and the Banshees , and Gang of Four . The record 's heavy style was also compared to that of popular industrial rock act Nine Inch Nails . 
 = = = Aesthetic = = = 
 James Dean Bradfield has described the album as representing " the most definitive period for us visually as well as the songs we were writing and the record [ ... ] we 've never been scared to admit that " . 
 While touring in early 1994 , the band visited army surplus stores and bought clothing to wear on stage , in a homage to The Clash . This military image was used consistently by the band during the promotion of The Holy Bible , including in their videos and television appearances . A performance of " Faster " on the BBC 's Top of the Pops in June 1994 resulted in a record number of complaints — over 25 @,@ 000 — due to Bradfield wearing a paramilitary @-@ style balaclava . 
 The album cover , designed by Richey Edwards while hospitalised , features a triptych by Jenny Saville depicting three perspectives on the body of an obese woman in her underwear , and is titled Strategy ( South Face / Front Face / North Face ) . Saville gave her permission for use of her work for free after a discussion with Edwards in which he described each song on the album . The back cover features a photo of the band in military uniforms and a quote taken from Octave Mirbeau 's book The Torture Garden . This album is also the first instance of the Manic Street Preachers using Gill Sans typeface with a reversed " R " in their album art . The typeface would later be re @-@ used on later albums and has become an easily recognised motif of the Manics ' artwork . The typeface is similar to one used on Empires and Dance by Simple Minds , one of James Dean Bradfield 's favourite records . 
 The lyrics booklet features various images including Christian iconography , photographs of the gate at Dachau concentration camp and a plan of the gas chambers at Belsen concentration camp , a photograph of Lenin 's corpse , an engraving depicting an execution by guillotine in Revolutionary France , a picture of an apple , a photograph of a woman with a parasitic twin , photographs of each of the Manic Street Preachers as children and a photograph of a group of British policemen in gas @-@ masks . The booklet also contains a Buddhist saying from the Tripitaka alongside a dedication to the band 's publicist , Philip Hall , who had died of cancer in 1993 . 
 The title " The Holy Bible " was chosen by Edwards to reflect an idea , according to Bradfield , that " everything on there has to be perfection " . Interviewed at the end of 1994 , Edwards said : " The way religions choose to speak their truth to the public has always been to beat them down [ ... ] I think that if a Holy Bible is true , it should be about the way the world is and that 's what I think my lyrics are about . [ The album ] doesn 't pretend things don 't exist " . 
 = = Health of Richey Edwards = = 
 Richey Edwards had had long @-@ term problems with alcohol abuse , depression and self @-@ harm . During 1994 , these problems had , according to Wire , " escalated to a point where everybody got a bit frightened " and Edwards had also begun to suffer from anorexia nervosa . During April and May , when the band played concerts in Thailand and Portugal , Edwards was habitually cutting himself and appeared onstage in Bangkok with self @-@ inflicted wounds across his chest . 
 He talked openly in the music press about his problems , telling the NME : " When I cut myself I feel so much better . All the little things that might have been annoying me seem so trivial because I 'm concentrating on the pain " , and " I 'm the sort of person who wakes up in the morning and needs to pour a bottle down my throat " . 
 His problems continued and , during the recording of the album , his mental state deteriorated after learning of the suicide of a close friend from university . In July , he was taken to hospital after severely lacerating himself at home , then transferred to Whitchurch Hospital , an NHS psychiatric facility in Cardiff . His weight had fallen to 6 stone ( 38 kg ) . 
 By the time of the album 's release in late August 1994 , Edwards was hospitalised at the private Priory Hospital in Roehampton . He rejoined the band to tour during the autumn of 1994 . Other band members felt that his drinking was under control at this point , but his eating continued to be a problem and he continued to self @-@ harm . On 1 February 1995 , he disappeared and is presumed to have committed suicide . His car was found close to the Severn Bridge . 
 The Holy Bible has been described by Q as a " graphic , violent torrent of self @-@ lacerating punk fury which infamously details the horrors in Richey Edwards ' head " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album reached No. 6 on the UK Albums Chart , remaining in the chart for 11 weeks . Despite not charting outside the UK and Japan , by mid @-@ 2014 The Holy Bible had sold more than 600 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 On 6 December 2004 an expanded version of The Holy Bible was released , containing two CDs and a DVD . Disc one comprised a digitally re @-@ mastered version of the original album plus four live tracks . The DVD features an interview with the band , footage of TV and festival appearances and promo videos . The second disc includes a remix of the album by Tom Lord @-@ Alge . The remixed version had been intended for release in the US , but this never happened " for well @-@ documented reasons " , according to James Dean Bradfield . The band felt the second mix was superior to the version originally released . As Bradfield puts it : " For once we got something back from the American record company — who we despised — and it was brilliant " . 
 A new special edition was released in December 2014 , commemorating the 20th anniversary of the album . This edition includes the vinyl edition of the full album , plus a three @-@ CD set , the first CD with the full album remastered for the special release , the second with the US mix remastered and the third including a performance at the Astoria in 1994 and an acoustic session for Radio 4 <unk> in 2014 . The special edition also contains a 40 @-@ page book full of rare photos and handwritten lyrics and notes by Richey and by the band . 
 As part of Record Store Day 2014 a 12 " picture disc of the US Mix of the album was released . Side A featured a mix of the Revol cover overlaid with the Jesus image from the CD . Side B was a white label image . The album was housed in a clear plastic sleeve . 1500 copies were pressed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Despite not charting in mainland Europe , and not selling very well initially , The Holy Bible received significant critical acclaim when it was released on August 1994 , and in the years following . 
 NME saw The Holy Bible as primarily the work of James Dean Bradfield , saying " The Holy Bible isn 't elegant , but it is bloody effective " . Melody Maker , seeing it as primarily the work of Richey Edwards , described it as " the sound of a group in extremis [ ... ] hurtling towards a private armageddon " . Upon its re @-@ release ten years later , the NME described it as " a work of genuine genius " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic said that the album was " Richey James ' last will and testament " , finishing with " Every song has a passage frightening in its imagery . Although the music itself isn 't as scarily intense , its tight , terse hard rock and glam hooks accentuate the paranoia behind the songs , making the lyrics cut deeper . " Joe Tangari from Pitchfork wrote " In a way , the story of Edwards ' spiral into some unknown oblivion is tied to the experience of The Holy Bible , which in retrospect has become a sort of horror @-@ show eulogy for a man who couldn 't live with the world around him . " 
 Observed Roy Wilkinson in Select : " Amid all the references to coma , carcasses , ' walking abortions ' and dying in the summer sits the spectre of Richey , holed up in a private clinic , having drunk too much , eaten too little and cut himself for reasons varying between dramatic gesture , a surrogate for screaming out loud and something ' sexual ' [ ... ] Let 's hope that , with a record of such unsettling , morbid resonance as The Holy Bible , no further gestures are required . " 
 Mark Edwards of Stylus opined that " The Holy Bible is easily one of the best albums of the 90s — ignored by many , but loved intensely by the few who 've lived with it over the years [ ... ] It puts everything the Manics have done since to shame , not to mention nearly everything else [ in music ] " . David Fricke of Rolling Stone also reviewed the album positively : " even the pall of [ Edwards ' ] absence can 't cancel out the life @-@ affirming force that hits you with the very first song " . 
 Nick Butler of Sputnikmusic praised the album , calling it a " classic " and awarding it 5 out of 5 stars , concluding with : " Punk , hard rock , indie , and even metal fans owe it to themselves to hear this . Anyone else may be scared off , but may just find they never look at life the same way again . I certainly haven 't . " 
 = = Touring = = 
 In April and May 1994 the band first performed songs from The Holy Bible at concerts in Thailand and Portugal and at a benefit concert for the Anti @-@ Nazi League at Brockwell Park , London . In June , they played the Glastonbury Festival . 
 In July and August , without Richey Edwards , they played T in the Park in Scotland , the Alte <unk> in Cologne , the <unk> Festival in The Hague and the Reading Festival . During September , October and December there was a headline tour of the UK and Ireland and two tours in mainland Europe with Suede and Therapy ? In December , three nights at the London Astoria ended with the band smashing up their equipment and the venue 's lighting rig , causing £ 26 @,@ 000 worth of damage . 
 James Dean Bradfield and Richey Edwards were due to fly to the United States for media interviews on 1 February 1995 , the day of Edwards ' disappearance , and Bradfield ended up doing this alone . Concerts in US cities as well as in Prague and Vienna had been scheduled for March and April 1995 , but were cancelled . 
 In late 2014 the band performed the album in full for the first time , at concerts in Glasgow , Manchester , Dublin and London , marking the 20th anniversary of its release . After the tour in the UK , the Manics are going to take The Holy Bible tour to North America , in the spring of 2015 , in April the band played in Washington DC , Toronto , New York , Boston , San Francisco , Los Angeles and Chicago . They also played in the Cardiff Castle with 10 @,@ 000 fans attending the gig , it was broadcast nationwide by BBC Two Wales . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Holy Bible has continued to receive praise in the years following its release , with many British music magazines listing the album among the greatest ever made . 
 The writers of Melody Maker ranked it 15th on its list of the top 100 albums of all time in 2000 , and Kerrang ! placed it 10th in a similar list five years later . It has also remained popular with the British public – in 2005 it topped a BBC Newsnight poll of viewers ' favourite albums . Readers of Q voted it as the 10th best album released during the magazine 's lifetime in 2001 and as the 18th greatest album ever in 2003 . 
 In 2011 NME ranked it number 1 in their " 50 Darkest Albums Ever " list . The same magazine placed the album at number 5 in their end of the year list of the best albums of 1994 . In 2003 it was voted on number 37 on NME 's poll of best albums of all time and , more recently , number 44 in their list of the 500 greatest albums ever made . The album is also featured in The Guardian 's list " 1000 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die " . At the NME awards 2015 , the album won " Reissue of the Year " for its 20th anniversary edition . 
 Ben Patashnik of Drowned in Sound later said that the album in the time of its release " didn 't sell very well , but its impact was felt keenly by anyone who 'd ever come into contact with the Manics " , and that it is now a " masterpiece [ ... ] the sound of one man in a close @-@ knit group of friends slowly disintegrating and using his own anguish to create some of the most brilliant art to be released on a large scale as music in years [ ... ] It 's not a suicide note ; it 's a warning . " 
 The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Richey Edwards ( credited as Richey James ) and Nicky Wire , all music composed by James Dean Bradfield and Sean Moore . 
 10th Anniversary Edition DVD 
 " Faster " ( performed on Top of the Pops ) 
 " Faster " ( performed on Butt Naked ) 
 " P.C.P. " ( performed on Butt Naked ) 
 " She Is Suffering " ( performed on Butt Naked ) 
 " 4st 7lb " ( performed on MTV Most Wanted ) 
 " She Is Suffering " ( performed on MTV Most Wanted ) 
 " Faster " ( performed at Glastonbury ' 94 ) 
 " P.C.P. " ( performed at Glastonbury ' 94 ) 
 " Yes " ( performed at Glastonbury ' 94 ) 
 " Revol " ( performed at Reading ' 94 ) 
 " Faster " ( US video ) 
 " Judge Yr <unk> " ( video ) 
 Yes ( New Film Made by Patrick Jones ) 
 Band interview 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Manic Street Preachers 
 James Dean Bradfield – lead vocals , lead and rhythm guitar , production 
 Richey Edwards ( credited as Richey James ) – rhythm guitar , sleeve design , production 
 Nicky Wire – bass guitar , production 
 Sean Moore – drums , production 
 Technical 
 Steve Brown – production ( " She Is Suffering " ) 
 Alex Silva – engineering 
 Mark Freegard – mixing 
 Jenny Saville – front cover painting 
 Barry Kamen – back cover painting 
 Octave Mirbeau – author of back cover text ( from The Torture Garden ) 
 Neil Cooper – sleeve photography 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Battle of Nazareth = 
 The Battle of Nazareth began on 20 September 1918 , during the Battle of Sharon , which together with the Battle of Nablus formed the set piece Battle of Megiddo fought during the last months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of the First World War . During the cavalry phase of the Battle of Sharon the Desert Mounted Corps rode to the Esdraelon Plain ( also known as the Jezreel Valley and the plain of Armageddon ) 40 and 50 miles ( 64 and 80 km ) behind the front line in the Judean Hills . At Nazareth on the plain , the 13th Cavalry Brigade of the 5th Cavalry Division attempted to capture the town and the headquarters of the Yildirim Army Group which was eventually captured the following day after the garrison had withdrawn . 
 The Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) attack on Nazareth was made possible by the British Empire infantry attack on 19 September which began the Battle of Sharon . The EEF infantry attacked along an almost continuous front from the Mediterranean Sea , across the Plain of Sharon and into the Judean Hills . The XXI Corps 's British Indian Army infantry captured Tulkarm and the headquarters of the Ottoman Eighth Army . During the course of this attack , the infantry created a gap in the Ottoman front line defences through which the Desert Mounted Corps rode northwards to begin the cavalry phase of the battle . Subsequently the infantry also captured Tabsor , Et Tire and Arara to outflank the Eighth Army . Meanwhile , the Desert Mounted Corps advanced to capture the communications hubs of Afulah , Beisan and Jenin on 20 September , cutting the main Ottoman withdrawal routes along their lines of supply and communications . 
 The 5th Cavalry Division had been assigned the task of capturing Nazareth , which was the site of the General Headquarters of the Central Powers ' Yildirim Army Group , on 20 September . However , due to the rough and narrow Shushu Pass over the Mount Carmel Range , they were forced to leave behind one brigade and the divisional artillery . Instead of both the 13th and 14th Cavalry Brigades advancing across the Esdrealon Plain to capture the Nazareth , the 14th Cavalry Brigade went directly to Afulah , the objective of the 4th Cavalry Division . By the time the 13th Cavalry Brigade attacked Nazareth , it had been reduced to two squadrons and was not strong enough to capture the Yilderim Army Group headquarters and secure the town . During the attack the German commander of the Yildirim Army Group , Generalleutnant ( Major General ) Otto Liman von Sanders and his senior staff officers escaped . The following day , after the Ottoman garrison retreated , Nazareth was occupied by the 13th Cavalry Brigade . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks by the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) in March / April and April / May 1918 , the EEF commanded by General Edmund Allenby occupied the Jordan Valley and the front line , which extended across the Judean Hills to the Mediterranean . Most of the British infantry and yeomanry cavalry regiments were redeployed to the Western Front to counter Ludendorff 's Spring Offensive and were replaced by British India Army infantry and cavalry . As part of reorganisation and training , these newly arrived soldiers carried out a series of attacks on sections of the Ottoman front line during the summer months . These attacks were aimed at pushing the front line to more advantageous positions in preparation for a major attack and to acclimatise the newly arrived India Army infantry . It was not until the middle of September that the consolidated force was ready for large @-@ scale operations . During this time the Occupation of the Jordan Valley continued . 
 By the afternoon of 19 September , it was clear that the breakthrough attacks in the Battle of Sharon by the XXI Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Edward Bulfin had been successful and the XX Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode was ordered to begin its attack , supported by an artillery barrage , against the well @-@ defended Ottoman front line . The attacks continued until midday on 21 September , when a successful flanking attack by the XXI Corps , combined with the XX Corps assault , forced the Seventh and Eighth Armies to disengage . The Ottoman Seventh Army retreated from the Nablus area towards the River Jordan crossing at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge before the rearguard at Nablus was captured . The Desert Mounted Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel advanced through the gap provided by the infantry on 19 September to almost encircle the fighting in the Judean Hills , capturing Nazareth , Haifa , Afulah , Beisan , Jenin and Samakh , before advancing to Tiberias . During this time , Chaytor 's Force commanded by Major General Edward Chaytor captured part of the retreating Ottoman and German column at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge to cut this line of retreat across the Jordan River . To the east of this river , as the Fourth Army began its retreat , Chaytor 's Force advanced to capture Es Salt on 23 September . Amman was captured on 25 September during the Second Battle of Amman when a strong Fourth Army rearguard was defeated there on 25 September . 
 = = = Deployment = = = 
 The Desert Mounted Corps , commanded by Chauvel , consisted of the 4th and 5th Cavalry , the Australian Mounted Divisions , less the 5th Light Horse Brigade temporarily attached to the infantry 60th Division , and less the Anzac Mounted Division assigned to Chaytor 's Force . The three cavalry divisions concentrated near Ramleh , Ludd ( Lydda ) and Jaffa , where they dumped surplus equipment in preparation for their advance , before concentrating behind the XXI Corps ' infantry divisions between the Mediterranean coast and the railway line from Ludd to Tulkarm . 
 Each of the three divisions was made up of three brigades , each with three regiments . The 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions which had transferred from France , consisted of one British yeomanry regiment and two British Indian Army cavalry regiments , one of which was usually lancers . Except the 15th ( Imperial Service ) Cavalry Brigade which had three regiments of Indian Imperial Service Troops lancers . Some of the cavalry regiments were armed , in addition to their Lee – Enfield rifles , bayonets and swords , with lances . The 5th Cavalry Division , consisted of three lancer regiments . The Australian Mounted Division consisting of three light horse brigades , each of three regiments consisting of a headquarters and three squadrons ; 522 men and horses in each regiment , was armed with swords , Lee – Enfield rifles and bayonets , while the Anzac Mounted Division detached to Chaytor 's Force , was , and remained throughout the war , only armed with rifles and bayonets . These divisions were supported by machine guns , three batteries from the Royal Horse Artillery or Honourable Artillery Company , and light armoured car units ; two Light Armoured Motor Batteries , and two Light Car Patrols . 
 By 17 September the Desert Mounted Corps 's leading division , the 5th Cavalry Division , was deployed north @-@ west of Sarona 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the front line . Ready to follow ; the 4th Cavalry Division was located in orange groves to the east of Sarona , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the front , and the Australian Mounted Division was in reserve near Ramleh and Ludd 17 miles ( 27 km ) from the front line . All movement had been restricted to night time culminating in a general move forwards on the night of 18 / 19 September when the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions moved to a position close behind the infantry , while the Australian Mounted Division moved forward to Sarona . The three cavalry divisions concentrated with their supplies carried in massed horse @-@ drawn transport and on long trains of camels . The divisions carried one iron ration and two days ' special emergency rations for each man , and 21 pounds ( 9 @.@ 5 kg ) of grain for each horse , all of which were carried on the horses , with an additional day 's grain for the horses carried on the first line transport in limbered wagons . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps objectives = = = 
 The cavalry divisions were to ride northwards up the coastal Plain of Sharon , then eastwards over the Mount Carmel Range and onto the Esdraelon Plain ( also known as the Jezreel Valley and the plain of Armageddon ) , to block the line of retreat of the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies fighting the XX and XXI Corps in the Judean Hills . If the Esdraelon Plain could be quickly captured , while the two Ottoman armies continued fighting the British Empire infantry , the lines of retreat by railway and road could be cut . The success of this plan depended on a rapid advance to simultaneously almost encircle the Seventh and Eighth Armies in the Judean Hills and capture Liman von Sanders and the Yilderim Army Group general headquarters . Further , in order to consolidate their success , the cavalry would be required to hold these places for some time . Operating many miles from their base , they would be dependent on rations being quickly and efficiently transported forward from base . 
 = = = Esdraelon Plain = = = 
 The lines of supply for the two Ottoman armies fighting in the Judean Hills depended on the main road and railway networks which crossed the Esdraelon Plain . ( See Falls Map 21 Cavalry advances detail below ) The plain stretches from Lejjun in the west , 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the white houses of Nazareth in the foothills of the Galilean Hills in the north , to Afulah in the centre of the plain and on to Beisan on its eastern edge close to the Jordan River , and to Jenin on its south edge at the foot of the Judean Hills . 
 The main route from the Plain of Sharon to the Esdrealon Plain was across the Mount Carmel Range via the Musmus Pass which enters the plain near Lejjun . This area is dominated by the site of the ancient fortress of Megiddo on Tell al Mutesellim . A small force on this prominent ground could control the routes to the north and across the plain where Egyptians , Romans , Mongols , Arabs , Crusaders and the army of Napoleon had marched and fought . Yet no defensive works had been identified on the plain , or covering the approaches to it , during aerial reconnaissances , except German troops garrisoning Yildirim Army Group headquarters . Liman von Sanders took steps to correct this failure at 12 : 30 on 19 September , by ordering the 13th Depot Regiment at Nazareth and the military police , a total of six companies and twelve machine guns to occupy Lejjun and defend the Esdrealon Plains exit of the Musmus Pass . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 " Concentration , surprise , and speed were key elements in the blitzkrieg warfare planned by Allenby . " Success at the Battle of Megiddo depended on an intense British Empire artillery barrage covering a successful attack on the front line by infantry who were required to also drive a gap in the front line . The gap was required for the cavalry to advance quickly to the Esdraelon Plain , 50 miles ( 80 km ) behind the Ottoman front line , during the first day of battle . The Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) were required to win control of the skies by destroying or dominating German aircraft activity and reconnaissances . These two flying arms carried out constant bombing raids on Afulah and the Seventh and Eighth Army headquarters at Tulkarm and Nablus respectively to cut communications with Liman von Sanders at Nazareth . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps advance = = = 
 During the initial cavalry advance up the coastal Plain of Sharon to Litera on the Nahr el Mefjir , the Desert Mounted Corps were to advance , " strictly disregarding any enemy forces that did not directly bar its path . " Then turning north @-@ east , the cavalry were to cross the Mount Carmel Range through two passes and ride onto the Plain of Esdraelon . The 5th Cavalry Division was to move through the more difficult northern pass from Sindiane to Abu Shusheh , 18 miles ( 29 km ) south @-@ east of Haifa , and on to Nazareth . The 4th Cavalry Division was to follow northwards until they reached the southern pass known as the Musmus Pass which would take them to Lejjun on the plain ; their objective was to capture Afulah . In reserve , the Australian Mounted Division was to follow the 4th Cavalry Division to Lejjun . 
 = = = = 5th Cavalry Division = = = = 
 The 5th Cavalry Division consisted of the 13th , 14th and 15th Cavalry Brigades , Essex and Nottinghamshire Batteries , Royal Horse Artillery , 5th Field Squadron , Royal Engineers , 5th Cavalry Division Signal Squadron , the 12th Light Armoured Motor Battery and the 7th Light Car Patrol . The division was to lead the advance north riding along the beach under the cover of some cliffs , past the Nahr el Falik on their way through <unk> and up the Plain of Sharon . Their advance guard , the 13th Cavalry Brigade and the 12th Light Armoured Motor Battery , were on the beach just south of Arsuf when Major General H. J. Macandrew the divisional commander , was informed at 07 : 00 by the 60th Division that Ottoman shelling had ceased south of the Nahr el Faliq , clearing the way for the cavalry . An hour later the 9th Hodson 's Horse leading its brigade , reached Nahr el Faliq , but the horses were " somewhat blown " by their quick journey across the soft sand . Macandrew had seen the speed the 13th Cavalry Brigade set and galloped after them , hoping to slow them down , but could not catch them . 
 By 10 : 00 the rest of the division had passed the Nahr el Falik . Although the division had been ordered to avoid conflict until they reached the entrenched line near Liktera , leading squadrons attacked 200 Ottoman infantry in a large orchard east of Basse el Hindi . Here they captured about 60 prisoners , two guns and many wagons at the cost of one man killed and two wounded . Another isolated machine gun was captured further north . Near <unk> , the 9th Hodson 's Horse outflanked another Ottoman position , and another at Nahr Iskanderun at 10 : 15 . A total of 110 prisoners , 2 artillery pieces and 12 wagons were captured . 
 The entrenched Ottoman position at Liktera was garrisoned by the Eighth Army Depot Regiment . It stretched from about Jelameh , through El Mejdel and Liktera , to the sea near the mouth of the Nahr Mefjir . Seeing the mounted divisions approaching up the plain , the garrison withdrew to Qaqun where 126 prisoners were later captured by the 4th Cavalry Division . The 5th Cavalry Division crossed the Nahr Iskanderun to arrive at Liktera 10 miles ( 16 km ) north @-@ west of Tulkarm , on the Nahr el Mefjir at 11 : 00 , an hour ahead of schedule . Having ridden 25 miles ( 40 km ) , the horses were fatigued , some being unfit for further service ; the 18th Lancers ( 13th Cavalry Brigade ) destroyed five horses and were forced to leave ten behind . The 9th Hodson 's Horse did not record the number of horses they destroyed or left behind but it was probably more . 
 The divisions rested here when the men , horses and several hundred Ottoman prisoners were watered and fed . During this time a squadron led by armoured cars went ahead to reconnoitre the track across the Mount Carmel Range from Sindiane through the Abu Shusheh Pass . The reconnaissance group reported the track across the Abu Shusheh pass rough and in a bad repair . <unk> informed Chauvel that his division would not be ready to move from Liktera before 18 : 15 when the 13th and 14th Cavalry Brigades would advance without wheels to negotiate the pass at night . As a consequence the 15th ( Imperial Service ) Cavalry Brigade remained to guard the guns . The artillery and the Jodhpur and 1st Hyderabad Lancers , were to follow at daylight on 20 September , while the Mysore Lancers waited at Liktera for the division 's transport , which they were to guard . Chauvel arrived at Liktera after midnight on 19 / 20 September when he ordered the 15th ( Imperial Service ) Cavalry Brigade to take the 5th Cavalry Division 's guns via J 'ara and Abu <unk> . They arrived at Abu Shusheh at 03 : 00 and rejoin their division at Afulah during the night . 
 = = = Approach to Nazareth = = = 
 The 13th and 14th Cavalry Brigades , commanded by Brigadier Generals Kelly and Clarke respectively , successfully rode through the Abu Shusheh Pass during the night of 19 / 20 September without incident . The 18th Lancers , 13th Cavalry Brigade , had taken the vanguard from the 9th Hodson 's Horse , advancing north along Napoleon 's route to <unk> <unk> 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) north @-@ west of Kerkur to the Wadi <unk> , which they followed north of <unk> village . They turned east to enter the Abu Shusheh Pass , moving in single file for most of the way along the rough , narrow track following the Wadi el <unk> to J 'ara on the northern side of the watershed at 01 : 00 on 20 September . Two squadrons of the 9th Hodson 's Horse were deployed at J 'ara in a rearguard position to defend the pass from an attack from Haifa . The front of the long column reached Abu Shusheh at 02 : 15 where they remained until 03 : 00 while the brigades concentrated . Having entered the Esdrealon Plain they cut a 100 yards ( 91 m ) section of the Haifa to Afulah railway line which was blown up and destroyed . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps plans = = = 
 Once on the Esdraelon Plain , the objectives of the 5th Cavalry Division were to attack and capture Nazareth , Liman von Sanders and his headquarters 70 miles ( 110 km ) from the Asurf , before clearing the plain to Afulah . Meanwhile , the 4th Cavalry Division 's objective after arriving on the Esdraelon Plan through the Musmus Pass was to capture Afulah . Later the same day , this division was to advance eastwards across the plain , to capture Beisan and occupy the road and railway bridges to the north , over the Jordan River . In particular , they were to hold or destroy the Jisr Mejamieh bridge 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Beisan and 97 miles ( 156 km ) from the front line . In reserve , the Australian Mounted Division was to enter the Esdraelon Plain and occupy Lejjun while the 3rd Light Horse Brigade advanced to capture Jenin 68 miles ( 109 km ) from the front line . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At daylight a reconnaissance by No. 1 Squadron aircraft reported three British armoured cars halfway across the Esdraelon Plain on their way to Afulah , a cavalry brigade at Lejjun and two brigades just entering the plain advancing on a broad front . The 5th Cavalry Division had ordered the 14th Cavalry Brigade to Afulah . This brigade reached the Afulah to Nazareth road at about 05 : 30 , and at 07 : 15 after attacking a German or Ottoman force , the 20th Deccan Horse captured Afulah railway station and about 300 prisoners . The division 's artillery , which had moved through the Abu Shusheh pass during the morning , rejoin the 5th Cavalry Division at Afulah later in the day . 
 The 5th Cavalry Division 's remaining brigade ; the 13th Cavalry Brigade reached Nazareth at 05 : 30 , having been weakened by diversions and a number of detachments . One squadron of 9th Hodson 's Horse had lost touch during the night march . Two troops of lancers were clearing the village of <unk> . The 18th Lancers surrounded and captured 200 sleeping Ottoman soldiers in the village of El <unk> at 03 : 30 , which they had mistaken for Nazareth . While the rest of the brigade were collecting prisoners , the only unit available to attack Nazareth , the Gloucester Hussars , was ordered to take over the advanced guard and attack Nazareth , closely followed by one squadron and three troops of the 18th Lancers . 
 = = = Nazareth = = = 
 Nazareth had a population of 15 @,@ 000 living in homes built at the bottom and on the steep sides of a depression in the Galilean Hills . These homes were dominated by buildings on top of the hills to the north @-@ west , while the roads from Afulah and Haifa winding their way up the steep hillside towards the town , joined 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) from Nazareth 's southern edge . On the left of the main road into the town , the Yildirim Army Group 's mess was located in the Hotel Germania , while 500 yards ( 460 m ) further on the General Headquarters and Liman von Sanders offices were in the Monastery of Casa Nuova . 
 My Cavalry are now in rear of the Turkish Army ... One of my Cavalry Divisions surrounded Liman von Sanders ' Headquarters , at Nazareth , at 03 : 00 today ; but Liman had made a bolt , at 19 : 00 yesterday . 
 Between 05 : 00 and 05 : 30 on 20 September , the leading troop of the Gloucester Hussars , after riding more than 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) , arrived at Nazareth with swords drawn . They captured many prisoners at the Hotel Germania and a mass of documents were found in houses nearby . Meanwhile , the bulk of Yilderim Army Group 's records were being burned at the Monastery of Casa Nuova . The commander of 13th Cavalry Brigade requested the assistance of the 14th Cavalry Brigade through 5th Cavalry Division 's headquarters at 06 : 50 . He reported the 13th Cavalry Brigade had captured many prisoners and material but that Liman von Sanders had left the evening before . The 14th Cavalry Brigade ( 5th Cavalry Division ) was unable to assist the attack on Nazareth . The brigade had captured 1 @,@ 200 prisoners during their advance southwards to capture Afulah where they joined the leading troops of the 10th Cavalry Brigade ( 4th Cavalry Division ) . 
 At Nazareth , the initial attack by the Gloucester Hussars was strongly opposed during street fighting . The Congestion created by prisoners was increased by numerous German lorries parked along the narrow streets . As they were continuing their attack , the Gloucester Hussars were fired on by machine guns from the buildings on the high ground to the north @-@ west and from balconies and windows . At 08 : 00 the Gloucester Hussars were reinforced by two squadrons and three troops of the 18th Lancers followed by a squadron of the 9th Hodson 's Horse . They were subsequently counter @-@ attack by German office workers who , despite being almost annihilated by the 13th Cavalry Brigade 's machine guns , held off the British cavalry attack . 
 At 10 : 55 divisional headquarters replied to the 13th Brigade 's request for assistance that the 14th Cavalry Brigade could not be sent to Nazareth because of " the state of the horses . " The 13th Cavalry Brigade was ordered to withdraw to the north of Afulah , taking with them 1 @,@ 250 prisoners , having ridden 50 miles ( 80 km ) in 22 hours . The Gloucester Hussars suffered 13 men killed and 28 horses and the 9th Hodgson 's Horse suffered 9 men killed . Kelly , the commander of 13th Cavalry Brigade , had failed to capture Nazareth ; failed to force a way through the town to cut the road from Nazareth to Tiberias and failed to capture Liman von Sanders . He was held responsible and lost his command as a result . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The 13th Cavalry Brigade moved to cut the Nazareth to Tiberias road to the north of the town , before being ordered to return and occupy the town the next morning . By then the German and Ottoman forces had retired towards Tiberias from Nazareth which was occupied without opposition . 
 The 4th Cavalry Division , which had advanced to capture Beisan in the afternoon of 20 September , now controlled the area north along the River Jordan , while the 5th Cavalry Division garrisoned Afulah and the Nazareth area . Here motor ambulances , which had been working in the Judean Hills , rejoined their division on 22 September . The Australian Mounted Division 's 3rd Light Horse Brigade occupied Jenin . In consequence , all direct routes northwards were now controlled by the Desert Mounted Corps , forcing the retreating Ottoman Seventh Army and what remained of the Eighth Army to withdraw along minor roads and tracks heading eastwards across the Jordan River , towards the Hedjaz railway . 
 During the first 36 hours of the Battle of Sharon ; between 04 : 30 on 19 September and 17 : 00 on 20 September , the German and Ottoman front line had been cut by infantry and the cavalry had passed through the gap to reach their objectives at Afulah , Nazareth and Beisan . The continuing infantry attack from the south forced the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth armies in the Judean Hills to withdraw northwards . 
 By the end of 20 September , the main achievements of the British infantry during the Battle of Tulkarm were the expulsion of the Eighth Army from the coastal Plain of Sharon and the capture the Eighth Army headquarters at Tulkarm . The 60th Division also captured Anebta in the Judean Hills , while their attached 5th Light Horse Brigade cut the Jenin railway south of Arrabe . During the Battle of Tabsor the 7th ( Meerut ) Division captured the village of Beit Lid and controlled the crossroads at Deir Sheraf . 
 By this time the Desert Mounted Corps blocked the Seventh Army and what remained of the Eighth Army 's main lines of retreat north from the Judean Hills . A large proportion of a retreating column seen withdrawing from Nablus in the direction of Beisan , would be captured at Jenin after the 3rd Light Horse Brigade 's Capture of Jenin . By dusk 4 @,@ 000 prisoners had been captured and brigade transport following the cavalry divisions was 20 miles ( 32 km ) inside Ottoman territory . After negotiating the heavy sand at Arsuf and at Nahr Iskanderun , the Desert Mounted Corps ' transport wagon train reached Liktera at 09 : 00 on 20 September . They were escorted through the Musmus Pass and arrived at Afulah at noon on 21 September . 
 Liman von Sanders and his headquarters ' staff escaped by motor vehicle along the road from Nazareth to Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee . From there they drove on to Samakh in the afternoon , where Liman von Sanders organised a strong rearguard which would be attacked by Australian light horse on 25 September during the Battle of Samakh . Liman von Sanders ordered the <unk> garrison , under German command and supported by German machine guns , to prepare for an attack ; they were to fight " to the last man " . During early stages of his journey , Liman von Sanders could not communicate with his armies , leaving the Fourth , Seventh and Eighth Armies without orders or direction . 
 = Oklahoma = 
 Oklahoma / <unk> / ( Cherokee : <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> ; or transliterated from English as <unk> ( <unk> ) , Pawnee : <unk> , Cayuga : <unk> ) is a state located in the South Central United States . Oklahoma is the 20th most extensive and the 28th most populous of the 50 United States . The state 's name is derived from the Choctaw words okla and humma , meaning " red people " . It is also known informally by its nickname , The Sooner State , in reference to the non @-@ Native settlers who staked their claims on the choicest pieces of land before the official opening date , and the Indian Appropriations Act of 1889 , which opened the door for white settlement in America 's Indian Territory . The name was settled upon statehood , Oklahoma Territory and Indian Territory were merged and Indian was dropped from the name . On November 16 , 1907 , Oklahoma became the 46th state to enter the union . Its residents are known as Oklahomans , or informally " Okies " , and its capital and largest city is Oklahoma City . 
 A major producer of natural gas , oil , and agricultural products , Oklahoma relies on an economic base of aviation , energy , telecommunications , and biotechnology . In 2007 , it had one of the fastest @-@ growing economies in the United States , ranking among the top states in per capita income growth and gross domestic product growth . Oklahoma City and Tulsa serve as Oklahoma 's primary economic anchors , with nearly two @-@ thirds of Oklahomans living within their metropolitan statistical areas . 
 With small mountain ranges , prairie , mesas , and eastern forests , most of Oklahoma lies in the Great Plains , Cross Timbers and the U.S. Interior Highlands — a region especially prone to severe weather . In addition to having a prevalence of English , German , Scottish , Scotch @-@ Irish , and Native American ancestry , more than 25 Native American languages are spoken in Oklahoma , second only to California . 
 Oklahoma is located on a confluence of three major American cultural regions and historically served as a route for cattle drives , a destination for southern settlers , and a government @-@ sanctioned territory for Native Americans . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Oklahoma comes from the Choctaw phrase okla humma , literally meaning red people . Choctaw Chief Allen Wright suggested the name in 1866 during treaty negotiations with the federal government regarding the use of Indian Territory , in which he envisioned an all @-@ Indian state controlled by the United States Superintendent of Indian Affairs . Equivalent to the English word Indian , okla humma was a phrase in the Choctaw language used to describe Native American people as a whole . Oklahoma later became the de facto name for Oklahoma Territory , and it was officially approved in 1890 , two years after the area was opened to white settlers . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Oklahoma is the 20th largest state in the United States , covering an area of 69 @,@ 898 square miles ( 181 @,@ 035 km2 ) , with 68 @,@ 667 square miles ( <unk> km2 ) of land and 1 @,@ 281 square miles ( 3 @,@ 188 km2 ) of water . It is one of six states on the Frontier Strip and lies partly in the Great Plains near the geographical center of the 48 contiguous states . It is bounded on the east by Arkansas and Missouri , on the north by Kansas , on the northwest by Colorado , on the far west by New Mexico , and on the south and near @-@ west by Texas . 
 The western edge of the Oklahoma panhandle is out of alignment with its Texas border . The Oklahoma / New Mexico border is actually 2 @.@ 1 to 2 @.@ 2 miles east of the Texas line . The border between Texas and New Mexico was set first as a result of a survey by Spain in 1819 . It was then set along the 103rd Meridian . In the 1890s , when Oklahoma was formally surveyed using more accurate surveying equipment and techniques , it was discovered that the Texas line was not set along the 103rd Meridian . Surveying techniques were not as accurate in 1819 , and the actual 103rd Meridian was approximately 2 @.@ 2 miles to the east . It was much easier to leave the mistake as it was than for Texas to cede land to New Mexico to correct the original surveying error . The placement of the Oklahoma / New Mexico border represents the true 103rd Meridian . 
 Cimarron County in Oklahoma 's panhandle is the only county in the United States that touches four other states : New Mexico , Texas , Colorado and Kansas . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Oklahoma is between the Great Plains and the Ozark Plateau in the Gulf of Mexico watershed , generally sloping from the high plains of its western boundary to the low wetlands of its southeastern boundary . Its highest and lowest points follow this trend , with its highest peak , Black Mesa , at 4 @,@ 973 feet ( 1 @,@ 516 m ) above sea level , situated near its far northwest corner in the Oklahoma Panhandle . The state 's lowest point is on the Little River near its far southeastern boundary near the town of <unk> , OK , which dips to 289 feet ( 88 m ) above sea level . 
 Among the most geographically diverse states , Oklahoma is one of four to harbor more than 10 distinct ecological regions , with 11 in its borders – more per square mile than in any other state . Its western and eastern halves , however , are marked by extreme differences in geographical diversity : Eastern Oklahoma touches eight ecological regions and its western half contains three . Although having fewer ecological regions Western Oklahoma contains many rare , relic species . 
 Oklahoma has four primary mountain ranges : the Ouachita Mountains , the Arbuckle Mountains , the Wichita Mountains , and the Ozark Mountains . Contained within the U.S. Interior Highlands region , the Ozark and Ouachita Mountains mark the only major mountainous region between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachians . A portion of the Flint Hills stretches into north @-@ central Oklahoma , and near the state 's eastern border , <unk> Hill is regarded by the Oklahoma Tourism & Recreation Department as the world 's tallest hill ; at 1 @,@ 999 feet ( 609 m ) , it fails their definition of a mountain by one foot . 
 The semi @-@ arid high plains in the state 's northwestern corner harbor few natural forests ; the region has a rolling to flat landscape with intermittent canyons and mesa ranges like the Glass Mountains . Partial plains interrupted by small , sky island mountain ranges like the Antelope Hills and the Wichita Mountains dot southwestern Oklahoma ; transitional prairie and oak savannahs cover the central portion of the state . The Ozark and Ouachita Mountains rise from west to east over the state 's eastern third , gradually increasing in elevation in an eastward direction . 
 More than 500 named creeks and rivers make up Oklahoma 's waterways , and with 200 lakes created by dams , it holds the highest number of artificial reservoirs in the nation . Most of the state lies in two primary drainage basins belonging to the Red and Arkansas rivers , though the Lee and Little rivers also contain significant drainage basins . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Forests cover 24 percent of Oklahoma and prairie grasslands composed of shortgrass , mixed @-@ grass , and tallgrass prairie , harbor expansive ecosystems in the state 's central and western portions , although cropland has largely replaced native grasses . Where rainfall is sparse in the western regions of the state , shortgrass prairie and shrublands are the most prominent ecosystems , though pinyon pines , red cedar ( junipers ) , and ponderosa pines grow near rivers and creek beds in the far western reaches of the panhandle . Southwestern Oklahoma contains many rare , disjunct species including sugar maple , <unk> maple , <unk> and southern live oak . 
 <unk> , <unk> minor , cypress forests and mixtures of <unk> pine , loblolly pine and deciduous forests dominate the state 's southeastern quarter , while mixtures of largely post oak , elm , red cedar ( Juniperus virginiana ) and pine forests cover northeastern Oklahoma . 
 The state holds populations of white @-@ tailed deer , mule deer , antelope , coyotes , mountain lions , bobcats , elk , and birds such as quail , doves , cardinals , bald eagles , red @-@ tailed hawks , and pheasants . In prairie ecosystems , American bison , greater prairie chickens , badgers , and armadillo are common , and some of the nation 's largest prairie dog towns inhabit shortgrass prairie in the state 's panhandle . The Cross Timbers , a region transitioning from prairie to woodlands in Central Oklahoma , harbors 351 vertebrate species . The Ouachita Mountains are home to black bear , red fox , grey fox , and river otter populations , which coexist with a total of 328 vertebrate species in southeastern Oklahoma . Also , in southeastern Oklahoma lives the American alligator . 
 = = = Protected lands = = = 
 Oklahoma has 50 state parks , six national parks or protected regions , two national protected forests or grasslands , and a network of wildlife preserves and conservation areas . Six percent of the state 's 10 million acres ( 40 @,@ 000 km2 ) of forest is public land , including the western portions of the Ouachita National Forest , the largest and oldest national forest in the Southern United States . 
 With 39 @,@ 000 acres ( 158 km2 ) , the <unk> Prairie Preserve in north @-@ central Oklahoma is the largest protected area of tallgrass prairie in the world and is part of an ecosystem that encompasses only 10 percent of its former land area , once covering 14 states . In addition , the Black Kettle National Grassland covers 31 @,@ 300 acres ( 127 km2 ) of prairie in southwestern Oklahoma . The Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge is the oldest and largest of nine national wildlife refuges in the state and was founded in 1901 , encompassing 59 @,@ 020 acres ( 238 @.@ 8 km2 ) . 
 Of Oklahoma 's federally protected park or recreational sites ; the Chickasaw National Recreation Area is the largest , with 9 @,@ 898 @.@ 63 acres ( 18 km2 ) . Other sites include the Santa Fe and Trail of Tears national historic trails , the Fort Smith and Washita Battlefield national historic sites , and the Oklahoma City National Memorial . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Oklahoma is located in a humid subtropical region . Oklahoma lies in a transition zone between humid continental climate to the north , semi @-@ arid climate to the west , and humid subtropical climate in the central , south and eastern portions of the state . Most of the state lies in an area known as Tornado Alley characterized by frequent interaction between cold , dry air from Canada , warm to hot , dry air from Mexico and the Southwestern U.S. , and warm , moist air from the Gulf of Mexico . The interactions between these three contrasting air currents produces severe weather ( severe thunderstorms , damaging thunderstorm winds , large hail and tornadoes ) with a frequency virtually unseen anywhere else on planet Earth . An average 62 tornadoes strike the state per year — one of the highest rates in the world . 
 Because of Oklahoma 's position between zones of differing prevailing temperature and winds , weather patterns within the state can vary widely over relatively short distances and can change drastically in a short time . As an example , on November 11 , 1911 , the temperature at Oklahoma City reached 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) in the afternoon ( the record high for that date ) , then an Arctic cold front of unprecedented intensity slammed across the state , causing the temperature to crash 66 degrees , down to 17 ° F ( − 8 ° C ) at midnight ( the record low for that date ) ; thus , both the record high and record low for November 11 were set on the same date . This type of phenomenon is also responsible for many of the tornadoes in the area , such as the 1912 Oklahoma tornado outbreak , when a warm front traveled along a stalled cold front , resulting in an average of about one tornado per hour over the course of a day . 
 The humid subtropical climate ( Koppen Cfa ) of central , southern and eastern Oklahoma is influenced heavily by southerly winds bringing moisture from the Gulf of Mexico . Traveling westward , the climate transitions progressively toward a semi @-@ arid zone ( Koppen BSk ) in the high plains of the Panhandle and other western areas from about Lawton westward , less frequently touched by southern moisture . Precipitation and temperatures decline from east to west accordingly , with areas in the southeast averaging an annual temperature of 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) and an annual rainfall of generally over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 020 mm ) and up to 56 inches ( 1 @,@ 420 mm ) , while areas of the ( higher @-@ elevation ) panhandle average 58 ° F ( 14 ° C ) , with an annual rainfall under 17 inches ( 430 mm ) . 
 Over almost all of Oklahoma , winter is the driest season . Average monthly precipitation increases dramatically in the spring to a peak in May , the wettest month over most of the state , with its frequent and not uncommonly severe thunderstorm activity . Early June can still be wet , but most years see a marked decrease in rainfall during June and early July . Mid @-@ summer ( July and August ) represents a secondary dry season over much of Oklahoma , with long stretches of hot weather with only sporadic thunderstorm activity not uncommon many years . Severe drought is common in the hottest summers , such as those of 1934 , 1954 , 1980 and 2011 , all of which featured weeks on end of virtual <unk> and high temperatures well over 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . Average precipitation rises again from September to mid @-@ October , representing a secondary wetter season , then declines from late October through December . 
 All of the state frequently experiences temperatures above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) or below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) , though below @-@ zero temperatures are rare in south @-@ central and southeastern Oklahoma . Snowfall ranges from an average of less than 4 inches ( 10 cm ) in the south to just over 20 inches ( 51 cm ) on the border of Colorado in the panhandle . The state is home to the Storm Prediction Center , the National Severe Storms Laboratory , and the Warning Decision Training Branch , all part of the National Weather Service and located in Norman . Oklahoma 's highest recorded temperature of 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) was recorded at Tipton on June 27 , 1994 and the lowest recorded temperature of − 31 ° F ( − 35 ° C ) was recorded at Nowata on February 10 , 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 Evidence exists that native peoples traveled through Oklahoma as early as the last ice age . Ancestors of the Wichita and Caddo lived in what is now Oklahoma . The Panhandle culture peoples were <unk> residents of the panhandle region . The westernmost center of the Mississippian culture was Spiro Mounds , in what is now Spiro , Oklahoma , which flourished between AD 850 and 1450 . Spaniard Francisco Vásquez de Coronado traveled through the state in 1541 , but French explorers claimed the area in the 1700s and it remained under French rule until 1803 , when all the French territory west of the Mississippi River was purchased by the United States in the Louisiana Purchase . 
 The territory now known as Oklahoma was first a part of the Arkansas Territory from 1819 until 1828 . 
 During the 19th century , thousands of Native Americans were expelled from their ancestral homelands from across North America and transported to the area including and surrounding present @-@ day Oklahoma . The Choctaw was the first of the Five Civilized Tribes to be removed from the southeastern United States . The phrase " Trail of Tears " originated from a description of the removal of the Choctaw Nation in 1831 , although the term is usually used for the Cherokee removal . 
 A total of 17 @,@ 000 Cherokees and 2 @,@ 000 of their black slaves were deported . The area , already occupied by Osage and Quapaw tribes , was called for the Choctaw Nation until revised Native American and then later American policy redefined the boundaries to include other Native Americans . By 1890 , more than 30 Native American nations and tribes had been concentrated on land within Indian Territory or " Indian Country " . 
 All Five Civilized Tribes supported and signed treaties with the Confederate military during the American Civil War . The Cherokee Nation had an internal civil war . Slavery in Indian Territory was not abolished until 1866 . 
 In the period between 1866 and 1899 , cattle ranches in Texas strove to meet the demands for food in eastern cities and railroads in Kansas promised to deliver in a timely manner . Cattle trails and cattle ranches developed as cowboys either drove their product north or settled illegally in Indian Territory . In 1881 , four of five major cattle trails on the western frontier traveled through Indian Territory . 
 Increased presence of white settlers in Indian Territory prompted the United States Government to establish the Dawes Act in 1887 , which divided the lands of individual tribes into allotments for individual families , encouraging farming and private land ownership among Native Americans but expropriating land to the federal government . In the process , railroad companies took nearly half of Indian @-@ held land within the territory for outside settlers and for purchase . 
 Major land runs , including the Land Run of 1889 , were held for settlers where certain territories were opened to settlement starting at a precise time . Usually land was open to settlers on a first come first served basis . Those who broke the rules by crossing the border into the territory before the official opening time were said to have been crossing the border sooner , leading to the term <unk> , which eventually became the state 's official nickname . 
 <unk> to make the territory into a state began near the end of the 19th century , when the Curtis Act continued the allotment of Indian tribal land . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 Attempts to create an all @-@ Indian state named Oklahoma and a later attempt to create an all @-@ Indian state named Sequoyah failed but the Sequoyah Statehood Convention of 1905 eventually laid the groundwork for the Oklahoma Statehood Convention , which took place two years later . On November 16 , 1907 , Oklahoma was established as the 46th state in the Union . 
 The new state became a focal point for the emerging oil industry , as discoveries of oil pools prompted towns to grow rapidly in population and wealth . Tulsa eventually became known as the " Oil Capital of the World " for most of the 20th century and oil investments fueled much of the state 's early economy . In 1927 , Oklahoman businessman Cyrus Avery , known as the " Father of Route 66 " , began the campaign to create U.S. Route 66 . Using a stretch of highway from Amarillo , Texas to Tulsa , Oklahoma to form the original portion of Highway 66 , Avery spearheaded the creation of the U.S. Highway 66 Association to oversee the planning of Route 66 , based in his hometown of Tulsa . 
 Oklahoma also has a rich African American history . There were many black towns that thrived in the early 20th century because of black settlers moving from neighboring states , especially Kansas . The politician Edward P. McCabe encouraged black settlers to come to what was then Indian Territory . He discussed with President Theodore Roosevelt the possibility of making Oklahoma a majority @-@ black state . 
 By the early 20th century , the Greenwood neighborhood of Tulsa was one of the most prosperous African @-@ American communities in the United States . Jim Crow laws had established racial segregation since before the start of the 20th century , but the blacks had created a thriving area . 
 Social tensions were exacerbated by the revival of the Ku Klux Klan after 1915 . The Tulsa Race Riot broke out in 1921 , with whites attacking blacks . In one of the costliest episodes of racial violence in American history , sixteen hours of rioting resulted in 35 city blocks destroyed , $ 1 @.@ 8 million in property damage , and a death toll estimated to be as high as 300 people . By the late 1920s , the Ku Klux Klan had declined to negligible influence within the state . 
 During the 1930s , parts of the state began suffering the consequences of poor farming practices , extended drought and high winds . Known as the Dust Bowl , areas of Kansas , Texas , New Mexico and northwestern Oklahoma were hampered by long periods of little rainfall and abnormally high temperatures , sending thousands of farmers into poverty and forcing them to relocate to more fertile areas of the western United States . Over a twenty @-@ year period ending in 1950 , the state saw its only historical decline in population , dropping 6 @.@ 9 percent as impoverished families migrated out of the state after the Dust Bowl . 
 Soil and water conservation projects markedly changed practices in the state and led to the construction of massive flood control systems and dams ; they built hundreds of reservoirs and man @-@ made lakes to supply water for domestic needs and agricultural irrigation . By the 1960s , Oklahoma had created more than 200 lakes , the most in the nation . 
 In 1995 , Oklahoma City was the site of one of the most destructive acts of domestic terrorism in American history . The Oklahoma City bombing of April 19 , 1995 , in which Timothy McVeigh detonated a large , crude explosive device outside the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building , killed 168 people , including 19 children . For his crime , McVeigh was executed by the federal government on June 11 , 2001 . His accomplice , Terry Nichols , is serving life in prison without parole for helping plan the attack and prepare the explosive . 
 On May 31 , 2016 , several cities experienced record setting flooding . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Oklahoma was 3 @,@ 911 @,@ 338 on July 1 , 2015 , a 4 @.@ 26 % increase since the 2010 United States Census . 
 At the 2010 Census , 68 @.@ 7 % of the population was non @-@ Hispanic White , down from 88 % in 1970 , 7 @.@ 3 % non @-@ Hispanic Black or African American , 8 @.@ 2 % non @-@ Hispanic American Indian and Alaska Native , 1 @.@ 7 % non @-@ Hispanic Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % non @-@ Hispanic Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 1 % from some other race ( non @-@ Hispanic ) and 5 @.@ 1 % of two or more races ( non @-@ Hispanic ) . 8 @.@ 9 % of Oklahoma 's population was of Hispanic , Latino , or Spanish origin ( they may be of any race ) . 
 As of 2011 , 47 @.@ 3 % of Oklahoma 's population younger than age 1 were minorities , meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non @-@ Hispanic white . 
 As of 2008 Oklahoma had a population of 3 @,@ 642 @,@ 361 with an estimated 2005 ancestral makeup of 14 @.@ 5 % German , 13 @.@ 1 % American , 11 @.@ 8 % Irish , 9 @.@ 6 % English , 8 @.@ 1 % African American , and 11 @.@ 4 % Native American ( including 7 @.@ 9 % Cherokee ) though the percentage of people claiming American Indian as their only race was 8 @.@ 1 % . Most people from Oklahoma who self @-@ identify as having American ancestry are of overwhelmingly English ancestry with significant amounts of Scottish and Welsh inflection as well . 
 The state had the second @-@ highest number of Native Americans in 2002 , estimated at 395 @,@ 219 , as well as the second highest percentage among all states . As of 2006 , 4 @.@ 7 % of Oklahoma 's residents were foreign born , compared to 12 @.@ 4 % for the nation . The center of population of Oklahoma is located in Lincoln County near the town of Sparks . 
 The state 's 2006 per capita personal income ranked 37th at $ 32 @,@ 210 , though it has the third fastest @-@ growing per capita income in the nation and ranks consistently among the lowest states in cost of living index . The Oklahoma City suburb Nichols Hills is first on Oklahoma locations by per capita income at $ 73 @,@ 661 , though Tulsa County holds the highest average . In 2011 , 7 @.@ 0 % of Oklahomans were under the age of 5 , 24 @.@ 7 % under 18 , and 13 @.@ 7 % were 65 or older . Females made up 50 @.@ 5 % of the population . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The English language has been official in the state of Oklahoma since 2010 . The variety of North American English spoken is called Oklahoma English , and this dialect is quite diverse with its uneven blending of features of North Midland , South Midland , and Southern dialects . In 2000 , 2 @,@ 977 @,@ 187 Oklahomans — 92 @.@ 6 % of the resident population five years or older — spoke only English at home , a decrease from 95 % in 1990 . 238 @,@ 732 Oklahoma residents reported speaking a language other than English in the 2000 census , about 7 @.@ 4 % of the total population of the state . Spanish is the second most commonly spoken language in the state , with 141 @,@ 060 speakers counted in 2000 . The most commonly spoken native North American language is Cherokee , with 10 @,@ 000 speakers living within the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area of eastern Oklahoma . Cherokee is an official language in the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area and in the United <unk> Band of Cherokee Indians . 
 German has 13 @,@ 444 speakers representing about 0 @.@ 4 % of the total state population , and Vietnamese is spoken by 11 @,@ 330 people , or about 0 @.@ 4 % of the population , many of whom live in the Asia District of Oklahoma City . Other languages include French with 8 @,@ 258 speakers ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) , Chinese with 6 @,@ 413 ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) , Korean with 3 @,@ 948 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , Arabic with 3 @,@ 265 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , other Asian languages with 3 @,@ 134 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , Tagalog with 2 @,@ 888 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , Japanese with 2 @,@ 546 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , and African languages with 2 @,@ 546 ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) . In addition to Cherokee , more than 25 Native American languages are spoken in Oklahoma , second only to California ( though , it should be noted that only Cherokee exhibits language vitality at present ) . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Oklahoma is part of a geographical region characterized by conservative and Evangelical Christianity known as the " Bible Belt " . Spanning the southern and eastern parts of the United States , the area is known for politically and socially conservative views , even though Oklahoma has more voters registered with the Democratic Party than with any other party . Tulsa , the state 's second largest city , home to Oral Roberts University , is sometimes called the " buckle of the Bible Belt " . According to the Pew Research Center , the majority of Oklahoma 's religious adherents are Christian , accounting for about 80 percent of the population . The percentage of Oklahomans affiliated with Catholicism is half of the national average , while the percentage affiliated with Evangelical Protestantism is more than twice the national average – tied with Arkansas for the largest percentage of any state . 
 In 2010 , the state 's largest church memberships were in the Southern Baptist Convention ( 886 @,@ 394 members ) , the United Methodist Church ( 282 @,@ 347 ) , the Roman Catholic Church ( 178 @,@ 430 ) , and the Assemblies of God ( 85 @,@ 926 ) . Other religions represented in the state include Buddhism , Hinduism , and Islam . 
 In 2000 , there were about 5 @,@ 000 Jews and 6 @,@ 000 Muslims , with 10 congregations to each group . 
 Oklahoma religious makeup : 
 Evangelical Protestant – 53 % 
 Mainline Protestant – 16 % 
 Roman Catholic – 13 % 
 Other – 6 % 
 Unaffiliated – 12 % 
 = = Economy = = 
 Oklahoma is host to a diverse range of sectors including aviation , energy , transportation equipment , food processing , electronics , and telecommunications . Oklahoma is an important producer of natural gas , aircraft , and food . The state ranks third in the nation for production of natural gas , is the 27th @-@ most agriculturally productive state , and also ranks 5th in production of wheat . Four Fortune 500 companies and six Fortune 1000 companies are headquartered in Oklahoma , and it has been rated one of the most business @-@ friendly states in the nation , with the 7th @-@ lowest tax burden in 2007 . 
 In 2010 , Oklahoma City @-@ based Love 's Travel Stops & Country Stores ranked 18th on the Forbes list of largest private companies , Tulsa @-@ based <unk> ranked 37th , and Oklahoma City @-@ based Hobby Lobby ranked 198th in 2010 report . Oklahoma 's gross domestic product grew from $ 131 @.@ 9 billion in 2006 to $ 147 @.@ 5 billion in 2010 , a jump of 10 @.@ 6 percent . Oklahoma 's gross domestic product per capita was $ 35 @,@ 480 in 2010 , which was ranked 40th among the states . 
 Though oil has historically dominated the state 's economy , a collapse in the energy industry during the 1980s led to the loss of nearly 90 @,@ 000 energy @-@ related jobs between 1980 and 2000 , severely damaging the local economy . Oil accounted for 35 billion dollars in Oklahoma 's economy in 2007 , and employment in the state 's oil industry was outpaced by five other industries in 2007 . As of September 2015 , the state 's unemployment rate is 4 @.@ 4 % . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2011 , Oklahoma had a civilian labor force of 1 @.@ 7 million and total non @-@ farm employment fluctuated around 1 @.@ 5 million . The government sector provides the most jobs , with 339 @,@ 300 in 2011 , followed by the transportation and utilities sector , providing 279 @,@ 500 jobs , and the sectors of education , business , and manufacturing , providing 207 @,@ 800 , 177 @,@ 400 , and 132 @,@ 700 jobs , respectively . Among the state 's largest industries , the aerospace sector generates $ 11 billion annually . 
 Tulsa is home to the largest airline maintenance base in the world , which serves as the global maintenance and engineering headquarters for American Airlines . In total , aerospace accounts for more than 10 percent of Oklahoma 's industrial output , and it is one of the top 10 states in aerospace engine manufacturing . Because of its position in the center of the United States , Oklahoma is also among the top states for logistic centers , and a major contributor to weather @-@ related research . 
 The state is the top manufacturer of tires in North America and contains one of the fastest @-@ growing biotechnology industries in the nation . In 2005 , international exports from Oklahoma 's manufacturing industry totaled $ 4 @.@ 3 billion , accounting for 3 @.@ 6 percent of its economic impact . Tire manufacturing , meat processing , oil and gas equipment manufacturing , and air conditioner manufacturing are the state 's largest manufacturing industries . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 Oklahoma is the nation 's third @-@ largest producer of natural gas , fifth @-@ largest producer of crude oil , and has the second @-@ greatest number of active drilling rigs , and ranks fifth in crude oil reserves . While the state ranked eighth for installed wind energy capacity in 2011 , it is at the bottom of states in usage of renewable energy , with 94 percent of its electricity being generated by non @-@ renewable sources in 2009 , including 25 percent from coal and 46 percent from natural gas . Oklahoma has no nuclear power . Ranking 13th for total energy consumption per capita in 2009 , Oklahoma 's energy costs were 8th lowest in the nation . 
 As a whole , the oil energy industry contributes $ 35 billion to Oklahoma 's gross domestic product , and employees of Oklahoma oil @-@ related companies earn an average of twice the state 's typical yearly income . In 2009 , the state had 83 @,@ 700 commercial oil wells churning 65 @.@ 374 million barrels ( 10 @,@ 393 @,@ 600 m3 ) of crude oil . Eight and a half percent of the nation 's natural gas supply is held in Oklahoma , with 1 @.@ 673 trillion cubic feet ( 47 @.@ 4 km3 ) being produced in 2009 . 
 According to Forbes magazine , Oklahoma City @-@ based Devon Energy Corporation , Chesapeake Energy Corporation , and <unk> Energy Corporation are the largest private oil @-@ related companies in the nation , and all of Oklahoma 's Fortune 500 companies are energy @-@ related . Tulsa 's ONEOK and Williams Companies are the state 's largest and second @-@ largest companies respectively , also ranking as the nation 's second and third @-@ largest companies in the field of energy , according to Fortune magazine . The magazine also placed Devon Energy as the second @-@ largest company in the mining and crude oil @-@ producing industry in the nation , while Chesapeake Energy ranks seventh respectively in that sector and Oklahoma Gas & Electric ranks as the 25th @-@ largest gas and electric utility company . 
 Oklahoma Gas & Electric , commonly referred to as OG & E ( NYSE : <unk> ) operates four base electric power plants in Oklahoma . Two of them are coal @-@ fired power plants : one in Muskogee , and the other in <unk> . Two are gas @-@ fired power plants : one in Harrah and the other in <unk> . OG & E was the first electric company in Oklahoma to generate electricity from wind farms in 2003 . 
 = = = = Wind generation = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 The 27th @-@ most agriculturally productive state , Oklahoma is fifth in cattle production and fifth in production of wheat . Approximately 5 @.@ 5 percent of American beef comes from Oklahoma , while the state produces 6 @.@ 1 percent of American wheat , 4 @.@ 2 percent of American pig products , and 2 @.@ 2 percent of dairy products . 
 The state had 85 @,@ 500 farms in 2012 , collectively producing $ 4 @.@ 3 billion in animal products and fewer than one billion dollars in crop output with more than $ 6 @.@ 1 billion added to the state 's gross domestic product . Poultry and swine are its second and third @-@ largest agricultural industries . 
