 Larkin , Ralph W. ( 1970 ) . " Pattern Maintenance and Change in Education " . The Teachers College Record ( Teachers College , Columbia University ) 72 ( 1 ) : 111 – 120 . 
 = Royal Mail Case = 
 The Royal Mail Case or R v Kylsant & <unk> was a noted English criminal case in 1931 . The director of the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company , Lord Kylsant , had falsified a trading prospectus with the aid of the company accountant to make it look as if the company was profitable and to entice potential investors . Following an independent audit instigated by HM Treasury , Kylsant and John Moreland , the company auditor , were arrested and charged with falsifying both the trading prospectus and company records and accounts . Although they were acquitted of falsifying records and accounts , Kylsant was found guilty of falsifying the trading prospectus and sentenced to twelve months in prison . The company was then liquidated , and reconstituted as The Royal Mail Lines Ltd with the backing of the British government . 
 As well as its immediate impact , the case instigated massive changes in the way companies were audited . The case highlighted flaws in the way company accounts were reviewed , and " probably had a greater impact on the quality of published data than all the Companies Acts passed up to that date " . The case " fell like an atomic bomb and profoundly disturbed both the industrial and the accountancy worlds " , and has also been linked to reduced public trust of big businesses . The case is also seen as the reason for the demise of accounting with the aid of secret reserves . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Royal Mail Steam Packet Company was a British shipping company founded in London in 1839 by James MacQueen . It became the largest shipping group in the world when it took over the White Star Line in 1927 . Lord Kylsant had been chairman of the company since 1902 . He had expanded the company rapidly : aside from the White Star Line , he bought the Pacific Steam Navigation Company in 1910 for £ 1 @.@ 5 million , the Union @-@ Castle Line in 1912 , and assumed control of the Harland and Wolff shipyards in 1924 . 
 The company had prospered during the First World War as the government paid to requisition its ships as military supply vessels and troop transports . The company had saved the profits , predicting that it would need them to cover income tax and excess profits tax . After these taxes had been paid there was approximately £ 1 million left , which they again saved , hoping to use this to cover any financial difficulties that might arise . The reserves were again boosted with government money paid under the Trade Facilities Act 1921 , but between 1921 and 1925 the profits of the company rapidly dropped and , beginning from 1926 , the directors supplemented the company income by taking money from the reserves . 
 In 1929 the company asked HM Treasury for an extension of the period in which government loans to the company could be paid . The Treasury first demanded an audit of the company accounts , and sent Sir William McClintock to write a report on the financial state of the company . McClintock 's report revealed that the company had not earned any trading profits since 1925 , but was still paying dividends by taking money from the reserves . The company had reported £ 439 @,@ 000 profits for 1926 , but had drawn £ 750 @,@ 000 out of the reserves and falsified accounts to make it appear that the money came from trading . In 1927 the company made a trading loss of £ 507 @,@ 000 , but money was again drawn from the reserves to make it appear that the company had made a profit of £ 478 @,@ 000 . As a result of this , and a report that in 1928 the company had issued a fraudulent prospectus inviting customers to buy shares in the company and saying that it had earned an average £ 500 @,@ 000 a year in the last decade , arrest warrants were issued for Lord Kylsant and John Moreland , the company auditor . At the time the ruse was discovered the company had a trading deficit of £ 300 @,@ 000 a year , the reserves were completely exhausted , and the company owed £ 10 million . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial began at the Old Bailey on 20 July 1931 before Mr Justice Wright , with Sir William Jowitt , D.N. Pritt and Eustace Fulton for the prosecution , Sir John Simon , J.E. Singleton and Wilfred Lewis for Lord Kylsant and Sir Patrick Hastings , Stuart Bevan , Frederick Tucker and C.J. Conway for John Moreland . The indictment contained 3 counts . On count 1 Kylsant was charged with issuing a document , namely the annual report for 1926 with intent to deceive the shareholders about the true state of the company , Morland was charged with aiding and abetting this offence . Count 2 was an identical count relating to the annual report for 1927 against both defendants and on count 3 Kylsant alone was charged with issuing a document — the debenture stock prospectus of 1928 with intent to induce people to advance property to the company . All counts were contrary to section 84 of the Larceny Act 1861 . Both defendants pleaded not guilty to all counts . 
 The main defence on the use of secret reserve accounting came with the help of Lord Plender . Plender was one of the most important and reliable accountants in Britain , and under cross @-@ examination stated that it was routine for firms " of the very highest repute " to use secret reserves in calculating profit without declaring it . Patrick Hastings said that " if my client ... was guilty of a criminal offence , there is not a single accountant in the City of London or in the world who is not in the same position . " Both Kylsant and Moreland were acquitted of counts 1 and 2 , but Kylsant was found guilty on count 3 and was sentenced to 12 months in prison . 
 <unk> appealed his conviction on count 3 and was bailed pending the appeal . The appeal was heard in November 1931 where the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction , ruling that although the statements within the prospectus were all true , the document as a whole was false because of what it concealed , omitted or implied . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Kylsant 's conviction the company was liquidated , and reconstituted as The Royal Mail Lines Ltd with the backing of the British government . The case led to several changes in the way companies were audited . Because many accountants shared Plender 's view that secret reserve accounting was a regular and respectable practice , and because the pair had not been found guilty of publishing false information as a result of this , the professional response was disjointed and half @-@ hearted . There were major changes , however : although the practice of secret reserve accounting remained acceptable , companies disclosed their use of this in their audit reports . The Companies Act 1947 made it clear that failing to disclose the use of this process was unacceptable , and undermined the " true and fair view " companies were required to give in their financial statements . 
 A second major change was in the approach accountants took to their job . Previously the attitude was that accountants were only required to do their legal duty , but after the Royal Mail Case accountants were more and more expected to use their ethical and moral judgement in making decisions . Contemporaries said that the case " probably had a greater impact on the quality of published data than all the Companies Acts passed up to that date " . The case " fell like an atomic bomb and profoundly disturbed both the industrial and the accountancy worlds " , and has been linked to reduced public trust of big businesses . 
 Following his release in 1932 , Kylsant stayed mainly out of the public eye despite a brief return in 1933 . 
 = A Thousand Suns = 
 For the 1991 Russell Morris album of the same name , see A Thousand Suns ( Russell Morris album ) 
 A Thousand Suns is the fourth studio album by American rock band Linkin Park . It was released on September 8 , 2010 , by Warner Bros. Records . The album was written by the band and was produced by Linkin Park vocalist Mike Shinoda and Rick Rubin , who worked together to produce the band 's previous studio album Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) . Recording sessions for A Thousand Suns took place at NRG Recording Studios in North Hollywood , California from 2008 until early 2010 . 
 A Thousand Suns is a multi @-@ concept album dealing with human fears such as nuclear warfare . The band has said the album is a drastic departure from their previous work ; they experimented on different and new sounds . Shinoda told MTV the album references numerous social issues and blends human ideas with technology . The title is a reference to Hindu Sanskrit scripture , a line of which was first popularized in 1945 by J. Robert Oppenheimer , who described the atomic bomb as being " as bright as a thousand suns " . It also appears in a line from the first single of the album , " The Catalyst " . 
 " The Catalyst " was sent to radio and released to digital music retailers on August 2 , 2010 . " The Catalyst " peaked at the Billboard Alternative Songs and Rock Songs charts . Three more singles were released to promote the album : " Waiting for the End " , " Burning in the Skies " and " Iridescent " . " The Catalyst " and " Waiting for the End " were certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Linkin Park promoted the album through the A Thousand Suns World Tour from October 2010 to September 2011 . 
 Upon release , the album polarized critics and fans . The band 's fanbase divided over their new sound , splitting them into " love @-@ it versus hate @-@ it groups " according to one reviewer . Despite this , the album has been a commercial success , debuting at number one on over ten charts . It was certified gold by the RIAA in February 2011 . By June 2014 , it had sold over 960 @,@ 000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Recording for the album began in 2008 , less than a year after the release of Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) . As with Minutes to Midnight , Shinoda and Rick Rubin produced the album . Primary recording sessions for A Thousand Suns took place at NRG Recording Studios in North Hollywood , Los Angeles , California . In November 2008 , lead singer Chester Bennington said the new record was a concept album ; he said it " sound [ ed ] a little daunting to me , so , I think my confidence level will drop , but when it was presented to us by this friend of ours , we liked the idea . It was an inspiring idea , and it was something we could relate a lot of the things we like to write about to . " 
 In May 2009 , Mike Shinoda revealed info on the album in a Billboard magazine story , saying : " I feel like we 've been writing a lot . I 'd say we 've got about half the music done , though I shouldn 't say halfway because who knows how long the next batch of songs will take . But all the material 's just kind of coming together , and every week we meet up and assess the situation and for the rest of the week we just go and work on whatever we find exciting . " He also explained the experimentation that the band would be working with , saying , " It 's not going to be Hybrid Theory . It 's not going to be Minutes to Midnight . And if we do it right , it 'll have a cutting edge sound that defines itself as an individual record separate from anything else that 's out there . " 
 Bennington continued composing for the album while touring with Dead by Sunrise in support of their 2009 studio album Out of Ashes . He said Linkin Park was still making a concept record , stating in another interview with MTV , " we might need to just make a record and still try to do a concept but figure out a way to do it without actually waiting another five or six years to put out a record , to try to pull off all the grandiose insanity we were thinking of doing . And we 're doing that . " Bassist Dave " Phoenix " Farrell predicted the band 's fans would be divided about A Thousand Suns , saying , " We 've known [ the album is ] going to be different , and if fans were expecting Hybrid Theory or Meteora , they 're going to be surprised . It 's going to take people some time to figure it out and know what to do with it . " 
 When asked about the new project , drummer Rob Bourdon said , " We tend to be perfectionists and it 's sort of how we work . We like being in the studio and when we get in there we write a ton of material . " Bourdon said the album was a challenge to complete ; he said , " We 've been making music for a long time so one of the challenges was to evolve and make something to keep us interested and also have a lot of fun in the process . We 've been used to making a certain type of music and using sounds to accomplish that . So to break out of that and push ourselves to grow is definitely challenging . " Shinoda later said the album was not a concept record , saying , " People asked us if it 's a concept record , and in the middle of the process , we were contemplating whether or not that was what we wanted to do , " although he said that eventually , A Thousand Suns at its completion has no narrative and is " more abstract " than many concept albums . 
 = = Style and composition = = 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone in May 2009 , Shinoda said the band was in the process of writing and recording material for the album . The album was originally scheduled for an early 2010 release , but Shinoda was concerned with " the quality of the tunes " and said , " if we need to take a step back and make sure everything is top , top quality by our standards , we will " . Shinoda also said that , in comparison to Minutes to Midnight , the new album would have a bigger " thread of consistency " and would be more experimental and " hopefully more cutting @-@ edge " . 
 Christopher Weingarten of The Village Voice compared the album to Radiohead 's third studio album , OK Computer , describing the record 's composition as " uninhibited hooks , daffy left turns , piano @-@ soaked bathos , explorations of the human relationship with technology , [ and ] a complete avoidance of metal " . Weingarten noted various elements and styles the band incorporated in A Thousand Suns , saying the band was " sink [ ing ] their distortion pedals into a tender oblivion , embracing the <unk> Vocoder syrup of Imogen Heap , the cuddly heavenward synths of Yeasayer , the post @-@ apocalyptic stutter @-@ hop of El @-@ P , the head rush of Ibiza house " . Jordy Kasko of Review Rinse Repeat compared the style of A Thousand Suns to that of Pink Floyd 's eighth studio album The Dark Side of the Moon and Radiohead 's fourth studio album Kid A. 
 James Montgomery of MTV compared the album to Kid A because of the lack of guitars , the style of being completely different to the band 's previous works , and the album 's message . Montgomery said , " None of these problems , these terrors or these specters that haunt us in 2010 are particularly new . Quite the opposite , in fact . We 've just chosen to ignore the warnings . And now it might be too late . " According to turntablist Joe Hahn , the album 's title is a reference to a line in the Hindu Sanskrit scripture the Bhagavad Gita " If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky , that would be like the splendor of the mighty one , " which was made famous by J. Robert Oppenheimer in reference to the atomic bomb . The title also appears in the album 's lead single " The Catalyst " , which appears in the line " God save us everyone , will we burn inside the fires of a thousand suns ? " . The band said Oppenheimer 's comments about the nuclear bomb influenced the apocalyptic themes of the album . The band wrote about these comments in the album 's liner notes : 
 Oppenheimer 's words resonate today not only for their historical significance , but for their emotional gravity . So , too , A Thousand Suns grapples with the personal cycle of pride , destruction , and regret . In life , like in dreams , this sequence is not always linear . And , sometimes , true remorse penetrates the devastating cycle . The hope , of course , springs from the notion that the possibility of change is born in our most harrowing moments . 
 The band has stated that the album 's tenth track , " Wretches and Kings " , pays homage to the hip @-@ hop group Public Enemy . Speaking to NME about the song 's reference to Public Enemy , Shinoda said , " There is a homage to Chuck D on there . It 's probably the most hip @-@ hop song on the record and one of the most aggressive ... Public Enemy were very three @-@ dimensional with their records because although they seemed political , there was a whole lot of other stuff going on in there too . It made me think how three @-@ dimensional I wanted our record to be without imitating them of course , and show where we were at creatively . " Ian Winwood of Kerrang ! noted that " Wretches and Kings " references the Public Enemy song " Fight the Power " and compared the album 's content to Public Enemy 's third studio album , Fear of a Black Planet . Chuck D later provided vocals on a remix by <unk> . The fifth track " When They Come for Me " references The <unk> : The Gift & The Curse , the seventh studio album by hip hop artist Jay @-@ Z , with whom the band collaborated on the 2004 EP Collision Course . The album includes samples of notable speeches by American political figures , including Martin Luther King , Jr . , J. Robert Oppenheimer , and Mario Savio . 
 Chester Bennington stated in an interview with MTV News , which referred to Linkin Park 's new style as being less technical and more organic : 
 " When it came to doing things that felt very much like older Linkin Park , like mixing hip @-@ hop with a rock chorus , [ we ] felt like , if we were going to do it , we need to really do it in a way that felt natural and felt original and felt like it was something we hadn 't done in the past ... [ While ] there are hip @-@ hop songs on the album — ' Wretches and Kings ' , ' When They Come for Me ' — they 're like nothing the band have tried before : snarling , raw , dark and ... strangely organic . " 
 Critics and reporters labeled the album 's material with several different genres , including trip hop , electronic rock , ambient , alternative rock , industrial rock , experimental rock , rap rock , and progressive rock on the album . Compared to their previous record , Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) , Shinoda contributed many more vocals , while Brad Delson 's guitar riffs are put further into the background , which Gary Graff of Billboard described as " on the back burner ( and barely even in the oven ) " . Shinoda raps on the tracks " When They Come for Me " , " Wretches and Kings " and the album 's second single " Waiting for the End " . Derek Oswald of <unk> noted reggae @-@ like influences on Shinoda 's verses in " Waiting for the End " . He sings verses on " Burning in the Skies " , " Robot Boy " , " Blackout " , " Iridescent " and " The Catalyst " . Bennington and Shinoda sing together on " The Catalyst " , " Jornada del Muerto " and " Robot Boy " , while " Iridescent " features all band members singing together . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was exhibited at a 3 @-@ D laser exhibition at Music Box Theater in Hollywood on September 7 , 2010 . A Thousand Suns was officially released on September 10 , 2010 , in Germany , Austria and Switzerland ; and on September 13 , 2010 , in the U.S. Linkin Park started worldwide promotion of the album with the A Thousand Suns World Tour , which started on October 7 , 2010 , and ended on September 25 , 2011 . The band performed an entire setlist in the Puerta de Alcalá Gate in Madrid ; their live performance of " Waiting for the End " was shown at the 2010 MTV Europe Music Awards . 
 Linkin Park also promoted A Thousand Suns by featuring songs from the album in video games . Joe Hahn said " The Catalyst " would be included in the video game Medal of Honor . Hahn also announced he would direct a trailer for the game ; it was released on August 1 , 2010 — one day before the single 's release . Dave " Phoenix " Farrell stated that the band 's members believed the song 's " dark undertones ... fits with the subject matter " of the game , which was the reason " The Catalyst " was chosen for Medal of Honor . During the Japanese release of the album on September 15 , 2010 , Warner Music Japan announced that " The Catalyst " would be the official theme song of Mobile Suit Gundam : Extreme Vs . " Blackout " was featured in the soccer video game FIFA 11 . The band released a video game called Linkin Park Revenge — an edition of Tap Tap Revenge that features four tracks from the album and six songs from previous Linkin Park albums . " Wretches and Kings " is featured in the trailer for the video game EA Sports MMA . 
 " Blackout " , " Burning in the Skies " , " The Catalyst " , " The Messenger " , " Waiting for the End " , and " Wretches and Kings " were available as downloadable content in the " Linkin Park Track Pack " for the rhythm video game Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , which was released on October 19 , 2010 , on the PlayStation Store , Xbox Live Marketplace , and Wii Shop Channel . Customers who purchased Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock from Amazon.com between October 17 and October 23 received a copy of A Thousand Suns . Three songs were remixed and released as downloadable content for the rhythm video game DJ Hero 2 in late 2010 . On January 11 , 2011 , a Linkin Park track pack was released for the rhythm video game Rock Band 3 ; it includes " Waiting for the End " and five songs from the band 's previous albums . 
 On March 5 , 2011 , Mike Shinoda announced the European release of A Thousand Suns + , a limited re @-@ issue of the album that was released on March 28 , 2011 . The re @-@ release includes a live DVD of the band 's MTV Europe Music Awards concert at Puerta de Alcalá , Madrid on November 7 , 2010 , and an MP3 audio file of the show . On June 19 , 2012 , a live version of the album , titled A Thousand Suns : Live Around the World was released on Spotify . It features ten of the album 's fifteen songs . The tracks were recorded in London , Hamburg , Paris , Berlin , and Las Vegas . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 During the announcement of the album 's release date , Linkin Park said the album 's first single would be " The Catalyst " , which was released on August 2 , 2010 . From July 9 , 2010 until July 25 , 2010 , the band held a contest titled " Linkin Park , Featuring You " . In the contest , fans could download stems from " The Catalyst " , remix the stems and / or write their own parts for the song on any instrument . The winner of this contest was Czeslaw " <unk> " <unk> from Świdnica , Poland , whose remix is featured as an extra track on a version of the album made available from Best Buy and Napster . The album 's liner notes credit <unk> with " supplemental programming " on " When They Come for Me " . The top 20 remixes that were selected by the band are being considered for future use as b @-@ sides and online downloads . 
 Two of the remixes by <unk> and ill Audio have since been released via the band 's webpage as free mp3 downloads , while two by Cale <unk> and DJ <unk> been released on an exclusive German release of " The Catalyst " . The music video for " The Catalyst " , directed by Joe Hahn , premiered on August 26 , 2010 . On August 31 , 2010 , It was announced that the band would give their first live performance of the single at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 , at Griffith Observatory . The venue was kept secret until the performance , although it was revealed to be a prominent landmark in Los Angeles . The single peaked at number one on the Billboard Rock Songs and Alternative Songs charts , and on the UK Rock Chart . The single also peaked at number twenty @-@ seven in the Billboard Hot 100 upon the release of A Thousand Suns , and spent five weeks on the chart . " The Catalyst " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in July 2011 . 
 On September 2 , 2010 , Linkin Park released the promotional single " Wretches and Kings " to those who had pre @-@ ordered the album . On September 8 , 2010 , the band debuted " Waiting for the End " and " Blackout " on their Myspace page . The band announced on its official website the " Full Experience Myspace Premiere " , the streaming of the entire album on its Myspace page on September 10 . A remix of " Blackout " by Renholdër was included in the soundtrack of Underworld : Awakening . 
 " Waiting for the End " was released as the album 's second single on October 1 , 2010 . The music video for the song premiered on October 8 , 2010 , and was directed by Joe Hahn . Linkin Park 's performance of " Waiting for the End " at Puerta de Alcala in Madrid was broadcast as part of the 2010 MTV Europe Music Awards . " Waiting for the End " and " When They Come for Me " were performed live on Saturday Night Live on February 5 , 2011 . " Waiting for the End " was featured in an episode of CSI : Crime Scene Investigation broadcast on CBS on October 14 , 2010 . The single peaked at number one on the Alternative Songs chart ; it was Linkin Park 's tenth number @-@ one song on the chart . It peaked at number two on the Rock Songs chart and at number forty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 , spending nine weeks on the chart . The single achieved success in other countries , peaking at number thirty @-@ four in Austria , number twenty in Belgium , number 29 in Germany , and number thirty @-@ four in Japan . " Waiting for the End " was certified gold by the RIAA in April 2011 . 
 On January 22 , 2011 , Linkin Park announced that its next international single would be " Burning in the Skies " . The music video , directed by Hahn , premiered on February 22 and the single was released on March 21 . The single reached number thirty @-@ five in Austria , number 35 in Portugal , number twenty @-@ six in German airplay , and number six in Mexico . 
 On April 13 , 2011 , Shinoda confirmed that the album 's third U.S. , fourth international , and overall final single would be " Iridescent " . He also said a slightly shorter version of the song would be included the soundtrack of the movie Transformers : Dark of the Moon , and that a music video directed by Hahn had been made to promote the single . Linkin Park performed the single remix of " Iridescent " at the film 's premiere at Red Square , Moscow , on June 23 , 2011 . The single peaked at number eighty @-@ one at the Billboard Hot 100 , spending three weeks on the chart ; it also peaked at number nineteen at the Alternative Songs chart and number twenty @-@ nine at the Rock Songs chart . Despite these low peaks , the single achieved moderate success in other countries , peaking at number thirty @-@ nine in Australia , number ten in Israel , and number two in South Korea and on the UK Rock Chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 A Thousand Suns debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with first @-@ week sales of 241 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , exceeding sales of Trey Songz 's Passion , Pain & Pleasure by 1 @,@ 000 , according to Nielsen SoundScan . It became Linkin Park 's fourth US number @-@ one album , although the first @-@ week sales were significantly lower than those of their previous album Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) , which opened at 623 @,@ 000 copies . The album entered Billboard 's Rock Albums , Alternative Albums , Hard Rock Albums , and Digital Albums charts at number one . In the second week , the album slid to number three , selling 70 @,@ 000 copies ; in December 2010 , two months after its release , its sales passed the half @-@ million mark . On January 11 , 2011 , A Thousand Suns was certified gold by the RIAA for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies sold in the U.S. It spent 30 weeks on the Billboard 200 . By June 2014 , the album had sold 906 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. according to SoundScan . 
 In Canada , A Thousand Suns peaked at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart with 23 @,@ 000 copies sold . In February 2011 , the album was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for 80 @,@ 000 units sold . In the United Kingdom album chart , on which it spent seventeen weeks , the album debuted at number two with first @-@ week sales of 46 @,@ 711 copies , behind The Script 's album Science & Faith . On September 10 , 2010 , two days after the album 's UK release , A Thousand Suns was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , marking shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies to retailers . In Australia , it debuted at number one on the ARIA Top 50 Albums , and retained the top position for four weeks . The album remained in the chart 's top 50 for 18 weeks . By the end of 2010 , A Thousand Suns had been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , and the following year it was certified platinum . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon its release , A Thousand Suns polarized critics , some of whom gave a positive response to the album and others less so . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 66 based on 10 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Rick Florino of Artistdirect gave the album five stars out of five , saying , " after A Thousand Suns , all rock ' n ' roll will revolve around Linkin Park " ; he credited Linkin Park with creating their own genre . Ian Winwood of Kerrang ! gave it an " excellent " rating , saying it " can only be best described as a political album " . He praised the songwriting , saying , " These are songs that have been constructed as much as they 've been written " , and that its closest comparison was Public Enemy 's 1990 album Fear of a Black Planet . Dave de Sylvia of Sputnikmusic called it " an extremely well @-@ crafted rock album , " saying it was somewhat better than its predecessor Minutes to Midnight ( 2007 ) , but does not live up to their debut , Hybrid Theory ( 2000 ) . David Buchanan of Consequence of Sound gave the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five , saying , " Some might argue this new sound is posturing , complete mutation to the point of absurdity ; in the band ’ s associated artwork and videos , evolution has been touted from day one . In essence , Linkin Park has been chasing this all along , and now it has become tangible , complete . " Johan Wippsson from Melodic said Linkin Park " have created a very cool and unique sound " and described " Blackout " and " When They Come for Me " as " really innovative " . Ian Winwood of BBC Music , in his review of the band 's succeeding album Living Things , praised A Thousand Suns and described it as " a body of work startling enough that it gambled with the massive commercial success the group had achieved since their debut album , 2000 's Hybrid Theory . " 
 James Montgomery of MTV called A Thousand Suns a " sprawling , discordant , ambitious and an all @-@ out game changer " and compared it with Radiohead 's 2000 album Kid A , but said A Thousand Suns is more optimistic than Kid A. Jordy Kasko with Review Rinse Repeat gave A Thousand Suns a perfect rating , calling it an " epic quest " . He compared it to Pink Floyd 's The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) and Radiohead 's Kid A , saying " A Thousand Suns is an <unk> . It is not a collection of songs . It is not meant to be listened to as such . The band is going so far as to release an iTunes version that is one track , 47 minutes and 56 seconds long . This is no more an ' album ' by conventional standards than Dark Side of the Moon or Kid A are . Sure , there are identifiable songs , but to understand or to appreciate any of them you must take them in the context of the entire album . " Christopher Weingarten of The Village Voice praised the album , calling it " 2010 's best avant @-@ rock nuclear @-@ anxiety concept record " , as well as comparing it to Radiohead 's OK Computer ( 1997 ) . 
 Mikael Wood of Spin gave the album six stars out of ten , saying it " contains plenty of aggressively arty material " and calling " The Messenger " the " most unexpected track on the boldly conceived A Thousand Suns " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B rating and said " at times the band 's odd mélange of industrial grind , hip @-@ hop swagger , and teenage @-@ wasteland angst feels jarring " . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone gave it three stars out of five ; she said Linkin Park were " feeling their way toward a new identity " ; she called their skill for melody " obvious " and said they sounded like " a killer Linkin Park tribute band " . Australia 's Music Network magazine gave the album a mixed review , calling it " a radical shift for the band , but it ’ s also a very uneven one ... while there 's some commanding moments ( ' The Catalyst , ' ' Wretches and Kings ' ) , many of the tracks feel like experiments rather than fully @-@ formed songs " . 
 Johnny Firecloud of <unk> condemned the album , called it a " melodramatic farce " , and said it was a " mechanized mess of sentimentality ... the 15 track collection is entirely unconvincing as a call to action for uprising and activism " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the album was a " clear continuation " of its predecessor , called it " recycled ideas " , and said " the problem is , the subdued rhythms , riffs and raps of A Thousand Suns winds up monochromatic " . Jim Farber of The New York Daily News gave the album one star out of five , saying , " no fewer than 15 cuts crowd the tight 47 @-@ minute length of the CD , many of them fragments or , more accurately , sonic non sequiturs " . Jamie <unk> of The Badger Herald wrote , " there are at least five filler tracks that contain nothing more than noise and sound bites ... the full @-@ length songs aren ’ t particularly daring or interesting " . 
 Fans of the band were equally polarized by A Thousand Suns . Initial signs of the fans ' division over the band 's new material occurred when " The Catalyst " was released as a single . MTV conducted a poll asking fans how they received the song ; most responses were positive but a large amount were dissatisfied with it . Fans then therefore debated on what they thought of the new sound . Sara Ferrer of Orange County Reloaded said the album split the views of fans and critics into " love @-@ it versus hate @-@ it groups " . Montgomery expressed similar sentiments , saying the album " alternately thrilled and thinned [ Linkin Park 's ] substantial fanbase with its vast swaths of sonic sprawl ( and overall lack of guitar solos ) . " Shinoda shared his thoughts on the divided reception of the fans ; he thanked the people who accepted the album and defended it from the criticism of those who disliked it . Commenting on fans ' polarized response to the album , Bennington said , " [ A Thousand Suns ] is definitely something that we knew people would need to digest and get over the fact that it 's not what they thought we would do . " 
 = = = = Accolades = = = = 
 Kerrang ! listed A Thousand Suns as the nineteenth @-@ best album of 2010 on their list of the top 20 albums that year . James Montgomery of MTV listed the album as twentieth best album of 2010 , calling it " the year 's most ambitious major @-@ label rock album ... there 's no denying the dense , dark power it packs " . 
 The album received numerous awards and nominations . At the 2011 MTV Video Music Aid Japan , A Thousand Suns was nominated for Album of the Year , while " The Catalyst " was nominated for Best Group Video and Best Rock Video . The album received two 2011 Billboard Music Award nominations ; Best Rock Album and Top Alternative Album . " Waiting for the End " was nominated for Top Alternative Song . The music video for " Waiting for the End " was nominated at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Special Effects . Linkin Park won the Best International Rock / Alternative Group for A Thousand Suns at the 2011 ECHO Awards . At the MTV Video Game Awards , " Blackout " won the Best Song in a Video Game award for its use in FIFA 11 . " Waiting for the End " was nominated at the 2011 Teen Choice Awards for Choice Rock Song . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Linkin Park . 
 = = = iTunes Deluxe Edition Bonus Content = = = 
 The iTunes deluxe edition of A Thousand Suns has numerous features and bonus content . 
 Note From The Band 
 20 ' In the Studio ' Exclusive photos 
 Meeting of A Thousand Suns ( Making Of The Album ) – 29 : 46 
 Linkin Park <unk> 
 Secret Code Puzzle 
 The Catalyst ( Music Video ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : Allmusic and A Thousand Suns booklet . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Other charted songs = = = 
 = = = Album number @-@ one chart successions = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Astrid Kirchherr = 
 Astrid Kirchherr ( born 20 May 1938 ) is a German photographer and artist and is well known for her association with the Beatles ( along with her friends Klaus Voormann and Jürgen Vollmer ) , and her photographs of the band 's original members - John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison , Stuart Sutcliffe and Pete Best - during their early days in Hamburg . 
 Kirchherr met artist Sutcliffe in the Kaiserkeller bar in Hamburg in 1960 , where he was playing bass with the Beatles , and was later engaged to him , before his death in 1962 . Although Kirchherr has taken very few photographs since 1967 , her early work has been exhibited in Hamburg , Bremen , London , Liverpool , New York City , Washington , D.C. , Tokyo , Vienna and at the Rock ' n ' Roll Hall of Fame . She has published three limited @-@ edition books of photographs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Astrid Kirchherr was born in 1938 in Hamburg , Germany , and is the daughter of a former executive of the German branch of the Ford Motor Company . During World War II she was evacuated to the safety of the Baltic Sea where she remembered seeing dead bodies on the shore ( after the ships Cap Arcona and the SS Deutschland had been bombed and sunk ) and the destruction in Hamburg when she returned . 
 After her graduation , Kirchherr enrolled in the Meisterschule für Mode , <unk> , <unk> und <unk> in Hamburg , as she wanted to study fashion design but demonstrated a talent for black @-@ and @-@ white photography . Reinhard Wolf , the school 's main photographic tutor , convinced her to switch courses and promised that he would hire her as his assistant when she graduated . Kirchherr worked for Wolf as his assistant from 1959 until 1963 . 
 In the late 1950s and early 1960s Kirchherr and her art school friends were involved in the European existentialist movement whose followers were later nicknamed " <unk> " by Lennon . In 1995 she told BBC Radio Merseyside : " Our philosophy then , because we were only little kids , was wearing black clothes and going around looking moody . Of course , we had a clue who Jean @-@ Paul Sartre was . We got inspired by all the French artists and writers , because that was the closest we could get . England was so far away , and America was out of the question . So France was the nearest . So we got all the information from France , and we tried to dress like the French existentialists ... We wanted to be free , we wanted to be different , and tried to be cool , as we call it now . " 
 = = The Beatles = = 
 Kirchherr , Voormann and Vollmer were friends who had all attended the Meisterschule , and shared the same ideas about fashion , culture and music . Voormann became Astrid 's boyfriend , and moved into the Kirchherr home , where he had his own room . In 1960 , after Kirchherr and Vollmer had had an argument with Voormann , he wandered down the Reeperbahn ( in the St. Pauli district of Hamburg ) and heard music coming from the Kaiserkeller club . Voormann walked in and watched a performance by a group called the Beatles : Lennon , McCartney , Harrison , Sutcliffe and Best , their drummer at the time . Voormann asked Kirchherr and Vollmer to listen to this new music , and after being persuaded to visit the Kaiserkeller ( which was in the rough area of the Reeperbahn ) , Kirchherr decided that all she wanted to do was to be as close to the Beatles as she could . The trio of friends had never heard this new music called Rock n ' Roll before , having previously listened to only Trad jazz , with some Nat King Cole and The Platters mixed in . The trio then visited the Kaiserkeller almost every night , arriving at 9 o 'clock and sitting by the front of the stage . Kirchherr later said : " It was like a merry @-@ go @-@ round in my head , they looked absolutely astonishing ... My whole life changed in a couple of minutes . All I wanted was to be with them and to know them . " 
 Kirchherr later said that she , Voormann and Vollmer felt guilty about being German , and about Germany 's recent history . Meeting the Beatles was something very special for her , although she knew that English people would think that she ate sauerkraut , and would comment on her heavy German accent , but they made jokes about it together . Lennon would make sarcastic remarks from the stage , saying " You <unk> , we won the war , " knowing that very few Germans in the audience spoke English , but any English sailors present would roar with laughter . 
 Sutcliffe was fascinated by the trio , but especially Kirchherr , and thought they looked like " real bohemians " . Bill Harry later said that when Kirchherr walked in , every head would immediately turn her way , and that she always captivated the whole room . Sutcliffe wrote to a friend that he could hardly take his eyes off her and had tried to talk to Kirchherr during the next break , but she had already left the club . Sutcliffe managed to meet them eventually , and learned that all three had attended the Meisterschule , which was the same type of art college that Lennon and Sutcliffe had attended in Liverpool . ( Note : Meisterschule für Mode , <unk> , <unk> und <unk> [ Master <unk> College for Fashion , Textile , Graphics , and Advertising ] , although it is now called the University of Applied Sciences ) . 
 = = Photographs = = 
 Kirchherr asked the Beatles if they would mind letting her take photographs of them in a photo session , which impressed them , as other groups had only snapshots that were taken by friends . The next morning Kirchherr took photographs with a <unk> camera , at a fairground in a municipal park called Hamburger Dom which was close to the Reeperbahn , and in the afternoon she took them all ( minus Best , who decided not to go ) to her mother 's house in Altona . Kirchherr 's bedroom ( which was all in black , including the furniture , with silver foil on the walls and a large tree branch suspended from the ceiling ) , was decorated especially for Voormann , with whom she had a relationship , although after the visits to the Kaiserkeller their relationship became purely platonic . Kirchherr started dating Sutcliffe , although she always remained a close friend of Voormann . 
 Kirchherr later supplied Sutcliffe and the other Beatles with Preludin , which , when taken with beer , made them feel euphoric and helped to keep them awake until the early hours of the morning . The Beatles had taken Preludin before , but it was possible at that time to get Preludin only with a doctor 's prescription note , so Kirchherr 's mother got them from a local chemist , who supplied them without asking questions . After meeting Kirchherr , Lennon filled his letters to Cynthia Powell ( his girlfriend at the time ) with " Astrid said this , Astrid did that " , which made Powell jealous , until she read that Sutcliffe was in a relationship with Kirchherr . When Powell visited Hamburg with Dot Rhone ( McCartney 's girlfriend at the time ) in April 1961 , they stayed at Kirchherr 's house . In August 1963 , Kirchherr met Lennon and Cynthia in Paris while they were both there for a belated honeymoon , as Kirchherr was there with a girlfriend for a few days ' holiday . The four of them went from wine bar to wine bar and finally ended up back at Kirchherr 's lodgings , where all four fell asleep on Kirchherr 's single bed . 
 The Beatles met Kirchherr again in Hamburg in 1966 when they were touring Germany , and Kirchherr gave Lennon the letters he had written to Sutcliffe in 1961 and 1962 . Lennon said it was " the best present I 've had in years " . All of the Beatles wrote many letters to Kirchherr : " I only have a couple from George [ Harrison ] , which I 'll never show anyone , but he wrote so many . So did the others . I probably threw them away . You do that when you 're young - you don 't think of the future . " Harrison later asked Kirchherr to arrange the cover of his Wonderwall Music album in 1968 . 
 = = = The Beatles haircut and clothes = = = 
 Kirchherr is credited with inventing the Beatles ' moptop haircut although she disagrees , saying : " All that rubbish people said , that I created their hairstyle , that 's rubbish ! Lots of German boys had that hairstyle . Stuart [ Sutcliffe ] had it for a long while and the others copied it . I suppose the most important thing I contributed to them was friendship . " In 1995 , Kirchherr told BBC Radio Merseyside : " All my friends in art school used to run around with this sort of what you call Beatles haircut . And my boyfriend then , Klaus Voormann , had this hairstyle , and Stuart liked it very very much . He was the first one who really got the nerve to get the Brylcreem out of his hair and asking me to cut his hair for him . Pete [ Best ] has really curly hair and it wouldn 't work . " Kirchherr says that after she cut Sutcliffe 's hair , Harrison asked her to do the same when she was visiting Liverpool , and Lennon and McCartney had their hair cut in the same style while they were in Paris , by Kirchherr 's friend , Vollmer , who was living there at the time as an assistant to photographer William Klein . 
 After moving into the Kirchherr family 's house , Sutcliffe used to borrow her clothes , as he was the same height as Kirchherr . He wore her leather pants and jackets , collarless jackets , oversized shirts , and long scarves . He also borrowed a corduroy suit with no lapels that he wore on stage , which prompted Lennon to sarcastically ask if his mother had lent him the suit . 
 = = Stuart Sutcliffe = = 
 Sutcliffe wrote to friends that he was infatuated with Kirchherr , and asked her friends which colours , films , books and painters she liked , and whom she fancied . Best later commented that the beginning of their relationship was , " like one of those fairy stories " . Kirchherr says that she immediately fell in love with Sutcliffe , and still calls him " the love of my life " . Kirchherr and Sutcliffe got engaged in November 1960 , and exchanged rings , as is the German custom . Sutcliffe later wrote to his parents that he was engaged to Kirchherr , which they were shocked to learn , as they thought he would give up his career as an artist , although he told Kirchherr that he would like to be an art teacher in London or Germany in the future . Sutcliffe later borrowed money from Kirchherr for the airfare to fly back to Liverpool in February 1961 , returning to Hamburg in March . 
 Kirchherr and Sutcliffe went to Liverpool in the summer of 1961 , as Kirchherr wanted to meet Sutcliffe 's family ( and to see Liverpool ) before their marriage . Everybody was expecting a strange beatnik artist from Hamburg , but Kirchherr turned up at the Sutcliffe 's house at 37 Aigburth Drive , Liverpool , bearing a single long @-@ stemmed orchid in her hand as a present , and dressed in a round @-@ necked cashmere sweater and tailored skirt . In 1962 , Sutcliffe collapsed in the middle of an art class in Hamburg . He was suffering from intense headaches , and Kirchherr 's mother had German doctors perform various checks on him , although they were unable to determine exactly what was causing the headaches . While living at the <unk> ' house in Hamburg his condition got worse . On 10 April 1962 , Kirchherr 's mother phoned her daughter at work and told her Sutcliffe was not feeling well , had been brought back to the house , and an ambulance had been called for . Kirchherr rushed home and rode with Sutcliffe in the ambulance , but he died in her arms before it reached the hospital . 
 Three days later Kirchherr met Lennon , McCartney and Best at the Hamburg airport ( they were returning to Hamburg to perform ) and told them Sutcliffe had died of a brain haemorrhage . Harrison and manager Brian Epstein arrived on another plane sometime later with Sutcliffe 's mother , who had been informed by telegram . Harrison and Lennon were helpful towards the distraught Kirchherr , with Lennon telling her one day that she definitely had to decide if she wanted to " Live or die , there is no other question . " 
 = = Freelance photographer = = 
 In 1964 , Kirchherr became a freelance photographer , and with her colleague Max Scheler she took " behind the scenes " photographs of the Beatles during the filming of A Hard Day 's Night , as an assignment for the German Stern magazine . Epstein had forbidden any publicity photographs to be taken without his permission , but Kirchherr phoned Harrison , who said he would arrange it , but added , " Only if they pay you . " 
 Stern phoned Bill Harry at his Mersey Beat newspaper and asked if he could arrange a photograph of all the groups in Liverpool , so Harry suggested Kirchherr be the photographer , although Kirchherr later said she placed an advertisement in the Liverpool Echo newspaper . Kirchherr and Scheler said that any group who wanted their photograph taken in front of St. George 's Hall would be paid £ 1 per musician , but over 200 groups turned up on the day , which meant Kirchherr and Scheler soon ran out of money . Kirchherr didn 't publish the photographs until 1995 , in a book called Liverpool Days , which is a limited @-@ edition collection of black @-@ and @-@ white photographs . In 1999 , a companion book called Hamburg Days was published ( a two @-@ volume limited edition ) , containing a set of photographs by Kirchherr and " memory drawings " by Voormann . The drawings are recollections of places and situations that Voormann clearly remembers , but Kirchherr had never photographed , or had lost the photographs . 
 Kirchherr described how difficult it was to be accepted as a female photographer in the 1960s : " Every magazine and newspaper wanted me to photograph the Beatles again . Or they wanted my old stuff , even if it was out of focus , whether they were nice or not . They wouldn 't look at my other work . It was very hard for a girl photographer in the 60s to be accepted . In the end I gave up . I 've hardly taken a photo since 1967 . " Kirchherr was quoted as saying that When We Was Fab ( Genesis Publications 2007 ) , would be her last book of photographs : " I have decided it is time to create one book in which I am totally involved so that it contains the pictures I like most , printed the way I would print them , even down to the text and design .... This book is me and that is why it will be the last one . The very last one . " 
 Kirchherr has expressed respect for other photographers , such as Annie Leibovitz ( because of the humour in her work ) , Irving Penn , Richard Avedon , Jim <unk> and Reinhard Wolf ( German Wikipedia ) , and French film @-@ makers François Truffaut , and Jean Cocteau . Kirchherr said that her favourite photos are the ones she took of Sutcliffe by the Baltic sea , and of Lennon and Harrison in her attic room at 45a <unk> Strasse . She has expressed reservations about digital photography , saying that a photographer should concentrate on the art of photography and not on the technical results , although admitting that she knows nothing about computers and is " afraid of the internet " . 
 Kirchherr admits that she is not good at business as she is not organised enough , and has never really looked after the negatives of her photographs to prove ownership . Her business partner Ulf Krüger — a songwriter and record producer — successfully found many of Astrid 's negatives and photographs and had them copyrighted , although he believes that Kirchherr has lost £ 500 @,@ 000 over the years because of people using her photographs without permission . In July 2001 Kirchherr visited Liverpool to open an exhibition of her work at the Mathew Street art gallery , which is close to the former site of The Cavern Club . She appeared as a guest at the city 's Beatles Week Festival during the August Bank Holiday . Kirchherr 's work has been exhibited internationally in places , such as Hamburg , Bremen , London , Liverpool , New York City , Washington D.C. , Tokyo , Vienna , and at the Rock ' n ' Roll Hall of Fame . 
 = = Later life to present = = 
 In 1967 , Kirchherr married English drummer Gibson Kemp ( born Gibson Stewart Kemp , 1945 , Liverpool , Lancashire ) , who had replaced Ringo Starr in Rory Storm and the Hurricanes . The marriage ended in divorce after seven years . She then worked as a barmaid , as an interior designer , and then for a music publishing firm , getting married for a second time to a German businessman . Kirchherr worked as an advisor in 1994 on the film Backbeat , which portrayed Kirchherr , Sutcliffe and the Beatles during their early days in Hamburg . She was impressed with Stephen Dorff ( who played Sutcliffe in the film ) , commenting that he was the right age ( 19 years old at the time ) , and his gestures , the way he smoked , and talked were so like Sutcliffe 's that she had goose pimples . Kirchherr was portrayed in the film by actress Sheryl Lee . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s Kirchherr and business partner Krüger have operated the K & K photography shop in Hamburg , offering custom vintage prints , books and artwork for sale . K & K periodically helps arrange Beatles ' conventions and other Beatles ' events in the Hamburg area . She has no children , and now lives alone : " " My [ second ] marriage ended in 1985 ... I regretted I had no children . I just couldn 't see me have [ sic ] any . But now I am pleased when I see the situation the world is in . I live alone and am very happy . " 
 = Morya Gosavi = 
 Morya Gosavi or <unk> Gosavi ( <unk> <unk> ) alias <unk> Gosavi was a prominent saint of the Hindu Ganapatya sect , which considers the elephant @-@ faced god Ganesha as the Supreme Being . Morya Gosavi is considered the chief spiritual progenitor of the Ganapatyas and has been described as the " most famous devotee " of Ganesha . 
 The lifetime of Morya Gosavi is speculated between the 13th to 17th century . Numerous legends recall his life . Morya became devoted to Ganesha when he started visiting the Morgaon temple of Ganesha . It is believed that due to the hindrance in Morya 's services to the god in the popular Ganesha shrine , Ganesha told Morya that he would appear in Chinchwad for Morya to worship , so Morya moved from Morgaon to Chinchwad , where Morya built a Ganesha temple . Consequently , Morya took sanjeevan samadhi by burying himself alive in his tomb . 
 Morya had a son called Chintamani , venerated as a living incarnation of Ganesha and addressed as Dev ( god ) . Chintamani was succeeded by six more Devs . The tomb of Morya Gosavi and the Ganesha temple at Chinchwad still attract many Ganesha devotees . 
 = = Dating = = 
 While Yuvraj Krishan places Morya Gosavi in the 13th – 14th century , RC Dhere places him in the 16th century . Paul B. Courtright and Anne Feldhaus date him to 1610 – 59 . The <unk> @-@ Chinchwad Municipal Corporation dates him to c . 1330 to 1556 . His marriage year is given as 1470 and his son 's birth corresponds to 1481 . The Encyclopedia of Religion dates his death to 1651 . 
 Various legends associate Morya Gosavi with Humayun ( 1508 – 1556 ) , Shahaji ( 1594 – 1665 ) and his son Shivaji ( 1627 – 1680 ) . His memorial temple has an inscription records that it was started in 1658 @-@ 9 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 According to one version of the story , Morya was born in Bidar , Karnataka . He was thrown out of the house by his father as he was thought to be of no use to the family . Morya travelled to the Ganesha shrine at Morgaon – in neighbouring Maharashtra – where he found a liking to Ganesha . He settled at Chinchwad , 50 miles ( 80 km ) away from Morgaon . Another story declares him to be a son of a poor but pious couple from Pune , Maharashtra . Morya is believed to have been born due to the grace of Ganesha , whom the childless couple propitiated . After the birth of Morya , the family moved to Pimple , 40 miles ( 64 km ) away from Chinchwad . After the death of his parents , Morya moved to Tathavade , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away from <unk> . Both legends declare he visited the Morgaon temple regularly , daily or monthly to worship Ganesha . 
 Another tale tells that Morya 's parents , Bhat Shaligram and his wife moved to Morgaon from Bidar . His parents prayed to Ganesha at Morgaon . Soon , Morya was born to them . Later , Morya became seriously ill and was not recovering so they prayed to Ganesha again . Soon , a Gosavi ( priest ) named Nayan Bharati came and gave medicine to Morya , curing him . Nayan Bharati also preached to Morya . Henceforth , the Bhat family took the family name Gosavi and Morya was known as Morya Gosavi . 
 = = From Morgaon to Chinchwad = = 
 According to a legend , on the occasion of Ganesh Chaturthi ( August – September ) – the largest festival dedicated to Ganesha – Morya could not find a place in the temple , crowded by the laity and the wealthy Pingle family . Morya left his offering under a tree and then by a " miracle " , the laity 's offerings from temple were exchanged with Morya 's offerings under the tree . The laity accused Morya of sorcery and prohibited his entry in Morgaon . Ganesha appeared in a dream of Pingle and told Pingle that he was offended by the ill @-@ treatment of his favourite devotee Morya . So Pingle requested Morya to come back to Morgaon , but Morya refused . Ganesha thus gave a vision to Morya saying that he would come to stay with Morya in Chinchwad . Accordingly , Morya found an image of Ganesha – similar to the one worshipped at Morgaon – while bathing in the river and built a small shrine for it . 
 Another tale tells that the head @-@ man of Morgaon was impressed by Morya 's pious ways and offered him milk every day he visited Morgaon . Once the head @-@ man was not present at his house , so a blind girl went to offer the milk to Morya . The moment she touched the threshold of the house where Morya was waiting , her sight was restored . Morya became famous due to this miracle and is credited to have cured the eyes of Shivaji ( 1627 – 1680 ) too – who would become the founder of the Maratha Empire later . To escape the crowds of people , Morya relocated to the forest , where present @-@ day Chinchwad stands . Due to his growing age , Morya found it hard to continue his visits to Morgaon . Once he reached Morgaon after the temple was closed . Tired and hungry , he slept . Ganesha gave Morya a dream @-@ vision telling Morya to offer his prayers to him and that he would reside with Morya in Chinchwad and incarnate in Morya 's lineage for seven generations . Morya woke to find the temple doors miraculously opened and offered his prayers . In morning when the temple @-@ priests opened the temple @-@ doors , they were astonished to see fresh flowers offered to the Lord and a pearl necklace missing . The necklace was discovered on Morya 's neck , who was imprisoned but then freed due to Ganesha 's aid . Morya found a conical stone rising in Chinchwad home , which he recognized as Ganesha and built a temple for it . 
 Another legend does not talk about his arrest , but says that Morya realised the presence of Ganesha at Morgaon but realised that there was hindrance in his devotion , so he moved to the forest near Tathavade to worship Ganesha . On every fourth lunar day after the full moon , Morya used to visit the Chintamani Temple of Theur . Once , devotees from Chinchwad requested Morya to visit the bank of <unk> River at Chinchwad . There , Chintamani – the form of Ganesha worshipped at Theur – is believed to have ordered Morya to marry . As per Ganesha 's orders , Morya got married to Uma , the daughter of <unk> Kulkarni whose family was staying in Tathavade near Chinchwad . 
 According to a story , as per his guru 's orders , Morya performed penance at Theur by observing a strict fast for 42 days , within this period , he is believed to have " divine revelations " . After the death of his parents , Morya moved from Morgaon to Chinchwad . The present structure of the Theur temple is built by Morya . 
 = = Death and lineage = = 
 Morya continued to visit Theur , <unk> ( another Ganesha temple site ) and Chinchwad . Morya had a son , whom he named Chintamani ( <unk> ) . Chintamani was venerated as a living incarnation of Ganesha . But before that according to some experts , he helped the deposed Mughal emperor Humayun ( 1508 – 1556 ) to escape to Kabul , when Humayun again became the Emperor of Delhi , he showered Morya with gifts . According to Dhere , Shivaji 's father Shahaji ( 1594 – 1665 ) is recorded as a donor to Morya Gosavi . 
 After his wife 's death and his guru Nayan Bharati 's sanjeevan samadhi , Morya also took sanjeevan samadhi by burying himself alive in a tomb with a holy book in his hand . Morya left strict orders that his tomb be never opened . Chintamani built a temple over his father 's tomb . Chintamani is described to have shown his true form as Ganesha to the Varkari saint @-@ poet Tukaram ( 1577 – c.1650 ) , who called Chintamani a Dev spelt also as Deva or Deo ( god ) . The lineage was henceforth known as the Dev family . 
 Chintamani was followed as a Dev by Narayan , Chintamani II , Dharmadhar , Chintamani III , Narayan II and Dharmadhar II . The Mughal emperor Aurangzeb ( 1658 – 1707 ) gifted Narayan the hereditary grant of eight villages , impressed by the latter 's " miracle " of changing a piece of beef sent by the former into jasmine flowers . ( Beef is considered unholy in Hinduism and killing of cows – considered sacred – is prohibited . ) Narayan II violated Morya 's orders and opened the latter 's tomb . According to the tale , Morya who was found still mediating in the tomb , was disturbed and cursed Narayan that his son would be the last Dev . Narayan 's son , Dharmadhar II – the seventh generation of Morya – died childless in 1810 ending the direct lineage of Morya , but a distant relative of Dharmadhar , <unk> was installed as a Dev by the priesthood to continue the temple funding . Devotional poetry of all the Devs still survive . 
 = = Veneration = = 
 Morya Gosavi is considered the chief spiritual progenitor and the most important saint of the Ganapatya – the Hindu sect centred on Ganesha worship – tradition and has been described as the " most famous devotee " of Ganesha . 
 Chinchwad has shrines to the departed Devs , chief of which is that of Morya . Morya 's memorial temple is a low plain building ( 30 ' x 20 ' x 40 ' ) with a square hall or mandap and an octagonal inner shrine , inscribed with a Marathi inscription : " This temple was begun on the bright twelfth of Kartik ( November – December ) Shaka 1580 ( A.D. 1658 @-@ 9 ) <unk> <unk> and finished on Monday the bright fourth of Ashadha , <unk> <unk> " . The temples enjoyed the revenue from the eight villages given by Aurangzeb in the past . The tomb of Morya Gosavi as well as the Ganesha temple constructed by him still attracts many Ganesha devotees to Chinchwad . Devotees believe that though Morya Gosavi attained moksha ( salvation ) but " his presence continues to endow the shrine with sacred significance . " 
 On the <unk> path ( Pradakshina path ) of the Morgaon Ganesha temple , there is a tree near the <unk> Mandir . The tree is believed to have the spot where Morya Gosavi underwent penance . An image of Morya Gosavi is worshipped in the temple complex too . Morya Gosavi is also credited to have popularized the Morgaon temple . 
 = Meredith Grey = 
 Meredith Grey , M.D. is a fictional character from the hit medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series ' producer Shonda Rhimes , and is portrayed by actress Ellen Pompeo . Meredith is the series ' protagonist , and was introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital ( later Seattle Grace @-@ Mercy West , and afterwards Grey Sloan Memorial ) , eventually obtaining the position of a resident , and later the position of an attending , and in 2015 , attaining the Chief of General Surgery position . As the daughter of world @-@ renowned surgeon Ellis Grey , Meredith struggles with the everyday life of being in a competitive profession , maintaining the relationship with her one @-@ night stand and eventual husband Derek Shepherd ( deceased ) , her motherhood and the friendships with her colleagues . 
 Meredith is the narrator of the show and serves as the focal point for most episodes . Pompeo 's connection with Patrick Dempsey ( Derek Shepherd ) is acclaimed as a high point of the series . Rhimes has characterized Meredith as not believing in good or bad , but instead doing what she thinks is right . Grey has been positively received by television critics , with Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times referring to her as " the heroine of Grey 's Anatomy " . News of Pompeo leaving arose when it was made clear that her contract ended after the eighth season , and whether or not she would return to the series after her contract expires has been the centre of media speculation ever since . In 2016 , Pompeo re @-@ negotiated her contract and signed up for the thirteenth season of the show . 
 Pompeo 's performance has been well received throughout the show and the character has gained widespread popularity worldwide . Pompeo has been nominated for multiple awards for her portrayal of the character in the long running ABC medical drama including Satellite Award for Best Actress and multiple nominations at the People 's Choice Awards for Best Actress winning at 39th People 's Choice Awards in 2013 and again in 2015 at 41st People 's Choice Awards , Pompeo has also received a Best Performance by an Actress in a Drama Series nomination at the 64th Golden Globe Awards . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Dr. Meredith Grey is the daughter of world @-@ renowned surgeon Ellis Grey , who suffers from Alzheimer 's disease . She is a graduate of Dartmouth College . The night before Grey 's internship begins , she has a one @-@ night stand with Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , a stranger she meets at a bar . She discovers the next day that he is the recently @-@ hired attending and new head of neurosurgery at her new workplace , Seattle Grace Hospital . Grey is assigned to work under resident Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , and befriends her fellow interns , George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) . Grey initially resists Shepherd 's advances , but they eventually begin a relationship . She is surprised by the arrival of Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , Shepherd 's wife , having been unaware that he was married . Shepherd struggles to choose between the two , but ultimately returns to Montgomery . Grey is devastated and turns to searching for her father , Thatcher , though their brief reunion fails to give her any closure regarding her childhood . She learns that her father remarried and had two more daughters , which is why he never fought for her . Grey has a series of one @-@ night stands , including one with O 'Malley , who is in love with her . When she cries in the middle of their encounter , their friendship temporarily ends . Grey embarks on a relationship with veterinarian Finn Dandridge ( Chris O 'Donnell ) , but it comes to a close when she reunites with Shepherd . 
 Her mother experiences a completely lucid day , and expresses her great disappointment at how ordinary Grey has turned out to be . Following a ferryboat accident , Grey is knocked into the water and has to be rescued by Shepherd . She flatlines at the hospital , and awakens in an " afterlife " , where she interacts with deceased former acquaintances . Ellis dies in the interim , and Grey meets with her mother , who tells her that she is anything but ordinary and urges her to wake up . Grey is subsequently resuscitated . She is promoted to a resident , as her half @-@ sister Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , begins working at Seattle Grace Hospital as an intern . Grey initially rejects Lexie 's attempts to form a relationship , but slowly softens towards her . Shepherd pushes Grey to make a greater commitment to their relationship than she feels able to , and the two break up once more . He begins dating a nurse , Rose , and Grey sees a therapist , Dr. Wyatt ( Amy Madigan ) , to seek happiness . She initiates a neurosurgical clinical trial , enlisting Shepherd as a consulting neurosurgeon . The trial fails repeatedly , but the final patient they treat survives , which leads them to reuniting and moving in together . Shepherd loses his confidence after a minor mistake in the initial operation started a chain of events which ended with the patient 's death and faced a malpractice lawsuit , leading to him taking a sabbatical and pushing everyone , including Grey , away . When Stevens is diagnosed with stage four metastatic melanoma , Grey convinces Shepherd to return to operate on her . He agrees to perform the surgery , and later proposes to Grey in the hospital elevator . Stevens begins to plan the perfect wedding for a reluctant Grey , but when , on their wedding day , Shepherd discovers that Stevens has a second brain tumor , the couple let her and Karev marry instead . 
 Grey and Shepherd marry by writing their wedding vows on a post @-@ it note . Having become a heavy drinker following Susan 's death , Thatcher experiences liver failure . For Lexie 's sake , Grey agrees to donate part of her liver to him . Thereafter , she discovers she is pregnant soon before a hospital shooting , endangering Shepherd . In the midst of the crisis , Grey miscarries the baby . She learns that she has a " hostile uterus " , which leads her to consider her other possible genetic flaws . Shepherd , worried about the possibility that she will develop Alzheimer 's , initiates a clinical trial hoping to cure the disease . Grey opts to work on the trial , with Shepherd . When the chief of surgery , Richard Webber ( James Pickens Jr . ) ' s wife , Adele , is diagnosed with Alzheimer 's , she receives a spot on Shepherd 's trial . Grey tampers with the drugs so that Adele does not receive the placebo . She and Shepherd decide to adopt Zola , an orphaned baby from Malawi , and make their marriage official . When the truth about Grey 's tampering comes out , however , a furious Shepherd tells her he cannot raise a child with her . Grey is fired , and tries to conceal both this and her marital separation from the adoption counselor . Although Webber steps down as chief of surgery and takes the blame for the trial tampering to protect Grey , Zola is taken away . She and Shepherd reconcile and fight to get Zola back , eventually having her returned to them . Meanwhile , Meredith experiences several traumatic events , such as an ambulance accident with Alex Karev . As her last year of residency is coming to a close , the residents travel around the country , searching for the best jobs in their specialties . In order to finish their residency , the residents must take the medical boards , and Grey passes them successfully . She decides to take a job offer at The Brigham and Women 's Hospital , and is subsequently involved in an aviation accident , killing Lexie , and leaving her and her co @-@ workers stranded . 
 Following their rescue , Grey becomes an attending general surgeon at the newly merged Seattle Grace Mercy West . Her newfound attitude and sarcasm leads to her being dubbed " Medusa " by the hospital 's new batch of interns . In mid @-@ season , Grey becomes pregnant for the second time . In the aftermath of the plane accident , the hospital is sued and eventually found guilty of negligence . Each victim including Shepherd , Yang , Robbins , and herself must receive $ 15 million of compensation , which leads the hospital to a near bankruptcy as the insurance company refuses to pay due to a loophole . Those doctors and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) buy the hospital with the help of the Harper Avery Foundation to prevent it from closing , and each become members of the new directing board . She asks Bailey to perform gene mapping on her to finally know whether she has Alzheimer 's genes like her mother or not and she tests positive for more than one of the genetic markers for the disease . 
 During this time , Meredith discovers she is pregnant again and she gives birth to a son . The baby is delivered via C @-@ section during a storm because it was not in the correct position . While stitching Meredith up , the obstetrician who operated on Meredith is called away to another patient and intern Shane Ross completes the stitching . When blood begins to appear from everywhere , Meredith diagnoses herself in as being in DIC . Bailey performs a spleen removal , which saves Meredith 's life . In return , Derek and Meredith name their son Bailey . 
 As a spouse , surgeon , and mother , Meredith has cited a number times that she did not want to be like either of her parents : her father had followed her mother around and ended up leaving as she valued her career over her family while her mother won two Harper Avery Awards but emotionally neglected her , resulting in her " dark and twisty " attitude towards life . She and Cristina drift apart as they realize that they now have different values and career paths . After being snubbed by Cristina for failing to keep up with the medical science while on maternity leave , Meredith calls Cristina out on her actions , stating that it was not fair for her to ignore those who did not value the same things she did . Cristina realizes that she has to leave Seattle before things deteriorate and eventually moves to Switzerland to work with Dr. Preston Burke , her former attending . Meanwhile , Meredith and Derek come to an agreement that he , having already established his career and reputation , would take a step back to take care of the children and allow her to shine . 
 Meredith and Derek 's marriage becomes strained when Derek goes against his promise and accepts an offer from the President to participate in the Brain Mapping Initiative , which gradually consumed his time . He receives an offer to head the project itself in Washington D.C. , meaning that he would have to be based there permanently , but she puts her foot down as she did not want to uproot their young family to move across the country . They begin a series of on @-@ and @-@ off arguments and " cold wars " over their careers . Derek accepts the job in the heat of the moment and promptly leaves for Washington D.C. During a phone call with Meredith , they agree to work things out after she tells him that she did not want them to become " one of those couples " who ended things and he reciprocates , saying that he missed her . She privately admits to Alex that she realized that she could live independently of Derek but chose not to . 
 Meredith finds out she has a half sister called Maggie Pierce who is now working in Grey Sloan Memorial . Meredith thinks she would have remembered if her mother was pregnant and thinks Maggie is lying until she finds a hospital document confirming the revelation . Meredith tries to piece together her relationship with her mother and half sister by going through old videos of her mother . She eventually recovers her repressed memories of the pregnancy when she 's views her mother 's diary and has a change of heart , choosing to accept her and begin building a relationship . 
 Meredith is widowed when Derek is a victim in a car accident and taken to Dillard Medical Center which did not have Level I trauma center status and was understaffed . He was on his way to the airport for his final trip to Washington D.C. to hand in his final report and official resignation letter when he took a shortcut and stopped to help victims of a multiple vehicle accident . The doctors at Dillard fail to recognize his head injury in time . Derek becomes brain dead , and police arrive at Derek and Meredith 's residence to notify her that Derek has been in an accident . Meredith begins to imagine arriving at the hospital and seeing Derek in stable condition , alive and alert . The scene then switches to reality with Meredith arriving at the hospital to see Derek in grave condition , where she spends time with him and then consents to remove him from life support , shortly before she 's hit with the first waves of morning sickness . She tells Penny , the intern who was assigned to Derek , that every doctor has " that one " patient who dies on their watch and haunts them forever and " that one will make you work harder , and they make you better . " 
 After Derek 's death , Meredith returns to Grey Sloan Memorial to inform the others of his passing . Following the funeral service , Meredith impulsively packs up her belongings and leaves with the children to San Diego . Months pass by while her friends and family are unaware of her whereabouts . Eventually , we are shown the parallels between Meredith and Ellis ' lives . Both have lost the love of their life , both run away from Seattle following their loss , and both eventually give birth to a daughter . We are again reminded that " the carousel never stops turning . " Meredith names her newborn daughter after her mother , Ellis . Although still grieving over Derek , Meredith returns to Seattle with the children and later becomes chief of general surgery . She sells the " dream house " as it no longer felt like home without her husband . She moves back to her mother 's house and now lives there with Maggie Pierce and Amelia Shepherd . Meredith hosts a dinner party and at the party Callie brings Penny as a date . Later at the event she finds out Penny ( Derek 's doctor ) will be joining her at Grey Sloan Memorial . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Pompeo discovered Grey 's Anatomy after a year of doing nothing but reading scripts looking for the project that suited her best . While casting actresses for the part of Meredith Grey , series ' creator Shonda Rhimes said : " I kept saying we need a girl like that girl from Moonlight Mile , and after a while , they were like , ' We think we can get that girl from Moonlight Mile . ' I spent time with her and got to know her , and then we started casting for the men . " She reported that Grey was not an easy role to cast . Rhimes was informed that the actress in question was Pompeo , who had a deal in place with ABC , having previously tested for a pilot show on the network . It has been speculated that Pompeo was the first character to be cast , but when asked , she said she did not know of this . When asked of how she created Pompeo 's character , Rhimes said : 
 Pompeo was cast as the program 's titular character , described by Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times as " a prickly , independent sort whose ambition , and ambivalence , is fueled by the fact that her mother was a gifted surgeon and now suffers from Alzheimer 's . " Grey also serves as the show 's narrator , and as such was likened in early reviews to Carrie Bradshaw ( Sarah Jessica Parker ) , the narrator and protagonist of Sex and the City . After her initial contract with Grey 's Anatomy expired , Pompeo negotiated a new one , in which she would be paid US $ 200 @,@ 000 per episode , making her the highest @-@ paid cast member on the show . In 2012 , Forbes recognized Pompeo as the eighth highest @-@ paid actress on television , with a salary of US $ 275 @,@ 000 per episode for her role on Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Pompeo 's second contract with Grey 's Anatomy expired after the eighth season , and speculation arose that she would be leaving after this . In September 2011 , Pompeo reported that she is open to the idea of extending her contract , if invited . She told TV Guide : " I would never turn up my nose at [ Grey 's Anatomy ] . As long as the stories are honest and truthful , and Patrick [ Dempsey ] and I feel there is material for us to be passionate about , it still beats a 9 @-@ to @-@ 5 job any day . If I hear from the fans that they want us to keep going , then I would continue because we owe them everything . " E ! Online reported in May 2012 , that Pompeo , as well as all original cast members have signed on for two more years . With the Huffington Post 's announcement of season nine having officially been renewed , the contract is set into place for Pompeo to return . 
 Pompeo 's contract expired again at the end of the twelfth season . She signed a new contract to keep her in the starring role on the series for thirteenth season . According to a report in Deadline.com , Pompeo was earning $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode under the new deal . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Grey is the protagonist and focal point of the series . She has been called " intelligent , compassionate , hard @-@ working , oftentimes outspoken , easily distracted , and indecisive " by Grey 's Anatomy executives . Pompeo says she is unaware if her character knows how to have fun , adding : " All of my scenes with [ Dempsey ] are the same — we 're either breaking up or having sex . " Her personality has evolved over the past few seasons from depressed , to happy and " fixed " . Pompeo said to Good Morning America , " I am so incredibly lucky to have Patrick [ Dempsey ] , to have the chemistry that we do , we have an amazing relationship , and it 's like any other relationship , you have your ups and downs . But we work it out , and we 've found a way to do this for this long and still get along , and make it work and believe in what we 're doing . " Pompeo told Entertainment Weekly : " It 's awkward with Patrick [ Dempsey ] because he 's like my brother . As soon as the camera is off , I 'm like , ' Is your hand on my butt ? ' But there are millions of girls who have been waiting for this , so I feel an obligation to the fans . " Rhimes used the dog " Doc " , which Meredith and Derek shared , as a metaphor of their relationship during the second season . She characterizes Grey as doing what she thinks is right : 
 The character had a one @-@ night stand with George O 'Malley , in the second season . Series writer Stacy McKee , said of the sexual encounter : " There ’ s no turning back . There ’ s nothing George and Meredith can do . The damage is done – things will never be the same . They ’ ve just changed something important in their lives <unk> and … they are freaking out . " Grey 's character development has also been known as an influence on the creation of her half @-@ sister , Lexie Grey . Particularly , it has been made clear that they both share the same motives . McKee offered her thoughts : " Meredith and Lexie both want to succeed . They want to be strong . They want to feel normal . They want , so much , to be whole . But it ’ s a struggle – a genuine struggle for them . Being hardcore doesn ’ t come naturally . Sometimes , they have to fake it . " Grey 's personality has been compared with that of Alex Karev 's . Rhimes offered the insight : 
 " I like to create moments for him and Meredith . Because , in my head , they are very similar people . Even though Karev can be such an ass , even though he ’ s arrogant , even though he gave O 'Malley the <unk> . He and Meredith are both lost , both lonely , both former screw @-@ ups who got their acts together . In another lifetime , they would be really good friends . So throughout the season , we watch them pause from time to time to look at each other and see that they are mirrors of one another . 
 Pompeo fights for a truthful storyline for her character — she wants it to be realistic and says you can 't always wrap it up in a neat little package . Referring to Grey 's tampering with Shepherd 's trial , Pompeo said : " Listen , what Meredith did clearly crossed a line . Derek has a right to be pissed . " Following the tampering , Rhimes said she believes that Grey and Shepherd are meant to be together and that it in the end , they will end up with each other . Grey 's relationship with Cristina Yang , has been looked upon as " sisterhood " , and Yang has repeatedly referred to Grey as " her person " . This led to the two being dubbed " the twisted sisters " . At the conclusion of season three , the duo went on a " honeymoon " together , and Rhimes called it her favorite detail of the finale . Grey has been characterized , by some , as " whiny " . Rhimes offered her insight : 
 Rhimes felt that the 100th episode showed well Meredith 's evolution throughout the show from a " dark and twisty girl " to a " happy woman " . She said : " She is the thing her mother wished for her . She is extraordinary . Because , to get past the crap of your past ? To move on ? To let the past go and change ? That is extraordinary . To love ? Without fear ? Without screwing it up ? That is extraordinary . It makes me happy to see her happy . " 
 Following the departure of Patrick Dempsey 's character , Rhimes was quoted as saying that " ... Meredith and the entire Grey ’ s Anatomy family are about to enter uncharted territory as we head into this new chapter of her life . The possibilities for what may come are endless . " With at least a year left in Pompeo 's contract with the show , viewers are sure to witness some of the most difficult times of Meredith 's life yet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The character has received both overwhelmingly positive reviews to weary response from television critics throughout the course of the show . The initial response to the character was positive but as the series progressed Meredith Grey became immensely popular and Pompeo established the character as a critic and fan favorite featuring on a number of Top TV Character lists . The development of the character has been deemed as the highlight of the show . Grey has constantly been defined as " the heroine of Grey 's Anatomy " . At the time of inception Newsday 's Diane Werts praised the character stating , " Like Hugh Laurie 's irascible " House " title character , star Ellen Pompeo 's newly minted Dr. Grey conveys such substance that you simply can 't stop watching . " Ellen A. Kim of After Pompeo not receiving an Emmy nomination for her work as Grey , McNamara of the Los Angeles Times suggested that Pompeo , " who has worked very hard and against all narrative odds to make Meredith Grey an interesting character at last " should have received a nomination at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . Later , during the twelfth season Western Gazette gave Ellen Pompeo the credit for carrying the show and re @-@ <unk> . " ( It 's ) time for Pompeo to finally win an Emmy Award . " Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly referred to Grey as the " trusty voice over master " of Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Former television columnist for The Star @-@ Ledger Alan Sepinwall expressed his boredom on the focus given on Grey 's relationships storylines while reviewing the second season 's finale : " On those occasions when Meredith 's not involved in a plot about her love life , I do kind of like her , but those moments are so infrequent compared to her constant <unk> over McDreamy -- not to mention all those seemingly unrelated storylines that always turn into a metaphor for that relationship -- that I really , really can 't stand her . " During the show 's third season , the development of the character received negative reviews , with Cristopher Monfette of IGN stating that her storyline has become " some bizarrely under @-@ developed sub @-@ plot about depression and giving Derek a season 's worth of reconsidering to do . " Also during the third season , Robert Rorke of the New York Post noted the decline in Meredith 's role in the show , expressing disappointment : " She used to be the queen of the romantic dilemmas , but lately , she 's been a little dopey , what with the endless McDreamy soliloquies . " Similarly , <unk> found their storyline in the fourth season overused , " This whole ' Oh I need more time , ' but ' Oh , I 'm jealous if you look at someone else ' angst was tired in the second season , frustrating in the third and now a total channel changer . The will @-@ they @-@ or @-@ won 't @-@ they plot doesn 't work because they 've already been in and out of that relationship too many times . Meredith is a nag and McDreamy is henpecked . " On a more positive note , her relationship with Shepherd was included in AOL TV 's list of the " Best TV Couples of All Time " and in the same list by TV Guide . During the sixth season the development of the character was praised , Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV commented that " You gotta love Mer when she 's gloomy . " , in addition to praising Pompeo 's performance . In her review of the episode Tainted Obligation she wrote " I felt for Meredith , but after Lexie 's heartfelt begging and pleading , I was happy that Mere finally grows up and casts her selfishness aside . Three seasons ago Meredith would never have dreamed of putting Lexie first , and I was proud of her for giving up part of her liver — her offer to get to know her dad was an even bigger milestone . " Reviewing the first part of the eighth season , TV Fanatic lauded the character and wrote : " this season belongs to Meredith Grey . She is the heart and soul of the show and has been outstanding . This is a character that used to be so dark and twisty and has now grown into a more mature woman . Ellen Pompeo has been at the top of her game this season . " 
 Wit & Fancy praised the transformation of the character and stated , " Of course Meredith will still make rash decisions like when she took off with Zola , or tampered with the trial but she does things out of love and the kindness of her heart now and not because she is dark and twisty . Considering where Meredith was at the beginning and where she is now , I think she went through a remarkable journey and did more than just growing up , she finally became “ all whole and healed “ . " 
 Maura O 'Malley of Bustle also lauded the development of the character ahead of season 12 saying , " When the series began , Meredith was just a girl sitting in a bar celebrating the exciting next phase of her life . She had graduated medical school , she was starting her residency at a prestigious hospital , and she was simply looking for a no @-@ strings attached , one night stand . What she got instead was a complicated romantic relationship that rivals Romeo and Juliet — but the key is , she wasn 't searching for love . Working and learning were — and continue to be — her priorities , while McDreamy was simply an added perk . Hopefully , the new season of Grey 's Anatomy will reflect this change in tone , because Meredith is a strong , independent woman — and she will be just fine . " 
 Later in the series , Ellen Pompeo received critical acclaim with numerous critics lauding her portrayal of the character . Reviewing the episode She 's Leaving Home <unk> called her the " anchor " for Grey 's saying , " Throughout , this was an episode completely anchored by Ellen Pompeo , who has done some of her best work ever on the show the past couple of weeks . Tonight , she cried , she fought , and she learned that she was carrying his child . " and added that Pompeo is often " <unk> " saying , " Her subtlety is probably why she is often overlooked . " Rick Porter of Zap2it reviewing " How to Save a Life " wrote , " Without Meredith , and without one of Pompeo 's strongest performances in her long time on the show , " How to Save a Life " would have run the risk of coming across as a baldly manipulative death episode , the likes of which the show has done several times before . He added . " How to Save a Life " may not be the ideal Emmy @-@ submission episode for Pompeo , considering Meredith is off screen for more than half of it . But it 's among the best work she 's ever done on the show . " USA Today also lauded Pompeo saying , " In some ways , the episode ( How to Save a Life ) was even more of a showcase for Pompeo . She had some of the more memorable and well @-@ played scenes , from her angry response to the doctor who tries to tell her what her choices are , to her resignation when she realizes she has to comfort and motivate the young doctor whose mistakes cost Derek his life . " 
 The relation between Meredith and Cristina has been acclaimed and been a highlight of the show . Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald considered the friendship to be " the secret core of Grey 's " . Aisha Harris of Slate called their relation The Best Female Friendship on TV adding that " With those two characters , showrunner Shonda Rhimes and her team of writers created one of the most nuanced and realistic portrayals of female friendship on television . " Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly called Cristina and Meredith the best female friends on TV because " they don ’ t try to be " . There ’ s nothing fake about them , which is a rarity in how female friends are portrayed on television . She further went on to call them ' soulmates ' , " And even though they ’ d never dare get sappy enough to say it , they ’ re soul mates . Margaret Lyons of Vulture ( magazine ) called the friendship " dream BFF relationship . " and the primary focus of the show , " One of the series ' calling cards has been its depiction of female friendship and particularly the primacy that friendship enjoyed over romantic relationships . " 
 E ! at the time of Sandra Oh 's exit wrote , " In Grey 's Anatomy 's 10 @-@ year history , the doctor duo has been through a lot together : weddings , deaths , plane crashes , bomb threats , shooting , you name it , they 've lived ( and danced ) through it . " and added , " And with the three words , " You 're my person . " Cristina Yang and Meredith Grey solidified their status as the small screen 's best best friends ever . " Marama Whyte of Hypable wrote , " Critically , the key relationship in Meredith ’ s life was not her romance with Derek Shepherd , but her passionate , indestructible , absolutely enviable friendship with Cristina . Talk about relationship goals ; who wants McDreamy when Cristina Yang could be your person . These two were the real powerhouse , and Shonda Rhimes didn ’ t shy away from making the audience remember this . Derek was the love of her life , but Cristina was her soul mate . More than anyone else , Cristina challenged Meredith , was honest with her , and inspired her . For these reasons , it was Cristina who was constantly the source of Meredith ’ s character development , not Derek . " 
 Pompeo 's character has also been used to define the image a strong woman , Bustle previewing the 12th <unk> wrote , " Meredith Grey has always been capable of being on her own . Grey 's Anatomy is about Meredith 's journey . Men and romantic interests are a part of her life , but they are not the priority . She doesn 't need McDreamy . Grey 's Anatomy doesn 't need McDreamy . So even if the writers do decide to create a new love interest for Ms. Grey ( Martin Henderson , perhaps ? ) , it wouldn 't matter . I have faith that the show 's writers will do this storyline justice , because TV needs more strong single women — and Meredith seems like the perfect candidate . " The site added , " This past season was almost a trial run for a McDreamy @-@ less Grey 's Anatomy . When Derek left for Washington D.C. to pursue his research , Meredith stayed behind and focused on her own career . She didn 't chase him . Her priority were her children and the Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital . Meredith showed that she would never put aside her own dreams and aspirations for a man , and I believe that this won 't change after Derek 's death . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Pompeo has won and has been nominated for multiple awards for her portrayal of Grey . She and the Grey 's Anatomy cast won Best Ensemble in a Television Series at the 2006 Satellite Awards . During the following year 's ceremony , she was named Best Actress in a Television Drama Series . She was among the Grey 's Anatomy cast members awarded the Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series accolade at the 13th Screen Actors Guild Awards , and received nominations in the same category in 2006 and 2008 . Pompeo received a Best Performance by an Actress in a Drama Series nomination at the 64th Golden Globe Awards – the program won Best Drama Series at the same ceremony . Also in 2007 , Pompeo and the female cast and crew of Grey 's Anatomy received the Women in Film Lucy Award , which honors those " whose work in television has positively influenced attitudes toward women . " 
 Pompeo 's performance has garnered her multiple People 's Choice Awards . At the 37th People 's Choice Awards , she was nominated against Dempsey and Oh in the Favorite TV Doctor category , and the following year , she was a contender in the Favorite TV Drama Actress category . Since 2012 Pompeo has received nomination at the People 's Choice Awards every year in two categories at 40th People 's Choice Awards alongside Patrick Dempsey and Sandra Oh respectively . She won the Best Drama Actress Award at both the 39th People 's Choice Awards and the 41st People 's Choice Awards . In 2007 , show @-@ business awards reporter Tom O 'Neil commented that Pompeo was overdue an Emmy Award nomination for her role in Grey 's Anatomy . Readers of O 'Neil 's awards website , The Envelope , included Pompeo in their 2009 nominations for Best Drama Actress in the site 's Gold Derby TV Awards . Entertainment Weekly launched the EWwy Awards in 2008 , to honor actors who have not received Emmy nominations . Pompeo was nominated in the Best Actress in a Drama Series category , and placed fourth , with 19 percent of readers ' votes . 
 = <unk> = 
 Pinnipeds ( / <unk> / ) , ( from Latin pinna " fin " and pes , <unk> " foot " ) commonly known as seals , are a widely distributed and diverse clade of carnivorous , fin @-@ footed , semiaquatic marine mammals . They comprise the extant families Odobenidae ( whose only living member is the walrus ) , Otariidae ( the eared seals : sea lions and fur seals ) , and Phocidae ( the earless seals , or true seals ) . There are 33 extant species of pinnipeds , and more than 50 extinct species have been described from fossils . While seals were historically thought to have descended from two ancestral lines , molecular evidence supports them as a monophyletic lineage ( descended from one ancestral line ) . Pinnipeds belong to the order Carnivora and their closest living relatives are bears and musteloids ( weasels , raccoons , skunks and red pandas ) , having diverged about 50 million years ago . 
 Seals range in size from the 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) and 45 kg ( 99 lb ) Baikal seal to the 5 m ( 16 ft ) and 3 @,@ 200 kg ( 7 @,@ 100 lb ) southern elephant seal , which is also the largest carnivoran . Several species exhibit sexual dimorphism . They have streamlined bodies and four limbs that are modified into flippers . Though not as fast in the water as dolphins , seals are more flexible and agile . Otariids use their front limbs primarily to propel themselves through the water , while phocids and walruses use their hind limbs . Otariids and walruses have hind limbs that can be pulled under the body and used as legs on land . By comparison , terrestrial locomotion by phocids is more cumbersome . Otariids have visible external ears , while phocids and walruses lack these . Pinnipeds have well @-@ developed senses — their eyesight and hearing are adapted for both air and water , and they have an advanced tactile system in their whiskers or vibrissae . Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths . They have a layer of fat , or blubber , under the skin to keep warm in the cold water , and , other than the walrus , all species are covered in fur . 
 Although pinnipeds are widespread , most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres . They spend most of their lives in the water , but come ashore to mate , give birth , molt or escape from predators , like sharks and killer whales . They feed largely on fish and marine invertebrates ; but a few , like the leopard seal , feed on large vertebrates , such as penguins and other seals . Walruses are specialized for feeding on bottom @-@ dwelling mollusks . Male pinnipeds typically mate with more than one female ( polygyny ) , although the degree of polygyny varies with the species . The males of land @-@ breeding species tend to mate with a greater number of females than those of <unk> or water @-@ breeding species . Male pinniped strategies for reproductive success vary between defending females , defending territories that attract females and performing ritual displays or lek mating . Pups are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear almost all the responsibility for raising them . Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for a relatively short period of time while others take foraging trips at sea between nursing bouts . Walruses are known to nurse their young while at sea . Seals produce a number of vocalizations , notably the barks of California sea lions , the gong @-@ like calls of walruses and the complex songs of Weddell seals . 
 The meat , blubber and fur coats of pinnipeds have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic . Seals have been depicted in various cultures worldwide . They are commonly kept in captivity and are even sometimes trained to perform tricks and tasks . Once relentlessly hunted by commercial industries for their products , seals and walruses are now protected by international law . The Japanese sea lion and the Caribbean monk seal have become extinct in the past century , while the Mediterranean monk seal and Hawaiian monk seal are ranked Critically Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . Besides hunting , pinnipeds also face threats from accidental trapping , marine pollution , and conflicts with local people . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The German naturalist Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger was the first to recognize the pinnipeds as a distinct taxonomic unit ; in 1811 he gave the name Pinnipedia to both a family and an order . American zoologist Joel Asaph Allen reviewed the world 's pinnipeds in an 1880 monograph , History of North American pinnipeds , a monograph of the walruses , sea @-@ lions , sea @-@ bears and seals of North America . In this publication , he traced the history of names , gave keys to families and genera , described North American species and provided synopses of species in other parts of the world . In 1989 , Annalisa Berta and colleagues proposed the unranked clade <unk> to contain the fossil genus Enaliarctos and modern seals as a sister group . Pinnipeds belong to the order Carnivora and the suborder <unk> ( known as dog @-@ like carnivorans ) . Pinnipedia was historically considered its own suborder under Carnivora . Of the three extant families , the Otariidae and Odobenidae are grouped in the superfamily <unk> , while the Phocidae belong to the superfamily <unk> . 
 Otariids are also known as eared seals due to the presence of pinnae . These animals rely on their well @-@ developed fore @-@ flippers to propel themselves through the water . They can also turn their hind @-@ flippers forward and " walk " on land . The anterior end of an otariid 's frontal bones extends between the nasal bones , and the supraorbital foramen is large and flat horizontally . The <unk> fossas are divided by a " secondary spine " and the bronchi are divided anteriorly . Otariids consist of two types : sea lions and fur seals . Sea lions are distinguished by their rounder snouts and shorter , rougher pelage , while fur seals have more pointed snouts , longer fore @-@ flippers and thicker fur coats that include an undercoat and guard hairs . The former also tend to be larger than the latter . Five genera and seven species ( one now extinct ) of sea lion are known to exist , while two genera and nine species of fur seal exist . While sea lions and fur seals have historically been considered separate subfamilies ( <unk> and <unk> respectively ) , a 2001 genetic study found that the northern fur seal is more closely related to several sea lion species . This is supported by a 2006 molecular study that also found that the Australian sea lion and New Zealand sea lion are more closely related to Arctocephalus than to other sea lions . 
 Odobenidae consists of only one living member : the modern walrus . This animal is easily distinguished from other extant pinnipeds by its larger size ( exceeded only by the elephant seals ) , nearly hairless skin and long upper canines , known as tusks . Like otariids , walruses are capable of turning their hind @-@ flippers forward and can walk on land . When moving in water , the walrus relies on its hind @-@ flippers for locomotion , while its fore @-@ flippers are used for steering . In addition , the walrus lacks external ear flaps . Walruses have pterygoid bones that are broad and thick , frontal bones that are V @-@ shaped at the anterior end and <unk> with pronounced tuberosity in the middle . 
 Phocids are known as true or " earless " seals . These animals lack external ear flaps and are incapable of turning their hind @-@ flippers forward , which makes them more cumbersome on land . In water , true seals swim by moving their hind @-@ flippers and lower body from side to side . Phocids have thickened <unk> , enlarged <unk> bones , everted pelvic bones and massive ankle bones . They also lack supraorbital processes on the frontal and have underdeveloped <unk> tubers . A 2006 molecular study supports the division of phocids into two monophyletic subfamilies : <unk> , which consists of Mirounga , <unk> and <unk> ; and <unk> , which includes Pusa , Phoca , Halichoerus , <unk> , <unk> , Erignathus and <unk> . 
 In a 2012 review of pinniped taxonomy , Berta and Morgan Churchill suggested that , based on morphological and genetic criteria , there are 33 extant species and 29 subspecies of pinnipeds , although five of the latter lack sufficient support to be conclusively considered subspecies . They recommend that the genus Arctocephalus be limited to Arctocephalus pusillus , and they resurrected the name <unk> for several species and subspecies formerly placed in Arctocephalus . More than 50 fossil species have been described . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 One popular hypothesis suggested that pinnipeds are <unk> ( descended from two ancestral lines ) , with walruses and otariids sharing a recent common ancestor with bears and phocids sharing one with Musteloidea . However , morphological and molecular evidence support a monophyletic origin . Nevertheless , there is some dispute as to whether pinnipeds are more closely related to bears or musteloids , as some studies support the former theory and others the latter . Pinnipeds split from other caniforms 50 million years ago ( mya ) during the Eocene . Their evolutionary link to terrestrial mammals was unknown until the 2007 discovery of Puijila <unk> in early Miocene deposits in Nunavut , Canada . Like a modern otter , Puijila had a long tail , short limbs and webbed feet instead of flippers . However , its limbs and shoulders were more robust and Puijila likely had been a quadrupedal swimmer – retaining a form of aquatic locomotion that give rise to the major swimming types employed by modern pinnipeds . The researchers who found Puijila placed it in a clade with <unk> ( traditionally considered a mustelid ) and Enaliarctos . Of the three , Puijila was the least specialized for aquatic life . The discovery of Puijila in a lake deposit suggests that pinniped evolution went through a freshwater transitional phase . 
 Enaliarctos , a fossil species of late Oligocene / early Miocene ( 24 – 22 mya ) California , closely resembled modern pinnipeds ; it was adapted to an aquatic life with a flexible spine , and limbs modified into flippers . Its teeth were adapted for shearing ( like terrestrial carnivorans ) , and it may have stayed near shore more often than its extant relatives . Enaliarctos was capable of swimming with both the fore @-@ flippers and hind @-@ flippers , but it may have been more specialized as a fore @-@ flipper swimmer . One species , Enaliarctos <unk> , exhibited notable sexual dimorphism , suggesting that this physical characteristic may have been an important driver of pinniped evolution . A closer relative of extant pinnipeds was <unk> , which lived in Oregon 19 – 15 mya . As in modern seals , <unk> had an orbital wall that was not limited by certain facial bones ( like the jugal or lacrimal bone ) , but was mostly shaped by the maxilla . 
 The lineages of Otariidae and Odobenidae split almost 28 mya . Otariids originated in the North Pacific . The earliest fossil <unk> , found in California , is dated to 11 mya . The <unk> lineage split earlier at 16 mya . Zalophus , <unk> and <unk> diverged next , with the latter colonizing the coast of South America . Most of the other otariids diversified in the Southern Hemisphere . The earliest fossils of Odobenidae — <unk> of Japan and <unk> of Oregon — date to 18 – 16 mya . These primitive walruses had much shorter canines and lived on a fish diet rather than a specialized mollusk diet like the modern walrus . <unk> further diversified in the middle and late Miocene . Several species had enlarged upper and lower canines . The genera <unk> and Odobenus developed elongated tusks . The lineage of the modern walrus may have spread from the North Pacific to the Caribbean ( via the Central American Seaway ) 8 – 5 mya and subsequently made it to the North Atlantic and returned to the North Pacific via the Arctic 1 mya . Alternatively , this lineage may have spread from the North Pacific to the Arctic and subsequently the North Atlantic during the Pleistocene . 
 The ancestors of the <unk> and <unk> diverged 33 mya . The Phocidae are likely to have descended from the extinct family <unk> in the North Atlantic . <unk> lived 23 – 10 mya and had elongated skulls , fairly large eyes , cheekbones connected by a <unk> structure and rounded cheek teeth . They also were sexually dimorphic and may have been capable of propelling themselves with both the foreflippers and hindflippers . 
 Phocids are known to have existed for at least 15 mya , and molecular evidence supports a divergence of the <unk> and <unk> lineages 22 mya . The fossil <unk> <unk> and phocine <unk> were found in southeastern North America . The deep split between the lineages of Erignathus and <unk> 17 mya suggests that the <unk> migrated eastward and northward from the North Atlantic . The genera Phoca and Pusa could have arisen when a phocine lineage traveled from the Paratethys Sea to the Arctic Basin and subsequently went eastward . The ancestor of the Baikal seal migrated into Lake Baikal from the Arctic ( via the Siberian ice sheet ) and became isolated there . The Caspian seal 's ancestor became isolated as the Paratethys shrank , leaving the animal in a small remnant sea , the Caspian Sea . The <unk> diversified southward . Monachus emerged in the Mediterranean and migrated to the Caribbean and then the central North Pacific . The two extant elephant seal species diverged close to 4 mya after the Panamanian isthmus was formed . The lobodontine lineage emerged around 9 mya and colonized the southern ocean in response to glaciation . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Pinnipeds have streamlined , spindle @-@ shaped bodies with reduced or non @-@ existent external ear flaps , rounded heads , flexible necks , limbs modified into flippers , and small tails . <unk> skulls have large eye orbits , short snouts and a constricted interorbital region . They are unique among carnivorans in that their orbital walls are significantly shaped by the maxilla and are not limited by certain facial bones . Compared to other carnivorans , their teeth tend to be fewer in number ( especially incisors and back molars ) , are pointed and cone @-@ shaped , and lack carnassials . The walrus has unique upper canines that are elongated into tusks . The mammary glands and genitals of pinnipeds can retract into the body . 
 Pinnipeds range in size from the 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) and 45 kg ( 99 lb ) Baikal seal to the 5 m ( 16 ft ) and 3 @,@ 200 kg ( 7 @,@ 100 lb ) southern elephant seal . Overall , they tend to be larger than other carnivorans ; the southern elephant seal is the largest carnivoran . Several species have male @-@ biased sexual dimorphism that correlates with the degree of polygyny in a species : highly polygynous species like elephant seals are extremely sexually dimorphic , while less polygynous species have males and females that are closer in size . In lobodontine seals , females are slightly larger than males . Males of sexually dimorphic species also tend to have secondary sex characteristics , such as the prominent proboscis of elephant seals , the inflatable red nasal membrane of hooded seals and the thick necks and manes of otariids . Despite a correlation between size dimorphism and the degree of polygyny , some evidence suggests that size differences between the sexes originated due to ecological differences and prior to the development of polygyny . 
 Almost all pinnipeds have fur coats , the exception being the walrus , which is only sparsely covered . Even some fully furred species ( particularly sea lions ) are less haired than most land mammals . In species that live on ice , young pups have thicker coats than adults . The individual hairs on the coat , known collectively as <unk> , can trap heat from sunlight and keep the pup warm . Pinnipeds are typically countershaded , and are darker colored dorsally and lighter colored ventrally , which serves to eliminate shadows caused by light shining over the ocean water . The pure white fur of harp seal pups conceals them in their Arctic environment . Some species , such as ribbon seals , ringed seals and leopard seals , have patterns of contrasting light and dark coloration . All fully furred species molt ; phocids molt once a year , while otariids gradually molt all year . Seals have a layer of subcutaneous fat known as blubber that is particularly thick in phocids and walruses . Blubber serves both to keep the animals warm and to provide energy and nourishment when they are fasting . It can constitute as much as 50 % of a pinniped 's body weight . Pups are born with only a thin layer of blubber , but some species compensate for this with thick lanugos . 
 Pinnipeds have a simple stomach that is similar in structure to terrestrial carnivores . Most species have neither a cecum nor a clear demarcation between the small and large intestines ; the large intestine is comparatively short and only slightly wider than the latter . Small intestine lengths range from 8 ( California sea lion ) to 25 times ( elephant seal ) the body length . The length of the intestine may be an adaptation to frequent deep diving , as the increased volume of the digestive tract serves as an extended storage compartment for partially digested food during submersion . Pinnipeds do not have an appendix . As in most marine mammals , the kidneys are divided into small lobes and can effectively absorb water and filter out excess salt . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Pinnipeds have two pairs of flippers on the front and back , the fore @-@ flippers and hind @-@ flippers . The elbows and ankles are enclosed within the body . Pinnipeds tend to be slower swimmers than cetaceans , typically cruising at 5 – 15 kn ( 9 – 28 km / h ; 6 – 17 mph ) compared to around 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) for several species of dolphin . Seals are more agile and flexible , and some otariids , such as the California sea lion , are capable of bending their necks backwards far enough to reach their hind @-@ flippers , allowing them to make dorsal turns . Pinnipeds have several adaptions for reducing drag . In addition to their streamlined bodies , they have smooth networks of muscle bundles in their skin that may increase laminar flow and make it easier for them to slip through water . They also lack arrector pili , so their fur can be streamlined as they swim . 
 When swimming , otariids rely on their fore @-@ flippers for locomotion in a wing @-@ like manner similar to penguins and sea turtles . Fore @-@ flipper movement is not continuous , and the animal glides between each stroke . Compared to terrestrial carnivorans , the fore @-@ limbs of otariids are reduced in length , which gives the locomotor muscles at the shoulder and elbow joints greater mechanical advantage ; the hind @-@ flippers serve as stabilizers . Phocids and walruses swim by moving their hind @-@ flippers and lower body from side to side , while their fore @-@ flippers are mainly used for steering . Some species leap out of the water , which may allow then to travel faster . In addition , sea lions are known to " ride " waves , which probably helps them decrease their energy usage . 
 Pinnipeds can move around on land , though not as well as terrestrial animals . Otariids and walruses are capable of turning their hind @-@ flippers forward and under the body so they can " walk " on all fours . The fore @-@ flippers move in a transverse , rather than a sagittal fashion . Otariids rely on the movements of their heads and necks more than their hind @-@ flippers during terrestrial locomotion . By swinging their heads and necks , otariids create momentum while they are moving . Sea lions have been recorded climbing up flights of stairs . Phocids are less agile on land . They cannot pull their hind @-@ flippers forward , and move on land by lunging , bouncing and wiggling while their fore @-@ flippers keep them balanced . Some species use their fore @-@ flippers to pull themselves forward . Terrestrial locomotion is easier for phocids on ice , as they can sled along . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 The eyes of pinnipeds are relatively large for their size and are positioned near the front of the head . One exception is the walrus , whose smaller eyes are located on the sides of its head . This is because it feeds on immobile bottom dwelling mollusks and hence does not need acute vision . A seal 's eye is adapted for seeing both underwater and in air . The lens is mostly spherical , and much of the retina is equidistant from the lens center . The cornea has a flattened center where refraction is nearly equal in both water and air . Pinnipeds also have very muscular and vascularized irises . The well @-@ developed dilator muscle gives the animals a great range in pupil dilation . When contracted , the pupil is typically pear @-@ shaped , although the bearded seal 's is more diagonal . In species that live in shallow water , such as harbor seals and California sea lions , dilation varies little , while the deep @-@ diving elephant seals have much greater variation . 
 On land , pinnipeds are near @-@ sighted in dim light . This is reduced in bright light , as the retracted pupil reduces the lens and cornea 's ability to bend light . They also have a well @-@ developed tapetum lucidum , a reflecting layer that increases sensitivity by reflecting light back through the rods . This helps them see in low @-@ light conditions . Ice @-@ living seals like the harp seal have corneas that can tolerate high levels of ultraviolet radiation typical of bright , snowy environments . As such , they do not suffer snow blindness . Pinnipeds appear to have limited color vision , as they lack S @-@ cones . Flexible eye movement has been documented in seals . The <unk> muscles of the walrus are well developed . This and its lack of orbital roof allow it to protrude its eyes and see in both frontal and dorsal directions . Seals release large amounts of mucus to protect their eyes . The corneal epithelium is keratinized and the sclera is thick enough to withstand the pressures of diving . As in many mammals and birds , pinnipeds possess nictitating membranes . 
 The pinniped ear is adapted for hearing underwater , where it can hear sound frequencies at up to 70 @,@ 000 Hz . In air , hearing is somewhat reduced in pinnipeds compared to many terrestrial mammals . While they are capable of hearing a wide range of frequencies ( e.g. 500 to 32 @,@ 000 Hz in the northern fur seal , compared to 20 to 20 @,@ 000 Hz in humans ) , their airborne hearing sensitivity is weaker overall . One study of three species — the harbor seal , California sea lion and northern elephant seal — found that the sea lion was best adapted for airborne hearing , the harbor seal was equally capable of hearing in air and water , and the elephant seal was better adapted for underwater hearing . Although pinnipeds have a fairly good sense of smell on land , it is useless underwater as their nostrils are closed . 
 Pinnipeds have well @-@ developed tactile senses . Their mystacial vibrissae have ten times the innervation of terrestrial mammals , allowing them to effectively detect vibrations in the water . These vibrations are generated , for example , when a fish swims through water . Detecting vibrations is useful when the animals are foraging and may add to or even replace vision , particularly in darkness . Harbor seals have been observed following varying paths of another seal that swam ahead several minutes before , similar to a dog following a scent trail , and even to discriminate the species and the size of the fish responsible for the trail . Blind ringed seals have even been observed successfully hunting on their own in Lake <unk> , likely relying on their vibrissae to gain sensory information and catch prey . 
 Unlike terrestrial mammals , such as rodents , pinnipeds do not move their vibrissae over an object when examining it but instead extend their moveable whiskers and keep them in the same position . By holding their vibrissae steady , pinnipeds are able to maximize their detection ability . The vibrissae of phocids are undulated and wavy while otariid and walrus vibrissae are smooth . Research is ongoing to determine the function , if any , of these shapes on detection ability . The <unk> 's angle relative to the flow , not the shape , however , seems to be the most important factor . The vibrissae of some otariids grow quite long — those of the Antarctic fur seal can reach 41 cm ( 16 in ) . Walruses have the most vibrissae , at 600 – 700 individual hairs . These are important for detecting their prey on the muddy sea floor . In addition to foraging , vibrissae may also play a role in navigation ; spotted seals appear to use them to detect breathing holes in the ice . 
 = = = Diving adaptations = = = 
 Before diving , pinnipeds typically exhale to empty their lungs of half the air and then close their nostrils and throat cartilages to protect the trachea . Their unique lungs have airways that are highly reinforced with cartilaginous rings and smooth muscle , and alveoli that completely deflate during deeper dives . While terrestrial mammals are generally unable to empty their lungs , pinnipeds can <unk> their lungs even after complete respiratory collapse . The middle ear contains sinuses that probably fill with blood during dives , preventing middle ear squeeze . The heart of a seal is moderately flattened to allow the lungs to deflate . The trachea is flexible enough to collapse under pressure . During deep dives , any remaining air in their bodies is stored in the bronchioles and trachea , which prevents them from experiencing decompression sickness , oxygen toxicity and nitrogen narcosis . In addition , seals can tolerate large amounts of lactic acid , which reduces skeletal muscle fatigue during intense physical activity . 
 The main adaptations of the pinniped circulatory system for diving are the enlargement and increased complexity of veins to increase their capacity . <unk> mirabilia form blocks of tissue on the inner wall of the thoracic cavity and the body periphery . These tissue masses , which contain extensive contorted spirals of arteries and thin @-@ walled veins , act as blood reservoirs that increase oxygen stores for use during diving . As with other diving mammals , pinnipeds have high amounts of hemoglobin and myoglobin stored in their blood and muscles . This allows them to stay submerged for long periods of time while still having enough oxygen . Deep @-@ diving species such as elephant seals have blood volumes that make up to 20 % of their body weight . When diving , they reduce their heart rate and maintain blood flow only to the heart , brain and lungs . To keep their blood pressure stable , phocids have an elastic aorta that dissipates some energy of each heartbeat . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Pinnipeds conserve heat with their large and compact body size , insulating blubber and fur , and high metabolism . In addition , the blood vessels in their flippers are adapted for countercurrent exchange . Veins containing cool blood from the body extremities surround arteries , which contain warm blood received from the core of the body . Heat from the arterial blood is transferred to the blood vessels , which then recirculate blood back to the core . The same adaptations that conserve heat while in water tend to inhibit heat loss when out of water . To counteract overheating , many species cool off by flipping sand onto their backs , adding a layer of cool , damp sand that enhances heat loss . The northern fur seal pants to help stay cool , while monk seals often dig holes in the sand to expose cooler layers to rest in . 
 = = = Sleep = = = 
 Pinnipeds spend many months at a time at sea , so they must sleep in the water . Scientists have recorded them sleeping for minutes at a time while slowly drifting downward in a belly @-@ up orientation . Like other marine mammals , seals sleep in water with half of their brain awake so that they can detect and escape from predators . When they are asleep on land , both sides of their brain go into sleep mode . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Living pinnipeds mainly inhabit polar and subpolar regions , particularly the North Atlantic , the North Pacific and the Southern Ocean . They are entirely absent from Indo @-@ Malayan waters . Monk seals and some otariids live in tropical and subtropical waters . Seals usually require cool , nutrient @-@ rich waters with temperatures lower than 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . Even those that live in warm or tropical climates live in areas that become cold and nutrient rich due to current patterns . Only monk seals live in waters that are not typically cool or rich in nutrients . The Caspian seal and Baikal seal are found in large landlocked bodies of water ( the Caspian Sea and Lake Baikal respectively ) . 
 As a whole , pinnipeds can be found in a variety of aquatic habitats , including coastal water , open ocean , brackish water and even freshwater lakes and rivers . Most species inhabit coastal areas , though some travel offshore and feed in deep waters off oceanic islands . The Baikal seal is the only freshwater species , though some ringed seals live in freshwater lakes in Russia close to the Baltic sea . In addition , harbor seals may visit estuaries , lakes and rivers and sometimes stay as long as a year . Other species known to enter freshwater include California sea lions and South American sea lions . Pinnipeds also use a number of terrestrial habitats and substrates , both continental and island . In temperate and tropical areas , they haul @-@ out on to sandy and pebble beaches , rocky shores , shoals , mud flats , tide pools and in sea caves . Some species also rest on man @-@ made structures , like piers , jetties , buoys and oil platforms . Pinnipeds may move further inland and rest in sand dunes or vegetation , and may even climb cliffs . Polar @-@ living species haul @-@ out on to both fast ice and pack ice . 
 = = Behavior and life history = = 
 Pinnipeds have an amphibious lifestyle ; they spend most of their lives in the water , but haul @-@ out to mate , raise young , molt , rest , thermoregulate or escape from aquatic predators . Several species are known to migrate vast distances , particularly in response to extreme environmental changes , like El Niño or changes in ice cover . Elephant seals stay at sea 8 – 10 months a year and migrate between breeding and molting sites . The northern elephant seal has one of the longest recorded migration distance for a mammal , at 18 @,@ 000 – 21 @,@ 000 km ( 11 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 mi ) . Phocids tend to migrate more than otariids . Traveling seals may use various features of their environment to reach their destination including geomagnetic fields , water and wind currents , the position of the sun and moon and the taste and temperature of the water . 
 Pinnipeds may dive during foraging or to avoid predators . When foraging , Weddell seals typically dive for less than 15 minutes to depths of around 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) but can dive for as long as 73 minutes and to depths of up to 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . Northern elephant seals commonly dive 350 – 650 m ( 1 @,@ 150 – 2 @,@ 130 ft ) for as long as 20 minutes . They can also dive 1 @,@ 259 – 4 @,@ 100 m ( 4 @,@ 131 – 13 @,@ 451 ft ) and for as long as 62 minutes . The dives of otariids tend to be shorter and less deep . They typically last 5 – 7 minutes with average depths to 30 – 45 m ( 98 – 148 ft ) . However , the New Zealand sea lion has been recorded diving to a maximum of 460 m ( 1 @,@ 510 ft ) and a duration of 12 minutes . Walruses do not often dive very deep , as they feed in shallow water . 
 Pinnipeds have lifespans averaging 25 – 30 years . Females usually live longer , as males tend to fight and often die before reaching maturity . The longest recorded lifespans include 43 years for a wild female ringed seal and 46 years for a wild female grey seal . The age at which a pinniped sexually matures can vary from 2 – 12 years depending on the species . Females typically mature earlier than males . 
 = = = Foraging and predation = = = 
 All pinnipeds are carnivorous and predatory . As a whole , they mostly feed on fish and cephalopods , followed by crustaceans and bivalves , and then zooplankton and endothermic ( " warm @-@ blooded " ) prey like sea birds . While most species are generalist and opportunistic feeders , a few are specialists . Examples include the crabeater seal , which primarily eats krill , the ringed seal , which eats mainly crustaceans , the Ross seal and southern elephant seal , which specialize on squid , and the bearded seal and walrus , which feed on clams and other bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates . Pinnipeds may hunt solitarily or cooperatively . The former behavior is typical when hunting non @-@ schooling fish , slow @-@ moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey . Solitary foraging species usually exploit coastal waters , bays and rivers . An exception to this is the northern elephant seal , which feeds on fish at great depths in the open ocean . In addition , walruses feed solitarily but are often near other walruses in small or large groups that may surface and dive in unison . When large schools of fish or squid are available , pinnipeds such as certain otariids hunt cooperatively in large groups , locating and herding their prey . Some species , such as California and South American sea lions , may forage with cetaceans and sea birds . 
 Seals typically consume their prey underwater where it is swallowed whole . Prey that is too large or awkward is taken to the surface to be torn apart . The leopard seal , a prolific predator of penguins , is known to violently swing its prey back and forth until it is decapitated . The elaborately cusped teeth of filter @-@ feeding species , such as crabeater seals , allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food . The walrus is unique in that it consumes its prey by suction feeding , using its tongue to suck the meat of a bivalve out of the shell . While pinnipeds mostly hunt in the water , South American sea lions are known to chase down penguins on land . Some species may swallow stones or pebbles for reasons not understood . Though they can drink seawater , pinnipeds get most of their fluid intake from the food they eat . 
 Pinnipeds themselves are subject to predation . Most species are preyed on by the killer whale or orca . To subdue and kill seals , orcas continuously ram them with their heads , slap them with their tails and fling them in the air . They are typically hunted by groups of 10 or fewer whales , but they are occasionally hunted by larger groups or by lone individuals . Pups are more commonly taken by orcas , but adults can be targeted as well . Large sharks are another major predator of pinnipeds — usually the great white shark but also the tiger shark and mako shark . Sharks usually attack by ambushing them from below . The prey usually escapes , and seals are often seen with shark @-@ inflicted wounds . Otariids typically have injuries in the hindquarters , while phocids usually have injuries on the forequarters . 
 Pinnipeds are also targeted by terrestrial and <unk> predators . The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic seals and walruses , particularly pups . Bears are known to use sit @-@ and @-@ wait tactics as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water . Other terrestrial predators include cougars , brown hyenas and various species of canids , which mostly target the young . Pinnipeds lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups . Some species are capable of inflicting damaging wounds on their attackers with their sharp canines — an adult walrus is capable of killing polar bears . When out at sea , northern elephant seals dive out of the reach of surface @-@ hunting orcas and white sharks . In the Antarctic , which lacks terrestrial predators , pinniped species spend more time on the ice than their Arctic counterparts . Arctic seals use more breathing holes per individual , appear more restless when hauled out , and rarely defecate on the ice . Ringed seals would build dens underneath fast ice . 
 Interspecific predation among pinnipeds does occur . The leopard seal is known to prey on numerous other species , especially the crabeater seal . Leopard seals typically target crabeater pups , which form an important part of their diet from November to January . Older crabeater seals commonly bear scars from failed leopard seal attacks ; a 1977 study found that 75 % of a sample of 85 individual <unk> had these scars . Walruses , despite being specialized for feeding on bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates , occasionally prey on Arctic seals . They kill their prey with their long tusks and eat their blubber and skin . Steller sea lions have been recorded eating the pups of harbor seals , northern fur seals and California sea lions . New Zealand sea lions feed on pups of some fur seal species , and the South American sea lion may prey on South American fur seals . 
 = = = Reproductive behavior = = = 
 The mating system of pinnipeds varies from extreme polygyny to serial monogamy . Of the 33 species , 20 breed on land , and the remaining 13 breed on ice . Species that breed on land are usually polygynous , as females gather in large aggregations and males are able to mate with them as well as defend them from rivals . Polygynous species include elephant seals , grey seals and most otariids . Land @-@ breeding pinnipeds tend to mate on islands where there are fewer terrestrial predators . Few islands are favorable for breeding , and those that are tend to be crowded . Since the land they breed on is fixed , females return to the same sites for many years . The males arrive earlier in the season and wait for them . The males stay on land and try to mate with as many females as they can ; some of them will even fast . If a male leaves the beach to feed , he will likely lose mating opportunities and his dominance . Polygynous species also tend to be extremely sexual dimorphic in favor of males . This dimorphism manifests itself in larger chests and necks , longer canines and denser fur — all traits that help males in fights for females . Increased body weight in males increases the length of time they can fast due to the ample energy reserves stored in the blubber . Larger males also likely enjoy access to feeding grounds that smaller ones are unable to access due to their lower thermoregulatory ability and decreased energy stores . In some instances , only the largest males are able to reach the furthest deepest foraging grounds where they enjoy maximum energetic yields that are unavailable to smaller males and females . 
 Other seals , like the walrus and most phocids , breed on ice with copulation usually taking place in the water ( a few land @-@ breeding species also mate in water ) . Females of these species tend to aggregate less . In addition , since ice is less stable than solid land , breeding sites change location each year , and males are unable to predict where females will stay during the breeding season . Hence polygyny tends to be weaker in ice @-@ breeding species . An exception to this is the walrus , where females form dense aggregations perhaps due to their patchy food sources . Pinnipeds that breed on fast ice tend to cluster together more than those that breed on pack ice . Some of these species are serially monogamous , including the harp seal , crabeater seal and hooded seal . Seals that breed on ice tend to have little or no sexual dimorphism . In lobodontine seals , females are slightly longer than males . Walruses and hooded seals are unique among ice @-@ breeding species in that they have pronounced sexual dimorphism in favor of males . 
 Adult male pinnipeds have several strategies to ensure reproductive success . Otariids establish territories containing resources that attract females , such as shade , tide pools or access to water . Territorial boundaries are usually marked by natural breaks in the substrate , and males defend their territorial boundaries with threatening vocalizations and postures , but physical fights are usually avoided . Individuals also return to the same territorial site each breeding season . In certain species , like the Steller sea lion and northern fur seal , a dominant male can maintain a territory for as long as 2 – 3 months . Females can usually move freely between territories and males are unable to coerce them , but in some species such as the northern fur seal , South American sea lion and Australian sea lion , males can successfully contain females in their territories and prevent them from leaving . In some phocid species , like the harbor seal , Weddell seal and bearded seal , the males have underwater territories called " <unk> " near female haul @-@ out areas . These are also maintained by vocalizations . The <unk> of Weddell seal males can overlap with female breathing holes in the ice . 
 Lek systems are known to exist among some populations of walruses . These males cluster around females and try to attract them with elaborate courtship displays and vocalizations . <unk> may also exist among California sea lions , South American fur seals , New Zealand sea lions and harbor seals . In some species , including elephant seals and grey seals , males will try to lay claim to the desired females and defend them from rivals . Elephant seal males establish dominance hierarchies with the highest ranking males — the alpha males — maintaining harems of as many as 30 – 100 females . These males commonly disrupt the copulations of their subordinates while they themselves can mount without inference . They will , however , break off mating to chase off a rival . Grey seal males usually claim a location among a cluster of females whose members may change over time . Male harp seals , crabeater seals and hooded seals follow and defend lactating females in their vicinity — usually one or two at a time , — and wait for them to reach estrus . 
 Younger or subdominant male pinnipeds may attempt to achieve reproductive success in other ways . Subadult elephant seals will sneak into female clusters and try to blend in by pulling in their noses . They also harass and attempt to mate with females that head out to the water . In otariid species like the South American and Australian sea lions , non @-@ territorial subadults form " gangs " and cause chaos within the breeding rookeries to increase their chances of mating with females . Alternative mating strategies also exist in young male grey seals , which do have some success . Female pinnipeds do appear to have some choice in mates , particularly in lek @-@ breeding species like the walrus , but also in elephant seals where the males try to dominate all the females that they want to mate with . When a female elephant seal or grey seal is mounted by an unwanted male , she tries to squirm and get away , while croaking and slapping him with her tail . This commotion attracts other males to the scene , and the most dominant will end the copulation and attempt to mate with the female himself . Dominant female elephant seals stay in the center of the colony where they are more likely to mate with a dominant male , while peripheral females are more likely to mate with subordinates . Female Steller sea lions are known to solicit mating with their territorial males . 
 = = = Birth and parenting = = = 
 With the exception of the walrus , which has five- to six @-@ year @-@ long inter @-@ birth intervals , female pinnipeds enter estrous shortly after they give birth . All species go through delayed implantation , wherein the embryo remains in suspended development for weeks or months before it is implanted in the uterus . Delayed implantation postpones the birth of young until the female hauls @-@ out on land or until conditions for birthing are favorable . Gestation in seals ( including delayed implantation ) typically lasts a year . For most species , birthing takes place in the spring and summer months . Typically , single pups are born ; twins are uncommon and have high mortality rates . Pups of most species are born precocial . 
 Mother pinnipeds have different strategies for maternal care and lactation . Phocids such as elephant seals , grey seals and hooded seals remain on land or ice and fast during their relatively short lactation period – four days for the hooded seal and five weeks for elephant seals . The milk of these species consist of up to 60 % fat , allowing the young to grow fairly quickly . In particular , northern elephant seal pups gain 4 kg ( 9 lb ) each day before they are weaned . Some pups may try to steal extra milk from other nursing mothers and gain weight more quickly than others . Alloparenting occurs in these fasting species ; while most northern elephant seal mothers nurse their own pups and reject <unk> from alien pups , some do accept alien pups with their own . 
 For otariids and some phocids like the harbor seal , mothers fast and nurse their pups for a few days at a time . In between nursing bouts , the females leave their young onshore to forage at sea . These foraging trips may last anywhere between a day and two weeks , depending on the abundance of food and the distance of foraging sites . While their mothers are away , the pups will fast . Lactation in otariids may last 6 – 11 months ; in the Galápagos fur seal it can last as long as 3 years . Pups of these species are weaned at lower weights than their phocid counterparts . Walruses are unique in that mothers nurse their young at sea . The female rests at the surface with its head held up , and the young suckle upside down . 
 Male pinnipeds generally play little role in raising the young . Male walruses may help inexperienced young as they learn to swim , and have even been recorded caring for orphans . Male California sea lions have been observed to help shield swimming pups from predators . Males can also pose threats to the safety of pups . In <unk> breeding species , pups may get crushed by fighting males . Subadult male South America sea lions sometimes abduct pups from their mothers and treat them like adult males treat females . This helps them gain experience in controlling females . Pups can get severely injured or killed during abductions . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Pinnipeds can produce a number of vocalizations such as barks , grunts , rasps , rattles , growls , creaks , warbles , trills , chirps , chugs , clicks and whistles . Vocals are produced both in air and underwater . Otariids are more vocal on land , while phocids are more vocal in water . Antarctic seals are more vocal on land or ice than Arctic seals due to a lack of terrestrial and <unk> predators like the polar bear . Male vocals are usually of lower frequencies than those of the females . Vocalizations are particularly important during the breeding seasons . Dominant male elephant seals advertise their status and threaten rivals with " clap @-@ threats " and loud drum @-@ like calls that may be modified by the proboscis . Male otariids have strong barks , growls , roars and " <unk> " . Male walruses are known to produce distinctive gong @-@ like calls when attempting to attract females . They can also create somewhat musical sounds with their inflated throats . 
 The Weddell seal has perhaps the most elaborate vocal repertoire with separate sounds for airborne and underwater contexts . Underwater vocals include trills , chugs , chirps , chugs and knocks . The calls appear to contain prefixes and suffixes that serve to emphasize a message . The underwater vocals of Weddell seals can last 70 seconds , which is long for a marine mammal call . Some calls have around seven rhythm patterns and are comparable to <unk> and <unk> . Similar calls have been recorded in other lobodontine seals and in bearded seals . In some pinniped species , there appear to be geographic differences in vocalizations , known as dialects , while certain species may even have individual variations in expression . These differences are likely important for mothers and pups who need to remain in contact on crowded beaches . <unk> females and their young use mother @-@ pup attraction calls to help them reunite when the mother returns from foraging at sea . Female pinnipeds are also known to bellow when protecting their young . 
 While most vocals are audible to the human ear , a captive leopard seal was recorded making ultrasonic calls underwater . In addition , the vocals of northern elephant seals may produce infrasonic vibrations . Non @-@ vocal communication is not as common in pinnipeds as in cetaceans . Nevertheless , when disturbed by intruders harbor seals and Baikal seals may slap their fore @-@ flippers against their bodies as warnings . Teeth chattering , hisses and exhalations are also made as aggressive warnings . Visual displays also occur : Weddell seals will make an S @-@ shaped posture when patrolling under the ice , and Ross seals will display the stripes on their chests and teeth when approached . Male hooded seals use their inflatable nasal membranes to display to and attract females . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 In a match @-@ to @-@ sample task study , a single California sea lion was able to demonstrate an understanding of symmetry , transitivity and equivalence ; a second seal was unable to complete the tasks . They demonstrate the ability to understand simple syntax and commands when taught an artificial sign language , though they only rarely used the signs semantically or logically . In 2011 , a captive California sea lion named Ronan was recorded bobbing its head in synchrony to musical rhythms . This " rhythmic entrainment " was previously seen only in humans , parrots and other birds possessing vocal mimicry . In 1971 , a captive harbor seal named Hoover was trained to imitate human words , phrases and laughter . For sea lions used in entertainment , trainers toss a ball at the animal so it may accidentally balance it or hold the ball on its nose , thereby gaining an understanding of the behavior desired . It may require a year to train a sea lion to perform a trick for the public . Its long @-@ term memory allows it to perform a trick after at least three months of non @-@ performance . 
 = = Human relations = = 
 = = = Cultural depictions = = = 
 Various human cultures have depicted pinnipeds for millennia . The anthropologist , A. Asbjørn Jøn , has analysed beliefs of the Celts of Orkney and Hebrides who believed in the <unk> — seals that could change into humans and walk on land . Seals are also of great importance in the culture of the Inuit . In Inuit mythology , the goddess Sedna rules over the sea and marine animals . She is depicted as a mermaid , occasionally with a seal 's lower body . In one legend , seals , whales and other marine mammals were formed from her severed fingers . One of the earliest Ancient Greek coins depicts the head of a seal , and the animals were mentioned by Homer and Aristotle . The Greeks believed that seals loved both the sea and sun and were considered to be under the protection of the gods Poseidon and Apollo . The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped the sea and its animals , and often depicted sea lions in their art . In modern popular culture , pinnipeds are often depicted as comical figures based on their performances in zoos , circuses and marine mammal parks . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Pinnipeds have been kept in captivity since at least the 17th century and can be found in facilities around the world . Their large size and playfulness make them popular attractions . Some exhibits have rocky backgrounds with artificial haul @-@ out sites and a pool , while others have pens with small rocky , elevated shelters where the animals can dive into their pools . More elaborate exhibits contain deep pools that can be viewed underwater with rock @-@ mimicking cement as haul @-@ out areas . The most common pinniped species kept in captivity is the California sea lion as it is abundant and easy to train . These animals are used to perform tricks and entertain visitors . Other species popularly kept in captivity include the grey seal and harbor seal . Larger animals like walruses and Steller sea lions are much less common . Some organizations , such as the Humane Society of the United States and World Animal Protection , object to keeping pinnipeds and other marine mammals in captivity . They state that the exhibits could not be large enough to house animals that have evolved to be migratory , and a pool could never replace the size and biodiversity of the ocean . They also oppose using sea lions for entertainment , claiming the tricks performed are " exaggerated variations of their natural behaviors " and distract the audience from the animal 's unnatural environment . 
 California sea lions are used in military applications by the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program , including detecting naval mines and enemy divers . In the Persian Gulf , the animals can swim behind divers approaching a U.S. naval ship and attach a clamp with a rope to the diver 's leg . Navy officials say that the sea lions can do this in seconds , before the enemy realizes what happened . Organizations like PETA believe that such operations put the animals in danger . The Navy insists that the sea lions are removed once their mission is complete . 
 = = = Conservation and management issues = = = 
 As of 2013 , International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) recognizes 35 pinniped species . Two species — the Japanese sea lion and the Caribbean monk seal — are recently extinct , and ten more are considered at risk , as they are ranked " Critically Endangered " ( the Mediterranean and Hawaiian monk seals ) , " Endangered " ( Galápagos fur seal , Australian sea lion , Caspian seal and Galápagos sea lion ) , and " Vulnerable " ( northern fur seal , hooded seal and New Zealand sea lion ) . Three species — the walrus , the ribbon seal , and the spotted seal — have a " Data Deficient " ranking . Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change , particularly declines in sea ice . There has been some debate over the cause of the decline of Steller sea lions in Alaska since the 1970s . 
 Humans have hunted seals since the Stone Age . Originally , seals were hit with clubs during haul @-@ out . Eventually , seal hunters used harpoons to spear the animals from boats out at sea , and hooks for killing pups on ice or land . They were also trapped in nets . The use of firearms in seal hunting during the modern era drastically increased the number of killings . Pinnipeds are typically hunted for their meat and blubber . The skins of fur seals and phocids are made into coats , and the tusks of walruses continue to be used for carvings or as ornaments . There is a distinction between the subsistence hunting of seals by indigenous peoples of the Arctic and commercial hunting : subsistence hunters typically use seal products for themselves and depend on them for survival . National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of killing are seen as less destructive and wasteful . This distinction is being questioned as indigenous people are using more modern weaponry and mechanized transport to hunt with , and are selling seal products in the marketplace . Some anthropologists argue that the term " subsistence " should also apply to these cash @-@ based exchanges as long as they take place within local production and consumption . More than 100 @,@ 000 phocids ( especially ringed seals ) as well as around 10 @,@ 000 walruses are harvested annually by native hunters . 
 Commercial sealing was historically just as important an industry as whaling . Exploited species included harp seals , hooded seals , Caspian seals , elephant seals , walruses and all species of fur seal . The scale of seal harvesting decreased substantially after the 1960s , after the Canadian government reduced the length of the hunting season and implemented measures to protect adult females . Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers ; for example , Antarctic fur seals may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting . The northern elephant seal was hunted to near extinction in the late 19th century , with only a small population remaining on Guadalupe Island . It has since recolonized much of its historic range , but has a population bottleneck . Conversely , the Mediterranean monk seal was extirpated from much of its former range , which stretched from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea and northwest Africa , and only remains in the northeastern Mediterranean and some parts of northwest Africa . 
 Several species of pinniped continue to be harvested . The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals allows limited hunting of crabeater seals , leopard seals and Weddell seals . However , Weddell seal hunting is prohibited between September and February if the animal is over one year of age , to ensure breeding stocks are healthy . Other species protected are southern elephant seals , Ross seals and Antarctic fur seals . The Government of Canada permits the hunting of harp seals . This has been met with controversy and debate . Proponents of seal hunts insist that the animals are killed humanely and the white @-@ coated pups are not taken , while opponents argue that it is irresponsible to kill harp seals as they are already threatened by declining habitat . 
 The Caribbean monk seal has been killed and exploited by Europeans settlers and their descendants since 1494 , starting with Christopher Columbus himself . The seals were easy targets for organized sealers , fishermen , turtle hunters and buccaneers because they evolved with little pressure from terrestrial predators and were thus " genetically tame " . In the Bahamas , as many as 100 seals were slaughtered in one night . In the mid @-@ nineteenth century , the species was thought to have gone extinct until a small colony was found near the Yucatán Peninsula in 1886 . Seal killings continued , and the last reliable report of the animal alive was in 1952 . The IUCN declared it extinct in 1996 . The Japanese sea lion was common around the Japanese islands , but overexploitation and competition from fisheries drastically decreased the population in the 1930s . The last recorded individual was a juvenile in 1974 . 
 Some species have become so numerous that they conflict with local people . In the United States , pinnipeds and other marine mammals are protected under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 ( MMPA ) . Since that year , California sea lion populations have risen to 250 @,@ 000 . These animals began exploiting more man @-@ made environments , like docks , for haul @-@ out sites . Many docks are not designed to withstand the weight of several resting sea lions , which causes major tilting and other problems . Wildlife managers have used various methods to control the animals , and some city officials have redesigned docks so they can better withstand them . Sea lions also conflict with fisherman since both depend on the same fish stocks . In 2007 , MMPA was amended to permit the lethal removal of sea lions from salmon runs at Bonneville Dam . The 2007 law seeks to relieve pressure on the crashing Pacific Northwest salmon populations . Wildlife officials have unsuccessfully attempted to ward off the sea lions using bombs , rubber bullets and bean bags . Efforts to chase sea lions away from the area have also proven ineffective . Critics like the Humane Society object to the killing of the sea lions , claiming that hydroelectric dams pose a greater threat to the salmon . Similar conflicts have existed in South Africa with brown fur seals . In the 1980s and 1990s , South African politicians and fisherman demanded that the fur seals be culled , believing that the animals competed with commercial fisheries . Scientific studies found that culling fur seals would actually have a negative effect on the fishing industry , and the culling option was dropped in 1993 . 
 Pinnipeds can also be threatened by humans in more indirect ways . They are unintentionally caught in fishing nets by commercial fisheries and accidentally swallow fishing hooks . <unk> and Seine netting is a significant cause of mortality in seals and other marine mammals . Species commonly entangled include California sea lions , Hawaiian monk seals , northern fur seals and brown fur seals . Pinnipeds are also affected by marine pollution . High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are near the top of food chains and have large reserves of blubber . Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young . These pollutants can cause gastrointestinal cancers , decreased <unk> and greater vulnerability to infectious diseases . Other man @-@ made threats include habitat destruction by oil and gas exploitation , encroachment by boats and underwater noise . 
 = Murder of Robert Eric Wone = 
 Robert Eric Wone was murdered in Washington , D.C. in August 2006 in the home of a college friend , Joe Price . Wone , who was 32 years old at the time , was a lawyer living in suburban Oakton , Virginia , but had been working as general counsel at Radio Free Asia in downtown Washington , D.C. He had stayed the night at the home of friends located about one mile from his office . According to police affidavits , Wone was believed to have been " restrained , incapacitated , and sexually assaulted " before his death . The murder was not committed by an intruder unknown to residents of the home Price , Victor Zaborsky and Dylan Ward . 
 Within days of the murder , D.C. police alleged that the crime scene had been tampered with , but no charges were filed for over two years . In late 2008 , police charged Price , Zaborsky and Ward with obstruction of justice and conspiracy related to alleged tampering with the crime scene . The men were acquitted of the charges in June 2010 . No one has been charged with Wone 's killing . In November 2008 , Wone 's widow filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Price , Zaborsky and Ward ; the suit was settled on August 3 , 2011 for an undisclosed sum and agreement . 
 = = Crime = = 
 Late on August 2 , 2006 , Robert Eric Wone was fatally stabbed while staying overnight at a Swann Street , NW townhouse in Washington , D.C. , owned by Joseph Price ( a / k / a Joseph Anderson ) and his domestic partner Victor Zaborsky , where they lived with Dylan Ward ( a / k / a Dylan Thomas ) in a <unk> relationship as a family . Wone had gone to Price 's residence at approximately 10 : 30 PM after working late , as had been arranged days before . Neighbors reported hearing a scream , later identified as Zaborsky 's , during the 11 : 00 PM newscast ( i.e. before 11 : 35 PM ) . Zaborsky made a 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 call at 11 : 49 PM , and paramedics arrived five minutes later , followed by the police . Price phoned Wone 's wife , and Wone was pronounced dead at George Washington University Hospital at 12 : 24 AM on August 3 . 
 Price , Zaborsky and Ward all initially spoke with the police without attorneys , and video recordings of those interviews were shown at the subsequent conspiracy trial . They denied any involvement in the death and speculated that an intruder had killed Wone . The three also denied any sexual relationship with Wone , and Wone 's family have described him as both " straight and happily married " . All three men attended Wone 's funeral , where Price served as a pallbearer . Eric Holder , who worked at that time at Covington & Burling , called Wone " a kind and gentle man " who was " killed in the most horrible of ways " . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Paramedics responding to the emergency call " found the three residents ’ calm behavior unusual ; none was screaming or even helping direct the paramedics . " According to Ward 's attorney , detectives who interrogated the three housemates on the night of the murder informed them that they were the main suspects in the case , and asked many sexually charged , accusatory questions . Three days after the murder , the Gay and Lesbian Liaison Unit of the D.C. police were called in , but unit head Sgt. Brett Parson declined to discuss the unit 's involvement . Within two weeks of the murder , police publicly alleged that the crime scene had been tampered with . Investigators spent more than three weeks examining the townhouse in detail , " removing flooring , pieces of walls , a chunk of staircase , the washing machine , even sink traps . " Allegations that the area around Wone 's body had been cleaned were revealed in an affidavit in support of a search warrant for homeowner Joseph Price 's offices at the D.C. law firm of Arent Fox . 
 = = = Burglary = = = 
 Three months after Wone 's death , Price 's brother and an accomplice burgled the Swann Street residence ; they took more than $ 7 @,@ 000 of electronic equipment . Two individuals , including Price 's brother , were charged with the burglary , but those charges were later dropped . In 2007 , D.C. police revealed that they had been preparing to make an arrest in the Wone murder case in 2006 , but that the burglary had derailed those plans . Police have not revealed the name of the arrest target , nor the charge ( s ) that would have been filed . 
 = = = Lack of progress = = = 
 In August 2007 The Washington Post reported Katherine Wone 's frustration with the FBI crime lab , " It has been trying at times as we continue to wait for the FBI to complete their analysis of all the samples that were taken . " Over one year the case had been transferred to three separate prosecutors , earning it " vagabond status " in the U.S. Attorneys ' office . On the one @-@ year anniversary of Wone 's death , Katherine Wone held a press conference to appeal for public assistance in finding the killer , her first public comment on the case . During the press conference , Holder publicly pleaded with the three residents to provide additional information , saying " You need to ask yourself , ' Have I provided police with all the information I know ? ' " Interested parties , such as the OCA , used the first anniversary of Wone 's death to criticize what they deemed police inaction in the investigation . In contrast to the first anniversary of Wone 's murder , there was no press conference on the second anniversary , and neither the Wone family nor police made any statements to the press . 
 = = = Arrests and charges = = = 
 An obstruction of justice charge was filed in October 2008 against housemate Dylan Ward , who had since moved to Miami @-@ Dade County , Florida and was living in a home owned by Price . In November 2008 , Price and Zaborsky were arrested and also charged with obstruction of justice . All three men were later released pending trial , but subject to electronic monitoring and curfews . On December 19 , 2008 , additional charges of conspiracy were filed against all three men . During the same hearing , the electronic monitoring and curfew restrictions for the three defendants were ended and prosecutors announced the possibility that charges related to tampering with evidence could be filed in the future . 
 The affidavit filed by authorities supporting the arrest warrant for Ward showed that investigators had concluded the men were not telling the truth about what happened . The report states " The evidence demonstrates that Robert Wone was restrained , incapacitated , sexually assaulted , and murdered inside 1509 Swann Street , " and there exists " overwhelming evidence , far in excess of probable cause " that Price , Zaborsky , and Ward " obstructed justice by altering and orchestrating the crime scene , planting evidence , delaying the reporting of the murder to the authorities , and lying to the police about the true circumstances of the murder . " Lawyers for the three accused men have called the affidavit " speculation , innuendo , assumptions , and irrelevant inflammatory comments " and maintain their clients ' innocence . Price and Zaborsky were domestic partners , and the affidavit alleges that Price had previously had a sexual relationship with Ward . Washington attorney Dale Sanders opined that the release of the extensively detailed affidavit was intended to turn one of the housemates , presumably Ward , against the others , and hypothesized that it indicated prosecutors lacked sufficient evidence to charge any of the housemates with additional crimes without the cooperation of a witness . 
 Officials believe that a knife from the kitchen had been smeared with blood and placed near the body , while a duplicate of the knife which was missing from a set found in Ward 's bedroom would have been more consistent with the wounds to Wone 's body . The autopsy revealed evidence of some degree of suffocation , perhaps by a pillow , and puncture marks on his neck , chest , foot and hand . Though no toxins were found in his blood , a lack of evidence of struggle led investigators to suspect Wone had been injected with a paralytic agent . Cadaver dogs found a blood residue in a dryer lint trap and the patio drain , which detectives believe may be evidence that someone washed themselves in the back patio area , and dried wet clothes in the dryer . City Paper Columnist Jason <unk> reported unattributed criticism of the medical examiner 's failure to test for exotic drugs and to keep a sample of Wone 's blood for later testing , as well as detectives ' failure to follow up on a lint trap that had attracted a cadaver dog 's attention . Price 's lawyer has challenged the timing of the indictments , has said that the civil suit " looked unseemly " , and questioned whether the prosecutors and Wone family attorneys were acting in concert . 
 In April , 2009 , prosecutors disclosed that two emails had been drafted on Wone 's BlackBerry " at a time when prosecutors believed Wone dead " . An independent criminal law attorney noted that " The defense will argue that this is consistent with their claim that the murder happened quickly by an intruder and it was not a long , drawn @-@ out effort to sexually assault Wone before he was killed , as the government is alleging . " Previously a court filing indicated the government intended to release a personal profile that Price allegedly used on <unk> , " a sexually oriented web site specializing in S & M practices " . 
 Formal defense in the conspiracy case began on June 17 , 2010 , and concluded without any of the defendants testifying . 
 Judge Lynn Leibovitz found each of the three men not guilty of charges of conspiracy , obstruction of justice and tampering with evidence on June 29 , 2010 . Leibovitz , in explaining her ruling for almost an hour from the bench , stated that she personally believed that the men knew who killed Wone , but was not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that they committed the offenses with which they were charged . 
 = = = Civil lawsuit = = = 
 On November 25 , 2008 , Wone 's widow Katherine filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the three men , largely based on the police affidavit . The lawsuit alleged " defendants ' negligent failure to rescue Robert Wone after he was injured , defendants ' destruction of evidence of Robert Wone ’ s murder , and defendants ' conspiracy to destroy evidence and obstruct the police investigation into Robert Wone ’ s murder . " The suit was settled August 3 , 2011 for an undisclosed sum and agreement . Prior to his nomination as United States Attorney General , Eric Holder advised Wone 's widow on a pro bono basis . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Wone 's death has proven to be one of Washington , D.C. ' s most mysterious homicide cases . The Washington Examiner listed the Wone case , in light of the arrests , as one of eight top crime stories in D.C. for 2008 . The Washington Blade stated that the case " has captured the interest of the gay community because it occurred inside the home of a prominent gay male couple . " In March 2009 , a <unk> story on the crime highlighted a website ( <unk> ) cataloging the investigative efforts of " four amateur sleuths who live in the neighborhood " . 
 Since Wone 's death , multiple organizations have established scholarships and other memorials in his name , including the Virginia Department of Social Services " Robert E. Wone Award for Exemplary Service " ; the annual " Robert E. Wone Judicial <unk> & Internship Conference , " which rotates among the D.C. area law schools , including Georgetown University Law Center , American University Washington College of Law , and Howard University School of Law ; a workroom at OCA headquarters ; the " Robert E. Wone Fellowship " of the Asian Pacific American Bar Association Educational Fund ; the " Robert E. Wone Scholarship " of OCA 's New Jersey Chapter ; the " Robert E. Wone Memorial Trust , " administered by the Community Foundation of the National Capital Region ; and the " Robert E. Wone Clinical Fellowship " at the University of Pennsylvania Law School , including a room in the law school 's Civil Practice Clinic . On October 22 , 2011 , family and friends gathered at Barksdale Field at the College of William and Mary to dedicate two benches and two Chinese <unk> trees in Robert 's memory . The plaques on the benches read " Rest awhile and enjoy the wonderful world around you , " a reference to one of Wone 's favorite songs by Louis Armstrong , It 's a Wonderful World . 
 = = Victim = = 
 Robert Eric Wone ( June 1 , 1974 – August 3 , 2006 ) was a fourth generation Chinese American , born in Manhattan and raised in Brooklyn , New York . After graduating from Xaverian High School as salutatorian of his class , he attended The College of William and Mary as a James Monroe Scholar . There , Wone met Joseph Price , then a senior , in the 1992 – 93 academic year . Wone and Price shared several activities , including an honor society and student government leadership positions , before Price graduated in 1993 . During 1993 , the Richmond Times Dispatch published an opinion piece co @-@ written by Wone , criticizing a prior Times Dispatch article on William and Mary faculty . Graduating in 1996 , Wone then received his law degree with honors from the University of Pennsylvania Law School in 1999 . He subsequently served as law clerk to Judge Raymond A. Jackson of the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia . Wone later worked in commercial real estate law for six years as an associate with the Washington , D.C. , firm of Covington & Burling . As part of his public service responsibilities with the law firm , Wone served as general counsel for the Organization of Chinese Americans ( OCA ) . On June 7 , 2003 , Wone married Katherine Ellen Yu , and the couple lived in Fairfax County . On June 30 , 2006 , about two months before he was killed , Wone left Covington & Burling and was hired as general counsel for Radio Free Asia . Wone was very active within the Asian American community , supporting organizations such as OCA and the Museum of Chinese in the Americas . At the time of his death , he was president @-@ elect of the Asian Pacific American Bar Association . 
 = Ivan the Russian = 
 Ivan the Russian ( Bulgarian : Иван <unk> , Ivan <unk> ; Hungarian : <unk> Iván ) ( fl . 1288 / 1323 – 1332 ) was a 14th @-@ century Bulgarian military leader of Russian origin who served Bulgarian tsars Michael Shishman and Ivan Alexander . Prior to joining the armed forces of the Second Bulgarian Empire , Ivan the Russian may have been a military commander in the service of the Hungarian governor of Severin . 
 Ivan the Russian rose to a high rank in the Bulgarian military in the wake of the accession of Michael Shishman to the throne . In 1323 , he was in charge of the Bulgarian defence of Plovdiv during the prolonged and ultimately successful Byzantine siege of the city . In 1328 , he was involved in a failed Bulgarian attempt to capture the Byzantine capital Constantinople from within . Probably taking part in the turbulent events that surrounded and followed Michael Shishman 's death , Ivan the Russian was last mentioned as a representative of Ivan Alexander in 1332 . 
 = = Early years and siege of Plovdiv = = 
 Bulgarian historian Plamen Pavlov conjectures that Ivan the Russian was a Ruthenian born in the Kingdom of Galicia – Volhynia ( centred on modern western Ukraine ) , a hypothesis based only on his ties to Hungary , the western neighbour of Galicia – Volhynia . Hungarian sources from 1288 make notice of one Russian named Ivan ( Iwan dicto <unk> ) as an ally of the ban of Severin , Theodore Vejtehi from the kindred Csanád , who was one of the nobles that opposed the rule of Charles I of Hungary in 1316 – 1317 . The land to the south of Severin was governed for Bulgaria by the despot of Vidin , Michael Shishman , a supporter of Vejtehi . Thus , as the Hungarian king established his authority over Severin and suppressed Vejtehi 's rebellion , Ivan the Russian may have fled to Vidin and entered the service of Michael Shishman . Ivan is thought to have been joined , as a commander subordinate to the despot of Vidin , by his personal forces which consisted of Hungarians and , presumably , Russians . 
 While Hungarian scholar György Györffy supports the identification of Ivan the Russian as the Iwan dicto <unk> of Hungarian chronicles , historian István Vásáry points to the lack of clear evidence and the large time span between the two . Before that identification was proposed , it was considered that Ivan had arrived in Bulgaria after fleeing the Mongol conquest of Rus ' , much like another Russian in Bulgarian service , Jacob Svetoslav . Either way , in 1323 Ivan 's right @-@ hand man was a Hungarian named <unk> . 
 Michael Shishman 's accession to the Bulgarian throne in 1323 meant that Ivan the Russian assumed an elite rank in the Bulgarian military hierarchy . Pavlov theorizes that he became protostrator , a title borrowed from Byzantium . The title was held by the second @-@ in @-@ command of the army and was approximate to the Western marshal . In the same year , Ivan was dispatched to the city of Plovdiv ( Philippopolis ) which had been recently conquered by Bulgaria after decades of Byzantine rule . With a one @-@ thousand @-@ strong cavalry force of Alans , Bulgarians and possibly Hungarians and two thousand infantrymen , Ivan was to defend the city from Byzantine raids . In that task he was assisted by his deputy <unk> and the Alan chieftains <unk> and <unk> . At the time , Ivan was already well @-@ known even in Byzantium as a military commander . 
 The Bulgarian forces commanded by Ivan the Russian managed to withstand the four @-@ month siege of Plovdiv undertaken by Andronikos III Palaiologos , claimant to the Byzantine throne , and his Bulgarian ally Voysil , despot of Kopsis . In their attempts to capture the city , the Byzantines employed German specialists to construct a siege machine , from which they fired with crossbows at the Bulgarian defenders . Despite the elaborate siege tactics , by the summer of 1323 the Bulgarians had not only retained the city , but also launched raids on nearby Byzantine @-@ held fortresses in the Rhodope Mountains , such as Stenimachos ( modern Asenovgrad ) and <unk> . Plovdiv was lost , however , to the Byzantines soon thereafter . As Ivan 's forces were leaving the city to meet the Bulgarian garrison that was to replace them , the pro @-@ Byzantine inhabitants of Plovdiv opened the city gates and let a covert Byzantine detachment in . 
 = = Anti @-@ Byzantine plot and later career = = 
 The loss of Plovdiv did not seem to have had a profound effect on Ivan 's career , and he remained a royal favourite . In 1328 , Ivan was tasked by Tsar Michael Shishman with the defence of the Great Palace of Constantinople , the residence of emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos . Andronikos II , facing imminent defeat at the hands of his grandson and co @-@ emperor Andronikos III in a protracted civil war , was distrustful of his own guard , and had requested the assistance of Michael Shishman . The Bulgarian emperor sent Ivan the Russian along with 3 @,@ 000 horsemen to Constantinople in aid . In the words of Byzantine historian Nikephoros Gregoras , the actual intentions of Michael Shishman were to use Ivan and his men as a Trojan Horse . In a suitable moment , the Bulgarian guard would arrest the emperor and take hold of the palace before allowing Michael Shishman with a large army and Tatar mercenaries into Constantinople . 
 In accordance with the plan , Ivan and his cavalry approached Constantinople while Michael Shishman waited in Yambol with his army . The plot was uncovered by the spies of Andronikos III . Fearing for his own imperial ambitions , he wrote to his rival and grandfather not to accept the Bulgarians into the capital . While Ivan stuck to the plan and signed an oath that he had come with peace to persuade the Byzantines , he promptly retreated to Bulgarian territory upon receiving that order from Michael Shishman . 
 Ivan 's role in the final years of Tsar Michael Shishman 's reign and the rule of Ivan Stephen is uncertain , as he is not mentioned in the sources pertaining to that period . His high @-@ ranking position nevertheless leads Pavlov to conjecture that Ivan took part in the Battle of Velbazhd of 28 July 1330 , a Serbian victory over Bulgaria that paved the way to the Serbian dominance of the Balkans in the mid @-@ 14th century . Michael Shishman was killed in the battle and succeeded by his son Ivan Stephen ( 1330 – 1331 ) . Pavlov believes that Ivan the Russian was among the Bulgarian nobles that ousted the weak Ivan Stephen in 1331 and placed Ivan Alexander ( 1331 – 1371 ) on the throne . It is also probable that Ivan the Russian took part in the Bulgarian victory over Byzantium at Rusokastro in 1332 because he was last recorded as Ivan Alexander 's representative in the peace negotiations that followed . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Ivan the Russian was held in high regard by John VI Kantakouzenos , writer and later Byzantine emperor who likely personally faced Ivan in battle . In his History , Kantakouzenos calls Ivan a man “ skilled in strategy ” . Kantakouzenos also referred to Ivan as “ one of Bulgaria 's illustrious people ” in his writings . Czech historian Konstantin Josef Jireček , a prominent researcher of Bulgarian history , assesses Ivan as “ the most clear @-@ cut figure of a Bulgarian military leader ” of that age . In the eyes of Pavlov , despite his foreign origin Ivan the Russian was not considered an emigrant or a mercenary by the Bulgarian nobility and the emperor , but rather a trusted commander and one of their own . 
 = Lethal Inspection = 
 " Lethal Inspection " is the sixth episode of the sixth season of the animated sitcom Futurama , originally aired on July 22 , 2010 on Comedy Central . In the episode Bender learns that he suffers from a terminal manufacturing defect , effectively rendering him mortal . Bender must cope with his newfound mortality and enlists Hermes Conrad 's help to track down the mysterious quality inspector , Inspector No. 5 , whom he blames for allowing him to enter the world only to die . 
 The episode was written by Eric Horsted and directed by Ray <unk> . From June 8 to June 15 , as part of its " Countdown to Futurama " event , Comedy Central Insider , Comedy Central 's news outlet , released various preview materials for the episode , including a storyboard of Bender 's and Hermes ' entry into the Central Bureaucracy and character designs for the war reenactment sequence . " Lethal Inspection " received positive reviews from critics , who viewed the emotional ending to be a return to form that the season had been missing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a reenactment of the " Sith @-@ al War " , Bender touts his perfection and " immortality " , specifically citing his ability to download a backup copy of himself into a new working body should anything happen to his present one . Bender soon discovers that he suffers from a terminal manufacturing defect : he is built without a backup unit , making him mortal . He is devastated by the revelation of his mortality and of Inspector No. 5 , believing the inspector 's careless error resulted in him being sent out into the world only to die . He becomes determined to find Inspector No. 5 and demand an answer to why he allowed Bender to exist despite his fatal flaw . 
 Hermes agrees to help Bender in his quest to discover the identity of Inspector No. 5 , which is locked in the Central Bureaucracy . While at the Central Bureaucracy , Hermes logs into the computer system with his ID to look up Inspector No. 5 's records . However , he and Bender find that the electronic record on Inspector No. 5 has been deleted and that the physical file is also missing . Bender calls Mom 's Friendly Robot Company , who created him , and tells her he is defective . Mom attempts to have Bender destroyed to cover up the existence of a defective robot . The two flee from Mom 's Killbots by train and arrive in Tijuana — where Bender was manufactured . 
 The original manufacturing plant is abandoned , but Bender finds an old directory listing Inspector No. 5 's address . However , upon reaching the home , they also find it abandoned . Realizing that he may never find the answers he seeks , Bender is forced to confront the reality of death . Hermes consoles him , telling him that now life is precious and he should not spend it bitter and angry . The two bond and soon the Killbots arrive and begin shooting into the house . Hermes tells Bender to flee while he attempts to hack into Inspector No. 5 's old Central Bureaucracy computer and fake Bender 's death . Successful , Hermes uploads false information to the Killbots claiming Bender has been eliminated , which ends their pursuit and he narrowly escapes the burning wreckage of the house . 
 Back at Planet Express , Bender celebrates his new outlook on life with the other crew members . Meanwhile , Hermes secretly burns Inspector No. 5 's file , whose cover falls away to reveal that he was Inspector No. 5 . A flashback reveals that he overrode the " defective " assessment on Bender to prevent him from being scrapped , then resigned from the company immediately afterward . Hermes ' personnel file was deleted , and he stole his own physical file from the Central Bureaucracy ; the computer at the Tijuana house was his own , so he did not have to hack into it . In the present , Hermes smiles quietly over the burning file , happy in knowing he did the right thing . 
 = = Production = = 
 From June 8 to June 15 , as part of its 2010 " Countdown to Futurama " event , Comedy Central Insider , Comedy Central 's news outlet , released various preview materials for the episode , including a storyboard of Bender 's and Hermes ' entry into the Central Bureaucracy and character designs for the war reenactment sequence . The episode is one of the few times where Hermes plays a major role and is key to the plot . The episode ends with " Little Bird , Little Bird " , an American children 's song , performed by Elizabeth Mitchell . 
 The cultural references in the episode include when Hermes and Bender enter " cubicle room 729 " , with cubicles set up in groups of nine , three rows across and three columns down . In order to get to Hermes ' cubicle , the group rotates right and left and up and down in the same fashion as a Rubik 's Cube . When Hermes 's cubicle stops , he says , " This is mine , right next to the center square , " also referencing the game show Hollywood Squares . The bureaucrat next to Hermes makes a comment and a red ' X ' pops up on his desk . This is a reference to actor and comedian Paul Lynde , who was the regular " center square " on the show . 
 The episode deals with the concept of realizing one 's mortality and discovering that life is more precious because of it . Learning that he is in fact not immortal as he once thought , Bender initially feels that living a life that is anything less than immortal is worthless . He deals with the devastating news of his newfound mortality by trying to find the one person who he believes can answer his questions about the reason for his life and why he was allowed to " be born " only to die . Though Bender cannot find the answers to his mortality , he ultimately ends up developing a new outlook on life , believing it to be more precious than it was before now that it is finite , and he resolves that life is worth living no matter how brief it is . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Lethal Inspection " originally aired on July 22 , 2010 on Comedy Central . In its original American broadcast , it was viewed by an estimated 1 @.@ 920 million viewers . The episode had a 1 @.@ 3 rating / 2 % share in Nielsen ratings and a 0 @.@ 9 rating / 3 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning 1 @.@ 3 % of households with televisions were watching the episode and 2 % of television viewers during the half @-@ hour were watching this episode . " Lethal Inspection " was down two tenths of a point from the previous week 's episode " The Duh @-@ Vinci Code " . 
 The episode received acclaim from critics . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave it an A- , praising the unlikely pairing of Bender and Hermes , writing : " If I had to name a character on the show least likely to pluck at my heartstrings , Bender and Hermes would be near the top of the list ... and yet they pulled it off . I 'm not sure if Baby Bender violates continuity or not , but I don 't care . It worked . " Handlen called the episode " more thoughtful " and also felt that the episode provided depth and growth to both Bender and Hermes without compromising characterization . In the case of Hermes , Handlen stated , " Hermes can be an obsessive , number @-@ loving accountant , and still have that memory of his younger self saving Baby Bender from the trash heap . It works because the twist is the discovery of compassion in someone we liked and wanted to love . " Danny Gallagher of TVSquad felt that the episode marked the return of the Futurama 's " true sense of emotion , " comparing it to previous episodes like season four 's " Jurassic Bark " . In particular , Gallagher noted the highly effective use of the Central Bureaucracy , stating that it allowed the show to use a Douglas Adams @-@ feel . Merrill Bar of Film School Rejects stated that the episode worked " 99 @.@ 9 % " and that it recovered what he felt had been lacking from the previous episodes of season six . While he disliked the opening Star Wars gag , he felt that the rest of the episode made up for it , stating that " Lethal Inspection " was " by far , the funniest episode since the shows [ sic ] return . If the writers can keep this up , then my faith will have been fully restored . " 
 Robert Canning of IGN was also pleased with the episode , noting that Hermes ' and Bender 's team @-@ up worked well and that the ending was cathartic . He found the episode to be his favorite of the new season , giving it a 9 / 10 and stating , " after an okay start , [ it ] turned out to be my favorite episode of this comeback season so far . The more I think about it , the more pleasure I find in it . It was an episode full of laughs , action and the kind of emotional tug the series has been missing of late . " Sean Gandert of Paste gave the episode a rating of 8 @.@ 7 / 10 and wrote : " Judging from this episode and the last it seems like Futurama is intentionally straying away from its old groupings and trying new things . The sixth season is moving off from the repetition of its first two episodes and is all the better for it . " Though he felt the episode was weaker with its jokes , he noted that this " is frequently the case in with episodes that deal more with the characters and less about making jokes in a wacky world . But this isn 't something I think will bother real fans , as that 's part of what 's given Futurama its cult audience in the first place : that the show gives a damn about its characters . " 
 = Education in Medieval Scotland = 
 Education in Medieval Scotland includes all forms of education within the modern borders of Scotland , between the departure of the Romans from Britain in the fifth century , until the establishment of the Renaissance late fifteenth century and early sixteenth century . Few sources on Scottish education survived the Medieval era . In the early Middle Ages , Scotland was an oral society , with verbal rather than literary education . Though there are indications of a Gaelic education system similar to that of Ireland , few details are known . The establishment of Christianity from the sixth century brought Latin to Scotland as a scholarly and written language . Monasteries served as major repositories of knowledge and education , often running schools . 
 In the High Middle Ages , new sources of education arose , such as song and grammar schools designed to train priests with emphases on music and Latin grammar , respectively . The number and size of these schools expanded rapidly after the 1380s . By the end of the Middle Ages , all the main burghs and some small towns had grammar schools . Educational provision was probably much weaker in rural areas , but there were petty or reading schools in rural areas , providing an elementary education . There was also the development of private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers that sometimes developed into " household schools " . Girls of noble families were taught in nunneries and by the end of the fifteenth century Edinburgh also had schools for girls . There is documentary evidence for about 100 schools of these different kinds before the Reformation . The Education Act 1496 decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn " perfyct Latyne " . All this resulted in an increase in literacy , with perhaps 60 per cent of the nobility being literate by the end of the period . 
 Those who wished to attend university had to travel to England or the continent , and just over 1 @,@ 000 students have been identified as doing so between the twelfth century and 1410 . Major intellectual figures produced by Scotland with this system included John Duns Scotus , Walter Wardlaw , William de Tredbrum , Laurence de Lindores and John Mair . This situation was transformed by the founding of St John 's College , St Andrews ( 1418 ) . St Salvator 's College was added to St. Andrews in 1450 , followed by foundations at Glasgow in 1451 and King 's College , Aberdeen in 1495 . Initially , these institutions were designed for the training of clerics , but they would increasingly be used by laymen who began to challenge the clerical monopoly of administrative posts in government and law . They provided only basic degrees and those wanting to study for the more advanced degrees , which were common amongst European scholars , needed to go to universities in other countries . In this period , Scottish universities largely had a Latin curriculum , designed for the clergy and civil and canon lawyers . Towards the end of the fifteenth century , a humanist influence and the teaching of Greek was becoming more evident . 
 = = Gaelic education and monasteries = = 
 In the early Middle Ages , Scotland was overwhelmingly an oral society and education was verbal rather than literary . Fuller sources for Ireland of the same period suggest that there were filidh , who acted as poets , musicians and historians , often attached to the court of a lord or king , and who passed on their knowledge in Gaelic to the next generation . After the " de @-@ <unk> " of the Scottish court from the twelfth century , a less highly regarded order of bards took over these functions and they would continue to act in a similar role in the Highlands and Islands into the eighteenth century . They often trained in bardic schools , of which a few , such as the one run by the MacMhuirich dynasty , who were bards to the Lord of the Isles , existed in Scotland and a larger number in Ireland , until they were suppressed from the seventeenth century . Much of their work was never written down and what survives was only recorded from the sixteenth century . Evidence of formal schooling is largely only preserved in place names . 
 The establishment of Christianity from the sixth century brought Latin to Scotland as a scholarly and written language . Monasteries served as major repositories of knowledge and education , often running schools and providing a small , educated and overwhelmingly male , elite , who were essential to create and read documents in a largely illiterate society . Literary life revolved around the contemplation of texts and the copying of manuscripts . Libraries were of great importance to monastic communities . The one at Iona may have been exceptional , but it demonstrates that the monks were part of the mainstream of European Christian culture . 
 = = Schools = = 
 In the High Middle Ages , new sources of education arose . Choir and grammar schools were designed to train priests , with an emphasis respectively on music and Latin grammar . The reorganisation of the church that began in the reign of David I ( 1124 – 53 ) gave the church a clearer diocesan and parochial structure , meaning that the seats of sheriffdoms , such as Perth , received schools that were usually under monastic patrons . Early examples of grammar schools include the High School of Glasgow in 1124 and the High School of Dundee in 1239 . These were usually attached to cathedrals or a collegiate church . The newly created diocesan chancellors may have had authority over cathedral schools and schoolmasters within their diocese . 
 The new religious orders that became a major feature of Scottish monastic life in this period also brought new educational possibilities and the need to train larger numbers of monks . Benedictine and Augustinian foundations probably had almonry schools , charity schools using funds from the almoner to provide a type of bursary to educate young boys , who might enter the priesthood . At the Cluniac Paisley Abbey , secular chaplains were employed as schoolmasters . Some monasteries , including the Cistercian abbey at Kinloss , Sweetheart Abbey and Beauly , opened their doors to a wider range of students to teach the sons of gentlemen . St Andrews , which was both the seat of a bishop and the site of a major Augustinian foundation , had both a grammar school , under the archdeacon , and a song school , under the priory . The foundation of over 100 collegiate churches of secular priests between 1450 and the Reformation would have necessitated the training of large numbers of choristers . Sometimes , as at <unk> , they were taught both music and grammar . Dominican friars were noted for their educational achievements and were usually located in urban centres , probably teaching grammar , as at Glasgow and Ayr . The number and size of these schools seems to have expanded rapidly from the 1380s . By the end of the Middle Ages , grammar schools could be found in all the main burghs and some small towns . 
 Educational provision was probably much weaker in rural areas , but there were petty or reading schools that provided an elementary education . There was also the development of private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers . Sometimes these developed into " household schools " , that may also have catered to neighbours and kin , as well as the sons of the laird 's household , which is known to have happened at Huntly . All these schools were almost exclusively aimed at boys . Girls of noble families were taught in nunneries such as Elcho , Aberdour and Haddington . By the end of the fifteenth century Edinburgh also had schools for girls , sometimes described as " sewing schools " , whose name probably indicates one of their major functions . Although reading may also have been taught in these schools , the students were probably taught by lay women or nuns . 
 There is documentary evidence for about 100 schools of these different kinds before the Reformation . Most of the schoolmasters of these schools were clergy , and also acted as chaplains of religious foundations , hospitals or private chaplains of noblemen to supplement their merge incomes . To some extent , all education was controlled by different branches of the church , but towards the end of the period there was an increasing lay interest . This sometimes resulted in conflict , as between the burgh of Aberdeen and the cathedral chancellor , when the former appointed a lay graduate as schoolmaster in 1538 , and when a married man was appointed to the similar post in Perth . Education began to widen beyond the training of the clergy , particularly as lay lawyers began to emerge as a profession , with a humanist emphasis on educating the future ruling class for their duties . The growing humanist @-@ inspired emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496 , thought to have been steered through parliament by the Keeper of the Privy Seal William Elphinstone , Bishop of Aberdeen , which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn " perfyct Latyne " . All this resulted in an increase in literacy , which was largely concentrated among a male and wealthy elite , with perhaps 60 per cent of the nobility being literate by the end of the period . 
 = = Universities = = 
 From the end of the eleventh century , universities had been founded across Europe , developing as semi @-@ autonomous centres of learning , often teaching theology , mathematics , law and medicine . Until the fifteenth century , those Scots who wished to attend university had to travel to England , to Oxford or Cambridge , or to the Continent . Just over 1 @,@ 000 students have been identified as doing so between the twelfth century and 1410 . Among the destinations Paris was the most important , but also Cologne , Orléans , Wittenberg , Louvain and Vienna . 
 Among these travelling scholars , the most important intellectual figure was John Duns Scotus ( c . 1266 – 1308 ) , who studied at Oxford , Cambridge and Paris . He probably died at Cologne in 1308 , after becoming a major influence on late medieval religious thought . After the outbreak of the Wars of Independence ( 1296 – 1357 ) , with occasional exceptions under safe conduct , English universities were closed to Scots and continental universities became more significant . Some Scottish scholars became teachers in continental universities . At Paris , this included John de <unk> ( died c . 1355 ) and Walter Wardlaw ( died c . 1387 ) in the 1340s and 1350s , William de Tredbrum in the 1380s and Laurence de Lindores ( 1372 – 1437 ) in the early 1500s . The continued movement to other universities produced a school of Scottish nominalists at Paris in the early sixteenth century , of which John Mair ( 1467 – 1550 ) was a member . He had probably studied at a Scottish grammar school and then Cambridge , before moving to Paris where he matriculated in 1493 . 
 This situation was transformed by the founding of St John 's College , St Andrews in 1418 . Henry Wardlaw , bishop of St. Andrews , petitioned the anti @-@ Pope Benedict XIII during the later stages of the Great Western Schism , when Scotland was one of his few remaining supporters . Wardlaw argued that Scottish scholars in other universities were being persecuted for their loyalty to the anti @-@ Pope . St Salvator 's College was added to St. Andrews in 1450 . The other great bishoprics followed , with the University of Glasgow being founded in 1451 and the King 's College , Aberdeen in 1495 . Both were also papal foundations , by Nicholas V and Alexander VI respectively . St Leonard 's College was added at St. Andrews in 1511 . St. Andrews was deliberately modelled on Paris , and although Glasgow adopted the statues of the University of Bologna , there , like Aberdeen , there was an increasing Parisian influence , partly because all its early regents had been educated in Paris . Initially , these institutions were designed for the training of clerics , but they would increasingly be used by laymen who began to challenge the clerical monopoly of administrative posts in government and law . They provided only basic degrees . Those wanting to study for the more advanced degrees that were common amongst European scholars still needed to go to universities in other countries . As a result , Scottish scholars continued to visit the Continent and returned to English universities after they reopened to Scots in the late fifteenth century . 
 By the fifteenth century , beginning in northern Italy , universities had become strongly influenced by humanist thinking . This put an emphasis on classical authors , questioning some of the accepted certainties of established thinking and manifesting itself in the teaching of new subjects , particularly through the medium of the Greek language . However , in this period , Scottish universities largely had a Latin curriculum , designed for the clergy , civil and common lawyers . They did not teach the Greek that was fundamental to the new humanist scholarship , focusing on metaphysics and putting a largely unquestioning faith in the works of Aristotle , whose authority would be challenged in the Renaissance . Towards the end of the fifteenth century , a humanist influence was becoming more evident . A major figure was Archibald Whitelaw , a teacher at St. Andrews and Cologne who later became a tutor to the young James III and served as royal secretary from 1462 to 1493 . By 1497 , the humanist and historian Hector Boece , born in Dundee and who had studied at Paris , returned to become the first principal at the new university of Aberdeen . In 1518 Mair returned to Scotland to become Principal of the University of Glasgow . He transferred to St. Andrews in 1523 and in 1533 he was made Provost of St Salvator 's College . While in Scotland his students included John Knox and George Buchanan . These international contacts helped integrate Scotland into a wider European scholarly world and would be one of the most important ways in which the new ideas of Humanism were brought into Scottish intellectual life in the sixteenth century . 
 = The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History = 
 The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History is a non @-@ fiction book about the American animated television series The Simpsons . It was written by John Ortved , and first published in October 2009 by Faber and Faber . In the United Kingdom , the book is called Simpsons Confidential : The uncensored , totally unauthorised history of the world 's greatest TV show by the people that made it . The book is an oral history of the show , and concentrates particularly on the writers and producers of the show . The book includes entire chapters devoted to key figures such as creator Matt Groening and James L. Brooks and Sam Simon , who helped develop the series . According to National Public Radio reviewer Linda Holmes , " Ortved 's thesis , essentially , is that lots of people are responsible for the success of The Simpsons , and their creator , Matt Groening , has too often been viewed as the sole source to the detriment of others who also deserve to be praised . " 
 In 2007 , John Ortved wrote an article for Vanity Fair titled " Simpson Family Values " . Producers of the show , including Groening , Brooks and Simon , chose not to cooperate in the project . Ortved believes that the reason was because " were upset [ that ] the myth of The Simpsons would be challenged . " Shortly after the article was published , an agent suggested that Ortved write a full book . The producers again decided not to participate , and , according to Ortved , Brooks asked current and former Simpsons employees not to talk to Ortved . However , the book does include portions of interviews that several figures did with other sources . Ortved did interview a number of sources for the book , including Hank Azaria , a cast member of the show since the second season , Fox Broadcasting Company owner Rupert Murdoch and former writer Conan O 'Brien . 
 Reviews of the book were mostly positive , with most reviewers commenting that the book was well researched and provided a solid history of the show . Critics felt that the final chapters , in which Ortved gives his opinion of the current state of the show , were out of place and did not fit in with the rest of the book . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2007 , John Ortved wrote an article for Vanity Fair titled " Simpson Family Values " . It was an oral history of The Simpsons , featuring interviews with several of the crew and cast members . According to Ortved , the producers of The Simpsons decided not to cooperate and be interviewed for the project because they had heard that he was asking questions about Sam Simon . Simon , one of the first executive producers of the show , had left after the fourth season after clashing with creator Matt Groening and executive producer James L. Brooks . Ortved believes that the producers " were upset [ that ] the myth of The Simpsons would be challenged . " He still wrote the story , without the approval of the Simpsons producers . 
 Shortly after the article was published , an agent suggested that Ortved write a full book . They put together a proposal and shopped it to several publishers , before being signed by Faber and Faber . According to Ortved , " When word of this got out , Brooks sent a letter to every current Simpsons employee , and all the former ones he thought mattered , asking them not to speak to me . The writers ’ agents sent denial after denial for interview requests and eventually stopped responding altogether . " He added , " There was one ' D 'oh ! ' in James L. Brooks and the Gracie Films master plan : Many people don ’ t like James L. Brooks . [ ... ] The book I ended up writing quotes more than 75 sources — some of them Simpsons staffers , former and current , who opened up because they considered his and Matt Groening ’ s attempt to stomp on my project very ' un @-@ Simpsons . ' " 
 Ortved decided to write the book as an oral history because he found that every person interviewed had a different perspective on the events . His decision was " reinforced " when he found out that the producers of the show would not cooperate . 
 = = Content = = 
 According to National Public Radio reviewer Linda Holmes , " Ortved 's thesis , essentially , is that lots of people are responsible for the success of The Simpsons , and their creator , Matt Groening , has too often been viewed as the sole source to the detriment of others who also deserve to be praised . " The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History is an oral history of the show , examining its beginnings , rise to success , impact on pop culture , as well as the people behind the show , including the animators , writers and producers . The content consists mostly of quotations from various figures , which are tied together by comments from Ortved . The book includes entire chapters devoted to key figures such as Matt Groening , James L. Brooks , Sam Simon and Conan O 'Brien . The book 's foreword was written by Canadian author Douglas Coupland . The final chapters of the book consist mostly of commentary from Ortved , in which he states that he believes that quality of the show has declined since its early years . 
 = = = Interviews = = = 
 Ortved interviewed a number of sources for the book , including main cast member Hank Azaria , former director Brad Bird , former supervising director Gábor Csupó and former writer O 'Brien . Groening , Brooks and Simon refused to participate in the book , or be interviewed by Ortved . However , the book does include portions of interviews that they did with other sources . According to Ortved , most of the participants " had stories to tell , or axes to grind , " or are " too successful to care . " Research and interviews for both the book and Vanity Fair article were conducted between January 2007 and May 2008 . Ortved commented that the person he most would have liked to interview was Dan Castellaneta , the voice of Homer Simpson . Rupert Murdoch , the owner of the Fox Broadcasting Company , agreed to be interviewed , and reportedly told Ortved " Those creative types , they 're always looking to pick a fight . " He also interviewed figures such as Fox CEO Barry Diller and guest stars Ricky Gervais , Art Spiegelman and Tom Wolfe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of the book were mostly positive . Linda Holmes of National Public Radio felt that " most of Ortved 's work provides a solid basic history . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly gave the book a " B + " , writing , " you have to admire all the work that went into this unauthorized history . " He noted that he " felt a little bad afterward for the central players who got sucker punched . [ ... ] The subsequent testimony about the empire Groening created is contentious and mesmerizing . It 's also conflicting and compromised , since some of the biggest <unk> of all did not talk to Ortved . [ ... ] The reader should be wary when sources assert that Groening is little more than an affable frontman for the show or that Brooks sometimes wielded his power imperiously : The guys aren 't there to defend themselves . In most cases , though , Ortved amasses quotes from many sources to establish such points , so the negative stuff doesn 't seem gratuitous . " Michael C. <unk> of Newsarama described the book as a " very effective , very worthwhile read " but felt that Ortved 's " editorializing " was " probably the most distracting element of the book . " Michael Hingston of See Magazine called the book " a well @-@ told patchwork that shines formidable light on the show " and gave it three and a half stars . However , he felt the book was released prematurely and should have been published after the end of the show , also criticizing Ortved 's narration and the lack of quotes from Matt Groening or James L. Brooks . Kyle Ryan of The A.V. Club pointed out that the book has " numerous factual errors " that " may only trip the alarms of hardcore fans , but even casual readers may be put off by the book 's redundancy . " He concluded that despite flaws , the " insight into its routines and eccentric personalities can 't help but fascinate . " 
 Ryan Bigge of The Toronto Star felt that Ortved 's " diligence and research is faultless , and [ he ] has worked hard to avoid writing another insider @-@ y true @-@ fans @-@ only look at the show . Still , certain chunks of the book are unlikely to appeal to casual Simpsons viewers . [ .. ] By mixing journalism about yellow people with a bit of yellow journalism , Ortved provides a tough , necessary look at Homer Simpson 's odyssey that would make Kent Brockman proud . " 
 Bryan Appleyard of The Sunday Times criticized the format of the book , writing that it was " alternately engrossing and infuriating book [ ... ] It is infuriating because of a fatal structural decision taken by the author and / or his publisher to include long quotations from interviewees as breaks in the text . This destroys narrative coherence and , for much of the time , makes reading a chore . " Appleyard concluded that it is " an important and controversial contribution to the ever @-@ expanding scope of Simpsons studies . " 
 Several critics felt that the final chapters , in which Ortved gives his opinion of the current state of the show , were out of place when compared with the rest of the book . Ken Tucker felt Ortved 's " complaints aren 't original or illuminating . " Linda Holmes wrote that " After spending most of the book using actual reporting to flesh out the facts , Ortved largely turns the floor over to himself for the part of the book in which he describes the creative decline of the show and tries to figure out whose fault it is by not infrequently simply declaring , among other things , which episodes are good and which are bad , sometimes without explaining himself at all . " Michael C. <unk> felt that Ortved 's criticism of the later seasons was " disconcerting " , noting that " It 's not that he 's wrong , but it seems unnecessary and at times even petty when cast against his own fawning over the undeniably massive influence of the show on current pop culture and comedy . " 
 = = Other editions = = 
 = Team Homer = 
 " Team Homer " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 7 , 1996 . In the episode , Homer starts a bowling team with Moe , Apu , and Otto . When Mr. Burns discovers the team was funded with his money , he insists on joining . Meanwhile , Bart 's " Down with homework " T @-@ shirt incites a student riot that leads to the implementation of a uniform dress code . 
 The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Mark Kirkland . Scully came up with the idea for it when he went bowling one day . The episode features cultural references to Mad magazine and the film Caddyshack . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , and was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Unable to afford the $ 500 registration fee to join a bowling league , Homer and his friends ( Moe , Apu , and Otto ) go to Mr. Burns for a sponsorship . Homer sneaks into Burns office , where he finds an anesthetized Burns ( who mistakes him for the Pillsbury Doughboy ) . Homer takes this opportunity to get Burns to sign the check . Meanwhile , at school , Bart 's " Down with homework " T @-@ shirt incites a student riot , and as a result , Principal Skinner forces all students to wear uniforms in order to prevent it from happening again . 
 Back at the bowling alley , Homer and his friends enter the bowling league competition , calling themselves the Pin Pals . They beat three teams before moving up into second place in their league . Meanwhile , Burns recovers from his stupor and discovers the check he wrote to Homer . Burns surprises everyone when he reveals he not only isn 't mad but also wants to join the team ( replacing Otto in the team ) , but since Burns is a horrible bowler , the team is convinced they will lose the championship . 
 Back at school , Skinner 's dress code <unk> the students until a rainstorm soaks through the uniforms , causing the grey color to be washed out , revealing tie @-@ dye colors that make the playful spirit of the children return . At the bowling alley , before the championship game begin , Burns gives the team new shirts . Two pins away from victory , Burns takes his turn . Otto tips over a vending machine and the vibrations help the Pin Pals win by knocking down the pins . As the team celebrates their win , Burns takes the trophy and keeps it for himself . Cheered on by his teammates , Homer attempts to break into the mansion and recover the trophy ; however , this ends disastrously when the hounds are released and catch Homer a few feet from the gate , mauling him severely . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Mike Scully . He was bowling " a lot " at the time and one day on when he was bowling he came up with the idea for " Team Homer " . The idea for the school plot came later in production when the school that Scully 's children went to was thinking of " switching over " to school uniforms . Both Scully and his children were against it so he decided to put it in the episode . 
 Former show runner of The Simpsons David Mirkin thought the episode was " really fun " because there were " lots of characters " in it and it featured " lots of terrific animation " . Mirkin liked that viewers could see the different characters " team up " and how they pair off . " It 's kind of cool to see them hang around like this . Particularly Homer 's group which has some nice emotion and they really comes together as a group , " Mirkin commented . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland . When he first read the script , he thought the challenge of this episode was that the bowling theme had already been covered in the season one episode " Life on the Fast Lane " . Since it had been done before , Kirkland felt pressure to make the bowling alley look " really good " . Kirkland and his team of The Simpsons animators at Film Roman all went over to a local bowling alley and had lunch . They checked out the whole alley for inspiration and drew sketches . " Life on the Fast Lane " deals with Marge becoming infatuated with Jacques , a French bowling instructor . Mirkin points out that Jacques makes a brief appearance in this episode , but without a speaking role . Also appearing with non @-@ speaking roles are Mindy Simmons , Lurleen Lumpkin and Princess Kashmir , the three women who almost broke up Marge and Homer 's marriage . 
 Mirkin remembered the episode " very fondly " because when it was finished , the staff got customized Simpsons bowling balls , bowling bags , and Pin Pal shirts as gifts . Scully said the bowling balls were " really cool " because they were yellow and had the Simpsons logo on them . 
 Doris Grau , script supervisor for the show and voice of Lunchlady Doris , died on December 30 , 1995 , from respiratory failure at a hospital in Los Angeles , California . " Team Homer " was one of the last episodes to feature her voice , and included a dedication to her . 
 In one scene , Homer tells Marge : " We were so close to winning the championship . Now , thanks to Burns , it 's never going to happen . And I spent so much time building that trophy case . " The scene then cuts to the trophy case with an Academy Award in it that Homer has stolen . In the original Fox broadcast , the name in the inscription on the Academy Award was <unk> S. Ngor . In American syndication and the season seven DVD , the name was changed to Don Ameche ( who had won for Cocoon ) . Ngor , who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the 1984 film The Killing Fields , was murdered on February 25 , 1996 , between the original and the syndicated broadcast . Producers were concerned the syndicated episode would imply Homer had murdered Ngor to steal the statue . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Bart and Milhouse buy an issue of Mad magazine . Bart also puts a Mad iron @-@ on reading " Down with Homework " on one of his T @-@ shirts , which causes controversy at school . Milhouse is shocked to see the new school uniforms , and his jaw drops , a " Woody Allen @-@ esque " type of joke . The final bowling scene is similar to the final golfing scene in the 1980 film Caddyshack . Homer references the song " Mr. <unk> " by Styx . Moe 's unsuccessful attempt to sideline Mr. Burns by hitting his leg with a crowbar is done in a similar manner to Shane <unk> 's attempt in 1994 to sideline figure skater Nancy Kerrigan by physical assault . When Martin and Lisa are modeling the new grey uniforms , the song playing in the background is " Spanish Flea " , by Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass . , which had previously appeared in the third season episode " The Otto Show " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Team Homer " finished 58th in the ratings for the week of January 1 – 7 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 . The episode was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Beverly Hills , 90210 , and Married ... With Children . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It was named the fifth best episode of the show by MSNBC . They praised how the episode utilized Burns 's physical weaknesses for laughs , and Homer 's line ; " I guess some people never change . Or , they quickly change and then quickly change back . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said that to his surprise , " the dress code plot works the best " . He liked the mockery of Mad magazine and the " overemphasis on the way it disrupts the educational process " . Jacobson thought the bowling plot had plenty of " nice moments " too , " and these add up to a solid show . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be when Homer ends a phone conversation with the " highly quotable " line , " I gotta go . My damn wiener kids are listening . " The website concluded its review by giving the episode a grade of A − . Mirkin described the episode as " excellent " , and praised Scully 's " great " script . 
 The episode received criticism from the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , who said that " Team Homer " is one of their least favorite episodes . They thought the school uniform plot was " a lot more satisfying than the bowling story " They added that the scene where Martin and Lisa model the new uniforms is the highlight of the episode . 
 = Mortal Kombat = 
 Mortal Kombat is a video game franchise originally developed by Midway Games ' Chicago studio in 1992 . Following Midway 's bankruptcy , the Mortal Kombat development team was acquired by Warner Bros. and turned into NetherRealm Studios . Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment currently owns the rights of the franchise and rebooted it in 2011 . 
 The development of the first game was originally based on an idea that Ed Boon and John Tobias had of making a video game starring Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , but as that idea fell through , a fantasy @-@ themed fighting game titled Mortal Kombat was created instead . The original game has spawned many sequels and has been spun off into several action @-@ adventure games , films ( animated and live @-@ action with its own sequel ) , and television series ( animated and live @-@ action ) . Other spin @-@ offs include comic book series , a card game and a live @-@ action tour . Along with Capcom 's Street Fighter and Bandai Namco 's Tekken , Mortal Kombat has become one of the most successful fighting franchises in the history of video games . 
 The series has a reputation for high levels of bloody violence , including , most notably , its Fatalities ( finishing moves , requiring a sequence of button inputs to perform ) . The Fatalities , in part , led to the creation of the ESRB video game rating system . The series name itself is also known for using the letter " K " in place of " C " for the hard C sound , thus intentionally misspelling the word " combat " , as well as other words with the hard C sound within later games in the series . Early games in the series were also noted for its realistic digitized sprites ( which differentiated it from its contemporaries ' hand @-@ drawn sprites ) and an extensive use of palette swapping to create new characters . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The original three games and their updates , Mortal Kombat , Mortal Kombat II , Mortal Kombat 3 , Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 and Mortal Kombat Trilogy , were styled in a 2D fighting fashion . The first two of them were played in the arcades with a joystick and five buttons : high punch , low punch , high kick , low kick , and block . Mortal Kombat 3 and its updates added a sixth " run " button . Characters in the early Mortal Kombat games play virtually identically to one another , with the only major differences being their special moves . Through the 1990s , the developer and publisher Midway Games would keep their single styled fighting moves with four attack buttons for a different array of punches and kicks and blocks . Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance changed this by differentiating characters normal moves and even giving them multiple fighting styles . Beginning in Deadly Alliance and until Mortal Kombat : Deception , the characters would have three fighting styles per character : two unarmed styles , and one weapon style . Few exceptions to this arose in Mortal Kombat : Armageddon , such as monster @-@ like boss characters like Moloch and Onaga who would have only one fighting style . While most of the styles used in the series are based on real martial arts , some are entirely fictitious . Goro 's fighting styles , for example , are designed to take advantage of the fact that he has four arms . For Armageddon , fighting styles were reduced to a maximum of two per character ( generally one hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat style and one weapon style ) due to the sheer number of playable characters . Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe dropped the multiple fighting style trend altogether in favor of giving each character a much wider variety of special moves , but some characters still use multiple fighting styles . 2011 's Mortal Kombat returned to a single 2D fighting plane although characters are rendered in 3D ; unlike previous MK games , each of four buttons on the game controller represents an attack linked to a corresponding limb . 
 According to Mortal Kombat co @-@ creator Ed Boon , " since the beginning , one of the things that 's separated us from other fighting games is the crazy moves we 've put in it , like fireballs and all the magic moves , so to speak . " When asked if Capcom 's Street Fighter series would ever do a crossover game with Mortal Kombat , Street Fighter producer Yoshinori Ono called Mortal Kombat a very different serious game from Street Fighter fun silly fantasy style . Capcom 's senior director of communications compared Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat by asking if the interviewer preferred the " precision and depth " of Street Fighter or the " gore and comedy " of Mortal Kombat ; he also stated that the Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat rivalry was considered similar to the Coke and Pepsi rivalry in the 1990s . Senior producer of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe , Hans Lo , himself also called Street Fighter " a little more <unk> fantasy " in comparison to Mortal Kombat . In 2013 , Boon named the hypothetical " <unk> " as his dream crossover game . In 2014 , Boon said his team has remained in touch with Capcom , but no one could resolve the incompatibility problem of Mortal Kombat being much more brutal than Street Fighter . 
 Mortal Kombat : Deception and Mortal Kombat : Armageddon feature " Konquest " , a free @-@ roaming action @-@ adventure mode that significantly expanded on the single @-@ player experience . Both games also include distinct minigame modes such " Chess Kombat " , an action @-@ strategy game similar to Archon . Two other bonus minigames , " Puzzle Kombat " inspired by Puzzle Fighter and " Motor Kombat " inspired by Mario Kart , feature super deformed versions of Mortal Kombat characters . The games also contain various unlockable content and hidden " cheats " . 
 = = = Finishing moves = = = 
 A defining and best @-@ known feature of the Mortal Kombat series is its finishing move system called Fatality . An original idea behind it was to give gamers a free hit at the end of the fight . The basic Fatalities are finishing moves that allow the victorious characters to end a match in a special way by murdering their defeated , defenseless opponents in a gruesome manner , usually in the predefined ways exclusive for the given character . The only exception from this is Mortal Kombat : Armageddon , which instead features the Kreate @-@ A @-@ Fatality , allowing the players to perform their own Fatalities by conducting a series of violent moves chosen from a pool that is common for all characters . 
 Other finishing moves in the various Mortal Kombat games include <unk> ( introduced in Mortal Kombat 3 ) turning a victor into an animal to violently finish off the opponent ; Brutality ( introduced in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 ) which is bashing an opponent into pieces with a long combo of hits ; and Stage Fatalities / Death Traps ( introduced in the original Mortal Kombat Pit Stage , and later made more difficult in Mortal Kombat II by requiring specific and different button sequences to be pressed ) utilizing parts of certain stages to execute a lethal finishing move . Mortal Kombat : Deception added the Hara @-@ Kiri , a self @-@ Fatality allowing the losers to engage in a suicide @-@ based finishing move ( enabling a possible race between both players to see if the winning player can finish off the losing player before the losing character can kill himself or herself first ) . 
 There are also some non @-@ violent finishing moves in the series . Friendship moves , introduced in Mortal Kombat II and involving displays of friendship towards the enemy , instead of killing , were made as a comical response to the attention the series gathered due to its violent content . A Fatality similar to Friendship is Babality , also introduced in MKII and turning the opponent into a baby . Mortal Kombat 3 saw Mercy , where the victor restores a minimal amount of the opponent 's health bar and the fight then resumes ; performing Mercy first is required to enable Animality . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series takes place in a fictional universe consisting of eighteen surviving realms which , according to in @-@ game backstories , were created by the Elder Gods . The Mortal Kombat : Deception manual described six of the realms as : " Earthrealm , home to such legendary heroes as Liu Kang , Kung Lao , Sonya Blade , Johnny Cage , and Jax , and also under the protection of the Thunder God Raiden ; Netherrealm , the fiery depths of which are inhospitable to all but the most vile , a realm of demons and shadowy warriors such as Quan Chi and Noob Saibot ; Outworld , a realm of constant strife which Emperor Shao Kahn claims as his own ; Seido , the Realm of Order , whose inhabitants prize structure and order above all else ; the Realm of Chaos , whose inhabitants do not abide by any rules whatsoever , and where constant turmoil and change are worshipped ; and Edenia , which is known for its beauty , artistic expression , and the longevity of its inhabitants . " The Elder Gods decreed that the denizens of one realm could only conquer another realm by defeating the defending realm 's greatest warriors in ten consecutive Mortal Kombat tournaments . 
 The first Mortal Kombat game takes place in Earthrealm ( Earth ) where seven different warriors with their own reasons for entering participated in the tournament with the eventual prize being the continued freedom of their realm , threatened with a takeover by Outworld . Among the established warriors were Liu Kang , Johnny Cage and Sonya Blade . With the help of the thunder god Raiden , the Earthrealm warriors were victorious and Liu Kang became the new champion of Mortal Kombat . In Mortal Kombat II , unable to deal with his minion Shang Tsung 's failure , Outworld Emperor Shao Kahn lures the Earthrealm warriors to the Outworld where the Earthrealm warriors eventually defeat Shao Kahn . By the time of Mortal Kombat 3 , Shao Kahn revives Edenia 's ( now a part of his Outworld domain ) former queen Sindel in Earthrealm , combining it with Outworld as well . He then attempts to invade Earthrealm but is ultimately defeated by the Earthrealm warriors again . After Kahn 's defeat , Edenia was freed from Kahn 's grasp and returned to a peaceful realm , ruled by Princess Kitana . The following game , Mortal Kombat 4 , features the former elder god Shinnok attempting to conquer the realms and attempting to kill the thunder god Raiden . However , he is also defeated by the Earthrealm warriors . 
 In Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance , the evil sorcerers Quan Chi and Shang Tsung join forces to conquer the realms . By Mortal Kombat : Deception , after several fights , the sorcerers emerge victorious having killed most of <unk> ' warriors until Raiden steps forth to oppose them . The Dragon King Onaga , who had been freed by Reptile at the end of Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance , had deceived Shujinko into searching for six pieces of Kamidogu , the source of Onaga 's power . Onaga then confronted the alliance of Raiden , Shang Tsung , and Quan Chi and thus obtained Quan Chi 's amulet , the final piece of his power . Only a few warriors remained to combat against the Dragon King and his forces . Shujinko eventually triumphed over the Dragon King and removed his threat to the Mortal Kombat universe . 
 In Mortal Kombat : Armageddon the catastrophe known as Armageddon starts . Centuries before the first Mortal Kombat , Queen Delia foretold the realms would be destroyed because the power of all warriors from all the realms would rise to such greatness it would overwhelm and destabilize the realms , triggering an all @-@ destructive chain of events . King Argus had his sons , Taven , and <unk> , put into incubation who would one day be awakened to save the realms from Armageddon by defeating a <unk> known as Blaze . In the end , however , Shao Kahn is the one who defeats Blaze , causing Armageddon . 
 In Mortal Kombat ( 2011 ) , it is revealed that the battle between the warriors of the six realms culminated into only two survivors : Shao Kahn and Raiden . Badly beaten , Raiden had only one last move he could make to prevent Shao Kahn from claiming the power of Blaze . He sends last @-@ ditch visions of the entire course of the Mortal Kombat timeline to himself in the past right before the tenth Mortal Kombat tournament ( first game ) . This transfer of information to his former self causes a rift in time , causing a new " reboot " timeline to be introduced that splits off from the original Armageddon timeline , with a new outcome of Mortal Kombat history to be written . But this story leads to even worse unforeseen events . It ends with many of the main game characters dying at the hands of Queen Sindel and Raiden accidentally killing Liu Kang in self @-@ defense . Eventually , the Elder Gods aid Raiden in killing Shao Kahn and saving Earthrealm . But as the scene goes on it is later revealed that this was all a plan by Shinnok and Quan Chi . 
 Mortal Kombat X sees Shinnok and Quan Chi enacting their plan , leading an army of undead revenants of those that were killed in Shao Kahn 's invasion against the realms . A team of warriors led by Raiden , Johnny Cage , and Sonya Blade oppose Shinnok , and in the ensuing battle , Shinnok is imprisoned , Quan Chi escapes , and various warriors are resurrected and freed from Shinnok 's thrall . Twenty @-@ five years later , Quan Chi resurfaces and allies himself with the insect @-@ like D 'Vorah in manipulating events that lead to Shinnok 's release . Though Quan Chi is killed by a vengeful Scorpion in the process , Shinnok resumes his assault against the realms . After a grueling , protracted battle , Shinnok is defeated by Cassandra Cage representing the next generation of Earthrealm 's warriors . With both Quan Chi and Shinnok gone , the undead revenants of Liu Kang and Kitana assume control of the Netherrealm and Lord Raiden now protects the Earthrealm not defensively but offensively with the help of the remaining revenants . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The series features scores of player characters ( 64 as of 2012 ) , including Baraka , Cassie Cage , Cyrax , Ermac , Goro , Jade , Jax Briggs , Johnny Cage , Kabal , Kano , Kenshi , Kitana , Kung Lao , Kurtis Stryker , Liu Kang , Mileena , Motaro , Nightwolf , Noob Saibot , Quan Chi , Raiden , Rain , Reptile , Scorpion , Sektor , Shang Tsung , Shao Kahn , Sheeva , Shinnok , Sindel , Smoke , Sonya Blade , and Sub @-@ Zero . Among them are Earth 's humans and cyborgs , good and evil deities , and denizens of Outworld and other realms . There are also some guest and crossover characters , such as several DC Universe heroes and villains , as well as Freddy Krueger from A Nightmare on Elm Street , Kratos from God of War , the Predator from Predator , Jason Voorhees from Friday the 13th , and Alien ( Xenomorph ) from Alien . 
 = = Development history = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Mortal Kombat started development in 1991 with only four people : Ed Boon , John Tobias , John Vogel and Dan Forden . In 2009 , Boon said : " The first Mortal Kombat game was 4 guys , literally , one programmer , myself ( Boon ) , two graphics guys ( Tobias and Vogel ) , and a sound guy ( Forden ) was the entire team , literally . " Originally , Boon and Tobias were approached to create a video game adaptation of the 1992 film Universal Soldier starring martial arts film actor Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , with a digitized version of the action star fighting villains . Intending to make a game " a lot more hard edge , a little bit more serious , a little bit more like Enter the Dragon or Bloodsport " than Street Fighter II 's cartoon fantasy style , Boon and Tobias decided to continue their project even after the deal to use the Bloodsport license fell through . One of their own characters , Johnny Cage , became " a spoof on the whole Van Damme situation . " 
 John Tobias said that his inspirations for the game 's story and characters came from the Chinese mythology and some of the stories and rumored events about the Shaolin monks . Regarding the film Big Trouble in Little China , Tobias wrote that although this movie " kind of Americanized my obsession for supernatural kung fu films from China , it was not my biggest influence . My biggest influences came from Tsui Hark films -- Zu Warriors & The Swordsman . We had to get them from bootleggers in Chicago 's Chinatown . " Tobias ' writing and artistic input on the series ended in 1997 . Fifteen years later , he said : " I knew exactly what I was going to do with a future story . A few years ago I [ wrote ] a sort of sequel to the first MK film and an advancement to the game 's mythological roots . The goal was to not runaway from what came before with a retelling , but to move the themes forward . I did it for fun as an exercise in screenwriting , but it felt good to get that out of my system . " 
 Ed Boon recalled that for six out of the eight months while they were in production of the original Mortal Kombat , " nobody could come up with a name nobody didn 't hate . " Some of the names suggested included " <unk> " , " Dragon Attack " , " Death Blow " and just " Fatality " . Someone had written down " combat " on the drawing board for the names in Boon 's office and then someone wrote a K over the C , according to Boon , " just to be kind of weird . " Steve Ritchie , a pinball designer at that time , was sitting in Boon 's office and saw the word " Kombat " and said to Boon , ' Why don 't you name it Mortal Kombat ? ' and that name " just stuck . " Since then , the series uses the letter " K " in place of " C " for various words containing the hard C sound . According to Boon , during the MK games ' development they usually spell the words correctly and only " <unk> it " when one of the developers points out they should do it . 
 = = = Graphics = = = 
 The characters of the original Mortal Kombat and its initial sequels were created using digitized sprites mostly based on filmed actors , as opposed to drawn graphics . Early Mortal Kombat games were known for their extensive use of palette swap , a practice of re @-@ coloring certain sprites to appear as different characters which was used for the ninja characters . In fact , many of the most popular characters have originated as simple palette swaps . In the very first game , the male ninja fighters were essentially the same character ; only the colors of their attire , fighting stance , and special techniques indicated the difference . Later games added other ninjas based on the same model , as well as several female ninja color swap characters initially also using just one base model ( beginning with Kitana in Mortal Kombat II ) . All of them gradually became very different characters in the following installments of the series . 
 Mortal Kombat 4 brought the series into 3D , replacing the digitized fighters of previous games with polygon models . The team switched from digitized actors to motion capture technology . 
 = = = Hidden content = = = 
 Mortal Kombat included secret characters , secret games , and other Easter eggs . For example , Mortal Kombat 3 includes a hidden game of Galaga and there is a hidden game of Pong in Mortal Kombat II . Many extras in the series have only been accessible through very challenging , demanding , and sometimes coincidental requirements . The Sega Mega Drive / Genesis versions contains some unique eggs , such as " <unk> " . The Sega Mega @-@ CD version also contained an additional code ( known as the " Dad 's Code " ) , which changed the names of the fighters to that of characters from the classic comedy series Dad 's Army . Popular characters of Reptile and Jade were originally introduced as hidden enemies , becoming playable after returning in subsequent games . 
 Some Easter eggs originated from in @-@ jokes between members of the development team . One example is " Toasty " , which found its way into the game in the form of a small image of sound designer Dan Forden , who would appear in the corner of the screen during gameplay ( after performing an uppercut ) and yell the phrase " Toasty ! " This egg was also the key to unlocking the hidden character Smoke when it happened in the Portal stage . In Mortal Kombat 4 , Forden would say " Toasty ! 3D ! " after Scorpion did his burn Fatality , a reference to the fact that it is the first 3D game of the series . " Toasty ! " is also found in Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks , appearing randomly after the character pulls off a chain of hits , though the picture of Forden was removed for that title , but brought back for the 2011 Mortal Kombat game . 
 Yet another private joke was the hidden character Noob Saibot , who has appeared in various versions of the game starting with Mortal Kombat II . The character 's name derived from two of the series ' creators ' surnames , Ed Boon and John Tobias , spelled backwards . In addition , a counter for <unk> on the game 's audits screen ( <unk> being short for error macros ) , was generally considered by some players to be a reference to a hidden character . The development team decided to turn the rumor into reality , introducing Ermac in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 as an unlockable secret character . The character <unk> , introduced in Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance , is a tribute to Carlos Pesina , who played Raiden in MK and MKII and has served as a motion capture actor for subsequent titles in the series . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = = Fighting games = = = = 
 The original Mortal Kombat game was released for arcade machines during October 1992 , having since been ported to several console and home computer systems by Probe Software and released by Acclaim Entertainment . The sequel , Mortal Kombat II , was released for arcades in 1993 , featuring an increased roster and improved graphics and gameplay , then ported to the numerous home systems in 1993 @-@ 1995 by Probe Entertainment and Sculptured Software , released again by Acclaim ; it was rereleased in 2007 for the PlayStation 3 . Mortal Kombat 3 followed in 1995 in both arcade and home versions . MK3 got two updates which expanded the number of characters and other features from the game : Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 , published that same year , and Mortal Kombat Trilogy the next year . The following game , Mortal Kombat 4 , was released in 1997 , marked the jump of the series to 3D rendered graphics instead of the series ' previously staple digitized 2D graphics . Mortal Kombat 4 was ported to the PlayStation , Nintendo 64 and PC . An update of <unk> titled Mortal Kombat Gold was released exclusively for the Dreamcast in 1999 . 
 While to this point Mortal Kombat games were only titled with their installment number , starting with Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance in 2002 , the series ' naming scheme changed to favor the use of sub @-@ titles instead . It was also at this point that the series started being targeted at consoles only , with Mortal Kombat 4 being the last game in the series to ever be released for the arcades . Deadly Alliance was released initially for the Xbox , PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) and GameCube . Deadly Alliance was also the first Mortal Kombat game to feature fully 3D gameplay , where up to Mortal Kombat 4 the gameplay had stayed in a 2D plane ; this trend would continue for the following two games . The Game Boy Advance port titled Mortal Kombat : Tournament Edition was released in 2003 . The next sequel was the 2004 Mortal Kombat : Deception , released for the PS2 , Xbox and GameCube . Its port for the PlayStation Portable , Mortal Kombat : Unchained , was developed by Just Games Interactive in 2006 . Mortal Kombat : Armageddon was published in the same year for the PS2 , Xbox , and in 2007 on the Wii . In 2008 , Midway released the Mortal Kombat Kollection , an anthology of the three then @-@ most recent titles to the main franchise : Mortal Kombat : Deception , Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks , and Mortal Kombat : Armageddon . Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe , a crossover between the Mortal Kombat franchise and DC Universe released in 2008 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 A ninth game in the series , a reboot titled simply Mortal Kombat , was developed by former Midway Games Chicago , now owned by Warner Bros. Games and renamed as NetherRealm Studios . It was first released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in 2011 , and was ported for the PlayStation Vita in 2012 and for the PC Windows in 2013 . A sequel , Mortal Kombat X was released in April 2015 on PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows . 
 Ed Boon has stated that he would like to do an Mortal Kombat / Killer Instinct crossover game for the Xbox One . 
 = = = = Action @-@ adventure games = = = = 
 Besides the fighting games , there are three action titles that work as spin @-@ offs from the Mortal Kombat storyline . Mortal Kombat <unk> : Sub @-@ Zero was released in 1997 for the PlayStation and Nintendo 64 ; its story is focused on the first incarnation character of Sub @-@ Zero and is focused in the timeline of before the first Mortal Kombat game . The next action game was Mortal Kombat : Special Forces released in 2000 for the PlayStation ; it is an action game starring Major Jackson Briggs in his mission to destroy the Black Dragon . Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks was released in 2005 for the PS2 and the Xbox ; starring Liu Kang and Kung Lao and telling an alternate version of the events between the first and second Mortal Kombat games . A similar game titled Mortal Kombat : Fire & Ice , which would star Scorpion and again Sub @-@ Zero , was canceled when Paradox Development ( Midway Studios – Los Angeles ) , the creators of Shaolin Monks , " couldn ’ t do it in time and under budget . " 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 = = = = Films = = = = 
 Mortal Kombat was adapted into two major motion pictures , Mortal Kombat ( 1995 ) , and Mortal Kombat : Annihilation ( 1997 ) , both co @-@ developed by Threshold Entertainment and released by New Line Cinema ( eventual corporate sibling , and later label , of Mortal Kombat rights holder Warner Bros. ) . Neither film was screened for critics prior to theatrical release . The first movie was released on August 18 , 1995 , grossing $ 23 million on its first weekend . Mortal Kombat , despite mixed reviews from critics , became a financial success , eventually grossing $ 70 million in the U.S. ( and over $ 122 million worldwide ) and gaining a cult following from fans of the series while jump starting the Hollywood career of its director Paul W. S. Anderson . That momentum did not carry over into John R. Leonetti 's Annihilation , however , which suffered from a poor reception by critics and fans alike , grossing only $ 36 million in the U.S. and $ 51 million worldwide , compared to the first movie 's worldwide intake of $ 122 million . In 2010 , director Kevin Tancharoen released an eight @-@ minute Mortal Kombat short film titled Mortal Kombat : Rebirth , made as a proof of concept for Tancharoen 's pitch of a reboot movie franchise to Warner Brothers . Tancharoen later confirmed that while the short is entirely unofficial , it does feature the writing of Oren <unk> , who was rumored to be writing the screenplay for the third Mortal Kombat movie . In September 2011 , New Line Cinema and Warner Bros. announced that Tancharoen has signed on to direct the reboot from a screenplay written by <unk> . In October 2013 , however , Tancharoen left the project to pursue " other creative opportunities " . In 2015 , it was reported that James Wan had signed @-@ on to produce the film . 
 = = = = Literature = = = = 
 Several Mortal Kombat comic books were based on the video game series , including the official Mortal Kombat and Mortal Kombat II comic books created by Tobias and advertised in the attract modes on early versions of the first two games . In 1994 , Malibu Comics launched an official MK comic book series , spawning two six @-@ issue series ( " Blood and Thunder " and " Battlewave " ) , along with several miniseries and one @-@ shot special issues dedicated to specific characters , until its publication ended in August 1995 . Two more comics were also made as tie @-@ ins for Mortal Kombat 4 and the DC Universe crossover game and a new miniseries was published prior to the release of Mortal Kombat X in 2015 . Jeff Rovin penned a novelization of the first Mortal Kombat game , which was published in June 1995 in order to coincide with the release of the movie . Novelizations of both Mortal Kombat movies were written by Martin <unk> and Jerome Preisler . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Mortal Kombat : The Album , a techno album based on the first game was created for Virgin America by Lords of Acid members Praga Khan and Oliver Adams as The Immortals in 1994 . Its iconic theme " Techno Syndrome " , incorporating the " Mortal Kombat ! " yell first shown in the Mortal Kombat commercial for home systems , was first released in 1993 as a single and was also used as a theme music for the Mortal Kombat film series . Each movie had their own soundtracks ( including the hit and award @-@ winning compilation album Mortal Kombat : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) , as had the second video game ( Mortal Kombat II : Music from the Arcade Game Soundtrack ) . The 2011 video game saw the release of Mortal Kombat : Songs Inspired by the Warriors , a new soundtrack album featuring electronic music by various artists . 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 The franchise sparked two television series by New Line Television : the 1996 cartoon Mortal Kombat : Defenders of the Realm and the 1998 live @-@ action series Mortal Kombat : Konquest , both of them co @-@ developed by Threshold Entertainment . Neither series ran for more than one season . In 2010 , Warner Premiere ordered a web series inspired by the Rebirth short , titled Mortal Kombat : Legacy and also directed by Kevin Tancharoen . The series ' first season was released for free on YouTube starting in April 2011 , promoted by Machinima.com , and the second season arrived in 2013 . In October 2014 , Warner Bros and Blue Ribbon are developing a live @-@ action untitled Mortal Kombat series that will tie in with Mortal Kombat X. The webseries will be released in 2016 . 
 = = = = Other media = = = = 
 An animated prequel to the first movie , titled Mortal Kombat : The Journey Begins , was released direct @-@ to @-@ video in 1995 . The stage show Mortal Kombat : Live Tour was launched at the end of 1995 , expanded to 1996 , and featured Mortal Kombat characters in a theatrical display on stage . Brady Games produced the collectible card game Mortal Kombat Kard Game in 1996 . Score Entertainment 's 2005 collectible card game Epic Battles also used some of the Mortal Kombat characters . 
 = = Legacy and cultural impact = = 
 Ed Boon reported that the Mortal Kombat games have sold 26 million copies by 2007 , and the number has reportedly reached over 30 million by 2012 . As of April 2015 , after the release of Mortal Kombat X , the franchise had sold 35 million units . A particularly successful game was Mortal Kombat II , which had unprecedented opening week sales figures never seen before in the video game industry , for the first time beating the box office numbers of summer hit films . The 2008 edition of Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition awarded the Mortal Kombat series with seven world records , including " most successful fighting game series " . The franchise holds ten world records in the 2011 Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition , including the " largest promotional campaign for a fighting video game " ( Mortal Kombat 3 ) , " highest grossing film based on a beat ‘ em up video game " ( Mortal Kombat 1996 ) , and " most successful video game spin @-@ off soundtrack album " ( Mortal Kombat : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) . 
 Numerous publications described it as one of the most important and also most violent series in the history of video games ; in 2011 , the staff of GameSpy wrote " its place in fighting game history is undeniable . " In 2009 , GameTrailers ranked Mortal Kombat as the ninth top fighting game franchise as well as the seventh bloodiest series of all time . In 2012 , Complex ranked Mortal Kombat as 37th best video game franchise overall , commenting on its " legendary status in video game history . " Mortal Kombat as a series was also ranked as the goriest video game ever by CraveOnline in 2009 and by <unk> in 2011 ; including it on their list of the goriest games , Cheat Code Central commented that " Mortal Kombat had enough gore to simultaneously offend a nation and change gaming forever . " 
 According to IGN , during the 1990s " waves of imitators began to flood the market , filling arcades with a sea of blood from games like Time Killers , Survival Arts , and Guardians of the Hood . Mortal Kombat had ushered in an era of exploitation games , both on consoles and in arcades , all engaging in a battle to see who can cram the most blood and guts onto a low @-@ res screen . " Notable Mortal Kombat clones , featuring violent finishing moves and / or digitized sprites , included Bio <unk> , <unk> , Cardinal Syn , Catfight , Eternal Champions , Kasumi Ninja , Killer Instinct , Mace : The Dark Age , Primal Rage , Street Fighter : The Movie , Tattoo Assassins , Thrill Kill , Ultra <unk> , Way of the Warrior , and Midway 's own War Gods , among many others ( even the Japanese game <unk> Gangan <unk> was localized in the U.S. as <unk> of Dark Kombat ) . Of all these , only Eternal Champions and Killer Instinct achieved a considerable success and were followed by sequels ( Eternal Champions : Challenge from the Dark Side and Killer Instinct 2 ) . 
 In a 2009 poll by GamePro , 21 % of voters chose Mortal Kombat as their favorite fighting game series , ranking it third after Street Fighter and Tekken . In 2012 , Capcom 's Street Fighter producer Yoshinori Ono said he is getting a lot of requests for Street Fighter vs. Mortal Kombat and understands why people want it , " but it 's easier said than done . Having Chun Li getting her spine ripped out , or Ryu 's head bouncing off the floor ... it doesn 't necessarily match . " In 2014 , martial artist Frankie Edgar opined Mortal Kombat has been far superior to Street Fighter . 
 The series and its characters are also referenced in the various other works of popular culture , such as in the title of <unk> 's debut album Metal Kombat for the Mortal Man and the <unk> episode " Model Kombat " . According to Complex in 2012 , " Years ago , MK became a phenomenon far outside gaming circles alone . Its name has become recognizable enough to be name dropped on sitcoms ( Malcolm in the Middle and Married ... With Children ) , found in movies ( Christian Slater plays <unk> in Very Bad Things ) , and used as part of cultural studies ( see Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins ' book From Barbie to Mortal Kombat : Gender and Computer Games ) . " It was also featured in the film Doom Generation . The name " Mortal Kombat " was even given to a dangerous illegal recreational drug that was introduced and caused multiple fatalities in early 2014 . 
 In 2012 , John Tobias said : " If you look at any other pop culture phenomenon — like if you look at the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , for instance — it became popular at the time right around when Mortal Kombat became popular , and it had its highs and lows , and here they are once again talking about a major motion picture . That ’ s because of its place in pop culture . It ’ s always there for someone to pick up , polish off , blow the dust off of it , and re @-@ release it . And Mortal Kombat will always be that way . It ’ ll be around 50 years from now . " 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The series was subject of a major video game controversy and several court cases , largely related to its extremely violent content , especially in relation to the original game which paved a way for the introduction of the ESRB ( Entertainment Software Rating Board ) game rating system in 1994 as well as Australian Classification Board . Various games in the series have been banned in a number of countries . <unk> Research CEO Joost van <unk> said , " Because of the obvious rift between gamers on the one hand and adult society on the other , Mortal Kombat set the tone for what constituted gamer culture . " 
 = = Further information = = 
 The History Of Mortal Kombat Video Series ( recommended by Netherrealm Studios ) 
 = Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In Theater Restaurant = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In Theater Restaurant is a theme restaurant at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , one of the four main theme parks at Walt Disney World in Bay Lake , Florida , United States . Established in May 1991 , the restaurant is modeled after a 1950s drive @-@ in theater . Walt Disney Imagineering designed the booths to resemble convertibles of the period , and some servers act as carhops while wearing roller skates . While eating , guests watch a large projection screen displaying film clips from such 1950s and 1960s films as Frankenstein Meets the Space Monster , Plan 9 from Outer Space , and Attack of the 50 Foot Woman . 
 The restaurant serves traditional cuisine of the United States . Popcorn functions as a complimentary hors d 'oeuvre . Initially , the menu listed items with themed names , such as " Tossed in Space " ( garden salad ) , " The Cheesecake that Ate New York " , and " Attack of the Killer Club Sandwich " , but these playful names were later altered so that they now describe the dishes in a more standard and straightforward manner . 
 In 1991 , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In opened along with nineteen other new Walt Disney World attractions marking the complex 's twentieth anniversary . By the following year , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In was serving upwards of 2 @,@ 200 people daily during peak periods , making it the park 's most popular restaurant . Thai movie theater operator EGV Entertainment opened the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe in Bangkok in 2003 , in a very similar style to the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In has received mixed reviews . USA Today 's list of the best restaurants in American amusement parks ranks the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In fifteenth , but many reviewers rate it more highly for its atmosphere than for its cuisine . Ed Bumgardner of the Winston @-@ Salem Journal wrote that the food is more expensive than it is worth , specifically calling the restaurant 's roast beef sandwich both delicious and a ripoff . In their book Vegetarian Walt Disney World and Greater Orlando , Susan Shumaker and Than Saffel call the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In " the wackiest dining experience in any Disney park " . 
 = = History = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , located on Commissary Lane across from Star Tours and adjacent to ABC Commissary , opened in May 1991 as one of the twenty new attractions opened at Walt Disney World to mark the complex 's twentieth anniversary . The restaurant was created with a strong emphasis on theme , in emulation of the 50 's Prime Time Café , which had opened two years prior . Disney hoped that the focus on theme would bring the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In the level of success that had been garnered by the 50 's Prime Time Café . Within five weeks of opening , it was serving between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 meals on a daily basis , just as the 50 's Prime Time Café was doing . A year after opening , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In had become the most popular restaurant in the park , serving more than 2 @,@ 200 people per day at peak periods . Starting from its earliest days , the restaurant equipped its servers with point of sale mobile devices that relayed orders to a printer in the kitchen , which was considered at the time to be in keeping with the science fiction theme because the technology had been developed shortly prior . 
 In 2003 , there were twenty character meals offered at Walt Disney World , during which actors portraying various Disney characters would interact with guests while they ate at the parks ' restaurants , and Disney was in the process of increasing the presence of costumed characters in the parks at the time . Nonetheless , Minnie Mouse character meals held at Hollywood & Vine were discontinued that year , and Robert Johnson of the Orlando Sentinel partially attributed this cancellation to competition from the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , which he said " almost always has a line of customers waiting " . 
 = = Theme = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is modeled after a 1950s drive @-@ in theater . The entrance is made to look like a box office , and guests can walk from there along a tall fence to the dining room , where guests sit at formica countertops in booths made to look like convertibles from the 1940s and 1950s . These booths were designed by Walt Disney Imagineering and are made of fiberglass with much chrome plating . The cars have whitewall tires , and speakers are mounted on poles next to each car . The license plates are dated from 1955 , and each convertible seats four people , although these mock vehicles were initially six @-@ seaters when the restaurant first opened . There are six picnic tables near the back of the room that are only used when the rest of the restaurant is full and there are guests who are willing to forego the experience of sitting in the cars . All guests who make reservations are seated in the cars , although this was not the case the year the restaurant first opened . The restaurant has a total seating capacity of 260 . 
 Some of the servers at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In wear roller skates , acting as carhops , while others improvise characters such as a police officer ostensibly in search of people who have sneaked into the theater without paying . The dining room is dark and air @-@ conditioned , and measures 8 @,@ 400 square feet ( 780 m2 ) . The ceiling simulates a night sky replete with twinkling stars made from optical fibers . There is the facade of a snack counter at the back of the room , behind which is the kitchen . The upper walls of the dining room display a cyclorama of Southern California as seen over a fence . 
 While eating at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , guests watch film clips from 1950s and 1960s science fiction films , B horror films , monster movies , pseudo @-@ documentaries , bizarre newsreels , and animated cartoons , all on a loop that lasts 47 minutes . The film clips are taken from such films as The Blob , Frankenstein Meets the Space Monster , Teenagers from Outer Space , The Amazing Colossal Man , Plan 9 from Outer Space , Invasion of the Saucer Men , and Cat @-@ Women of the Moon . The original Attack of the 50 Foot Woman trailer is also included . The clips are shown on a large projection screen . During Star Wars Weekends , a special breakfast is offered called the Star Wars Dine @-@ In Galactic Breakfast , during which guests can interact with Star Wars characters and watch clips from the Star Wars films . 
 = = Food = = 
 At the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , lunch guests stay for an average of fifty minutes and dinner guests for an average of just longer than an hour , with lunch and dinner guests being served their food on average five and ten minutes after ordering respectively . The restaurant participates in the Disney Dining Plan . Meals are served starting at 10 : 30 a.m. on Sundays and Wednesdays , and starting at 11 : 00 a.m. every other day of the week . The restaurant closes each day at the same time that the park does , which is in the late evening . The menu is the same all day , without a distinction between lunch and dinner . A full bar service is available , and there is also a limited wine selection . 
 Food selection at the restaurant comes from the traditional cuisine of the United States . Popcorn is served as a free hors d 'oeuvre . Other food items include milkshakes , hot fudge sundaes , seafood salad , turkey sloppy joes , fried pickles , St. Louis @-@ style barbecue ribs , beef @-@ and @-@ blue @-@ cheese salads , sautéed shrimp with <unk> , French fries , cucumber salads , Buffalo wings , Boca Burgers , <unk> , and steaks . Drinks include souvenir phosphorescent ice cubes . The desserts are served in larger portions than are customary elsewhere . There are vegetarian options . The chefs at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In sometimes cater for special requests in advance . The cookbook Delicious Disney Just for Kids contains a recipe for the BLT soup served at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . 
 Items in the restaurant 's menu used to have themed names , such as " The Galactic Grill " ( triple @-@ decker grilled cheese sandwich ) , " Beast from 1 @,@ 000 Islands " ( Reuben sandwich ) , " Tossed in Space " ( garden salad ) , " The Cheesecake that Ate New York " , " Attack of the Killer Club Sandwich " , " Beach Party Panic " ( fish fillet ) , " Saucer Sightings " ( rib eye steak ) , " Terror of the Tides " ( broiled fish ) , and " Journey to the Center of the Pasta " ( vegetable lasagne ) , but these have since been replaced with more descriptive names . A popcorn bisque was once on the menu , but it was removed due to poor reception . 
 = = Imitation = = 
 In 2003 , EGV Entertainment , a movie theater operator in Thailand , opened the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe in Bangkok , explicitly modeling the restaurant after the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . <unk> Poolwaraluk , the company 's executive president and chief executive officer , visited the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In in 2000 , and was inspired to open a similar restaurant . He said that , while he was eating at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , the other guests seemed more interested in their food than in the film clips on the screen , and he therefore considered the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In more of a restaurant than a theater , with the film reel simply being a gimmick . Appealing to EGV 's identity as a movie theater operator , Poolwaraluk said that the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe " can probably do a better job blending the cinema and the food together and also concentrate on both of them " . Like the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe features classic cars for seating , but , instead of showing film clips on a loop , the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe shows entire short films . 
 In 2014 , NBCUniversal opened a new Universal Orlando hotel called Cabana Bay Beach Resort , which houses the Bayliner Diner , a restaurant that borrows its premise from the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . Both restaurants play old film footage on a loop . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In has received mixed reviews . Jack Hayes of Nation 's Restaurant News calls the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In " wacky " and " on the cutting edge of sheer dining fun " . In USA Today 's list of the sixteen best restaurants in American amusement parks , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ranks fifteenth . Samuel Muston of The Independent writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is " memorable in the best way " . In the Evansville Courier & Press , Pete <unk> writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ranks among the most unusual of the restaurants at Disney 's Hollywood Studios . In The Unofficial Guide to Walt Disney World 2015 , Bob Sehlinger and Len Testa call the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In the most entertaining restaurant in Walt Disney World , writing that " everyone gets a kick out of this unusual dining room " . 
 Multiple reviewers have called the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In more notable for being an attraction than a food destination . One reviewer from The Guardian compares the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In to Epcot 's Coral Reef Restaurant , writing that both restaurants " are great settings " where " eating is awful " . Sehlinger and Testa consider the prices too high , and the food too simple , although they praise the Reuben sandwich and the ribs . Schultz writes that the food is simple and that some of the beers are decent . The book DK Eyewitness Travel Guide : Walt Disney World Resort & Orlando also states that the food is more expensive than it is worth . Ed Bumgardner of the Winston @-@ Salem Journal shared this opinion as well , specifically singling out the restaurant 's roast beef sandwich as a ripoff , despite calling it delicious . Peggy <unk> of the Tampa Bay Times writes that , although the food is mediocre , " Who cares ? Food is besides the point " . She goes on to argue that the prices are low , particularly for sandwiches . In Frommer 's Walt Disney World and Orlando 2012 , Laura Lea Miller expresses disappointment that the menu no longer contains the playful item names it once did . She writes positively of the atmosphere , but considers the food mediocre . In the book Walt Disney World Resort : Also Includes Seaworld and Central Florida , Corey Sandler writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is " a must @-@ see eatery ... for adults and adventurous kids " and that " the food is appropriate for a drive @-@ in theater — very ordinary , but that 's not really the reason you came " . 
 Some food items at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In have been received favorably by reviewers . Rona <unk> and Jennifer Greenhill @-@ Taylor write highly of the restaurant 's hot @-@ fudge sundaes in Fodor 's 2012 Walt Disney World . In Plan Your Walt Disney World Vacation in No Time , Douglas Ingersoll writes very positively of the milkshakes , and argues that the sandwiches and burgers are better than at the fast food restaurants in the park . A reviewer for the United Kingdom 's The Sentinel also writes positively of the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In 's milkshakes , and writes that , " if you chose to treat yourself to a good lunch in one of the Disney parks , then this is the one " . 
 Positive reviews of the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In have indicated diverse reasons for appreciating the restaurant . In Vegetarian Walt Disney World and Greater Orlando , Susan Shumaker and Than Saffel write that the restaurant has " the wackiest dining experience in any Disney park " . Shumaker and Saffel contend that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In provides a reasonable compromise when vegetarians and non @-@ vegetarians are looking to eat together , and that it is also suitable for both large and small families with young children . The restaurant tends to be popular with children , and it is common for people who lived through the 1950s to enjoy the restaurant for its nostalgia value . Paul Schultz of the Daily News writes , " Anyone who is a fan of trashy sci @-@ fi movies of the 1950s should check [ the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ] out " . In his book Sci @-@ Fi Movie Freak , Robert Ring calls the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In film clips " hokey " , while David Steele of The Rotarian calls them " classically awful " , and Rick <unk> of Restaurant Business Magazine calls them " campy " . 
 = 1991 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1991 Giro d 'Italia was the 74th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro began on May 26 with a mass @-@ start stage that began and ended in the Italian city of Olbia . The race came to a close in Milan on June 16 . Twenty teams entered the race , which was won by the Italian Franco Chioccioli of the Del Tongo @-@ MG Boys Maglificio team . Second and third respectively were the Italians Claudio Chiappucci and Massimiliano Lelli . 
 The race was first led by Frenchman Philippe Casado who won the first stage into Olbia . Casado lost the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) after stage 2a that contained a mountainous course . Éric Boyer took the race lead from Chioccioli after winning the event 's fourth stage . However , he lost the lead back to Chioccioli the following day . Chioccioli protected his lead and built upon his advantage by winning three stages of the race before the race 's finish . 
 In the race 's other classifications , Massimiliano Lelli of the Ari @-@ Ceramiche Ariostea team finished as the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification , finishing in third place overall ; Carrera Jeans – Tassoni rider Claudio Chiappucci won the points classification , Iñaki Gastón of the <unk> @-@ <unk> team won the mountains classification , and <unk> @-@ <unk> rider Alberto <unk> won the intergiro classification . Carrera Jeans @-@ Tassoni finished as the winners of the team classification . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty teams were invited by the race organizers to participate in the 1991 edition of the Giro d 'Italia , ten of which were based outside of Italy . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 180 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager were introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place on 25 May . From the riders that began the race , 133 made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton did include the previous year 's winner Gianni Bugno . He also stated that Claudio Chiappucci would likely contend for the overall crown due to his good form coming into the race . According to Paolo Viberti of El País , Bugno came in as the odds on favorite to win the race . Eugenio <unk> of La Repubblica and La Stampa 's Gianni Ranieri believed that the race was going be won by either Chiappucci or Bugno . Despite being favored to win the race , Bugno entered the race with no victories to his name that season . American Greg LeMond told the press he planned to be more competitive at this Giro than he had in years past . Other favorites to win the race were Laurent Fignon , Pedro Delgado , and Marino Lejarreta . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1991 edition of the Giro d 'Italia was revealed to the public on television by head organizer Vincenzo Torriani , on 1 December 1990 . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were twelve stages containing thirty @-@ nine categorized climbs , of which five had summit finishes : stage 12 , to Monviso ; stage 13 , to Sestriere ; stage 15 , to Aprica ; stage 16 , to Selva di Val Gardena ; and stage 17 , to Passo Pordoi . The organizers chose to include one rest day , which was used to transfer the riders from Cagliari to Sorrento . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 265 km ( 165 mi ) shorter , contained one more rest day , and the same number of individual time trials and split @-@ stages . In addition , this race contained one more stage . 
 <unk> of La Repubblica believed that the route favored a rider that could defend well and put in a good time during the uphill time trial . La Stampa writer Gianni Ranieri felt the two non @-@ uphill time trials would favor Gianni Bugno , while the up @-@ hill time trial could be a place where Claudio Chiappucci could gain time on the field . Pedro Delgado believed the race to be tougher than the Tour de France that same year . The Cima Coppi – the highest point in altitude the race reached – was scheduled to be the Passo dello Stelvio , but the pass was scrapped from the race and the Passo Pordoi – the next highest mountain – became the new Cima Coppi . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 During the first stage , Alberto <unk> attacked on his own and led the race for 150 km ( 93 mi ) before being caught by the chasing peloton within the final ten kilometers . It then came down to a bunch sprint finish that was so close that it required a photo to determine the winner , Philippe Casado . The next day of racing consisted of a mass @-@ start stage in the morning and an individual time trial in the afternoon . Reigning winner Gianni Bugno won the trans @-@ alpine morning stage ahead of other main contenders . This stage saw the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) switch from Casado to Franco Chioccioli . Gianluca <unk> of ZG Mobili team won the afternoon time trial by five seconds over Spaniard Marino Lejarreta . The following day of racing was the last on the island of Sardinia before the race was transferred to mainland Italy . The day of racing ended with a bunch sprint contested by Adriano Baffi , Mario Cipollini , and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov , of which Cipollini got the best and won . 
 The fourth leg of the event consisted of five laps on a set circuit of 35 km ( 22 mi ) . The stage saw several attacks on the final lap of the course with most being caught by the peloton . Éric Boyer attacked with fifteen kilometers to go in the stage and was able to establish a solid gap between himself and the peloton . Boyer went on to win the stage by twenty @-@ three seconds over the chasing peloton , gaining enough time to earn the race lead . The following day saw the general classification contenders reach the final climb of the day , Mount Godi , together . Chioccioli attacked on the climb and only Lejarreta was able to mark his move . The two rode to the finish together as Boyer led the group of chasing riders to the finish fifty seconds later . Lejarreta won the stage and Chioccioli regained the race lead . 
 The sixth day of racing was marred by poor weather . General classification contenders Pedro Delgado and Laurent Fignon lost time due to crashing on the descent of Monte Terminillo , while Greg LeMond lost over two minutes . On the final climb of the day , Iñaki Gastón and Leonardo Sierra attacked with eight kilometers to go but were caught by the chasing riders . Gaston attacked again with a kilometer remaining , but was robbed of the stage win as Vladimir Poulnikov overtook him three meters before the finish . Cipollini won the event 's seventh leg by means of a field sprint . 
 The following stage saw a group of nine riders form off the front of the peloton with under twenty kilometers remaining . Despite the best efforts of the chasing peloton , the breakaway group survived and saw Ari @-@ Ceramiche Ariostea 's Davide Cassani take the stage by edging out Mario Mantova . Massimo Ghirotto of Carrera Jeans – Tassoni team attacked with about fifty kilometers to go in the ninth stage . He rode solo and wound up winning the stage , while the general classification remained largely unchanged . The next stage was a 43 km ( 27 mi ) individual time trial that was won by Bugno . He won by margin of eight seconds and moved up into second place overall , a second off the leader Chioccioli . 
 The eleventh stage was contested in rainy conditions on a winding course . After an unsuccessful breakaway attempt by fifteen riders , Maximilian Sciandri , LeMond , and Michele Coppolillo attacked and formed a group off the front . Sciandri and LeMond crossed the line in first and second , respectively , while Coppolillo was caught by the peloton in the closing meters of the stage . The next day saw the race 's first mountain @-@ top finish , to Monviso . The group of main contenders reached the final climb together , with Banesto 's Jean @-@ François Bernard launching the first attack which saw him gain a maximum advantage of around thirty seconds . The next to make a serious effort was Lejarreta , who was followed by Chioccioli , Massimiliano Lelli , and Sierra , who attacked with ten kilometers left in the stage . The trio caught up to Bernard and rode as a group to the finish . Lelli took the stage as Chioccioli defended his lead . Bugno lost almost two minutes during the day . 
 The thirteenth leg of the race featured two ascents of the Alpine mountain Sestriere , the second of which served as the finish for the day . The day began with a breakaway of twelve that was caught before the final climb to Sestriere . The first rider to launch a serious attack on the climb was Pedro Delgado , who was quickly followed by Chioccioli , Lejaretta , Eduardo Chozas , and Chiappucci , meanwhile Bugno was unable to follow their wheels . Chozas managed to win the stage as the group of four finish within four seconds of each other . With twenty kilometers to go in the fourteenth leg , Franco Ballerini , Casado , Juan Martínez Oliver , and Brian Peterson formed a breakaway group . The group managed to stretch out an advantage of almost two minutes as they entered the closing kilometers . Ballerini took the stage victory after he and Casado had managed to distance themselves slightly from the two other breakaway riders . LeMond abandoned the race following the conclusion of the fourteenth stage . The next day , on the ascent of the Mortirolo , race leader Chioccioli attacked and formed a solo attack . He rode the remaining fifty kilometers on his own to the stage victory , with his lead expanding to at most two minutes thirty seconds . He managed to put over a minute into each of his rivals . 
 The sixteenth saw no major shifts in the general classification . The top five riders in the general classification formed a leading group on the final climb but there were no major moves to create time gaps . Lelli took the stage win after ahead of Bugno . The following day was the last in the Dolomites and saw the ascension of five major climbs , including the Cima Coppi Passo Pordoi . On the second climbing of Pordoi , Chioccioli attacked and rode to the top of the climb to win the stage by thirty @-@ eight seconds . Lejaretta crashed on the day and lost over six and a half minutes , putting him out of contention for the podium and overall victory . Mid @-@ way through the stage , Fignon abandoned the race . The eighteenth day of racing was a transition stage . Several attempts were made to form a breakaway group before a group of eight were successful in creating a gap . The group was caught with five hundred meters to go by the chasing peloton which was setting up for a field sprint . Silvio <unk> managed to outsprint the likes of Cipollini and Abdoujaparov to win the day . 
 The nineteenth leg featured only one categorized climb , which Iñaki Gastón won to seal his victory in the mountains classification . The stage saw no major time disparities in the general classification contenders as they finished together , with Bugno taking the stage win . The penultimate stage of the race was a 66 km ( 41 mi ) individual time trial that contained one un @-@ categorized climb within the route . Race leader Chioccioli took the course and at the first time check at 15 @.@ 5 km ( 10 mi ) he had already put thirty seconds into Bugno . He ended up winning the stage by fifty @-@ seconds over Bugno , thereby extending his lead over the rest of his competitors . The final stage culminated with a bunch sprint that was won by Cipollini . Chioccioli had won the Giro d 'Italia for the first time by almost four minutes over the second place finisher Chiappucci . 
 Four riders achieved multiple stage victories : Cipollini ( stages 3 , 7 , and 21 ) , Bugno ( stages 2a , 10 , and 19 ) , Lelli ( stages 12 and 16 ) , and Chioccioli ( stages 15 , 17 , and 20 ) . Stage wins were achieved by eight of the twenty competing squads , six of which won multiple stages . Del Tongo @-@ MG Boys Maglificio collected a total of seven stage wins through three riders , Cipollini , Ballerini ( stage 14 ) , and Chioccioli . Carrera Jeans @-@ Tassoni earned three stage wins through Poulnikov ( stage 6 ) , Ghirotto ( stage 9 ) , and Sciandri ( stage 11 ) . Ari @-@ Ceramiche Ariostea achieved the same feat through Cassani ( stage 8 ) and Lelli . Chateau d 'Ax @-@ Gatorade garnered three stage victories through Bugno . Z amassed a total of two stage victories through Casado ( stage 1 ) and Boyer ( stage 4 ) . <unk> gained two stage victories through Lejaretta ( stage 5 ) and Chozas ( stage 13 ) . ZG Mobili and Gis Gelati @-@ Ballan each won a single stage at the Giro , the first through <unk> ( stage 2b ) and the second through <unk> ( stage 18 ) . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Five different jerseys were worn during the 1991 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . The time bonuses for the 1991 Giro were twelve seconds for first , eight seconds for second , and four seconds for third place on the stage . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo Pordoi . It was crossed twice by the riders , for the first climbing of the mountain , Italian Franco Vona was the first over the climb , while Franco Chioccioli was first over the second passing . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1967 were eligible for it . 
 The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = = = Team classification = = = 
 = Tropical Storm Candy = 
 Tropical Storm Candy produced minor impact in the state of Texas during the 1968 Atlantic hurricane season . The third tropical cyclone of the annual season , it developed from a tropical disturbance in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico on June 22 . Gradual strengthening occurred , with the depression becoming Tropical Storm Candy on the following day . The storm reached its peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) later that day and made landfall Port Aransas , Texas on June 23 . Candy weakened into a tropical depression only hours after moving inland . However , the system remained a designated cyclone until June 26 , at which time it completed extratropical transition over the state of Michigan . 
 Due to rainfall from a trough for several days , combined 11 inches ( 280 mm ) in some areas from Candy itself , flooding occurred in eastern Texas ; there was minor damage to crops , roads , and bridges . Agricultural losses alone were slightly less than $ 2 million ( 1968 USD ) . Storm surge along the coast of Texas caused " cuts " on Padre Island . The storm spawned 24 tornadoes , though only one caused significant impact . Candy and its remnants dropped rainfall in 24 other states , reaching as far north as New Hampshire . Overall , the system caused $ 2 @.@ 7 million in damage and no fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Between mid- to late June , satellite imagery indicated above normal amounts of shower and thunderstorm activity over the southwestern Gulf of Mexico . By June 22 , the system developed into a tropical depression just off the coast of Mexico in the Bay of Campeche . The depression , which initially had an elongated structure , moved north to north @-@ northwestward at roughly 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) . On June 22 , three separate and distinct circulation centers were noted in weather radar images from Brownsville , Texas . Later that afternoon , a United States Navy reconnaissance aircraft investigated the depression and recorded sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Therefore , the system was upgraded to Tropical Storm Candy at 1800 UTC on that same day . 
 Late on June 23 , Candy made landfall near Port Aransas , Texas . Despite moving ashore , Candy attained its peak intensity at 0000 UTC on June 24 , with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Both were observations from a weather station in Austwell , Texas . The storm quickly weakened inland , falling to tropical depression status early on June 24 . In advance of a cold front , Candy curved northeastward on June 25 and began to accelerate . While moving across the Midwestern United States , the storm began to lose tropical characteristics due to the presence of cold air . At 0000 UTC on June 26 , Candy transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while situated over southern Michigan . The remnants continued eastward for several more hours before dissipating over western New York . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Gale @-@ force winds were reported from Corpus Christi to Galveston , Texas . Sustained winds were above 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) for more than an hour at Austwell , Texas . The peak wind gust of 71 mph ( 114 km / h ) was measured at Port Aransas , Texas , where the storm made landfall . Storm surge was highest in San Antonio and Corpus Christi Bays , at 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) , and was 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) along the rest of the Texas coast . However , damage from the storm surge was confined to the formation of " cuts " along Padre Island and to coastal oil refinery equipment . 
 Prior to the formation of Candy , a trough had brought eight to ten days of rainfall throughout Texas which helped the heavy rainfall from the storm produced damage to crops , roads , and bridges throughout eastern Texas . The rains from Candy also caused flooding on many middle and upper coastal rivers with significant damage confined to the eastern and western forks of the San Jacinto River . The highest recorded rainfall was 11 @.@ 28 inches ( 287 mm ) at Point Comfort , Texas . Elsewhere in southeast Texas , precipitation amounts were generally 3 to 6 inches ( 76 to 152 mm ) . Impact from winds was mostly minor , except at the 740 feet ( 230 m ) public fishing pier in Port O 'Connor , which was severely damaged by 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) winds . Ten towboats and barges , as well as several other small vessels , received minor impacts at Hopper 's Landing on San Antonio Bay . 
 Outside of Texas , 2 to 4 inches ( 51 to 102 mm ) of rain was reported in eastern Oklahoma , northwestern Arkansas , central Missouri , and northern Illinois . Precipitation in Michigan exceeded 6 inches ( 150 mm ) in some areas , contributing to the ongoing flooding event in Ann Arbor . Flash flooding was reported in western New York , due to precipitation amounts up to 3 @.@ 04 inches ( 77 mm ) in Buffalo during a 24 – hour period . As a result , streams overflowed their banks , inundating many basements , sewers , and underpasses . While tropical , Candy spawned 19 tornadoes or funnel @-@ clouds to form between June 23 and 25 . Ten were reported in Texas , five in Arkansas , three in Louisiana , and one in Missouri . Five additional tornadoes , which were associated with the extratropical remnants of Candy , were reported on June 25 in eastern Ohio . Despite the amount of tornadoes , only one caused significant damage . That tornado " nearly demolished " a school in Morning Star , Arkansas . The total property damage from the storm was " conservatively " estimated at $ 1 million , while losses to agriculture in eastern Texas approached $ 2 million . No deaths were reported in relation to the storm . Candy made 1968 only one of four years to have three named storms in June , with the others being 1886 , 1936 , and 1959 . 
 = Mother Gothel = 
 Mother Gothel is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Pictures ' 50th animated feature film Tangled ( 2010 ) as the main antagonist . The character is voiced by American actress and singer Donna Murphy in her voice @-@ acting debut , prior to which she was predominantly known as a stage actress . Upon learning from her agent that Disney was auditioning potentials for the antagonistic role of Mother Gothel , Murphy decided to audition for the part spontaneously . Loosely based on the witch character in the German fairy tale " Rapunzel " , Mother Gothel is a vain old witch who hoards the healing powers of a magical flower in order to remain young and beautiful forever . When the flower is suddenly harvested by the kingdom in order to heal its ailing queen , its rejuvenating powers are inherited by the king and the queen 's daughter , Princess Rapunzel , stripping Gothel of her access to it . With her life suddenly endangered , Gothel kidnaps the baby , imprisoning the young Princess Rapunzel in an isolated tower for eighteen years while masquerading as her mother . 
 Inspired by the Evil Queen in Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) and Lady Tremaine in Disney 's Cinderella ( 1950 ) , Gothel was developed by directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard into a much more complex villain than the fairy tale witch upon whom she is based because the character is forced to rely solely on her wit , charisma and intelligence as opposed to sorcery in order to survive . The film 's most difficult character to develop , Gothel 's exotic appearance , whose beauty , dark curly hair and voluptuous figure were deliberately drawn to serve as a foil to Rapunzel 's , was inspired by both Murphy and American singer Cher . 
 Mother Gothel has been mostly well received by film critics , who enjoyed the character 's humor , complexity , charisma and showmanship , dubbing her a scene stealer , while praising Murphy 's performance enthusiastically . However , some critics felt that Gothel was simply too passive – a weaker , less intimidating Disney villainess than Maleficent from Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) , Cruella de Vil from One Hundred and One Dalmatians and Ursula from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Walt Disney himself first attempted to adapt the fairy tale " Rapunzel " into a feature @-@ length animated film during the 1940s . However , the filmmaker 's efforts were never fully realized because the fairy tale was considered too " small " . In 2008 , co @-@ directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard decided to enlarge the film 's scale in order to transform it into a " big event " in order for it to be successful . Meanwhile , the character Mother Gothel was developed into a much more complex villain than the witch upon whom she is based , conceiving her as " a very lonely woman who really did not know how to have a relationship of any kind " . Little else had been determined about the character at the time , who was simply described as " the type of woman who ... envisioned herself in the spotlight . " A departure from traditional Disney villains , Mother Gothel is not a witch or a sorceress . Because she lacks supernatural powers , the character is forced to rely solely on her wit , charm , intellect and charisma because , a conscious decision made by Greno and Howard . However , in the Brothers Grimm 's original fairy tale , Gothel is very much depicted as a typical witch @-@ like character , an idea that was modified for the Disney film adaptation in favor of having Gothel 's agelessness instead be " derive [ d ] ... from Rapunzel 's hair " , becoming one of the few Disney villainesses to not possess magical powers of her own . 
 Seeking inspiration for Gothel and Rapunzel 's " bizarre " relationship , Greno and Howard conducted a series of interviews with several female Disney employees , asking them to list qualities in their mothers that " they found annoying and cloying or restricting " , specifically " the things that they ’ re [ sic ] mothers would do that made them feel trapped or made them feel smothered " in order to make the villain appear more relatable . Gothel 's " Mother Knows Best " line " Getting kind of chubby " was in fact borrowed from one of these interviews . Gothel embodies " the darker side " of overprotective parents ; at the beginning of the film , Gothel and Rapunzel 's relationship resembles more @-@ so of " a pure mother @-@ daughter relationship . " Elaborating on Gothel 's " unique mothering style " , Howard explained to Den of Geek that the character " has to convince this smart girl that she is her mother ... whatever her motivations are . " Citing Gothel as one of the film 's most difficult characters to develop as a result of her complex relationship with Rapunzel , Greno explained to Den of Geek : 
 " Mother Gothel can 't be mean . She has to be very passive @-@ aggressive . She was one of the hardest characters to crack . When we were developing her , people were saying that she doesn 't feel enough like a villain , and people would point to characters like Ursula . And then she was too dark for a while ... Because what you do with her directly affects how you play Rapunzel in the movie . Because , if you play an extremely dominant and cruel villain , that girl is going to become meek and downtrodden , with almost nothing of a person , with low self @-@ esteem . And we knew we didn 't want a character like that ... We had to balance it out , and figured that Gothel has to be more subtle than that , rather than a one @-@ note , domineering mother . " 
 The St. Paul Pioneer Press observed that Gothel represents " an update " of the traditional wicked stepmother , evolving into " the passive @-@ aggressive stepmother " instead . In actress Donna Murphy 's opinion , a " classic " villainess is " somebody who wants something with such intensity and such great need but comes to a place of not being bound by any kind of moral code or any sense of what ’ s ethical " , concluding that " They will do anything to get what they want " . The Austin Chronicle observed that the directors ' inclusion of Gothel as " an evil mother figure as a trigger for the storyline " remains one of the " classic hallmarks of Disney animation " . According to Kay Turner , author of the book Transgressive Tales : <unk> the Grimms , " Gothel " means " godmother " in German . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The directors admitted that they were not keen on hiring solely big @-@ named , A @-@ list celebrities or top @-@ billed actors to voice the film 's main characters . Howard explained that , in order to be cast , the actors simply had to have the " right voice " for the characters , preferring voice actors " who could ... bring a natural ease to those characters . " Greno elaborated , " It was never about how big the star was ... It was always about ... who ’ s best for the part " . Film critic James Berardinelli of ReelViews observed that this decision echoed " Disney 's approach during the late 1980s and early 1990s , when big name stars where often bypassed in favor of lesser known talents . " An additional asset was that the actor be able to perform well both independently and collaboratively . 
 Mother Gothel is voiced by American actress and singer Donna Murphy , a Tony Award @-@ winning Broadway actress who was informed about the casting call for Tangled by her agent . Having never voiced an animated character before , the actress decided to audition for the role of the film 's villain based solely on the expectation that the unfamiliar experience would be " fun " . Almost immediately , Murphy developed a strong liking towards Gothel because of the character 's complexity . Known for her award @-@ winning Broadway performances , Murphy prepared herself for her Tangled audition similar to the way in which the actress would have prepared for a Broadway audition . Refusing to rely solely on her voice , Murphy also provided Gothel with an additional background that " flush [ ed ] out the moments beyond what we see in the film . " Although Greno and Howard had already held Murphy in high regard as " a spectacular singer " , the actress was required to audition a song for the directors nonetheless , performing " Children Will Listen " from the musical Into the Woods . Howard revealed in an interview that Murphy was ultimately chosen out of hundreds of actresses because she possessed " something extra " ; the directors especially enjoyed the charisma and intelligence Murphy brought to the role . 
 Growing up a fan of Disney films , Murphy had never wanted to play a princess , preferring characters who were adventurous and " drove the action " instead . In the actress ' opinion , villains continue to be the most dynamic characters in Disney films . Describing the opportunity to voice a Disney villain as a " juicy " experience , Murphy explained that this is because these characters are " not bound by ethics or moral codes or concern for what someone thinks or how it might hurt someone else " , providing actors with more freedom . Upon her first session , Murphy appreciated the directors for exposing her to early concepts and ideas about Gothel . However , Murphy was not provided with a complete script because " They ’ re very protective about that . " Murphy was directed to lower the pitch of her voice in favor of demonstrating a rather " flat " sound . Although Murphy did not base her own performance on any one individual in particular , she admitted to Babble that she was somewhat inspired by Betty Lou Gerson 's performance as Cruella de Vil in Disney 's One Hundred and One Dalmatians ( 1961 ) . Comparing voice acting to Broadway , Murphy commented that , in animation , " You ’ re recording and you ’ re discovering it and giving the performance all at the same time . It ’ s not like you have three weeks rehearsal . " Additionally , Murphy never worked with co @-@ star Mandy Moore , voice of Rapunzel ; instead , Murphy revealed that scenes with Gothel and Rapunzel were actually recorded opposite one of the directors impersonating Moore , who also explained to Murphy that Gothel 's design will continue to evolve as the character begins to adapt the actress ' mannerisms . Howard enthused that Murphy " nailed " Gothel , admitting to ultimately using 90 % of the actress ' original material and takes because " The character just came right to life when she came in . " 
 = = = Characterization , design and analysis = = = 
 Convinced that " Disney does villains better than anyone , " the directors felt pressured to create a villain who would ultimately " live up to the classic villains of [ Disney 's ] past films . " Greno and Howard wanted Gothel to be both a funny and frightening character , describing her as " a commanding and powerful presence ... who could also have warmth " . Greno believes that Gothel is particularly scary because she is not a witch , explaining , " She 's a real @-@ world @-@ type villain . " Considered " one of the [ film 's ] hardest characters to crack " by Greno , he and Howard wanted Gothel to be depicted as a conniving villain who is likeable and charismatic enough that audiences would be convinced by her and Rapunzel 's unconventional relationship . Greno explained , " if Mother Gothel was a mean villainess , and looked like a villainess and acted scary , you 'd be like , ' Why is Rapunzel staying in the tower ? ' " In early drafts , Gothel was inspired by Ursula from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , causing the character to become " too dark . " Ultimately , the filmmakers voted in favor of having Gothel be subtle as opposed to having her remain " a one @-@ note , domineering mother , " similar to Lady Tremaine from Disney 's Cinderella ( 1950 ) . 
 As reported by The Korea Times , the thought of Gothel being a villain who is both a " greedy , selfish woman and a mother figure to Rapunzel " was initially " perplexing " for animator Jin Kim , and it wasn 't until after Kim heard Gothel 's " Mother Knows Best " for the first time that he " came up with the 1940s Hollywood screen siren motif " for the character . The directors also strived to make it obvious that Mother Gothel and Rapunzel are not related . Greno told Animation World Network , " When they 're standing together , it is very clear that this is not a mother and daughter , just by the frames of their bodies , their hair , the pigments of their skin , " as opposed to when Rapunzel is in close proximity with her true parents , the King and Queen . Howard added that , in comparison to Rapunzel , " Gothel is very tall and curvy , she ’ s very voluptuous , she ’ s got this very exotic look to her . Even down to that curly hair , we ’ re trying to say visually that this is not this girl ’ s mother . " The animators studied footage of Murphy in order to get " ideas about facial expressions " and " gestures . " After much speculation , the directors finally admitted that , in addition to Murphy , Gothel 's physical appearance was in fact influenced by American singer Cher . Howard explained that this was " because Cher is very exotic and Gothic looking , " continuing that the singer " definitely was one of the people we looked at visually , as far as what gives you a striking character . " 
 The term passive @-@ aggressive has since gone on to be commonly associated with Gothel . Critics felt that Gothel could possibly pioneer " a new kind of Disney villainess , " introducing " the undermining , passive @-@ aggressive , guilt @-@ trip @-@ inducing witch . " The Village Voice wrote that , as a villain , Gothel " is Disney ’ s first villainess whose chief crime is being an <unk> , " warning Rapunzel that she is simply " too silly , too uneducated , too unsophisticated " to survive life outside of the tower . The Los Angeles Times referred to Gothel as " A guilt @-@ tripping , overprotective , super @-@ manipulative parent from hell . " One film critic observed that " Gothel is one of the most understated villains Disney has used in a long time . She harkens back to the wicked step mother idea in Cinderella ... She proves it 's possible to be evil without all the theatrics . " The author continued , " Gothel is one for the ages with a bit of darkly comedic timing and the overall greed and menace a villain needs to be disdained . " The character has received comparisons to the Evil Queen from Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) . 
 Donna Murphy believed that Gothel did really love Rapunzel in her own way . 
 " I also think there is this thread of a kind of love that she does have for Rapunzel . It ’ s not what she set out . But she does raise this child and it ’ s the most intimate and certainly the most sustained relationship I think the woman has had in her 387 years or however old she might be . So as deep as the need is to get something for herself , she can ’ t help but fall in love with her . She ’ s spirited , creative , and charming and I think that stirs something in her that is confusing for Gothel . And Gothel has to keep reminding herself of what is most important , which is taking care of herself . But I think there is a genuine kind of humanity . It ’ s by degree , it ’ s not unconditional love but there is a love that develops . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Mother Gothel performs two of the films songs : " Mother Knows Best , " described as a " brassy , Broadway @-@ targeted tune " and an " authoritarian anthem " in which Gothel warns her daughter " all about the evils out to get Rapunzel , " and " Mother Knows Best ( Reprise ) , " both written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Glenn Slater . While making Rapunzel 's music more modern in the vein of a singer @-@ songwriter , " young and contemporary and fresh , " Menken decided to make Gothel 's songs " more classic Broadway , " described as more of " a big stage diva type " of music . Critics have observed similarities between " Mother Knows Best " and " Out There " from Disney 's The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , on which Menken also served as a composer . 
 Musically , the filmmakers " were open ... to ideas that [ Murphy ] had , " as the actress had felt different about " a slightly different ending to something musically in the arrangement , " requesting to try something else , to which the filmmakers responded , " Absolutely ! " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Tangled = = = 
 Mother Gothel appears in in Tangled ( 2010 ) . For hundreds of years , Gothel , a vain old woman , hoards the <unk> powers of a magical flower in order to remain young and beautiful , while selfishly keeping the flower 's whereabouts a secret from the rest of the kingdom . However , when the pregnant Queen of Corona falls fatally ill , the flower is desperately retrieved and fed to her , healing her and in turn inadvertently stripping Gothel of her access to what is essentially the only thing that is keeping her alive . Meanwhile , the King and Queen 's newborn daughter Rapunzel is gifted with the flower 's abilities , which manifest via her long , golden hair when a special song is sung so long as it remains uncut . Desperate to stay alive , Gothel steals the baby from the palace and she imprisoned her in a secluded tower for eighteen years , raising the child as her own and prohibiting her from leaving solely in order to use her hair to stay young . 
 As her eighteenth birthday approaches , Rapunzel continues to grow eager to leave the tower in order to view the mysterious " floating lights " – secretly lanterns released annually by the King and Queen in remembrance of their lost daughter – from up close . While Gothel , reprimanding Rapunzel when she asks , forbids this , she agrees to Rapunzel 's request to take a three @-@ day @-@ long journey to retrieve art supplies for Rapunzel , giving her just enough time to escape the tower , aided by a wanted thief named Flynn Rider . However , not too far from the castle , Gothel is soon tipped off by Maximus , a guard horse who is searching for Flynn , that Rapunzel has gone missing . With her life endangered and her age rapidly increasing , Gothel desperately pursues Rapunzel and Flynn . 
 Enlisting the help of the Stabbington Brothers , a duo of muscular thieves who were once betrayed by Flynn , Gothel offers them both revenge on Flynn Rider and Rapunzel 's gift once they agree to help her find them , not intending to keep the latter half of her promise as she only wants Rapunzel for herself . When her initial attempt to convince Rapunzel to return home with her fails , Gothel , upon a second encounter , tricks the Stabbington Brothers into immobilizing Flynn , later knocking them unconscious when they attempt to kidnap Rapunzel . Convincing Rapunzel that Flynn has betrayed her , they return to the tower . While Flynn escapes from the dungeon , Rapunzel suddenly realizes her true identity and rebels against Gothel , only to be chained and gagged . Gothel stabs Flynn upon his arrival to rescue Rapunzel , but agrees to free Rapunzel long enough to heal him on the condition that she remain with her forever . However , Flynn unexpectedly cuts Rapunzel 's hair , causing it to lose its magic . It turns brown , and a horrified Gothel ( failing to salvage Rapunzel 's hair ) ages rapidly , falling out of the tower 's window but disintegrating into dust before she hits the ground , essentially dying of old age . Flynn dies in Rapunzel 's arms , but is miraculously revived by Rapunzel 's tear , and Rapunzel is finally reunited with her parents . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Mother Gothel has garnered mostly positive reviews from film critics . Nigel Andrews of the Financial Times felt that the character was given the film 's " best lines and tunes . " Film4 described Gothel as a " fun " character " to the extent that she risks making the good guys seem a bit dull . " Hailing Gothel as the film 's " <unk> de resistance , " Georgie Hobbs of Little White Lies wrote that Gothel " performs ... ' Mother Knows Best ' ... with a schizophrenic frenzy worthy of the very best of [ Stephen ] Sondheim 's crazed heroines . " IGN 's Jim Vejvoda penned , " Mother Gothel nearly steals the show , with her overprotective tyranny being made to seem almost rational . " Dubbed Disney 's " first passive @-@ aggressive villain " by Helen O 'Hara of Empire , the author reviewed , " the fact that [ Gothel ] is entirely bereft of superpowers and reliant on her considerable wits to keep her going makes her strangely admirable . " Writing for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel , Cathy Jakicic called the character " a great contemporary villain " who " many daughters ( and mothers ) will find ... funny and a little too familiar . " In the The New York Times ' A. O. Scott 's opinion , " The Disney pantheon is full of evil <unk> , though none quite match Mother Gothel for sheer sadistic intensity . " According to Jake Coyle of the Southtown Star , Gothel is " one of Disney 's best " villains , while Gary Thompson of the Philadelphia Daily News dubbed the character " one reason to love Disney . " Michael Smith of the Tulsa World reviewed Gothel as " perfectly wicked as she kills Rapunzel 's dreams . " Kirk Baird of The Blade identified Gothel as the film 's " strongest character . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune commented , " In her own way , Gothel is scarier than Snow White 's wicked stepmother " because the character " doesn 't cast spells ; she 's fully capable of manipulating , guilt @-@ tripping and emotionally undermining the girl . " Several comparisons have been made between Gothel and the Evil Queen in Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , while several critics observed the character 's likeness to singer Cher ; Peter Howell of the Toronto Star joked that Gothel is " suspiciously Cher @-@ like in her quest for eternal youth . " 
 However , critics were not unanimous in their praise , as some reviewers felt that the character was too passive and tame to be a convincing villain . Jeff Meyers of the Detroit Metro Times wrote that the film 's " villain isn 't all that villainous , " while Tyler Hanley of the Palo Alto Daily News received Gothel as too " one @-@ dimensional and generic . " PopMatters ' Bill Gibron wrote that , as a villain , Gothel " can ’ t compete with traditional House of Mouse miscreants like Maleficent or Cruella de Vil . " Alison Gang of U @-@ T San Diego felt that Gothel was an " annoying " character at times , while USA Today 's Claudia Puig wrote that " Gothel plays the role of Rapunzel 's loving mom [ only ] sometimes convincingly . " Although Michelle Orange of Movieline enjoyed Gothel 's personality to an extant , the author criticized the character in a mixed review that " By reducing Mother Gothel to a vain woman who doesn 't want immortality so much as she 's determined to keep her profile taut , the film misses the chance to get seriously mythical , and as a result the narrative lacks dramatic impact . " 
 Meanwhile , Donna Murphy 's vocal performance as Gothel has garnered unanimous praise . Critics hailed the actress as a " standout " – in particular , Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly singled out Gothel as " a firecracker " amidst an otherwise " sedate " cast . " Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal wrote that " Donna Murphy does evil deliciously as the voice of Mother Gothel " , while Now 's Norman Wilner felt that the actress successfully " channelled " Broadway actress Patti LuPone in her performance . Meanwhile , Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph compared Murphy 's performance to actress and singer Julie Andrews , writing , " the Julie @-@ Andrews @-@ on @-@ stimulants vocal stylings of Broadway star Donna Murphy ... makes Mother Gothel into a memorable manipulative diva . " Joe Neumaier of the Daily News called Murphy 's acting " deliciously mischievous " . Meanwhile , Jonathan Crocker of Total Film wrote , " Donna Murphy 's vocal performance as the vain , villainous fake @-@ matriarch is marvellous " , adding , " her belted @-@ out rendition of ‘ Mother Knows Best ’ is easily the film ’ s top musical number . " Likewise , the Tampa Bay Times ' Steve Persall penned , " Nobody but Murphy should be cast as Gothel " , continuing , " her ' Mother Knows Best ' is a knockout . " Simon Reynolds of Digital Spy felt that " Donna Murphy steals the show " . Similarly dubbing Murphy a scene @-@ stealer , Canoe.ca 's Lindsey Ward wrote that " Murphy ... turns into a giant spectacle with her voice , a powerful force to be reckoned with . " David Edelstein of Vulture.com hailed Murphy as " Broadway ’ s gift to animated movies " , praising in particular the actress ' delivery of " the movie ’ s best line : “ Oh , so I ’ m the bad guy now ? ” Quickflix deemed Murphy " wonderful " , while Stephen Witty of The Star @-@ Ledger ' called her " terrific " . Sandie Angulo Chen of Common Sense Media opined , " As for the dramatic tension , it 's best in the form of Mother Gothel -- brilliantly played by Murphy , whose signature Broadway voice ... adds the necessary punch " . Chen added that Gothel " is ... a personal favorite " while comparing the character to Cher and actress Sophia Loren . The A.V. Club 's Tasha Robinson wrote that Gothel was " magnificently voiced by star Murphy . " Murphy 's performance of " Mother Knows Best " has also been very positively received , with critics again comparing the actress to Julie Andrews . While calling Gothel 's voice " to die for " , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone deemed her performance of the song " comic bliss . " Linda Cook of the Quad @-@ City Times penned that the song was " belted out wonderfully by Murphy and makes the purchase of the soundtrack worthwhile . " Marjorie Baumgarten of The Austin Chronicle opined , " Murphy brings stage showmanship to her musical interludes as Mother Gothel , which drip with sarcasm and biting wit . " Slant Magazine 's Christian Blauvelt , who felt that the film 's songs lacked as a result of Moore 's " pop @-@ star vocals " , happened to very much enjoy Gothel 's performances , writing , " when Broadway vet Murphy takes to scaling Menken 's octave @-@ climbing melodies like a vocal escalator , it 's a different story . " Calling Gothel " one of the most potent schemers in the Disney canon , " Time 's Richard Corliss felt that Murphy 's performance was worthy of a Tony Award for Best Actress , concluding , " no one can summon the malice in humor , and the fun in pain , like this prima Donna . " In his review of the film 's soundtrack , James Christopher Monger of AllMusic wrote that both " Moore and Murphy take on the lion ’ s share of the work here , and both deliver the goods . " 
 IGN ranked Mother Gothel fourth on their list of " the 12 Disney <unk> " . In a list of the thirty @-@ three greatest Disney villains conducted by E ! , Mother Gothel was ranked twenty @-@ fifth . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 In addition to the popular Mother Gothel Classic Doll and appearing alongside Rapunzel , Flynn , Pascal and Maximus in the Rapunzel Tangled Figure Play Set , the character 's likeness has since been adapted and modified by Disney into a much more glamorous doll for sale alongside several re @-@ imagined Disney villainesses as part of the company 's Disney Villains Designer Collection , released in 2012 . Costumed in a long burgundy gown made of satin , Gothel wears her thick black hair in " a theatrical up @-@ do . " 
 = Alasdair Cochrane = 
 Alasdair Cochrane ( born 1978 ) is a British political theorist and ethicist who is currently a senior lecturer in political theory in the Department of Politics at the University of Sheffield . He is known for his work on animal rights from the perspective of political theory , which is the subject of his two books : An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory ( 2010 , Palgrave Macmillan ) and Animal Rights Without Liberation ( 2012 , Columbia University Press ) . He is a founding member of the Centre for Animals and Social Justice , a UK @-@ based think tank focussed on furthering the social and political status of nonhuman animals . He joined the Department at Sheffield in 2012 , having previously been a faculty member at the Centre for the Study of Human Rights , London School of Economics . 
 Cochrane 's work forms part of the political turn in animal ethics — that is , the emergence of academic literature exploring the normative aspects of human / nonhuman animal relationships from a political perspective . He is known for his interest @-@ based account of animal rights , a theory of justice which claims that animals have rights based on their possession of <unk> @-@ significant interests . The account is a two @-@ tiered one , with individuals ' strong interests grounding prima facie rights , and some prima facie rights becoming concrete , or all @-@ things @-@ considered , rights . In this picture , the violation of concrete rights , but not necessarily prima facie rights , represents an injustice . In particular , Cochrane argues that sentient animals ' interests against suffering and death ground prima facie rights against the infliction of suffering and death . These prima facie rights convert to concrete rights in , for example , animal agriculture and animal testing , meaning that killing nonhuman animals or making them suffer for these purposes is unjust . 
 Cochrane argues that nonhuman animals do not possess an intrinsic interest in freedom . Therefore , owning or using nonhuman animals is not , in itself , unjust . This aspect of his thought has generated responses by others , including the political theorist Robert Garner and the philosopher John Hadley , who argue that there may be reasons to claim that nonhuman animals do possess an interest in freedom . Cochrane has also proposed a cosmopolitan alternative to Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka 's picture of a political animal rights , explicated in their 2011 book Zoopolis . Though Donaldson and Kymlicka have defended their account against Cochrane 's criticism , they have said that they welcome attempts to develop alternative political theories of animal rights to their own . Cochrane 's other research focusses variously on bioethics , punishment , just war and human rights . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Alasdair Cochrane studied in the Department of Politics at Sheffield as an undergraduate . There , he was taught by James <unk> , a specialist in environmental politics , who sparked his interest in political and environmental philosophy . Cochrane received a first @-@ class honours degree in politics in 2000 from the university . He subsequently obtained an MSc in political theory from the London School of Economics ( LSE ) . It was during this time that he met Cécile Fabre , who went on to become his PhD supervisor . In 2007 , Cochrane received a PhD from the Department of Government at the LSE . His thesis , supervised by Fabre with Paul Kelly acting as an advisor , was entitled Moral obligations to non @-@ humans . In that year , Cochrane published his first peer @-@ reviewed research article : " Animal rights and animal experiments : An interest @-@ based approach " . The paper , a reworked version of chapter five ( " Non @-@ human animals and experimentation " ) of Moral obligations to non @-@ humans , appeared in Res Publica , and was the winner of the journal 's second annual postgraduate essay prize . 
 = = = Academic career = = = 
 In 2007 , after completing his postgraduate studies , Cochrane joined the Centre for the Study of Human Rights at the LSE . He was initially a fellow , then became a lecturer . In 2009 , he published articles in Utilitas and Political Studies defending his " liberty thesis " , the idea that nonhuman animals lack an intrinsic interest in freedom . This claim has attracted article @-@ length responses from the political theorist Robert Garner , and the philosophers John Hadley , Andreas T. Schmidt , and Valéry Giroux . Cochrane 's first book , An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory , was published in 2010 , and was one of the first to consider nonhuman animals from the perspective of political theory . The book introduces readers to the debate about the inclusion of nonhuman animals within accounts of justice . He first addresses the historical dimension of the question , arguing that there was disagreement in classical exploration of the issue , unanimous rejection in medieval considerations and disagreement in contemporary treatments . He then considers the place of nonhuman animals in utilitarian , liberal , communitarian , Marxist and feminist political theory , concluding that no single tradition is sufficient to account for the place nonhuman animals should have in politics , but that all have something worthwhile to offer to the debate . 
 In 2011 Cochrane became a founding member of the Centre for Animals and Social Justice ( <unk> ) . The <unk> is a think tank that aims to bring academics and policy makers together with a view to understanding and furthering the social and political status of nonhuman animals . In January 2012 Cochrane became a faculty member in the Department of Politics at the University of Sheffield , first as a lecturer in political theory , and then as a senior lecturer in political theory . His second book , Animal Rights Without Liberation , was released that year by Columbia University Press . The book is based upon the research he completed during his PhD at LSE , and offers an extended defence of the theoretical basis and practical consequences of his interest @-@ based rights account of animal ethics . In 2013 he edited a special section in the journal Global Policy on " International Animal Protection " ; the section included articles by the philosopher Oscar Horta , the environmental law scholar Stuart R. Harrop and the animal law scholar Steven White , with an introduction by Cochrane . He also contributed to the inaugural issue of the journal Law , Ethics and Philosophy as a part of a symposium on Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka 's Zoopolis . Cochrane 's paper argued for a " cosmozoopolis " , a cosmopolitan alternative to Donaldson and Kymlicka 's proposal for a " zoopolis " — a picture of a mixed human / nonhuman animal state with group @-@ differentiated political rights for nonhuman animals . A reply to Cochrane 's piece ( as well as the other contribution , by Horta ) from Donaldson and Kymlicka was also included . In 2014 , he was named a BBC Radio 3 New Generation Thinker for his work on animal rights . 
 = = Research = = 
 Cochrane has research interests in animal ethics , bioethics , environmental ethics , rights theory , and human rights , as well as contemporary political theory more broadly . He is a leading figure in what Garner calls the " political turn in animal ethics " , though precisely what this means is disputed . Similarly , Tony Milligan characterises Cochrane as a key figure in the " political turn in animal rights " , while <unk> Ahlhaus and Peter Niesen identify a discipline of " Animal Politics " , of which Cochrane 's work is a major part , separate from animal ethics . The literature to which these authors variously refer explores the relationships of humans and nonhuman animals from the perspective of normative political theory . 
 Cochrane has himself — writing with Garner and Siobhan O 'Sullivan — explored the nature of the political turn . Cochrane , Garner and O 'Sullivan argue both that the new literature is importantly unified and that it is distinct from more traditional approaches to animal ethics , presenting the focus on justice as the key feature . They write that " the crucial <unk> and distinctive feature of these contributions – and what can properly be said to mark them out as a ' political turn ' – is the way in which they imagine how political institutions , structures and processes might be transformed so as to secure justice for both human and nonhuman animals " . 
 = = = Interest @-@ based rights approach = = = 
 Cochrane advocates the " interest @-@ based rights approach " to animal rights , which he distinguishes from the intrinsic value approach of Tom Regan and the relational account of Donaldson and Kymlicka . Rights set limits on what can be done , even in the pursuit of aggregative well @-@ being . Cochrane suggests that rights should be grounded in interests , and follows Joseph Raz 's formulation that 
 'X has a right ' if and only if X can have rights and , other things being equal , an aspect of X 's well @-@ being ( his interest ) is a sufficient reason for holding some other person ( s ) to be under a duty . 
 Cochrane draws out several aspects of this account , which serves as the basis of the analysis in his Animal Rights Without Liberation and elsewhere . First , interests must be " sufficient to give grounds for holding another to be under a duty " . Judging this entails considering the strength of an interest as well as " all other considerations " ; so , for example , individuals may have a very strong interest in free expression , but , " all things considered " , this fact does not necessitate the protection of slander . The greater interest of the victim of slander can outweigh the interest in free expression , and so context is important . This is the difference between prima facie rights and concrete rights . The former exist on an abstract level outside of particular circumstances . Prima facie rights can translate into concrete rights when considered in particular situations , but they do not always , as the free expression example illustrates . The account is for moral rights , and Cochrane 's normative claims are intended to form part of a " democratic <unk> " , informing and persuading political communities . 
 The strength of an interest is determined by a consideration of the value of something to an individual ( though this is not understood purely subjectively ) and the relationship between the individual at this time and the individual when he or she has the interest satisfied ( see personal identity ) . Sentient animals , Cochrane argues , possess significant interests in not being made to suffer and in not being killed , and so have a prima facie right not to be made to suffer and a prima facie right not to be killed . Whether these prima facie rights translate into concrete rights depends on the situation in question . Cochrane explores the consequences of the account in his Animal Rights Without Liberation , arguing that , with very few exceptions , nonhuman animals have a concrete rights not to be killed or made to suffer in animal testing , animal agriculture , in entertainment , for environmental purposes and in cultural practices . Despite this , because Cochrane does not posit a right against use for nonhuman animals , his account is highly permissive when contrasted with other animal rights accounts . 
 In his interest @-@ based rights approach , Cochrane draws upon a number of normative theories , but most particularly utilitarianism and liberalism , and the framework has been presented by commentators as a possible middle @-@ ground between the rights theory of Regan and the utilitarian account offered by Peter Singer . Cochrane is not the first theorist to advocate an interest @-@ based account of animal rights . Garner identifies Joel Feinberg , James <unk> and Steve Sapontzis as three philosophers who have previously used the language of interest rights , while Cochrane identifies R. G. Frey and Regan as two others who have addressed the possibility . Interest @-@ based approaches to animal ethics have become significant in recent academic literature ; Milligan identifies " a strong emphasis upon animal interests but in the context of a rights theory rather than a Singer @-@ style consequentialism " as one of the key components of the political turn . 
 = = = Liberty thesis = = = 
 Cochrane 's " liberty thesis " is that nonhuman animals — with the possible exception of some great apes and cetaceans — do not have an intrinsic interest in freedom . Nonetheless , Cochrane claims , nonhuman animals may often have an extrinsic interest in freedom . This is because restricting a nonhuman animal 's freedom may result in its suffering , and , regardless of their interest in freedom , sentient animals possess an interest in not suffering . Schmidt summarises Cochrane 's argument as the following : 
 P1 : To have a moral right to freedom , one needs to have a sufficient intrinsic interest in freedom . 
 P2 : To have a sufficient and intrinsic interest in freedom implies that freedom by itself contributes to a person 's wellbeing . 
 P3 : Only in case of autonomous persons does freedom contribute by itself to their wellbeing ( because only for autonomous persons does <unk> undermine the ability to ' frame and pursue their own conception of the good ' ) . 
 P4 : Non @-@ human animals are not autonomous persons . 
 C1 : Therefore , freedom does not by itself contribute to the wellbeing of non @-@ human animals . 
 C2 : Therefore , non @-@ human animals do not have an intrinsic interest in freedom . 
 C3 : Therefore , non @-@ human animals do not have a moral right to freedom . 
 Though Cochrane argues that nonhuman animals are not the victim of an injustice simply because they are owned , he claims that ownership of an animal must be understood as not entailing absolute control over said animal . He <unk> owned animals as " individual sentient creatures with interests of their own " . In understanding owned animals in this way , he challenges alternative accounts which frame owned animals variously as living artifacts , slaves , co @-@ citizens or beings who have strategically situated themselves alongside humans . In Animal Rights Without Liberation , Cochrane argues that there is nothing intrinsically wrong with using or owning animals , and so , as long as their interests are respected , there is nothing intrinsically wrong with using them , for example , in scientific tests , or for agricultural purposes . Ahlhaus and Niesen characterise the book as a whole as a critique of Singer 's Animal Liberation , saying that the former explores the latter 's " undeclared premise that liberation is what animals want or need " . 
 Schmidt criticises Cochrane 's liberty thesis on the grounds that nonhuman animals may have a non @-@ specific instrumental interest in freedom , meaning that although freedom is not intrinsically valuable for these animals , it may be that they can achieve other things which are intrinsically valuable only through possessing freedom . Thus , Cochrane 's thesis underestimates the value that freedom could have for nonhuman animals . Hadley criticises Cochrane 's non @-@ pragmatic approach , arguing that Cochrane , as an animal advocate , is wrong to deny that nonhuman animals possess an " intrinsic " interest in freedom . Hadley links freedom to the value of nonhuman animals , arguing that the latter can be undermined by arguing against the former . Garner criticises Cochrane 's thesis on the grounds that Cochrane has , Garner claims , underestimated the weight of the argument from marginal cases . To the extent that Cochrane 's argument works for nonhuman animals , Garner suggests , it will also work for many humans , leading to counter @-@ intuitive consequences . Garner ties autonomy not merely to liberty , but also life , which means that Cochrane 's argument would imply that some humans have less of an interest in life than others . Nonetheless , Garner argues that Cochrane 's liberty thesis is not destructive of animal rights , and that animal rights positions can still make claims of significance without endorsing the claim that nonhuman animal use is , in itself , problematic . Indeed , merely a right against suffering , Garner suggests , could go a long way towards achieving the abolitionist goal of the end of animal industry . All three authors praise Cochrane for drawing attention to the previously under @-@ examined issue . 
 The abolitionist theorist Jason Wyckoff draws attention to Cochrane 's argument that nonhuman animals do not have an interest in not being owned . He <unk> Cochrane 's argument as follows : 
 1 . Possession ( understood as restriction of freedom ) is something to which we do not object across the board even in the case of human children , so there is no across @-@ the @-@ board objection to possession when the case involves animals . 
 2 . Non @-@ lethal use of animals that does not cause suffering is consistent with full respect for the interests of those animals , provided that those animals are not treated exclusively as means to human ends . 
 3 . At least some <unk> of animals ( including sales ) are consistent with full respect for those animals ’ interests , provided that the transfer does not cause suffering . 
 4 . The rights to possess , use , and transfer items are at the core of our concept of property . 
 5 . Therefore , the property status of animals is compatible with full respect for the interests of animals . 
 He claims that Cochrane 's argument is invalid because it assumes that nonhuman animals are harmed by being owned only if they are killed or have suffering inflicted on them and because it assumes that ownership is permissible when it does not compromise the interests of the particular owned animal . Both of these assumptions are false , claim Wyckoff , as though " instances of possession , use , and transfer may possibly not violate the interests of an individual , the systematic treatment of that individual as the kind of entity that can be possessed , used , and transferred constructs that entity and others like it ( or him , or her ) as an object , and when that entity is a moral patient with interests , that construction as an object subordinates the interests of that patient and similar patients to those who benefit from the objectification of the individual " . 
 = = = International animal rights = = = 
 Some of Cochrane 's research concerns animal rights from an international or cosmopolitan perspective . As an alternative to Donaldson and Kymlicka 's proposal for a " zoopolis " , Cochrane proposes a " cosmozoopolis " , drawing upon cosmopolitan theory . The zoopolis picture , Cochrane suggests , unfairly elevates the interests of nonhuman " citizens " over other nonhuman animals , even though these other animals may have comparable interests , and , in offering sovereignty to free @-@ living animals , denies the importance of nonhuman animal mobility . Ahlhaus and Niesen consider Cochrane 's criticism of Donaldson and Kymlicka valuable , but question the extent to which his " cosmozoopolis " picture is compatible with his liberty thesis . Donaldson and Kymlicka offer a defence of their zoopolis picture against Cochrane 's criticism , affirming the importance of nonhuman animals ' interests in their territory and the legitimacy of offering benefits to members of particular societies denied to non @-@ members . Despite this , they say that , citing Cochrane 's cosmozoopolis picture as an example , " one of [ their ] aims is to inspire people to develop ... alternative political theories of animal rights " to their own . 
 Cochrane is of the view that " a lack of a clear , focused and coherent set of international standards and policies for animal protection is an important contributing factor " to the gulf between the theoretical and legal valuation of nonhuman animals and their treatment around the world . With Steve Cooke , he argues that it is theoretically acceptable — drawing upon Simon Caney 's account of just war — for states to go to war to protect nonhuman animals . Nonetheless , the pair argue that it will almost never be acceptable in practice . 
 = = = Other research = = = 
 Cochrane is critical of the use of claims about dignity in debates about the genetic engineering of nonhuman animals , in questions about the use of nonhuman animals in human entertainment , and in the bioethics literature . He holds that nonhuman animals do not possess an interest against being treated in undignified ways , and endorses " undignified bioethics " — bioethics without the concept of dignity . Cochrane has sympathy for the standard criticisms of dignity in bioethics ( that the concept is indeterminate , reactionary and redundant ) , and , in a 2010 paper , defends these criticisms against counter @-@ claims from those who endorse various understandings of dignity . The bioethicist Inmaculada de Melo @-@ Martín responded to Cochrane 's article , claiming that the problems Cochrane identifies are problems with common understandings of the concepts of dignity , not with the concepts themselves , and arguing that Cochrane 's conclusion leads to a conception of bioethics almost devoid of ethics . 
 Recent literature exploring bioethical questions from a human rights perspective has been criticised on the grounds that human rights theory contains unresolved problems . <unk> have claimed that bioethical inquiry can contribute to resolving these problems . Cochrane claims that this contribution to human rights literature offers three insights , but that these are not entirely original . These insights are questions about institutional fairness , rights as trumps and rights as solely belonging to humans . Cochrane holds that human rights should be <unk> as sentient rights . The grounding of human rights , he claims , are not distinct from the grounding of human obligations to nonhuman animals , and attempts to distinguish human rights from the rights of other sentient beings ultimately fail . 
 Cochrane has also published work on environmental ethics and punishment . Concerning the latter , he argues , building upon Thomas Mathiesen 's claim that prison is not justified by classic theories of punishment , that the institution cannot be justified on the basis of Antony Duff 's " communicative " account of punishment . 
 = = Select bibliography = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2012 ) . Animal Rights Without Liberation . New York : Columbia University Press . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2010 ) . An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory . Basingstoke , England : Palgrave Macmillan . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Cochrane , Alasdair , Siobhan O 'Sullivan and Robert Garner ( 2016 ) . " Animal ethics and the political " . Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy. doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> @.@ 2016 @.@ <unk> . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2016 ) . " Prison on appeal : The idea of communicative incarceration " . Criminal Law and Philosophy. doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> @-@ 015 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ; Cooke , Steve ( 2016 ) . " ' Humane intervention ' : The international protection of animal rights " . Journal of Global Ethics 12 ( 1 ) : 106 – 21 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> @.@ 2016 @.@ <unk> . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2013 ) . " <unk> : The case against group @-@ differentiated animal rights " . Law , Ethics and Philosophy 1 : 127 – 41 . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2013 ) . " From human rights to sentient rights " . Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 16 ( 5 ) : 655 – 75 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> @.@ 2012 @.@ <unk> . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2012 ) . " Evaluating ' bioethical approaches ' to human rights " . Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 15 ( 3 ) : 309 – 322 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> @-@ 012 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2010 ) . " <unk> bioethics " . Bioethics 24 ( 5 ) : 234 – 241 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1467 @-@ <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2009 ) . " Do animals have an interest in liberty ? " . Political Studies 57 ( 3 ) : 660 – 679 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1467 @-@ <unk> 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2009 ) . " Ownership and justice for animals " . Utilitas 21 ( 4 ) : 424 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2007 ) . " Animal rights and animal experiments : An interest @-@ based approach " . Res Publica 13 ( 3 ) : 293 – 318 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> @-@ 007 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Chapters = = = 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2016 ) . " Inter @-@ species solidarity : Labour rights for animals " . In Garner , Robert ; O 'Sullivan , Siobhan . The Political Turn in Animal Ethics . London : Rowman & Littlefield International . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2016 ) . " Life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness ? Specifying the rights of animals " . In <unk> , Tatjana ; Garner , Robert . The Ethics of Killing Animals . Oxford : Oxford University Press. pp. 201 – 14 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / acprof : oso / <unk> @.@ 003 @.@ 0012 . 
 Cochrane , Alasdair ( 2014 ) . " Born in chains ? The ethics of animal domestication " . In Gruen , Lori . The Ethics of Captivity . Oxford : Oxford University Press. pp. 156 – 73 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / acprof : oso / <unk> @.@ 003 @.@ 0011 . 
 = Acharya Institute of Technology = 
 Acharya Institute of Technology , or AIT , is a private co @-@ educational engineering and management college in Bangalore , India , affiliated with the Visvesvaraya Technological University ( VTU ) and accredited by the National Board of Accreditation ( NBA ) . Established in 2000 , it offers eleven undergraduate courses and eight postgraduate courses . AIT includes the <unk> School of Architecture , which offers a five @-@ year undergraduate course in architecture and is accredited by the Council of Architecture ( COA ) . The college has links and collaborations with various industries and universities across the world . 
 It is one of the several institutes run by the JMJ Education Society and features in various ranking lists of top engineering colleges in India published by media agencies and publications like Outlook , Competition Success Review ( CSR ) , <unk> , NASSCOM , The Week and Electronics For You . In 2009 , 2010 , 2011 and 2012 rankings , AIT was ranked among the top five Engineering colleges in Karnataka by the Global Human Resources Development Centre ( GHRDC ) . It features as an AA + institution in the rankings of the Careers 360 magazine . The CSR @-@ GHRDC survey , in 2009 rankings , listed the college as the most promising engineering college in India . The college received the South India 's Excellent Institution Award from A @-@ Plus TV Media Works . The <unk> <unk> survey of industry linked engineering institutions , in 2012 , has ranked AIT as No. 2 in the South- Western region comprising the states of Karnataka and <unk> and No. 13 in India . 
 AIT organises the Acharya Habba , an annual 2 days long inter @-@ collegiate cultural festival that is one of the largest in Bangalore and Karnataka . 
 The Deccan Herald lists AIT as one of the " notable " colleges to apply the Karnataka Management Aptitude Test ( <unk> ) for admission to postgraduate management courses . 
 = = History = = 
 The Acharya Institute of Technology ( AIT ) was established in 2000 by <unk> Reddy , chairman of the Acharya Group of Institutions . The college is managed by the JMJ Education Society , headquartered in Bangalore . AIT offers thirteen Bachelor of Engineering ( BE ) courses , six Master of Technology ( MTech ) courses , Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) , Master of Computer Applications ( MCA ) and a PhD course in Mathematics . All courses are affiliated to the Visvesvaraya Technological University ( VTU ) . It was the first college under the VTU to start an undergraduate course in Mechatronics in Karnataka . 
 In 2009 the college constructed a 3 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) long road from its campus to the <unk> Main Road . The road was inaugurated by <unk> Swamiji of <unk> Math in September 2010 . It is named Acharya Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Road after former Indian President Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan . 
 In 2012 , the institute was granted " Technical Campus " status by the All India Council for Technical Education ( AICTE ) . 
 On 16 June 2012 , the college hosted India 's first Heavy metal music festival as a part of Bangalore Open Air 2012 backed by Germany 's Wacken Open Air at the college stadium . German Heavy metal bands and Teutonic thrash metal bands like the Kreator and the <unk> along with an American Power metal band and Indian metal bands namely <unk> , Eccentric Pendulum , Dying Embrace , 1833 AD , <unk> Sea and Albatross performed in the fest . Although Iced Earth were scheduled to perform at the fest , but backed out due to the denial of Visa by the Indian embassy . 
 = = Academic profile = = 
 = = = Admission criteria = = = 
 AIT admits 50 percent students on the basis of their rank in the Common Entrance Test ( CET ) conducted by the Government of Karnataka and 30 percent students through the Undergraduate Entrance Test of the Consortium of Medical , Engineering and Dental Colleges ( <unk> ) of Karnataka . It also admits 20 percent students under a management quota without merit requirements and has admitted about 150 foreigners from 25 countries under " PIO Quota " . 
 There is a lateral entry scheme in place , by which students holding diploma degrees can enter directly into the second year of study in engineering . After completing their graduation , students receive a BE degree from the VTU . Students are admitted to postgraduate courses on the basis of their test scores in the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering , as well as on their Karnataka Postgraduate Common Entrance Test ( <unk> ) and <unk> scores . 
 = = = Departments and courses = = = 
 Undergraduate courses 
 The college offers four @-@ year BE courses in the following subjects . All are recognised by VTU . 
 Aeronautical Engineering 
 Automobile Engineering 
 Biotechnology 
 Civil Engineering 
 Computer Science 
 Construction technology 
 Electronics & Communication Engineering 
 Electrical & Electronics Engineering 
 Mechatronics Engineering 
 Mechanical Engineering 
 Mining Engineering 
 Information Science & Engineering 
 Postgraduate courses 
 The college offers the following two @-@ year postgraduate courses , all recognised by the VTU . 
 MBA 
 MCA 
 MTech in Biotechnology 
 MTech in Computer Networking Engineering 
 MTech in Computer Science and Engineering 
 MTech in Digital Communication Engineering 
 MTech in Machine Design 
 MTech in Power Systems 
 Architecture 
 Acharya 's <unk> School of Architecture offers a five @-@ year undergraduate course in architecture ( <unk> ) , which is accredited by the Council of Architecture ( COA ) . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 AIT maintains a teacher @-@ student ratio of 1 : 10 . It is the first college in Karnataka to put in effect the Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations for faculty pay scale . 
 = = = Research Centers = = = 
 The Institute receives a " Modernisation and Removal of Obsolescence " grant from the AICTE for research activities and upgraded state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art laboratory facilities . The Visvesvaraya Technological University recognises the college 's departments of Biotechnology , Electronics and Communication Engineering , Mathematics , and Mechanical Engineering as research centers : 
 = = = Accreditation and Rankings = = = 
 AIT is accredited by the National Board of Accreditation ( NBA ) . It was the first college of the Visvesvaraya Technological University to start an undergraduate course in Mechatronics in Karnataka . It is one of the seven colleges in Karnataka to be funded by the World Bank and receives endowments from the VTU to carry out research in both its undergraduate and postgraduate departments . 
 The college is ranked consistently among the top 50 engineering colleges in India by publications and organizations such as Outlook , Competition Success Review ( CSR ) , <unk> , NASSCOM , The Week and Electronics For You . In 2009 , 2010 , 2011 and 2012 rankings , AIT was ranked among the top five engineering colleges in Karnataka by the Global Human Resources Development Centre ( GHRDC ) . It features as an AA + institution in the rankings of the Careers 360 magazine . The CSR @-@ GHRDC survey , in 2009 rankings , listed the college as the most promising engineering college in India . The college received the South India 's Excellent Institution Award from A @-@ Plus TV Media Works . 
 = = Administration = = 
