 At 592 @,@ 800 square kilometres ( 228 @,@ 900 sq mi ) , Madagascar is the world 's 46th largest country and the fourth @-@ largest island . The country lies mostly between latitudes 12 ° S and 26 ° S , and longitudes 43 ° E and 51 ° E. Neighboring islands include the French territory of Réunion and the country of Mauritius to the east , as well as the state of Comoros and the French territory of Mayotte to the north west . The nearest mainland state is Mozambique , located to the west . 
 The prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana separated the <unk> – Antarctica – India landmass from the Africa – South America landmass around 135 million years ago . Madagascar later split from India about 88 million years ago , allowing plants and animals on the island to evolve in relative isolation . Along the length of the eastern coast runs a narrow and steep escarpment containing much of the island 's remaining tropical lowland forest . 
 To the west of this ridge lies a plateau in the center of the island ranging in altitude from 750 to 1 @,@ 500 m ( 2 @,@ 460 to 4 @,@ 920 ft ) above sea level . These central highlands , traditionally the homeland of the Merina people and the location of their historic capital at Antananarivo , are the most densely populated part of the island and are characterized by terraced , rice @-@ growing valleys lying between grassy hills and patches of the subhumid forests that formerly covered the highland region . To the west of the highlands , the increasingly arid terrain gradually slopes down to the Mozambique Channel and mangrove swamps along the coast . 
 Madagascar 's highest peaks rise from three prominent highland massifs : <unk> 2 @,@ 876 m ( 9 @,@ 436 ft ) in the Tsaratanana Massif is the island 's highest point , followed by <unk> Peak 2 @,@ 658 m ( 8 @,@ 720 ft ) in the Andringitra Massif , and <unk> 2 @,@ 643 m ( 8 @,@ 671 ft ) in the Ankaratra Massif . To the east , the Canal des <unk> is a chain of man @-@ made and natural lakes connected by canals built by the French just inland from the east coast and running parallel to it for some 600 km ( 370 mi ) . 
 The western and southern sides , which lie in the rain shadow of the central highlands , are home to dry deciduous forests , spiny forests , and deserts and xeric shrublands . Due to their lower population densities , Madagascar 's dry deciduous forests have been better preserved than the eastern rain forests or the original woodlands of the central plateau . The western coast features many protected harbors , but silting is a major problem caused by sediment from the high levels of inland erosion carried by rivers crossing the broad western plains . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The combination of southeastern trade winds and northwestern monsoons produces a hot rainy season ( November – April ) with frequently destructive cyclones , and a relatively cooler dry season ( May – October ) . Rain clouds originating over the Indian Ocean discharge much of their moisture over the island 's eastern coast ; the heavy precipitation supports the area 's rain forest ecosystem . The central highlands are both drier and cooler while the west is drier still , and a semi @-@ arid climate prevails in the southwest and southern interior of the island . 
 Tropical cyclones annually cause damage to infrastructure and local economies as well as loss of life . In 2004 Cyclone Gafilo became the strongest cyclone ever recorded to hit Madagascar . The storm killed 172 people , left 214 @,@ 260 homeless and caused more than US $ 250 million in damage . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 As a result of the island 's long isolation from neighboring continents , Madagascar is home to an abundance of plants and animals found nowhere else on Earth . Approximately 90 % of all plant and animal species found in Madagascar are endemic , including the lemurs ( a type of strepsirrhine primate ) , the carnivorous fossa and many birds . This distinctive ecology has led some ecologists to refer to Madagascar as the " eighth continent " , and the island has been classified by Conservation International as a biodiversity hotspot . 
 More than 80 percent of Madagascar 's 14 @,@ 883 plant species are found nowhere else in the world , including five plant families . The family Didiereaceae , composed of four genera and 11 species , is limited to the spiny forests of southwestern Madagascar . Four @-@ fifths of the world 's Pachypodium species are endemic to the island . Three @-@ fourths of Madagascar 's 860 orchid species are found here alone , as are six of the world 's nine baobab species . 
 The island is home to around 170 palm species , three times as many as on all of mainland Africa ; 165 of them are endemic . Many native plant species are used as herbal remedies for a variety of afflictions . The drugs vinblastine and vincristine , used to treat Hodgkin 's disease , leukemia and other cancers , were derived from the Madagascar periwinkle . The traveler 's palm , known locally as ravinala and endemic to the eastern rain forests , is highly iconic of Madagascar and is featured in the national emblem as well as the Air Madagascar logo . 
 Like its flora , Madagascar 's fauna is diverse and exhibits a high rate of endemism . Lemurs have been characterized as " Madagascar 's flagship mammal species " by Conservation International . In the absence of monkeys and other competitors , these primates have adapted to a wide range of habitats and diversified into numerous species . As of 2012 , there were officially 103 species and subspecies of lemur , 39 of which were described by zoologists between 2000 and 2008 . They are almost all classified as rare , vulnerable , or endangered . At least 17 species of lemur have become extinct since humans arrived on Madagascar , all of which were larger than the surviving lemur species . 
 A number of other mammals , including the cat @-@ like fossa , are endemic to Madagascar . Over 300 species of birds have been recorded on the island , of which over 60 percent ( including four families and 42 genera ) are endemic . The few families and genera of reptile that have reached Madagascar have diversified into more than 260 species , with over 90 percent of these being endemic ( including one endemic family ) . The island is home to two @-@ thirds of the world 's chameleon species , including the smallest known , and researchers have proposed that Madagascar may be the origin of all chameleons . 
 Endemic fish of Madagascar include two families , 15 genera and over 100 species , primarily inhabiting the island 's freshwater lakes and rivers . Although invertebrates remain poorly studied on Madagascar , researchers have found high rates of endemism among the known species . All 651 species of terrestrial snail are endemic , as are a majority of the island 's butterflies , scarab beetles , lacewings , spiders and dragonflies . 
 = = = Environmental issues = = = 
 Madagascar 's varied fauna and flora are endangered by human activity . Since the arrival of humans around 2 @,@ 350 years ago , Madagascar has lost more than 90 percent of its original forest . This forest loss is largely fueled by tavy ( " fat " ) , a traditional slash @-@ and @-@ burn agricultural practice imported to Madagascar by the earliest settlers . Malagasy farmers embrace and perpetuate the practice not only for its practical benefits as an agricultural technique , but for its cultural associations with prosperity , health and venerated ancestral custom ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 As human population density rose on the island , deforestation accelerated beginning around 1400 years ago . By the 16th century , the central highlands had been largely cleared of their original forests . More recent contributors to the loss of forest cover include the growth in cattle herd size since their introduction around 1000 years ago , a continued reliance on charcoal as a fuel for cooking , and the increased prominence of coffee as a cash crop over the past century . 
 According to a conservative estimate , about 40 percent of the island 's original forest cover was lost from the 1950s to 2000 , with a thinning of remaining forest areas by 80 percent . In addition to traditional agricultural practice , wildlife conservation is challenged by the illicit harvesting of protected forests , as well as the state @-@ sanctioned harvesting of precious woods within national parks . Although banned by then @-@ President Marc Ravalomanana from 2000 to 2009 , the collection of small quantities of precious timber from national parks was re @-@ authorized in January 2009 and dramatically intensified under the administration of Andry Rajoelina as a key source of state revenues to offset cuts in donor support following Ravalomanana 's ouster . 
 It is anticipated that all the island 's rainforests , excluding those in protected areas and the steepest eastern mountain slopes , will have been deforested by 2025 . Invasive species have likewise been introduced by human populations . Following the 2014 discovery in Madagascar of the Asian common toad , a relative of a toad species that has severely harmed wildlife in Australia since the 1930s , researchers warned the toad could " wreak havoc on the country 's unique fauna . " 
 Habitat destruction and hunting have threatened many of Madagascar 's endemic species or driven them to extinction . The island 's elephant birds , a family of endemic giant ratites , became extinct in the 17th century or earlier , most probably due to human hunting of adult birds and poaching of their large eggs for food . Numerous giant lemur species vanished with the arrival of human settlers to the island , while others became extinct over the course of the centuries as a growing human population put greater pressures on lemur habitats and , among some populations , increased the rate of lemur hunting for food . 
 A July 2012 assessment found that the exploitation of natural resources since the 2009 coup has had dire consequences for the island 's wildlife : 90 percent of lemur species were found to be threatened with extinction , the highest proportion of any mammalian group . Of these , 23 species were classified as critically endangered . By contrast , a previous study in 2008 had found only 38 percent of lemur species were at risk of extinction . 
 In 2003 Ravalomanana announced the Durban Vision , an initiative to more than triple the island 's protected natural areas to over 60 @,@ 000 km2 ( 23 @,@ 000 sq mi ) or 10 percent of Madagascar 's land surface . As of 2011 , areas protected by the state included five Strict Nature Reserves ( Réserves Naturelles <unk> ) , 21 Wildlife Reserves ( Réserves <unk> ) and 21 National Parks ( <unk> Nationaux ) . In 2007 six of the national parks were declared a joint World Heritage Site under the name Rainforests of the Atsinanana . These parks are Marojejy , Masoala , Ranomafana , <unk> , Andohahela and Andringitra . Local timber merchants are harvesting scarce species of rosewood trees from protected rainforests within Marojejy National Park and exporting the wood to China for the production of luxury furniture and musical instruments . To raise public awareness of Madagascar 's environmental challenges , the Wildlife Conservation Society opened an exhibit entitled " Madagascar ! " in June 2008 at the Bronx Zoo in New York . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early period = = = 
 The settlement of Madagascar is a subject of ongoing research and debate . Archaeological finds such as cut marks on bones found in the northwest and stone tools in the northeast indicate that Madagascar was visited by foragers around 2000 BC . Traditionally , archaeologists have estimated that the earliest settlers arrived in successive waves throughout the period between 350 BC and 550 AD , while others are cautious about dates earlier than 250 AD . In either case , these dates make Madagascar one of the last major landmasses on Earth to be settled by humans . 
 Early settlers arrived in outrigger canoes from southern Borneo . Upon arrival , early settlers practiced slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture to clear the coastal rainforests for cultivation . The first settlers encountered Madagascar 's abundance of megafauna , including giant lemurs , elephant birds , giant fossa and the Malagasy hippopotamus , which have since become extinct due to hunting and habitat destruction . By 600 AD groups of these early settlers had begun clearing the forests of the central highlands . Arab traders first reached the island between the seventh and ninth centuries . A wave of Bantu @-@ speaking migrants from southeastern Africa arrived around 1000 AD . They introduced the zebu , a type of long @-@ horned humped cattle , which they kept in large herds . 
 By 1600 , irrigated paddy fields were developed in the central highland Betsileo Kingdom , and were extended with terraced paddies throughout the neighboring Kingdom of Imerina a century later . The rising intensity of land cultivation and the ever @-@ increasing demand for zebu pasturage had largely transformed the central highlands from a forest ecosystem to grassland by the 17th century . The oral histories of the Merina people , who may have arrived in the central highlands between 600 and 1000 years ago , describe encountering an established population they called the Vazimba . Probably the descendants of an earlier and less technologically advanced Austronesian settlement wave , the Vazimba were assimilated or expelled from the highlands by the Merina kings Andriamanelo , Ralambo and Andrianjaka in the 16th and early 17th centuries . Today , the spirits of the Vazimba are revered as <unk> ( ancestral masters of the land ) by many traditional Malagasy communities . 
 = = = Arab and European contacts = = = 
 Madagascar was an important transoceanic trading hub connecting ports of the Indian Ocean in the early centuries following human settlement . The written history of Madagascar began with the Arabs , who established trading posts along the northwest coast by at least the 10th century and introduced Islam , the Arabic script ( used to transcribe the Malagasy language in a form of writing known as sorabe ) , Arab astrology , and other cultural elements . European contact began in 1500 , when the Portuguese sea captain Diogo Dias sighted the island . The French established trading posts along the east coast in the late 17th century . 
 From about 1774 to 1824 , Madagascar gained prominence among pirates and European traders , particularly those involved in the trans @-@ Atlantic slave trade . The small island of Nosy <unk> off the northeastern coast of Madagascar has been proposed by some historians as the site of the legendary pirate utopia of <unk> . Many European sailors were shipwrecked on the coasts of the island , among them Robert Drury , whose journal is one of the few written depictions of life in southern Madagascar during the 18th century . The wealth generated by maritime trade spurred the rise of organized kingdoms on the island , some of which had grown quite powerful by the 17th century . Among these were the Betsimisaraka alliance of the eastern coast and the Sakalava chiefdoms of Menabe and <unk> on the west coast . The Kingdom of Imerina , located in the central highlands with its capital at the royal palace of Antananarivo , emerged at around the same time under the leadership of King Andriamanelo . 
 = = = Kingdom of Madagascar ( 1540 – 1897 ) = = = 
 Upon its emergence in the early 17th century , the highland kingdom of Imerina was initially a minor power relative to the larger coastal kingdoms and grew even weaker in the early 18th century when King Andriamasinavalona divided it among his four sons . Following almost a century of warring and famine , Imerina was reunited in 1793 by King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) . From his initial capital Ambohimanga , and later from the Rova of Antananarivo , this Merina king rapidly expanded his rule over neighboring principalities . His ambition to bring the entire island under his control was largely achieved by his son and successor , King Radama I ( 1810 – 28 ) , who was recognized by the British government as King of Madagascar . 
 Radama concluded a treaty in 1817 with the British governor of Mauritius to abolish the lucrative slave trade in return for British military and financial assistance . Artisan missionary envoys from the London Missionary Society began arriving in 1818 and included such key figures as James Cameron , David Jones and David Griffiths , who established schools , transcribed the Malagasy language using the Roman alphabet , translated the Bible , and introduced a variety of new technologies to the island . 
 Radama 's successor , Queen Ranavalona I ( 1828 – 61 ) , responded to increasing political and cultural encroachment on the part of Britain and France by issuing a royal edict prohibiting the practice of Christianity in Madagascar and pressuring most foreigners to leave the territory . Residents of Madagascar could accuse one another of various crimes , including theft , Christianity and especially witchcraft , for which the ordeal of tangena was routinely obligatory . Between 1828 and 1861 , the tangena ordeal caused about 3 @,@ 000 deaths annually . 
 Among those who continued to reside in Imerina were Jean Laborde , an entrepreneur who developed munitions and other industries on behalf of the monarchy , and Joseph @-@ François Lambert , a French adventurer and slave trader , with whom then @-@ Prince Radama II signed a controversial trade agreement termed the Lambert Charter . Succeeding his mother , Radama II ( 1861 – 63 ) attempted to relax the queen 's stringent policies , but was overthrown two years later by Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony ( 1852 – 1865 ) and an alliance of Andriana ( noble ) and Hova ( commoner ) courtiers , who sought to end the absolute power of the monarch . 
 Following the coup , the courtiers offered Radama 's queen Rasoherina ( 1863 – 68 ) the opportunity to rule , if she would accept a power sharing arrangement with the Prime Minister — a new social contract that would be sealed by a political marriage between them . Queen Rasoherina accepted , first wedding Rainivoninahitriniony , then later deposing him and wedding his brother , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony ( 1864 – 95 ) , who would go on to marry Queen Ranavalona II ( 1868 – 83 ) and Queen Ranavalona III ( 1883 – 97 ) in succession . 
 Over the course of Rainilaiarivony 's 31 @-@ year tenure as prime minister , numerous policies were adopted to modernize and consolidate the power of the central government . Schools were constructed throughout the island and attendance was made mandatory . Army organization was improved , and British consultants were employed to train and professionalize soldiers . Polygamy was outlawed and Christianity , declared the official religion of the court in 1869 , was adopted alongside traditional beliefs among a growing portion of the populace . Legal codes were reformed on the basis of British common law and three European @-@ style courts were established in the capital city . In his joint role as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Rainilaiarivony also successfully ensured the defense of Madagascar against several French colonial incursions . 
 = = = French colonisation ( 1897 – 1960 ) = = = 
 Primarily on the basis that the Lambert Charter had not been respected , France invaded Madagascar in 1883 in what became known as the first Franco @-@ Hova War . At the end of the war , Madagascar ceded the northern port town of Antsiranana ( Diego Suarez ) to France and paid 560 @,@ 000 francs to Lambert 's heirs . In 1890 , the British accepted the full formal imposition of a French protectorate on the island , but French authority was not acknowledged by the government of Madagascar . To force capitulation , the French bombarded and occupied the harbor of Toamasina on the east coast , and Mahajanga on the west coast , in December 1894 and January 1895 respectively . 
 A French military flying column then marched toward Antananarivo , losing many men to malaria and other diseases . Reinforcements came from Algeria and Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Upon reaching the city in September 1895 , the column bombarded the royal palace with heavy artillery , causing heavy casualties and leading Queen Ranavalona III to surrender . France annexed Madagascar in 1896 and declared the island a colony the following year , dissolving the Merina monarchy and sending the royal family into exile on Réunion Island and to Algeria . A two @-@ year resistance movement organized in response to the French capture of the royal palace was effectively put down at the end of 1897 . 
 Under colonial rule , plantations were established for the production of a variety of export crops . Slavery was abolished in 1896 and approximately 500 @,@ 000 slaves were freed ; many remained in their former masters ' homes as servants or as sharecroppers ; in many parts of the island strong discriminatory views against slave descendants are still held today . Wide paved boulevards and gathering places were constructed in the capital city of Antananarivo and the Rova palace compound was turned into a museum . Additional schools were built , particularly in rural and coastal areas where the schools of the Merina had not reached . Education became mandatory between the ages of 6 to 13 and focused primarily on French language and practical skills . 
 The Merina royal tradition of taxes paid in the form of labor was continued under the French and used to construct a railway and roads linking key coastal cities to Antananarivo . Malagasy troops fought for France in World War I. In the 1930s , Nazi political thinkers developed the Madagascar plan on the basis of earlier proposals from Poland and elsewhere in Europe that had identified the island as a potential site for the deportation of Europe 's Jews . During the Second World War , the island was the site of the Battle of Madagascar between the Vichy government and the British . 
 The occupation of France during the Second World War tarnished the prestige of the colonial administration in Madagascar and galvanized the growing independence movement , leading to the Malagasy Uprising of 1947 . This movement led the French to establish reformed institutions in 1956 under the Loi Cadre ( Overseas Reform Act ) , and Madagascar moved peacefully towards independence . The Malagasy Republic was proclaimed on 14 October 1958 , as an autonomous state within the French Community . A period of provisional government ended with the adoption of a constitution in 1959 and full independence on 26 June 1960 . 
 = = = Independent state ( since 1960 ) = = = 
 Since regaining independence , Madagascar has transitioned through four republics with corresponding revisions to its constitution . The First Republic ( 1960 – 72 ) , under the leadership of French @-@ appointed President Philibert Tsiranana , was characterized by a continuation of strong economic and political ties to France . Many high @-@ level technical positions were filled by French expatriates , and French teachers , textbooks and curricula continued to be used in schools around the country . Popular resentment over Tsiranana 's tolerance for this " neo @-@ colonial " arrangement inspired a series of farmer and student protests that overturned his administration in 1972 . 
 Gabriel <unk> , a major general in the army , was appointed interim president and prime minister that same year , but low public approval forced him to step down in 1975 . Colonel Richard <unk> , appointed to succeed him , was assassinated six days into his tenure . General Gilles <unk> ruled after <unk> for four months before being replaced by another military appointee : Vice Admiral Didier Ratsiraka , who ushered in the socialist @-@ Marxist Second Republic that ran under his tenure from 1975 to 1993 . 
 This period saw a political alignment with the Eastern Bloc countries and a shift toward economic insularity . These policies , coupled with economic pressures stemming from the 1973 oil crisis , resulted in the rapid collapse of Madagascar 's economy and a sharp decline in living standards , and the country had become completely bankrupt by 1979 . The Ratsiraka administration accepted the conditions of transparency , anti @-@ corruption measures and free market policies imposed by the International Monetary Fund , World Bank and various bilateral donors in exchange for their bailout of the nation 's broken economy . 
 Ratsiraka 's dwindling popularity in the late 1980s reached a critical point in 1991 when presidential guards opened fire on unarmed protesters during a rally . Within two months , a transitional government had been established under the leadership of Albert Zafy ( 1993 – 96 ) , who went on to win the 1992 presidential elections and inaugurate the Third Republic ( 1992 – 2010 ) . The new Madagascar constitution established a multi @-@ party democracy and a separation of powers that placed significant control in the hands of the National Assembly . The new constitution also emphasized human rights , social and political freedoms , and free trade . Zafy 's term , however , was marred by economic decline , allegations of corruption , and his introduction of legislation to give himself greater powers . He was consequently impeached in 1996 , and an interim president , Norbert Ratsirahonana , was appointed for the three months prior to the next presidential election . Ratsiraka was then voted back into power on a platform of decentralization and economic reforms for a second term which lasted from 1996 to 2001 . 
 The contested 2001 presidential elections in which then @-@ mayor of Antananarivo , Marc Ravalomanana , eventually emerged victorious , caused a seven @-@ month standoff in 2002 between supporters of Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka . The negative economic impact of the political crisis was gradually overcome by Ravalomanana 's progressive economic and political policies , which encouraged investments in education and ecotourism , facilitated foreign direct investment , and cultivated trading partnerships both regionally and internationally . National GDP grew at an average rate of 7 percent per year under his administration . In the later half of his second term , Ravalomanana was criticised by domestic and international observers who accused him of increasing authoritarianism and corruption . 
 Opposition leader and then @-@ mayor of Antananarivo , Andry Rajoelina , led a movement in early 2009 in which Ravalomanana was pushed from power in an unconstitutional process widely condemned as a coup d 'état . In March 2009 , Rajoelina was declared by the Supreme Court as the President of the High Transitional Authority , an interim governing body responsible for moving the country toward presidential elections . In 2010 , a new constitution was adopted by referendum , establishing a Fourth Republic , which sustained the democratic , multi @-@ party structure established in the previous constitution . Hery Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the 2013 presidential election , which the international community deemed fair and transparent . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Madagascar is a semi @-@ presidential representative democratic multi @-@ party republic , wherein the popularly elected president is the head of state and selects a prime minister , who recommends candidates to the president to form his cabinet of ministers . According to the constitution , executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in the ministerial cabinet , the Senate and the National Assembly , although in reality these two latter bodies have very little power or legislative role . The constitution establishes independent executive , legislative and judicial branches and mandates a popularly elected president limited to three five @-@ year terms . 
 The public directly elects the president and the 127 members of the National Assembly to five @-@ year terms . The last National Assembly election was held on 20 December 2013 . All 33 members of the Senate serve six @-@ year terms , with 22 senators elected by local officials and 11 appointed by the president . After taking power , Rajoelina dissolved both the National Assembly and the Senate , leaving the nation without a constitutional legislative body . 
 At the local level , the island 's 22 provinces are administered by a governor and provincial council . Provinces are further sub @-@ divided into regions and communes . The judiciary is modeled on the French system , with a High Constitutional Court , High Court of Justice , Supreme Court , Court of Appeals , criminal tribunals , and tribunals of first instance . The courts , which adhere to civil law , lack the capacity to quickly and transparently try the cases in the judicial system , often forcing defendants to pass lengthy pretrial detentions in unsanitary and overcrowded prisons . 
 Antananarivo is the administrative capital and largest city of Madagascar . It is located in the highlands region , near the geographic center of the island . King Andrianjaka founded Antananarivo as the capital of his Imerina Kingdom around 1610 or 1625 upon the site of a captured Vazimba capital on the hilltop of Analamanga . As Merina dominance expanded over neighboring Malagasy peoples in the early 19th century to establish the Kingdom of Madagascar , Antananarivo became the center of administration for virtually the entire island . In 1896 the French colonizers of Madagascar adopted the Merina capital as their center of colonial administration . The city remained the capital of Madagascar after regaining independence in 1960 . In 2011 , the capital 's population was estimated at 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 inhabitants . The next largest cities are Antsirabe ( 500 @,@ 000 ) , Toamasina ( 450 @,@ 000 ) and Mahajanga ( 400 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Since Madagascar gained independence from France in 1960 , the island 's political transitions have been marked by numerous popular protests , several disputed elections , an impeachment , two military coups and one assassination . The island 's recurrent political crises are often prolonged , with detrimental effects on the local economy , international relations and Malagasy living standards . The eight @-@ month standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana , following the 2001 presidential elections , cost Madagascar millions of dollars in lost tourism and trade revenue as well as damage to infrastructure , such as bombed bridges and buildings damaged by arson . 
 A series of protests led by Andry Rajoelina against Ravalomanana in early 2009 became violent , with more than 170 people killed . Modern politics in Madagascar are colored by the history of Merina subjugation of coastal communities under their rule in the 19th century . The consequent tension between the highland and coastal populations has periodically flared up into isolated events of violence . 
 Madagascar has historically been perceived as being on the margin of mainstream African affairs despite being a founding member of the Organisation of African Unity , which was established in 1963 and dissolved in 2002 to be replaced by the African Union . Madagascar was not permitted to attend the first African Union summit because of a dispute over the results of the 2001 presidential election , but rejoined the African Union in July 2003 after a 14 @-@ month hiatus . Madagascar was again suspended by the African Union in March 2009 following the unconstitutional transfer of executive power to Rajoelina . Madagascar is a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military . Eleven countries have established embassies in Madagascar , including France , the United Kingdom , the United States , China and India . 
 Human rights in Madagascar are protected under the constitution and the state is a signatory to numerous international agreements including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child . Religious , ethnic and sexual minorities are protected under the law . Freedom of association and assembly are also guaranteed under the law , although in practice the denial of permits for public assembly has occasionally been used to impede political demonstrations . Torture by security forces is rare and state repression is low relative to other countries with comparably few legal safeguards , although arbitrary arrests and the corruption of military and police officers remain problems . Ravalomanana 's 2004 creation of BIANCO , an anti @-@ corruption bureau , resulted in reduced corruption among Antananarivo 's lower @-@ level bureaucrats in particular , although high @-@ level officials have not been prosecuted by the bureau . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 The rise of centralized kingdoms among the Sakalava , Merina and other ethnic groups produced the island 's first standing armies by the 16th century , initially equipped with spears but later with muskets , cannons and other firearms . By the early 19th century , the Merina sovereigns of the Kingdom of Madagascar had brought much of the island under their control by mobilizing an army of trained and armed soldiers numbering as high as 30 @,@ 000 . French attacks on coastal towns in the later part of the century prompted then @-@ Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony to solicit British assistance to provide training to the Merina monarchy 's army . Despite the training and leadership provided by British military advisers , the Malagasy army was unable to withstand French weaponry and was forced to surrender following an attack on the royal palace at Antananarivo . Madagascar was declared a colony of France in 1897 . 
 The political independence and sovereignty of the Malagasy armed forces , which comprises an army , navy and air force , was restored with independence from France in 1960 . Since this time the Malagasy military has never engaged in armed conflict with another state or within its own borders , but has occasionally intervened to restore order during periods of political unrest . Under the socialist Second Republic , Admiral Didier Ratsiraka instated mandatory national armed or civil service for all young citizens regardless of gender , a policy that remained in effect from 1976 to 1991 . The armed forces are under the direction of the Minister of the Interior and have remained largely neutral during times of political crisis , as during the protracted standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana in the disputed 2001 presidential elections , when the military refused to intervene in favor of either candidate . This tradition was broken in 2009 , when a segment of the army defected to the side of Andry Rajoelina , then @-@ mayor of Antananarivo , in support of his attempt to force President Ravalomanana from power . 
 The Minister of the Interior is responsible for the national police force , paramilitary force ( gendarmerie ) and the secret police . The police and gendarmerie are stationed and administered at the local level . However , in 2009 fewer than a third of all communes had access to the services of these security forces , with most lacking local @-@ level headquarters for either corps . Traditional community tribunals , called <unk> , are presided over by elders and other respected figures and remain a key means by which justice is served in rural areas where state presence is weak . Historically , security has been relatively high across the island . Violent crime rates are low , and criminal activities are predominantly crimes of opportunity such as pickpocketing and petty theft , although child prostitution , human trafficking and the production and sale of marijuana and other illegal drugs are increasing . Budget cuts since 2009 have severely impacted the national police force , producing a steep increase in criminal activity in recent years . 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 Madagascar is subdivided into 22 regions ( <unk> ) . The regions are further subdivided into 119 districts , 1 @,@ 579 communes , and 17 @,@ 485 fokontany . 
 = = Economy = = 
 During Madagascar 's First Republic , France heavily influenced Madagascar 's economic planning and policy and served as its key trading partner . Key products were cultivated and distributed nationally through producers ' and consumers ' cooperatives . Government initiatives such as a rural development program and state farms were established to boost production of commodities such as rice , coffee , cattle , silk and palm oil . Popular dissatisfaction over these policies was a key factor in launching the socialist @-@ Marxist Second Republic , in which the formerly private bank and insurance industries were nationalized ; state monopolies were established for such industries as textiles , cotton and power ; and import – export trade and shipping were brought under state control . Madagascar 's economy quickly deteriorated as exports fell , industrial production dropped by 75 percent , inflation spiked and government debt increased ; the rural population was soon reduced to living at subsistence levels . Over 50 percent of the nation 's export revenue was spent on debt servicing . 
 The IMF forced Madagascar 's government to accept structural adjustment policies and liberalization of the economy when the state became bankrupt in 1982 and state @-@ controlled industries were gradually privatized over the course of the 1980s . The political crisis of 1991 led to the suspension of IMF and World Bank assistance . Conditions for the resumption of aid were not met under Zafy , who tried unsuccessfully to attract other forms of revenue for the State before aid was once again resumed under the interim government established upon Zafy 's impeachment . The IMF agreed to write off half Madagascar 's debt in 2004 under the Ravalomanana administration . Having met a set of stringent economic , governance and human rights criteria , Madagascar became the first country to benefit from the Millennium Challenge Account in 2005 . 
 Madagascar 's GDP in 2009 was estimated at 8 @.@ 6 billion USD , with a per capita GDP of $ 438 . Approximately 69 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line threshold of one dollar per day . The agriculture sector constituted 29 percent of Malagasy GDP in 2011 , while manufacturing formed 15 percent of GDP . Madagascar 's sources of growth are tourism , agriculture and the extractive industries . Tourism focuses on the niche eco @-@ tourism market , capitalizing on Madagascar 's unique biodiversity , unspoiled natural habitats , national parks and lemur species . An estimated 365 @,@ 000 tourists visited Madagascar in 2008 , but the sector has declined as a result of the political crisis with 180 @,@ 000 tourists visiting in 2010 . 
 = = = Natural resources and trade = = = 
 Madagascar 's natural resources include a variety of unprocessed agricultural and mineral resources . Agriculture ( including raffia ) , fishing and forestry are mainstays of the economy . Madagascar is the world 's principal supplier of vanilla , cloves and ylang @-@ ylang . Other key agricultural resources include coffee , lychees and shrimp . Key mineral resources include various types of precious and semi @-@ precious stones , and Madagascar currently provides half of the world 's supply of sapphires , which were discovered near <unk> in the late 1990s . 
 Madagascar has one of the world 's largest reserves of ilmenite ( titanium ore ) , as well as important reserves of chromite , coal , iron , cobalt , copper and nickel . Several major projects are underway in the mining , oil and gas sectors that are anticipated to give a significant boost to the Malagasy economy . These include such projects as ilmenite and zircon mining from heavy mineral sands near Tôlanaro by Rio Tinto , extraction of nickel near Moramanga and its processing near Toamasina by <unk> International , and the development of the giant onshore heavy oil deposits at <unk> and <unk> by Madagascar Oil . 
 Exports formed 28 percent of GDP in 2009 . Most of the country 's export revenue is derived from the textiles industry , fish and shellfish , vanilla , cloves and other foodstuffs . France is Madagascar 's main trading partner , although the United States , Japan and Germany also have strong economic ties to the country . The Madagascar @-@ U.S. Business Council was formed in May 2003 , as a collaboration between USAID and Malagasy artisan producers to support the export of local handicrafts to foreign markets . Imports of such items as foodstuffs , fuel , capital goods , vehicles , consumer goods and electronics consume an estimated 52 percent of GDP . The main sources of Madagascar 's imports include France , China , Iran , Mauritius and Hong Kong . 
 = = = Infrastructure and media = = = 
 In 2010 , Madagascar had approximately 7 @,@ 617 km ( 4 @,@ 730 mi ) of paved roads , 854 km ( 530 mi ) of railways and 432 km ( 270 mi ) of navigable waterways . The majority of roads in Madagascar are unpaved , with many becoming impassable in the rainy season . Largely paved national routes connect the six largest regional towns to Antananarivo , with minor paved and unpaved routes providing access to other population centers in each district . 
 There are several rail lines . Antananarivo is connected to Toamasina , <unk> and Antsirabe by rail , and another rail line connects Fianarantsoa to Manakara . The most important seaport in Madagascar is located on the east coast at Toamasina . Ports at Mahajanga and Antsiranana are significantly less used due to their remoteness . The island 's newest port at <unk> , constructed in 2008 and privately managed by Rio Tinto , will come under state control upon completion of the company 's mining project near Tôlanaro around 2038 . Air Madagascar services the island 's many small regional airports , which offer the only practical means of access to many of the more remote regions during rainy season road washouts . 
 Running water and electricity are supplied at the national level by a government service provider , Jirama , which is unable to service the entire population . As of 2009 , only 6 @.@ 8 percent of Madagascar 's fokontany had access to water provided by Jirama , while 9 @.@ 5 percent had access to its electricity services . 56 % of Madagascar 's power is provided by hydroelectric power plants with the remaining 44 % provided by diesel engine generators . Mobile telephone and internet access are widespread in urban areas but remain limited in rural parts of the island . Approximately 30 percent of the districts are able to access the nations ' several private telecommunications networks via mobile telephones or land lines . 
 Radio broadcasts remain the principal means by which the Malagasy population access international , national and local news . Only state radio broadcasts are transmitted across the entire island . Hundreds of public and private stations with local or regional range provide alternatives to state broadcasting . In addition to the state television channel , a variety of privately owned television stations broadcast local and international programming throughout Madagascar . Several media outlets are owned by political partisans or politicians themselves , including the media groups MBS ( owned by Ravalomanana ) and Viva ( owned by Rajoelina ) , contributing to political polarization in reporting . 
 The media has historically come under varying degrees of pressure over time to censor their criticism of the government . Reporters are occasionally threatened or harassed and media outlets are periodically forced to close . Accusations of media censorship have increased since 2009 due to the alleged intensification of restrictions on political criticism . Access to the internet has grown dramatically over the past decade , with an estimated 352 @,@ 000 residents of Madagascar accessing the internet from home or in one of the nation 's many internet cafes in December 2011 . 
 = = Health = = 
 Medical centers , dispensaries and hospitals are found throughout the island , although they are concentrated in urban areas and particularly in Antananarivo . Access to medical care remains beyond the reach of many Malagasy , especially in the rural areas , and many recourse to traditional healers . 
 = = Education = = 
 Prior to the 19th century , all education in Madagascar was informal and typically served to teach practical skills as well as social and cultural values , including respect for ancestors and elders . The first formal European @-@ style school was established in 1818 at Toamasina by members of the London Missionary Society ( LMS ) . The LMS was invited by King Radama I ( 1810 – 28 ) to expand its schools throughout Imerina to teach basic literacy and numeracy to aristocratic children . The schools were closed by Ranavalona I in 1835 but reopened and expanded in the decades after her death . 
 By the end of the 19th century Madagascar had the most developed and modern school system in pre @-@ colonial Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Access to schooling was expanded in coastal areas during the colonial period , with French language and basic work skills becoming the focus of the curriculum . During the post @-@ colonial First Republic , a continued reliance on French nationals as teachers , and French as the language of instruction , displeased those desiring a complete separation from the former colonial power . 
 Consequently , under the socialist Second Republic , French instructors and other nationals were expelled , Malagasy was declared the language of instruction and a large cadre of young Malagasy were rapidly trained to teach at remote rural schools under the mandatory two @-@ year national service policy . 
 This policy , known as <unk> , coincided with a severe economic downturn and a dramatic decline in the quality of education . Those schooled during this period generally failed to master the French language or many other subjects and struggled to find employment , forcing many to take low @-@ paying jobs in the informal or black market that mired them in deepening poverty . Excepting the brief presidency of Albert Zafy , from 1992 to 1996 , Ratsiraka remained in power from 1975 to 2001 and failed to achieve significant improvements in education throughout his tenure . 
 Education was prioritized under the Ravalomanana administration ( 2002 – 09 ) , and is currently free and compulsory from ages 6 to 13 . The primary schooling cycle is five years , followed by four years at the lower secondary level and three years at the upper secondary level . During Ravalomanana 's first term , thousands of new primary schools and additional classrooms were constructed , older buildings were renovated , and tens of thousands of new primary teachers were recruited and trained . Primary school fees were eliminated and kits containing basic school supplies were distributed to primary students . 
 Government school construction initiatives have ensured at least one primary school per fokontany and one lower secondary school within each commune . At least one upper secondary school is located in each of the larger urban centers . The three branches of the national public university are located at Antananarivo ( founded in 1961 ) , Mahajanga ( 1977 ) and Fianarantsoa ( 1988 ) . These are complemented by public teacher @-@ training colleges and several private universities and technical colleges . 
 As a result of increased educational access , enrollment rates more than doubled between 1996 and 2006 . However , education quality is weak , producing high rates of grade repetition and dropout . Education policy in Ravalomanana 's second term focused on quality issues , including an increase in minimum education standards for the recruitment of primary teachers from a middle school leaving certificate ( <unk> ) to a high school leaving certificate ( BAC ) , and a reformed teacher training program to support the transition from traditional didactic instruction to student @-@ centered teaching methods to boost student learning and participation in the classroom . Public expenditure on education was 13 @.@ 4 percent of total government expenditure and 2 @.@ 9 percent of GDP in 2008 . Primary classrooms are crowded , with average pupil to teacher ratios of 47 : 1 in 2008 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In 2012 , the population of Madagascar was estimated at 22 million . The annual population growth rate in Madagascar was approximately 2 @.@ 9 percent in 2009 . The population grew from 2 @.@ 2 million in 1900 to an estimated 22 million in 2012 . 
 Approximately 42 @.@ 5 percent of the population is younger than 15 years of age , while 54 @.@ 5 percent are between the ages of 15 and 64 . Those aged 65 and older form three percent of the total population . Only two general censuses , in 1975 and 1993 , have been carried out after independence . The most densely populated regions of the island are the eastern highlands and the eastern coast , contrasting most dramatically with the sparsely populated western plains . 
 = = = Ethnic groups = = = 
 The Malagasy ethnic group forms over 90 percent of Madagascar 's population and is typically divided into eighteen ethnic sub @-@ groups . Recent DNA research revealed that the genetic makeup of the average Malagasy person constitutes an approximately equal blend of Southeast Asian and East African genes , although the genetics of some communities show a predominance of Southeast Asian or East African origins or some Arab , Indian or European ancestry . 
 Southeast Asian origins – specifically from the southern part of Borneo – are most predominant among the Merina of the central highlands , who form the largest Malagasy ethnic sub @-@ group at approximately 26 percent of the population , while certain communities among the coastal peoples ( collectively called <unk> ) have relatively stronger East African origins . The largest coastal ethnic sub @-@ groups are the Betsimisaraka ( 14 @.@ 9 percent ) and the Tsimihety and Sakalava ( 6 percent each ) . 
 Chinese , Indian and Comorian minorities are present in Madagascar , as well as a small European ( primarily French ) populace . Emigration in the late 20th century has reduced these minority populations , occasionally in abrupt waves , such as the exodus of <unk> in 1976 , following anti @-@ Comoran riots in Mahajanga . By comparison , there has been no significant emigration of Malagasy peoples . The number of Europeans has declined since independence , reduced from 68 @,@ 430 in 1958 to 17 @,@ 000 three decades later . There were an estimated 25 @,@ 000 <unk> , 18 @,@ 000 Indians , and 9 @,@ 000 Chinese living in Madagascar in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 The Malagasy language is of Malayo @-@ Polynesian origin and is generally spoken throughout the island . The numerous dialects of Malagasy , which are generally mutually intelligible , can be clustered under one of two sub @-@ groups : eastern Malagasy , spoken along the eastern forests and highlands including the Merina dialect of Antananarivo and western Malagasy , spoken across the western coastal plains . French became the official language during the colonial period , when Madagascar came under the authority of France . In the first national Constitution of 1958 , Malagasy and French were named the official languages of the Malagasy Republic . Madagascar is a francophone country , and French is mostly spoken as a second language among the educated population and used for international communication . 
 No official languages were recorded in the Constitution of 1992 , although Malagasy was identified as the national language . Nonetheless , many sources still claimed that Malagasy and French were official languages , eventually leading a citizen to initiate a legal case against the state in April 2000 , on the grounds that the publication of official documents only in the French language was unconstitutional . The High Constitutional Court observed in its decision that , in the absence of a language law , French still had the character of an official language . 
 In the Constitution of 2007 , Malagasy remained the national language while official languages were reintroduced : Malagasy , French , and English . English was removed as an official language from the constitution approved by voters in the November referendum 2010 . The outcome of the referendum , and its consequences for official and national language policy , are not recognized by the political opposition , who cite lack of transparency and inclusiveness in the way the election was organized by the High Transitional Authority . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Approximately half of the country 's population practice traditional religion , which tends to emphasize links between the living and the <unk> ( ancestors ) . The veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb building , as well as the highlands practice of the famadihana , whereby a deceased family member 's remains may be exhumed to be periodically re @-@ wrapped in fresh silk shrouds before being replaced in the tomb . The famadihana is an occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor 's memory , reunite with family and community , and enjoy a festive atmosphere . Residents of surrounding villages are often invited to attend the party , where food and rum are typically served and a hiragasy troupe or other musical entertainment is commonly present . 
 Consideration for ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to fady , taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who establishes them . It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors in these ways , they may intervene on behalf of the living . Conversely , misfortunes are often attributed to ancestors whose memory or wishes have been neglected . The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or honor the ancestors . In addition , the Malagasy traditionally believe in a creator god , called Zanahary or <unk> . 
 Almost half the Malagasy are Christian , with practitioners of Protestantism slightly outnumbering adherents to Roman Catholicism . In 1818 the London Missionary Society sent the first Christian missionaries to the island , where they built churches , translated the Bible into the Malagasy language and began to gain converts . Beginning in 1835 Queen Ranavalona I persecuted these converts as part of an attempt to halt European cultural and political influence on the island . In 1869 a successor , Queen Ranavalona II , converted the court to Christianity and encouraged Christian missionary activity , burning the sampy ( royal idols ) in a symbolic break with traditional beliefs . 
 Today , many Christians integrate their religious beliefs with traditional ones related to honoring the ancestors . For instance , they may bless their dead at church before proceeding with traditional burial rites or invite a Christian minister to consecrate a famadihana reburial . The Malagasy Council of Churches comprises the four oldest and most prominent Christian denominations of Madagascar ( Roman Catholic , Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar , Lutheran , and Anglican ) and has been an influential force in Malagasy politics . 
 Newer groups such as Seventh @-@ day Adventists are rapidly growing in rural areas through the establishment of intellectual discussion groups , as well as clinics and churches . 
 Islam is also practiced on the island . Islam was first brought to the island in the Middle Ages by Arab and Somali Muslim traders , who established several Islamic schools along the eastern coast . While the use of Arabic script and loan words and the adoption of Islamic astrology would spread across the island , the Islamic religion failed to take hold in all but a handful of southeastern coastal communities . Today , Muslims constitute 7 percent of the population of Madagascar and are largely concentrated in the northwestern provinces of Mahajanga and Antsiranana . The vast majority of Muslims are Sunni . Muslims are divided between those of Malagasy ethnicity , Indians , Pakistanis and <unk> . More recently , Hinduism was introduced to Madagascar through Gujarati people immigrating from the Saurashtra region of India in the late 19th century . Most Hindus in Madagascar speak Gujarati or Hindi at home . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Each of the many ethnic sub @-@ groups in Madagascar adhere to their own set of beliefs , practices and ways of life that have historically contributed to their unique identities . However , there are a number of core cultural features that are common throughout the island , creating a strongly unified Malagasy cultural identity . In addition to a common language and shared traditional religious beliefs around a creator god and veneration of the ancestors , the traditional Malagasy worldview is shaped by values that emphasize <unk> ( solidarity ) , <unk> ( destiny ) , tody ( karma ) , and hasina , a sacred life force that traditional communities believe imbues and thereby legitimates authority figures within the community or family . Other cultural elements commonly found throughout the island include the practice of male circumcision ; strong kinship ties ; a widespread belief in the power of magic , diviners , astrology and witch doctors ; and a traditional division of social classes into nobles , commoners , and slaves . 
 Although social castes are no longer legally recognized , ancestral caste affiliation often continues to affect social status , economic opportunity and roles within the community . Malagasy people traditionally consult <unk> ( " Makers of the Days " ) to identify the most auspicious days for important events such as weddings or famadihana , according to a traditional astrological system introduced by Arabs . Similarly , the nobles of many Malagasy communities in the pre @-@ colonial period would commonly employ advisers known as the ombiasy ( from <unk> @-@ be @-@ hasina , " man of much virtue " ) of the southeastern Antemoro ethnic group , who trace their ancestry back to early Arab settlers . 
 The diverse origins of Malagasy culture are evident in its tangible expressions . The most emblematic instrument of Madagascar , the valiha , is a bamboo tube zither carried to Madagascar by early settlers from southern Borneo , and is very similar in form to those found in Indonesia and the Philippines today . Traditional houses in Madagascar are likewise similar to those of southern Borneo in terms of symbolism and construction , featuring a rectangular layout with a peaked roof and central support pillar . Reflecting a widespread veneration of the ancestors , tombs are culturally significant in many regions and tend to be built of more durable material , typically stone , and display more elaborate decoration than the houses of the living . The production and weaving of silk can be traced back to the island 's earliest settlers , and Madagascar 's national dress , the woven lamba , has evolved into a varied and refined art . 
 The Southeast Asian cultural influence is also evident in Malagasy cuisine , in which rice is consumed at every meal , typically accompanied by one of a variety of flavorful vegetable or meat dishes . African influence is reflected in the sacred importance of zebu cattle and their embodiment of their owner 's wealth , traditions originating on the African mainland . Cattle rustling , originally a rite of passage for young men in the plains areas of Madagascar where the largest herds of cattle are kept , has become a dangerous and sometimes deadly criminal enterprise as herdsmen in the southwest attempt to defend their cattle with traditional spears against increasingly armed professional rustlers . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 A wide variety of oral and written literature has developed in Madagascar . One of the island 's foremost artistic traditions is its oratory , as expressed in the forms of <unk> ( poetry ) , kabary ( public discourse ) and <unk> ( proverbs ) . An epic poem exemplifying these traditions , the <unk> , has been handed down over the centuries in several different forms across the island , and offers insight into the diverse mythologies and beliefs of traditional Malagasy communities . This tradition was continued in the 20th century by such artists as Jean @-@ Joseph Rabearivelo , who is considered Africa 's first modern poet , and Elie Rajaonarison , an exemplar of the new wave of Malagasy poetry . Madagascar has also developed a rich musical heritage , embodied in dozens of regional musical genres such as the coastal salegy or highland hiragasy that enliven village gatherings , local dance floors and national airwaves . 
 The plastic arts are also widespread throughout the island . In addition to the tradition of silk weaving and lamba production , the weaving of raffia and other local plant materials has been used to create a wide array of practical items such as floor mats , baskets , purses and hats . Wood carving is a highly developed art form , with distinct regional styles evident in the decoration of balcony railings and other architectural elements . Sculptors create a variety of furniture and household goods , aloalo funerary posts , and wooden sculptures , many of which are produced for the tourist market . The decorative and functional woodworking traditions of the Zafimaniry people of the central highlands was inscribed on UNESCO 's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2008 . 
 Among the Antaimoro people , the production of paper embedded with flowers and other decorative natural materials is a long @-@ established tradition that the community has begun to market to eco @-@ tourists . Embroidery and drawn thread work are done by hand to produce clothing , as well as tablecloths and other home textiles for sale in local crafts markets . A small but growing number of fine art galleries in Antananarivo , and several other urban areas , offer paintings by local artists , and annual art events , such as the <unk> open @-@ air exhibition in the capital , contribute to the continuing development of fine arts in Madagascar . 
 = = = Sport and recreation = = = 
 A number of traditional pastimes have emerged in Madagascar . <unk> , a type of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , is a popular spectator sport in coastal regions . It is traditionally practiced by men , but women have recently begun to participate . The wrestling of zebu cattle , which is named <unk> or <unk> @-@ <unk> , is also practiced in many regions . In addition to sports , a wide variety of games are played . Among the most emblematic is fanorona , a board game widespread throughout the Highland regions . According to folk legend , the succession of King Andrianjaka after his father Ralambo was partially due to the obsession that Andrianjaka 's older brother may have had with playing fanorona to the detriment of his other responsibilities . 
 Western recreational activities were introduced to Madagascar over the past two centuries . Rugby Union is considered the national sport of Madagascar . Football is also popular . Madagascar has produced a world champion in <unk> , a French game similar to lawn bowling , which is widely played in urban areas and throughout the Highlands . School athletics programs typically include football , track and field , judo , boxing , women 's basketball and women 's tennis . Madagascar sent its first competitors to the Olympic Games in 1964 and has also competed in the African Games . Scouting is represented in Madagascar by its own local federation of three scouting clubs . Membership in 2011 was estimated at 14 @,@ 905 . 
 Because of its advanced sports facilities , Antananarivo gained the hosting rights for several of Africa 's top international basketball events , including the 2011 FIBA Africa Championship , the 2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women , the 2014 FIBA Africa Under @-@ 18 Championship , the 2013 FIBA Africa Under @-@ 16 Championship , and the 2015 FIBA Africa Under @-@ 16 Championship for Women . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 = Scientific jury selection = 
 Scientific jury selection , often abbreviated SJS , is the use of social science techniques and expertise to choose favorable juries during a criminal or civil trial . Scientific jury selection is used during the jury selection phase of the trial — when lawyers have the opportunity to question jurors and they and the judge choose which people will be on the jury . It almost always entails an expert 's assistance in the attorney 's use of peremptory challenges — the right to reject a certain number of potential jurors without stating a reason — during jury selection . The practice is currently confined to the American legal system . 
 SJS has roots in criminal trials during the Vietnam War era , but in modern times is usually employed in high @-@ stakes civil litigation ( where only money is usually at issue , in contrast to criminal trials , where the defendant can go to prison ) . SJS practitioners determine what background characteristics and attitudes predict favorable results , and then coordinate with attorneys in choosing the jury . Studies are mixed as to the effectiveness of the practice , though it is clear that the evidence presented at trial is the most important determiner of verdicts ( the trial result ) and that SJS is more likely to have an impact where that evidence is ambiguous . SJS 's potential to unfairly skew the jury has led to some reform proposals , but none have yet been implemented . The limited fictional portrayals of SJS have been negative towards the practice . 
 = = History and use = = 
 During jury selection in the United States , attorneys have two options for excluding potential jurors . The first option is a challenge for cause , in which attorneys must state the reason for a challenge ( such as clear bias or a conflict of interest ) , the opposing party is allowed to respond , and the judge decides whether to exclude the juror . The second option is a peremptory challenge , where an attorney can exclude a juror without stating any reason . While challenges for cause are unlimited , attorneys have a limited number of peremptory challenges , sometimes as few as four , although 10 is more common in non @-@ capital felony cases . 
 Attorneys have long used peremptory challenges to exclude undesirable prospective jurors , but have not always been successful . Much of the early efforts were based on lawyers ' folklore about who makes a good juror for their case . Early examples of scientific jury selection were similar . For example , in the 1975 Joan Little trial , defense attorneys used an astrologer to help choose the jury . More rigorous methodology was on display during the first major use of SJS , the 1972 Harrisburg Seven trial . During that trial , social scientists used demographic characteristics to identify biases in favor of conviction . The consultants in the case had conducted surveys that indicated women and Democrats would make defense @-@ friendly jurors , and the religious , those with college degrees , and Reader 's Digest subscribers would be better for the prosecution . Although surveys had indicated that 80 % of citizens in conservative Harrisburg , Pennsylvania would convict the defendants , they were acquitted of all serious charges . 
 A jury consultant helped pick the jury in the O. J. Simpson murder trial . Criminologist Jo @-@ Ellan Dimitrius used surveys to determine the ideal defense juror demographic ( black women ) and analyzed and judged the prospective jurors ' answers to a questionnaire and response and body language during voir dire ( the stage of jury selection where lawyers are permitted to directly question the jury ) . Prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi gives more credit to the traditional change of venue . He argues that transferring the case to a section of Los Angeles with more blacks in the jury pool was most detrimental to the selection of a prosecution @-@ friendly jury . Incidentally , the prosecutor fired her court @-@ appointed jury consultant early in the process . 
 Contemporary jury consultants are often sociologists , people with experience in communications and marketing , or attorneys themselves , but they are most frequently psychologists and specialize in legal psychology . Although most of the practice 's roots are in criminal trials , modern jury consultants are more often involved in torts ( civil litigation ) , particularly where wealthy corporate defendants fear an enormous monetary judgment for the plaintiff , or where plaintiffs ’ attorneys have invested large sums of money in an important lawsuit . Since the 1980s , large jury consulting and trial consulting firms have sprouted up with multi @-@ million dollar incomes , mostly from such high @-@ stakes civil litigation . The simultaneous shift from ad @-@ hoc groups of academics to a business model has sparked the criticism that SJS magnifies the distorting effect money has on trials , since only the wealthy can afford it . Jury consultants argue that they operate in an adversarial process the same way lawyers do ; by pursuing their clients ' interests in a rule @-@ bound framework . Jeffrey Abramson , who has written extensively about juries , argues that even if SJS is ethical or has zero effect , the mere myth of powerful , effective jury manipulators shakes public confidence in the jury system . 
 = = Methods = = 
 The theory behind SJS is that juror attitudes predict voting preferences most effectively . By discovering what relationships exist between certain attitudes , attorneys can exclude those from the jury whose attitudes would predispose them to a bad verdict . Researcher Shari Diamond indicates that jury consultants primarily rely on two methods : telephone surveys and mock trials ( trial simulations ) . Telephone surveys are the practitioners ' " primary research method " . During a survey of the community where the trial is taking place , jury consultants ask about : 
 background characteristics of the jury pool such as race , sex , marital status , age , income , and job ; and perhaps more specific questions that depend upon the case itself ; 
 beliefs and attitudes likely associated with a favorable or unfavorable verdict ; and 
 ( after reading a summary of the facts of the case ) which verdict the survey respondent would favor . 
 Diamond writes that jury consultants then compare the three data sets to determine which background characteristics correlate to favorable attitudes and verdicts , and which attitudes correlate to favorable verdicts . Attorneys can then use that information to select favorable jurors , based either on prospective jurors ' characteristics or whatever an attorney can learn about jurors ' attitudes . This has prompted the most frequent criticism of SJS : that consultants stack juries with inexorably biased or dumb jurors ; in turn , practitioners insist this is impossible and that bias can only be removed from a jury pool . 
 An alternative is to test respondents at the researcher 's facility with opening statements or a full @-@ blown mock trial instead of reading a case summary over the telephone . The higher cost of a mock trial allows for a more realistic portrayal of the real trial and ( researchers hope ) more accurate data . It also provides a better opportunity to question the subjects , before and after the trial simulation . On the other hand , telephone surveys provide a larger and more representative sample of the jury pool . Diamond indicates that since both methods have advantages , SJS practitioners commonly rely on both in the same case . 
 Besides the occasional astrologer or psychic , a few practitioners use unorthodox methods , such as in @-@ courtroom assessment of posture , pupil dilation , or breathing to judge jurors both during selection and during trial . Though such methods have the veneer of science , psychologists reject them as nonsense and " science fiction " . Notwithstanding this , Jo @-@ Ellan Dimitrius ( from the Simpson trial ) indicates that she also relies on appearance , body language , conduct , and even smells such as perfume or medication . She sometimes decides based upon her " gut feeling " about a juror . 
 Research psychologists <unk> and Wrightsman indicate that the model employed ( demographic factors predict attitudes that predict verdicts ) has empirical weaknesses . That attitudes predict verdicts is taken for granted and rarely studied . For example , veterans might favor current troops , but that does not necessarily translate into a likelihood to acquit their brethren of crimes . However , the relationship between demographics and verdicts can be more reliably predicted by mock trials . Successful prediction of jury verdicts often requires data specific to the case and jurisdiction . The sheer number of ways that one case can be unique outstrips the published research on the subject , so original research is often required . That necessity is exacerbated by the fact that many modern consultants are reluctant to share knowledge , even with other firms , because of paranoia , client confidentiality , and their regard for their work as " trade secrets " . 
 One important variation is " group dynamics analysis " . Some jury selection is concerned with the attitudes and bias of individuals . Some trial consultants also try to predict how individuals will form themselves into groups in the jury and which jurors will become leaders and followers in those groups . Consultants also use this tool after jury selection is over . 
 = = Efficacy = = 
 Although advocates and practitioners of scientific jury selection claim the practice is overwhelmingly effective at choosing juries that will render the desired verdict , its true effect is often more difficult to discern . Part of this difficulty is in duplicating the conditions of a real trial . In one experiment , two kinds of shadow juries watched a trial and rendered a verdict . The results indicated that the juries were substantially different , but that this difference was likely due to the two experimental juries ’ knowledge that they were not deciding an actual verdict , prompting a lower burden of proof . 
 Another simplified experiment indicated that lawyers trained in a systematic selection method made better predictions of juror verdicts in two of four cases – the sale of illegal drugs and a military court @-@ martial ( the other two cases were murder and drunk driving ) . The systematic method was more effective in those two cases where the predictive relationships between demographic variables and attitudes / verdicts were strongest , and least effective where such predictive relationships were weak or nonexistent . 
 Some academic researchers argue that the actual efficacy of SJS is obscured by poor research methodology . Specifically , demographic characteristics used to predict juror attitudes and juror verdicts may not hold true across all kinds of cases . For example , men convict more frequently than women in some types of criminal trials but less frequently in others . Besides this , demographic characteristics are often less predictive than the attitudes jurors hold ; for example , attitudes towards rape are better verdict @-@ predictors than gender in rape trials . 
 The actual efficacy of jury consultants may not be very important because the demographic composition of the jury has little effect on the verdict it renders , usually causing only a 5 % – 15 % variance in verdicts . The evidence presented at trial has far more impact on what the verdict will be . As Kressel and Kressel indicate , " when the evidence is strong , nothing else matters much " and even when the evidence is ambiguous , demographic characteristics of jurors are a relatively minor influence . Some researchers argue that a significant improvement in jury selection , however small , may be worthwhile when the stakes are high , like for a defendant accused of a capital crime or a corporation that stands to lose millions of dollars in a civil suit . 
 A popular " proof is in the pudding " argument is often made , especially by consultants themselves ; the argument goes that since attorneys and clients pay such high fees ( sometimes as much as $ 500 @,@ 000 ) for consultants , their services must be effective . Others argue that most attorneys are unaware of the social science research on the topic . 
 The effectiveness of scientific jury selection has also been comparison tested against other methods , such as attorney folklore and intuition . For trial attorneys , justifying the expense of SJS is contingent upon an improvement of their own jury selection abilities . Several empirical studies of traditional jury selection ( by attorneys acting alone ) have indicated that it and SJS are about equally effective . 
 = = Suggested reforms = = 
 In light of the criticisms leveled against scientific jury selection — that it lets lawyers stack juries and distorts the effect of money — several reforms have been proposed . One common reform proposal is the elimination of peremptory challenges . Supreme Court precedent already forbids use of peremptories ( peremptory challenges ) to exclude jurors based solely on their race or <unk> Proponents argue that doing away with peremptories altogether will eliminate the perceived and real injustice of permitting lawyers to eliminate jurors <unk> unfavorable to them without a challenge for cause argument in open court . Opponents counter that attorneys cannot always ferret out actionable evidence of juror bias , particularly in the context of a limited voir dire . 
 Other proposals include : 
 lower the number of peremptories to force attorneys to use them only on the most clearly biased jurors and severely curtail their ability to " shape " the jury with peremptory challenges . 
 ban jury consulting through legislative action , though it may be impossible to fairly draw a line that excludes SJS but doesn 't exclude advice from other attorneys in the same firm , for example . 
 limit useful information by severely curtailing verbal questioning and written questionnaires of prospective jurors . This may have the perverse effect of encouraging many erroneous Batson challenges based solely on race or gender instead of more sophisticated metrics of bias . 
 prohibit investigation of the jury pool or release the list of prospective jurors on the eve of jury selection to make investigation of prospective jurors impossible . 
 force disclosure of consultant use by making surveys of prospective jurors or the community discoverable by ( legally accessible to ) the opposing party . If consultants ' research is discoverable , each party could use and benefit from their research . 
 Despite serious discussion among lawyers , scholars , legislators , and others about various reform proposals , none have been implemented and no consensus exists about which remedy , if any , would be the most appropriate and effective . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The major fictional representations to date have largely portrayed jury consultants as villains that are highly effective at influencing the jury , often using illegal tactics that mainstream practitioners do not use . Consultants are major characters in John Grisham 's novel The Runaway Jury and the similar film adaptation . In the film , Rankin Fitch , " jury consultant for the defense , " leads a team that uses high technology and sometimes @-@ illegal tactics to prevent a judgment against their corporate client in what Salon calls " our worst nightmare of corporate arm @-@ twisting . " Writing about the book , Kressel and Kressel say Grisham " plays on fears that the American justice system has been hijacked by crafty attorneys and immensely effective hired @-@ gun social scientists . " Jean <unk> Korelitz 's A Jury of Her Peers stretches the known reality of consulting much further . Korelitz 's fictional consultants are part of an unscrupulous firm that charges prosecutors to kidnap homeless people , program them with drugs into conviction @-@ only jurors , and substitute them for those hoping to avoid jury duty . <unk> says the novel is " hardly realistic " but " reveals the distrust engendered by jury consultants . " 
 In a fifth @-@ season episode of the CBS television series Numb3rs , entitled " Guilt Trip , " an illegal arms dealer ( James Marsters ) is tried for racketeering and the murder of the key witness against him . After he is unexpectedly acquitted , the investigation reveals that he had hired a sleazy jury consultant to not only identify those jurors who would most likely sway the rest of the jury 's deliberations , so as to bribe and extort them into pushing for acquittal , but also train one of his henchmen to pose as the perfect " prosecutor 's juror " and get placed on the jury . In season one , episode eleven , of the television series Leverage , a pharmaceutical company is under fire for a wrongful death case involving a stimulative all natural herbal supplement . In an attempt to prevent major losses for the pharmaceutical company in question , and to protect the investment of a soon to be parent company 's subsidiary , scientific jury selection is used . However , the Leverage team thwarts their efforts every step of the way similar to a giant chess match . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 ^ 1 Batson v. Kentucky ( 1986 ) is the seminal case in this area , finding race @-@ based use of peremptory challenges by prosecutors unconstitutional . Georgia v. McCollum ( 1992 ) extended the same prohibition to defense attorneys . The relevant precedents in civil law are Edmonson v. <unk> Concrete Company ( 1991 ) ( regarding race ) and J.E.B. v. Alabama ( 1994 ) ( regarding gender ) . 
 = Alien : Isolation = 
 Alien : Isolation is an action @-@ adventure video game developed by Creative Assembly and based on the Alien science fiction horror film series . It was published by Sega and originally released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 and Xbox One on 7 October 2014 . The game is set 15 years after the events of Ridley Scott 's 1979 Alien film and follows Amanda Ripley , daughter of Alien protagonist Ellen Ripley , and her efforts to investigate the disappearance of her mother . 
 Unlike previous video game adaptations of the Alien franchise , Alien : Isolation places a strong emphasis on stealth and survival horror gameplay , requiring the player to avoid and outsmart a single alien creature over the course of the game with the help of gadgets like a motion tracker and a flamethrower . It was designed more in line with Scott 's film as opposed to James Cameron 's more action @-@ oriented 1986 sequel Aliens , and features a similar lo @-@ fi , 1970s vision of what the future would look like . The game runs on an entirely new engine that was built from scratch to accommodate technical aspects like the game 's atmospheric and lighting effects as well as the alien 's behavioural design . Creative Assembly originally intended to make Alien : Isolation a third @-@ person game , but the perspective was later shifted to first @-@ person in order to create a more intense experience . 
 Upon release , Alien : Isolation received generally positive reviews from video game journalists and sold over two million copies in Europe and the US as of May 2015 . Critics praised the game 's retro @-@ futuristic art direction , sound design , and the alien 's artificial intelligence , but criticized its story , characters , and voice acting . The game won several year @-@ end awards , including Best Audio at the 2015 Game Developers Choice Awards and Audio Achievement at the 2015 British Academy of Film and Television Arts Awards . Several downloadable content packs that extend the game with new missions and challenges were also released . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Alien : Isolation is a single @-@ player action @-@ adventure game with stealth and survival horror features , in which the player controls the protagonist , Amanda Ripley , from a first @-@ person perspective to interact with the environment . To advance through the game , the player must explore a space station and complete numerous objectives while avoiding , outsmarting and defeating enemies like human occupants or hostile androids . Objectives range from activating computers to collecting certain items or reaching a specific area in the game . The player has the ability to run , climb ladders , and sneak into vents . The player can also crouch and hide behind objects to break the line of sight with enemies , and covertly peek over or lean around to gain view . The player has also the ability to go under nearby tables or inside lockers to hide from enemies . 
 Unlike previous video game adaptations of the Alien franchise , Alien : Isolation features a single alien creature that pursues the player over the course of the game . The alien creature cannot be defeated , requiring the player to use stealth tactics in order to survive . Instead of following a predetermined path , the alien has the ability to actively investigate disturbances and hunt the player by sight or sound . Along the way , the player can use both a flashlight and a motion tracker to detect the alien 's movements . However , using any of these increases the chance of the alien finding the player . For example , if the alien is moving and close enough , the tracker 's sound will attract the alien , forcing the player to wisely use the tracker and remove it as soon as it detects motion . The motion tracker cannot detect enemies when they are not moving and cannot determine whether the alien creature is up in the ducts or on the ground level . 
 Although the player can use certain weapons to defeat enemies , Alien : Isolation emphasizes evasion over direct combat by providing the player with limited ammunition . The game features four weapons that become available as the player progresses throughout the game : a revolver , a shotgun , a bolt gun , and a flamethrower . The player can also craft several items by collecting schematics and different kind of materials throughout the game . Items range from EMP mines to <unk> , molotov cocktails and pipe bombs , among others . These items help the player deal with enemies and the alien . For example , the noisemaker can be used to attract enemies in one particular direction . The alien is afraid of fire , so using the flamethrower or a molotov cocktail will force it to retreat into the station 's ventilation system . The player has a limited amount of health which decreases when attacked by enemies . Nevertheless , the player can restore lost health using <unk> , which can be crafted with materials in Amanda 's inventory . 
 The space station is divided into multiple sections connected by trams and elevators . Each section is composed of a set of rooms and corridors separated by doors . Some doors require certain actions to be performed first before entry is allowed . For example , some doors require a keycard or a numbered entry code , while others need to be cut with a variety of welding torches or hacked using an electronic device . The player may also encounter computer terminals that can be used to access information or trigger in @-@ game actions like disabling security cameras or manipulating the space station 's air @-@ purification mechanism . The game features an automap to help players navigate the different areas of the game . To save their progress , players need to locate a terminal in the game and manually insert Amanda 's access card in it . If Amanda dies , the player will need to start the game again from the last saved point . In addition to the campaign mode , Alien : Isolation features a separate game mode , called Survivor Mode , that focuses on short , player @-@ versus @-@ alien scenarios . In each scenario , the player needs to complete a set of objectives while avoiding the alien under a time limit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In <unk> , 15 years after the disappearance of the Nostromo spacecraft , Amanda Ripley , daughter of Ellen Ripley , is approached by the android Christopher Samuels of the Weyland @-@ Yutani corporation . Samuels informs her that the flight recorder of the Nostromo was recently located by a ship named the Anesidora and is being held aboard Sevastopol , a remote space station owned by the <unk> Corporation , in orbit around the gas giant <unk> . He offers her a place on the Weyland @-@ Yutani team sent to retrieve it so that she can have closure regarding the fate of her missing mother . Ripley , Samuels , and Weyland @-@ Yutani executive Nina Taylor travel to Sevastopol on board the courier ship Torrens , owned by captain Diane Verlaine . The group arrives at Sevastopol to find the station damaged and its communications offline . Ripley , Samuels , and Taylor attempt to spacewalk over to the station to investigate , but their EVA line is severed by debris , and Ripley is separated from them and forced to enter the station on her own . 
 Ripley attempts to find help , but is confronted by Axel , a survivor who explains that Sevastopol is out of control due to a " monster " loose aboard the station . Although Ripley convinces him to help her in exchange for a ride off the station aboard the Torrens , Axel is soon killed by said monster , an alien creature . While exploring the station , Ripley finds the Nostromo 's flight recorder but discovers , to her dismay , that it contains no data . After contacting Samuels and recovering medical supplies from the station 's medical bay to treat an injured Taylor , Ripley reunites with the station 's marshal , Waits , and his deputy , Ricardo . Waits explains that the alien was brought on board the station by Anesidora captain Henry Marlow , who is now in Waits ' custody . After speaking with Marlow , Ripley learns that the Anesidora crew discovered the flight recorder near the planetoid LV @-@ 426 , where they also found a derelict ship previously found by the Nostromo crew and the nest of alien eggs contained within . While exploring the ship , Marlow 's wife was attacked by a facehugger . Marlow then brought her aboard Sevastopol for emergency medical treatment , but an alien ultimately hatched from her . Waits convinces Ripley to help him contain the alien by luring it into a remote section of the station and sealing it inside . Ripley is successful , but Waits truly plotted to use Ripley as bait , and ejects the module from the station . As the module careens into space , Ripley manages to space @-@ jump back to Sevastopol using an EVA suit . 
 Ripley makes her way back to Ricardo , who explains that the station 's androids abruptly started slaughtering the remaining crew , including Waits . He also tells her that Samuels is attempting to interface with the station 's controlling artificial intelligence , APOLLO , to cease the rampage . However , APOLLO 's defensive countermeasures electrocute Samuels shortly after he managed to open a path for Ripley into APOLLO 's control core . Upon reaching APOLLO , Ripley discovers that <unk> , who has been trying to sell off Sevastopol for years , has finally found a buyer : Weyland @-@ Yutani , who instructed APOLLO to protect the alien . When Ripley tells APOLLO that the creature is no longer aboard the station and demands to cease all activity , APOLLO refuses and turns its attention to the station 's reactor . Ripley descends to the base of the reactor and learns that it has been converted into an alien nest . She then initiates a reactor purge to destroy the nest , but multiple alien creatures escape and begin to overrun Sevastopol in the process . Ripley learns from Ricardo that Taylor was sent by Weyland @-@ Yutani to retrieve the alien , and that she freed Marlow in exchange for the location of LV @-@ 426 . However , Marlow double @-@ crosses her and takes her hostage aboard the Anesidora . 
 Aboard the Anesidora , Ripley discovers a message from her mother after her initial report of the events on the Nostromo , thus finally giving her closure . Marlow then appears with Taylor and tells Ripley that he plans to overload the Anesidora 's fusion reactor and destroy the station , thus ensuring that no aliens survive . In the ensuing confrontation , both Marlow and Taylor are killed by an electric discharge and Ripley is forced to escape the Anesidora shortly before it explodes . Ricardo tells Ripley that the Anesidora explosion destroyed Sevastopol 's orbital stabilizers , causing the station to slowly drift into <unk> 's atmosphere . Ripley and Ricardo manage to contact the Torrens for extraction , but Ricardo is attacked and paralyzed by a facehugger . After making her way outside to help the Torrens detach from the station , Ripley is surrounded by several alien creatures and then thrown into the ship due to a blast . Aboard the Torrens , Ripley makes her way to the bridge to find Verlaine , but is confronted by another alien . Still in her EVA suit , Ripley is cornered into the airlock and is forced to open it , jettisoning both herself and the alien into space . The final shot of the game depicts Ripley , adrift and unconscious in her EVA suit , suddenly awakened by a searchlight that crosses her face . 
 = = Development = = 
 Alien : Isolation was developed by the Creative Assembly , which is best known for their work on the Total War real @-@ time strategy video game series . The idea of developing a game based on the Alien film series from 20th Century Fox was conceived when the company finished Viking : Battle for Asgard in 2008 , after publisher Sega acquired the rights to develop Alien games in December 2006 . A six @-@ person team developed a small multiplayer game to pitch the idea to Sega , a " hide and seek " prototype where one of the players had to control the alien while the others would need to conceal themselves in the environment . The game captured the attention of Sega and the project was eventually approved . Since the Creative Assembly had no experience with survival horror games , the company had to hire several people from other studios like Bizarre Creations , Black Rock , Crytek , Ubisoft , and Realtime Worlds for the project . According to director Alistair Hope , the development team grew from " a couple of guys crammed in with the Total War team " to a group of 100 people by 2014 . 
 The Creative Assembly decided to design the game more in line with Ridley Scott 's 1979 film Alien as opposed to James Cameron 's more action @-@ oriented 1986 sequel Aliens . To help the designers authentically recreate the atmosphere of the film , Fox provided them with three terabytes of original production material , including costume photography , concept art , set design , behind the scenes photos , videos , and the film 's original sound effect recordings . As artist John <unk> recalls , " It was a proper gold mine . We saw angles of things we 'd never seen before . " During the first stage of development , the developers deconstructed the film to find out what made its setting unique . This would allow them to build new environments that were faithful to it . Similarly , the film 's original soundtrack was deconstructed so that composers could identify the main cues , which would then be used as templates to extend the soundtrack and fill out the length of the game . The developers also had the chance to meet Alien and Blade Runner editor Terry Rawlings , who would give them additional insight . 
 Rather than go for a shiny , high @-@ tech science fiction look , the designers opted to recreate the setting and feel of the original Alien film using the work of concept artists Ron Cobb and <unk> . As a result , the game features a lo @-@ fi , 1970s vision of what the future would look like . For example , the game features clunky machinery like phone receivers , monochrome displays , and distorted CRT monitors . To create period authentic distortion on in @-@ game monitors , the developers recorded their in game animations onto VHS and Betamax video recorders , then filmed those sequences playing on an " old curvy portable TV " while adjusting the tracking settings . As digital hacking was not conceived in the 1970s , the game 's hacking device was built the way it would have been built on the set of the movie , and requires players to tune into a computer 's signal while selecting icons on its screen . Artist Jon McKellan noted , " We had this rule : If a prop couldn 't have been made in ' 79 with the things that they had around , then we wouldn 't make it either . " 
 The Creative Assembly wanted Alien : Isolation to have a story that was closely related to the film . As a result , the team decided to explore a story set 15 years after the events of the film which would involve Ellen Ripley 's daughter and the Nostromo 's flight recorder . Writer Will Porter explained that the process of creating a backstory for Amanda was " refreshing " as he felt that she was an overlooked character of the Alien universe . The derelict ship the Nostromo crew previously found in the film was also included in the game since the developers felt it was a central point in the Alien canon . Actress Sigourney Weaver agreed to reprise her role as Ellen Ripley to voice small sections throughout the game because she felt that the story was interesting and true to the film . Along with Weaver , the original Alien cast , which includes Tom Skerritt , Veronica Cartwright , Harry Dean Stanton , and Yaphet Kotto , reprised their roles for the game 's separate downloadable content missions , marking the first time they were brought back together since the release of the film . All the characters were created with 3D face scans . 
 Alien : Isolation runs on an entirely new engine that was built from scratch by the Creative Assembly . The new engine allowed the development team to accommodate technical aspects like the game 's atmospheric and lighting effects as well as the alien 's behavioural design . The alien itself was designed to look similar to H. R. Giger 's original design for the creature from the film , including the skull underneath its semitransparent head . However , the designers did alter its humanoid legs with recurved ones to provide the alien a walk cycle that would hold up to scrutiny during longer encounters with the player . Between 70 and 80 different sets of animation for the alien were created . The alien 's artificial intelligence was programmed with a complex set of behavioural designs that evolve as it encounters the player , creating the illusion that the alien learns from each encounter and appropriately adjusts its hunting strategy . As gameplay designer Gary Napper explains , " We needed something that would be different every time you played it . You ’ re going to die a lot , which means restarting a lot , and if the alien was scripted , you ’ d see the same behaviour . That makes the alien become predictable , and a lot less scary . " The save system was inspired by a scene in the film where Captain Dallas uses a key @-@ card to access Nostromo 's computer , Mother . 
 The developers originally planned to add a feature that would allow players to craft weapons , but the idea was ultimately discarded . According to Hope , " We thought about what people would want to do in order to survive . We explored different ideas , and one of them was fashioning weapons to defend yourself . That was quite early on , but then we realised that this game isn 't really about pulling the trigger . " Another cancelled feature was the alien 's iconic acid blood as a game mechanic , which could melt through metal like in the film . Although the feature was implemented at one point , it was eventually removed from the game because the developers felt it would change the course of the game in a " weird " direction . In addition , the developers considered the possibility for the game to be played from a third @-@ person perspective , but then realized that it would significantly change the experience . Hope explained that it would become " a game about jockeying the camera and looking after your avatar . But in first @-@ person it 's you that 's being hunted . If you 're hiding behind an object and you want to get a better view of your surroundings , you have to move . " The actual development of the game took overall four years to complete after the Creative Assembly first pitched the idea to Sega . The game went gold on 9 September 2014 and is dedicated to Simon Franco , a programmer of the game , who died during its development . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Alien : Isolation was first unveiled on 12 May 2011 when UK government minister Ed Vaizey visited the Creative Assembly and revealed on his Twitter account that the studio was hiring for an Alien game . Although no gameplay details were confirmed , the Creative Assembly did confirm to CVG that the game would be released for consoles , but did not specify any format . Sega boss Mike Hayes also said that the game was going to be " very much a triple @-@ A project . We want this to be a peer to the likes of Dead Space 2 . " Although the game 's name was anticipated following a trademark registration in October 2013 and some screenshots of the game were leaked in December 2013 , Alien : Isolation was formally announced and confirmed for the Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One platforms with the release of a teaser trailer on 7 January 2014 . The developers also stated that they were not worried about the fact that Sega 's previous Alien game , Aliens : Colonial Marines , received a negative public reaction . According to Napper , " It did completely reaffirm to us that there was a massive Alien fanbase out there [ and ] just to see such a vocal reaction to the game , everything that they 've said they want is something that we 're building and we 're very excited about that . " 
 In June 2014 , Alien : Isolation was presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) , where journalists had a chance to play a demonstration of the game . The game was also playable on the Oculus Rift virtual reality ( VR ) headset that was shown at the show . Danielle Riendeau of Polygon described the demo as " one of the most effectively terrifying slices of a game I 've ever played in my life . " The game was awarded Best VR Game and was nominated for Game of the Show , Best Xbox One Game , Best PlayStation 4 Game , Best PC Game , and Best Action Game at the IGN 's Best of E3 2014 Awards . Similarly , at the 2014 Game Critics Awards , the game was nominated for Best of Show , Best Console Game , and Best Action / Adventure Game . In August 2014 , a cinematic trailer for the game was shown at Gamescom . 
 Alien : Isolation was released on 7 October 2014 , featuring two pre @-@ order downloadable content missions that allow players to play two scenes from the original film . The first mission , entitled Crew Expendable , features the original crew of the Nostromo and involves the player controlling Ripley , Dallas or Parker attempting to flush the alien creature from the air vents and into the ship 's airlock . The second mission , Last Survivor , is set during the film 's finale and involves the player controlling Ripley as she tries to activate the Nostromo 's self @-@ destruct sequence and reach the escape shuttle . Unlike the first mission , the second mission is only available for players who pre @-@ ordered the game at certain retailers . Upon release , five additional downloadable content packs for the game were periodically released between October 2014 and March 2015 . These packs expand the game 's Survivor Mode with new characters , challenges , maps , and other features . A collection featuring the game and all the downloadable content packs was released for Linux , OS X , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in late 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for Alien : Isolation was divided but generally positive , with review scores ranging from IGN 's 5 @.@ 9 out of 10 to PC Gamer 's 93 out of 100 . Josh Harmon of Electronic Gaming Monthly felt that Alien : Isolation " succeeds as a genuine effort to capture the spirit of the film franchise in playable form , rather than a lazy attempt to use it as an easy backdrop for a cash @-@ in with an ill @-@ fitting genre . " Writing for GameSpot , Kevin VanOrd credited the game for its tense and frightening gameplay , stating that " when all mechanics are working as intended , alien @-@ evasion is dread distilled into its purest , simplest form . " However , he criticized the game 's " trial and error " progression and frustrating distances between save points . Jeff Marchiafava of Game Informer stated similar pros , but criticized the story and poor acting from the voice actors . 
 The game 's visuals and atmosphere were highlighted positively . Polygon editor Arthur Gies felt that Alien : Isolation is " a beautiful game , full of deep shadows and mystery around every corner , " while Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer praised the lighting and unusually compelling environment design . IGN 's Ryan McCaffrey gave high marks to the game 's retro @-@ futuristic art direction and sound design , commenting : " From wisps of smoke that billow out of air vents to clouds of white mist that obscure your vision when you rewire an area 's life @-@ support systems in order to aid your stealthy objectives , Isolation certainly looks and sounds like a part of the Alien universe . " Similarly , PC Gamer reviewer Andy Kelly said that the game 's art design sets Alien : Isolation apart from the likes of System Shock or Dead Space and creates a " convincing science @-@ fiction world , with machines and environments that are functional and utilitarian , rather than overtly futuristic . " 
 The story and characters were generally criticized , with Game Informer stating that " Amanda exhibits little growth or personality , other than concern for her fellow humans and a desire to not die gruesomely . " Similarly , Blake Peterson of Game Revolution noted that none of characters are fully developed . According to him , " we never spend enough time with them to build the emotional bond necessary for their inevitable deaths to mean anything . " GameTrailers said that most of the computer terminals found in the game contain unoriginal logs to describe predictable events . Nevertheless , he remarked that reading reports from different computer terminals " grounds Sevastopol in an appreciable way . " 
 Writing for GamesRadar , David Houghton highlighted the alien 's advanced artificial intelligence , stating that " progress becomes a case of ' if ' and ' how ' , not ' when ' . Movement is measured in inches and feet rather than metres , and simply remaining alive becomes more exhilarating than any objective achieved . " Peterson praised the gameplay for being tense , scary and effective , commenting that Alien : Isolation is " a solid , incredibly striking example of the [ survival horror ] genre that uses its first person perspective to greater personalize the horror . " PC Gamer credited the crafting system for giving the game " a lot of unexpected depth " , allowing players to outsmart enemies in multiple ways . The game 's Survivor Mode was praised by Chris Carter of Destructoid , who felt it offered players different feelings and experiences each time they played it . 
 Although the gameplay was praised by several reviewers , some found the game to be unnecessarily long , repetitive and unforgiving . In a mixed review , McCaffrey felt that the game does not offer many options of survival , requiring players to spend most of their time hiding in lockers " staring at the motion tracker " . Polygon criticized the overexposure to the alien creature , turning Alien : Isolation into an irritating experience . As Gies explained , " Every time I thought I heard the monster , every blip on my motion tracker , was a cause for a tightness in my chest at first . By the 300th time I dived under a table or into a locker , I wasn 't scared anymore — I was annoyed . " Despite the criticism , Alien : Isolation was considered a " brave " title due to its difficult and unforgiving gameplay , a feature that is uncommon in games with large development costs . As of January 2015 , Alien : Isolation has sold over one million copies worldwide according to Sega . As of March 2015 , the game has sold over 2 @.@ 1 million copies in Europe and the US . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Alien : Isolation received several year @-@ end awards , including PC Gamer 's Game of the Year 2014 , Audio Achievement at the 11th British Academy Games Awards , Best Audio at the 15th Game Developers Choice Awards , and four awards at the 14th National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers . The game also appeared on several year @-@ end lists of the best games of 2014 . It was ranked 1st in The Daily Telegraph 's the 25 best video games of 2014 , 2nd in Empire 's the 10 Best Games Of The Year , 2nd in Time 's Top 10 Video Games of 2014 , 4th in The Guardian 's Top 25 Games of 2014 , 3rd in Reader 's top 50 games of 2014 by Eurogamer , and in Daily Mirror 's the 10 best games of 2014 . In 2015 , Alien : Isolation was ranked 7th in Kotaku 's list of the 10 Best Horror Games . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 In October 2015 , Creative Assembly studio director Tim Heaton stated that , while Sega was disappointed with the sales of the game , a sequel was " not out of the question " and that " there was more to be said . " However , he also highlighted significant obstacles in creating a sequel , commenting : " Spending very significant amounts of money , and getting close to break @-@ even or just about in the black ? That ’ s not where Sega wants to be , when we have a brilliant portfolio of other games that do great business . " Sega later confirmed that a sequel is still being considered , but the question of whether or not a sequel would be profitable will eventually decide the fate of the project . 
 = SS Winfield Scott = 
 SS Winfield Scott was a sidewheel steamer that transported passengers and cargo between San Francisco , California and Panama in the early 1850s , during the California Gold Rush . After entering a heavy fog off the coast of Southern California on the evening of December 1 , 1853 , the ship crashed into Middle Anacapa Island . All 450 passengers and crew survived , but the ship was lost . 
 Winfield Scott has been the object of numerous salvage operations since the crash , and currently rests underwater as part of the Channel Islands National Park and Marine Sanctuary . The Winfield Scott wreck site is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = California Gold Rush = = = 
 The discovery of gold at Sutter 's Mill in 1848 brought thousands of people to California in search of fortune until the late 1850s . Since neither the Panama Canal nor the First Transcontinental Railroad had been constructed , people emigrating to California from the Eastern United States had three main routes of passage . They could travel over land , which was expensive and dangerous , or they could sail the roughly 14 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 23 @,@ 000 km ) route around South America . This was more attractive to some but no less dangerous , due in part to the rough waters of the Drake Passage . In addition to the inherent dangers of either route , the journey often took as long as six months to complete . 
 The third route involved traversing the jungles of the Isthmus of Panama , then departing via the southern coast of Panama . While this cut the length of the sea journey in half , ships to ferry passengers from Panama to San Francisco were not commonplace . As a result , many had to wait months to complete the second half of their journey . To fill this growing need for swift passage from Panama to California , shipbuilding activities increased dramatically . 
 = = = Construction and service = = = 
 Winfield Scott ( originally to be named Placer ) was constructed by the shipbuilding company Westervelt and MacKay of New York , and was completed in March 1850 . The ship was named for the celebrated United States Army general Winfield Scott ( the stern was built with a bust in his likeness ) , and she was launched on 27 October 1850 . An announcement in the October 20 edition of the New York Herald stated that " We understand that no expense has been spared to secure strength , safety and speed ... " Her hull was wooden with double iron bracing and was made from White oak , Live oak , Locust , <unk> and Georgia yellow pine . 
 The steamer , owned by Davis , Brooks and Company , initially transported passengers on the New York @-@ New Orleans route . In 1852 , the ship 's ownership was transferred to the New York and San Francisco Steamship Company Line , and she arrived in San Francisco on April 28 , 1852 . Once there , she began taking gold seekers , nicknamed <unk> , on the Panama Route ( between San Francisco and Panama ) . After the demise of the New York and San Francisco Steamship Company Line ( which had been renamed as the New York and California Steamship Company in May 1853 ) , the ship 's ownership was again transferred on July 8 , 1853 , this time to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company . 
 = = = Last voyage = = = 
 Winfield Scott , bound for Panama , departed from San Francisco on the morning of 1 December 1853 . In addition to her complement of passengers and crew , the ship was transporting a shipment of gold bullion worth an estimated US $ 2 million . The ship 's progress was slowed in the afternoon when repairs had to be made to a leaking boiler , but she had resumed course at full speed . Later that evening , Captain Simon F. Blunt navigated the ship into the Santa Barbara Channel in an effort to save time . Captain Blunt knew the channel well , having helped survey the area a few years previously . 
 At approximately 11 PM , the ship encountered a heavy fog , and ran aground into Middle Anacapa Island ( approximately 400 miles from port ) . Her speed at the time of the wreck was estimated at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She struck the island bow first , and when Capt. Blunt attempted to back away the stern was struck , removing the ship 's rudder . With the ship taking on massive amounts of water and unable to steer , all aboard , perhaps as many as 500 people , began scrambling for land . The ship was completely evacuated in approximately two hours , and the survivors spent the first night camped on a pinnacle of rock that measured 50 by 25 yards ( 46 by 23 m ) . The next day they moved to a larger piece of land on the island . 
 One of the passengers , Asa Cyrus Call , recalled " a terrible jar and crashing of timbers ... I hurried out on deck , where my attention was fixed on a wall of towering cliffs , the tops of which were hidden by the fog and darkness and appeared about to fall and crush us . All round was the loud booming of angry breakers surging about invisible rocks . " 
 On 2 December , the steamship SS California , returning to San Francisco from Panama , was alerted to the presence of the wreck survivors by the smoke of a gun they had fired . California rescued the women and children , as well as Winfield Scott 's complement of gold bullion . On 9 December California returned to rescue the remaining passengers . The crew stayed behind to recover as much of the mail and passenger luggage as possible . Winfield Scott , however , had sustained too much damage and was left in the waters of the channel . 
 = = Wreckage and salvage = = 
 The remains of Winfield Scott are located under 25 – 30 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 1 m ) of water in the Channel Islands National Park and Marine Sanctuary . The wreckage site was verified in 1981 and was registered with the National Register of Historic Places in 1988 . The site is protected by California and United States law , which prohibits divers from removing any part of the wreckage . 
 A salvage operation was undertaken in 1894 , utilizing San Pedro . Much of the iron machinery , as well as hundreds of copper bolts , were recovered . An additional salvage operation during World War II recovered additional iron and brass for the war effort . 
 The remaining wreckage is considered important from an historical perspective , as it represents a tangible example of mid @-@ 19th century shipbuilding . Although much of the wooden hull has long since disintegrated , some of the machinery is still relatively intact . 
 Between 1853 and 1980 , more than 140 shipwrecks were documented in the Channel Islands National Park Marine Sanctuary . As of December 2000 , twenty sites had been located . The prevailing currents and weather conditions of the area make it a dangerous place for navigation . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Light beacon = = = 
 Shortly after the wreck , the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey recommended that a permanent lighthouse facility be built on Anacapa Island . Due to a lack of funding , the installation ( an unmanned acetylene beacon on a fifty @-@ foot tower ) was not constructed until 1912 . The tower was replaced by a lighthouse in 1932 . 
 = = = Impact on local ecosystem = = = 
 One possible lingering effect of the Winfield Scott 's wreck was the introduction of black rats to the ecosystem of the Channel Islands . While the wreck is one possible source for the arrival of rats on Anacapa , another is the later construction of a lighthouse . The first mention of rats on the island is in 1907 . 
 The black rats were a major disruption to the local wildlife on Anacapa Island and are still a problem on San Miguel Island . The black rats were successfully eradicated from Anacapa Island by 2003 , with a controversial program that involved an aerial application of the rodenticide brodifacoum , the first such eradication in the United States . The program cost nearly $ 1 million . 
 = Photography in Denmark = 
 Photography in Denmark has developed from strong participation and interest in the very beginnings of the art in 1839 to the success of a considerable number of Danes in the world of photography today . Pioneers such as Mads <unk> and Georg Emil Hansen paved the way for a rapidly growing profession during the last half of the 19th century while both artistic and press photographers have made internationally recognized contributions . Although Denmark was slow to accept photography as an art form , Danish photographers are now increasingly active , participating in key exhibitions around the world . 
 Among Denmark 's most successful contemporary photographers are Jacob Aue Sobol , who gained recognition for captivating portraits of his Greenlandic girlfriend , and Per Bak Jensen , who introduced a new perspective to modern landscape photography . Press photography has prospered too under award @-@ winning contributors such as Jan Grarup and Claus Bjørn Larsen , who have covered wars and conflicts of global importance over the past 20 years . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Christian Tuxen Falbe , a Danish marine officer , was in Paris in January 1839 on behalf of Crown Prince Frederik when Louis Daguerre revealed the art of <unk> . Falbe informed the Crown Prince of a visit to Daguerre where he had seen some of the very earliest daguerreotypes , explaining how impressed he had been by the new process and how important he thought it would be for art and science in Denmark . Shortly afterwards , he returned to Copenhagen with a camera and a couple of his own daguerreotypes for the Crown Prince who , believing them to be of scientific importance , deposited them with Hans Christian Ørsted , one of Denmark 's most prominent scientists . As a result of Ørsted 's own interest in photography , the new art took on rapidly : the <unk> Mads <unk> ( 1809 – 76 ) opened Copenhagen 's first photographic studio in 1842 ; and by 1850 there were over a hundred studios in Copenhagen and many more in the provinces . 
 The oldest photograph on record in Denmark is credited to Peter Faber ( 1810 – 1877 ) , a songwriter and a pioneer in telegraphy . His daguerreotype of <unk> Plads is in the Copenhagen City Museum . The image of the square is in fact reversed left to right , as was normal for daguerreotypes unless a mirror was used together with the camera . Careful analysis of the photograph suggests that it dates back to July 1840 . The exposure time of about 15 minutes in sunlight explains why the only figure to be seen is a man sleeping at the foot of the Pillar of Shame towards the left of the picture . 
 Its status in the history of Danish photography is rivalled by a portrait of Bertel Thorvaldsen sitting at an easel outside his studio in the garden of the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts at Charlottenborg Palace in Copenhagen . This daguerrotype was taken by the French photographer <unk> Charles Théodore Neubourg , who visited Copenhagen in the summer of 1840 . An examination of the circumstances under which it was taken reveals that the date was Sunday , 26 July 1840 . It has also been noticed that Thorvaldsen is making the horn sign with what apparently is his left hand although , as a result of the daguerrotype mirror effect , it is actually his right hand . This has been ascribed to the anxiety he must have experienced while facing the new mechanical device which could reveal even the slightest detail . 
 Several Danes are remembered for their contributions to <unk> . While in Paris in 1848 , Anton <unk> ( 1818 – 1875 ) , a marine artist , learnt from Daguerre . Rudolph Striegler , Johan Emilius <unk> and Johan Ludvig <unk> were among those who began to specialize in portrait photography opening studios in Copenhagen and the provinces . 
 Georg Emil Hansen ( 1833 – 1891 ) from <unk> came from a family of photographers . When his father , Carl Christian Hansen , opened a studio in Copenhagen , he decided to open one of his own . He became one of the most respected photographers of his day , with Christian IX of Denmark and the Danish Royal Family as customers in the early 1860s . He also excelled in adopting new techniques . He was the first to use paper prints and to make full @-@ length portrait enlargements . He received awards for his exhibitions in London ( 1862 ) and Berlin ( 1865 ) . In 1867 , together with his brother , Niels Christian Hansen , and two other photographers , he set up a photographic firm which later became Hansen , <unk> & Weller , suppliers to the royal Danish court . 
 = = = Carte de visite photography = = = 
 The technique of carte de visite photography was brought to Denmark by Rudolph Striegler in 1860 . It spread rapidly and by the 1870s provided a cheap and attractive alternative to portrait painting for photographers such as Ludvig Grundtvig ( 1836 – 1901 ) and Adolph <unk> ( 1835 – 1916 ) in Copenhagen , and Heinrich <unk> ( 1856 – 1903 ) who opened a studio in Aalborg . 
 Heinrich <unk> ( 1825 – 1903 ) remains to date one of the premier CDV photographers of Denmark . In June 1856 he began his photographic career as a partner under C. Fritsche in Aalborg and by December of the same year he bought his partner 's share of the business and struck out with a studio under his own name . By 1861 , Tönnies ' business boomed requiring a larger studio and the hiring of assistants , and by 1870 he became a Danish citizen . Ultimately , his family business spanned three @-@ generations and 75 years . The breadth of his photographic products included : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , photo @-@ lithography , stereoscopy , <unk> , CDVs , and medallions . It is believed that he produced no less than 75 @,@ 000 CDVs , many ordered in relation to a large wave of emigration from Nordjylland to North America . Owing to the poverty of Denmark 's Vendsyssel region , local demands for inexpensive CDVs persisted in Aalborg right up until World War I , making Tönnies ' studio one of the last to produce CDVs in Denmark . 
 Pietro Boyesen ( 1819 – 1882 ) was a Danish photographer who spent most of his professional life in Rome . Boyesen had a talent for composition and characterization . In contrast to the boring studio portraits which were so common at the time , Boyesen would have his subjects pose outdoors in intimate Roman settings . By playing with the subjects clothes and their relationship to the surroundings , Boyesen would produce works presenting a somewhat timid but intimate charm . 
 Frederikke <unk> ( 1839 – 1913 ) was one of the very first female photographers in Denmark . At the age of 35 , she received training in photography from her family in Hamburg , Germany , where her uncle , Poul Friedrich <unk> , her aunt and cousins were all photographers . In 1876 , when registering her business in Aalborg , she became one of the first officially recognized female photographers in Denmark when she gave her profession as " <unk> " , a German word which clearly shows that she was a woman . Specializing in portraits , she also became one of the earliest female members of the Dansk <unk> Forening in 1883 . One of the first to experiment with magnesium powder for flash , she installed electric lamps in her studio when electricity came to Aalborg in 1901 . 
 Kristen <unk> ( 1839 – 1919 ) stands as another Danish photographer known mainly for his images captured far beyond the borders of Denmark . From the 1860s until the 1890s , <unk> participated in expeditions to Sumatra , Singapore , and Penang . In 1867 , he exhibited photos at an exhibition in Paris and in 1870 he joined an expedition to the Batak lands of East Sumatra , where he successfully recorded scores of ethnographic images . 
 Christian <unk> ( 1852 – 1932 ) counts as among the earliest Danish photographers who emigrated the farthest distance . Though educated in Denmark , he left Copenhagen in 1878 and settled in Hawaii . Primarily occupied as a mechanical engineer at the Hana Sugar Plantation , Island of Maui , and later as a technical manager at the Honolulu Iron Works , as an avid amateur photographer he helped found the Hawaiian Camera Club ( 1889 – 1893 ) . He became an American citizen in 1903 and in 1909 accepted an appointment as Danish Consul . His remarkable photographs of the Hawaiian royal family and native social elites remain as some of the earliest images available of pre @-@ annexed Hawaii . 
 Mary Steen ( 1856 – 1939 ) was a successful photographer in Copenhagen , pioneering indoor photography with pictures of families inside their own homes . Later , as court photographer , she not only photographed the royal family in Denmark but also spent some time in London where she photographed Queen Victoria . She did much to improve working conditions for women and her example encouraged many women to become professional photographers . 
 Benedicte Wrensted ( 1859 – 1949 ) was a notable Danish female photographer , who emigrated to the USA in 1894 . Wrensted learned her craft from her maternal aunt , Charlotte Borgen , and for a time in the 1880s operated a studio on Torvet 8 , in Horsens , Denmark . Much of her photographic career is anchored to her studio in Pocatello , a small town in southeastern Idaho , where she took photographs of the local inhabitants and recorded the growth of the town . Perhaps her most famous work remains her documentary photographs of the Shoshone Great Basin Native Americans which are considered of great anthropological importance . Wrensted became a U.S. citizen in 1912 , at age 53 , and in the same year ended her career as a photographer . Many of her Native American images are preserved at the Smithsonian Institution and National Archives . 
 Ludvig Luplau operated in Copenhagen until he emigrated to the U.S.A ( circa 1870 ) , where he opened a photography studio in Chicago . His CDV <unk> stated " Ludvig Luplau from Copenhagen , " and the Chicago city business directories listed him at a variety of locations in the 1870s @-@ 90s . His <unk> <unk> advertising claimed Luplau & Co . , of 80 Fourth Street , specialized in both outdoor photography and stereoscopic interiors . Louis <unk> , his son , continued in photography beginning in the 1890s . 
 Peter <unk> ( 1866 – 1931 ) , who served his photography apprenticeship in 1893 in Hillerød with Carl <unk> , soon opened a studio of his own together with his two brothers . His work was widely recognized with the result that , in 1900 , he was given the title of Photographer to the Royal Danish Court . He took not only a large number of portraits but also landscapes across Denmark . He later became a major name in cinematography too . 
 = = = Other techniques = = = 
 A number of other techniques developed in parallel with the use of daguerreotypes . The <unk> , using <unk> to produce a positive image on glass , and the <unk> , also <unk> @-@ based , were both used in Denmark from around 1855 . Negative @-@ based paper prints , used from the beginning of the 1850s , were produced on salt paper until around 1857 when salt was replaced by albumen . <unk> emulsion chloride paper was used from 1865 and in 1880 gelatin emulsion paper was introduced . 
 = = = Growing popularity = = = 
 Thanks to the increasing availability of simpler techniques , amateur photography gained popularity at the beginning of the 20th century . <unk> Werner and Julius Møller were among the many who were influenced by the <unk> trend , concentrating on pictorial landscape and genre photography . 
 From the 1890s , the Detroit Publishing Company used the <unk> technique based on chromolithography to produce a large number of colour postcards , many of European cityscapes . In their collection , there are several views of Copenhagen taken between 1890 and 1900 . 
 Benefitting from the advent of postcards , Mary Willumsen ( 1884 – 1961 ) photographed women in scanty clothing or nude at the Helgoland beach facility in Copenhagen . Between 1916 and 1920 , she took many such photographs which she sold at a nearby kiosk . The operation was discontinued when the police began to take an interest . Many of the compositions are now considered to have considerable artistic merit . 
 = = Press and documentary photography = = 
 The Danish Union of Press Photographers ( <unk> ) is claimed to be the world 's first national organization for newspaper photographers . It was founded in 1912 in Copenhagen by six press photographers . Today it has over 800 members . 
 One of the earliest and most successful press photographers was Danish @-@ American Jacob Riis ( 1849 – 1914 ) who campaigned for social reform in the United States . Essentially a journalist , he took up photography only after he had emigrated to America . A prominent user of flash , he was able to publish indoor scenes of the slums of New York City , contributing to the implementation of " model tenements " . He is now regarded as a pioneer in photography . 
 While some Danish newspapers started to include photographs in the 1890s , it was only in the 1950s that press photography was introduced throughout the country . Taking the French @-@ based international photographic bureau Magnum as a model , Jesper <unk> , <unk> Nielsen and others set up Delta Photos , a group designed to support journalistic photography . 
 Delta Photos was dissolved in 1972 but other organizations such as Morten Bo 's Ragnarok and Henrik <unk> 's 2 . Maj sought to promote more clearly defined social and political objectives . Some photographers , such as Viggo <unk> and <unk> Clement , chose instead to become freelancers . 
 In the 1970s , Jacob <unk> ( b . 1947 ) spent a number of years in the United States where he photographed scenes of the socially disadvantaged across the country . In his book American Pictures ( 1977 ) , a worldwide success , he contrasted these with photographs of the American elite , hoping to provide a basis for social reform . 
 Today Danish press photographers are as active as ever . Jan Grarup , in particular , has covered wars and conflicts around the globe over the past 20 years , earning prestigious awards at home and abroad . Claus Bjørn Larsen , also working as a war photographer , won the World Press Photo of the Year award in 1999 for his work in Kosovo . 
 Documentary photography has also flourished outside the press . As an example , Jette Bang ( 1914 – 1964 ) was fascinated by Greenland and the Greenlanders . From 1936 , she took over 12 @,@ 000 black @-@ and @-@ white photographs of the country and its inhabitants , showing how close to nature people lived . 
 = = Art or science ? = = 
 Since the very beginning , Danes have argued about the precise place of photography in society . In 1839 , Crown Prince Frederik deposited Falbe 's daguerreotypes with Ørsted , the secretary of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters , despite the fact that Daguerre , the inventor , was an artist . In 1842 , the artist Johan Frederik Møller was refused a grant from the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts for studying photography in France on the grounds that it was not an art . Photographers came within neither the scope of the Academy of Sciences nor that of the Academy of Fine Arts but were regarded as manual workers . 
 The confusion continued until the end of the 19th century when artists began to use photography as an aid to painting . Notable examples are Peder Severin Krøyer , Jens Ferdinand Willumsen and Laurits Andersen Ring who used photography to obtain more detail and realism in their paintings . 
 With the advent of photographic societies such as Danske Kamera <unk> ( Danish Camera <unk> ) in the 1930s , there was increasing pressure from activists such as H. B. J. Cramer to have photography recognized as an art form . Indeed , the movement continued right up to the 1970s . A counter @-@ movement to <unk> , the 1920s ' Neue <unk> was slow to reach Denmark but surfaced in 1948 when Keld Helmer @-@ Petersen published his abstract colour studies in 122 Colour Photographs . 
 Apart from the 20 rather amateurish artistic photography events arranged by Aage <unk> between 1946 and 1976 at Charlottenborg , Denmark had few photographic exhibitions until the 1960s . The situation improved in 1963 when Jesper <unk> arranged an exhibition at the Danish Museum of Art & Design with photographers from New York , Moscow and Paris . Another positive influence was Keld Helmer @-@ Petersen 's book Fragments of a City with photographs of fire escapes and artistically silhouetted cranes taken while he was a student at Chicago 's Institute of Design , some of which were published in the magazine <unk> . 
 In the winter of 1968 – 1969 , Jens Juncker @-@ Jensen went even further with an excellent exhibition <unk> som <unk> ( Photography as a means of expression ) for which he drew the very best material from the few photographic books of the time , attracting not only professional and amateur photographers but also architects and television producers . It provided a basis for six TV programmes over the following months . There was , however , little real discussion of photography as an art form . 
 In the early 1970s , under the influence of the United States where photography had become an academic discipline , exhibitions such as New American Photography in Copenhagen 's Bella Center presented top artistic photographers of the 1950s and 1960s including Harry Callahan , Jerry <unk> and Diane Arbus . This was followed in 1973 by the opening of <unk> for <unk> <unk> ( Gallery for Creative Photography ) in Copenhagen , to be followed in 1977 by the <unk> gallery in Aarhus which encouraged experimental photography . Subsequent exhibitions involved the landscape photographer Kirsten Klein , the pioneers of staged photography Nanna <unk> <unk> and Lis <unk> , as well as the magic realist Per Bak Jensen . 
 In the 1990s , after Per Bak Jensen had joined the teaching staff at the Royal Academy in Copenhagen , it was clear that photography had been accepted as an art form . As evidence , in October 2004 , for the very first time , a number of the Academy 's students and graduates presented their photographs at an exhibition in Copenhagen 's Galleri Asbæk under the common title ” Eye of the Beholder – et blik på <unk> ” . 
 = = Contemporary photographers = = 
 Recognizing the growing status of photography as an art form , artists such as Richard Winther , Stig Brøgger , Jytte Rex , Peter Brandes and Ane Mette Ruge have actively contributed to its development . On the digital front , younger artists like Lisa <unk> have combined classical techniques of art and photography with digitized forms of expression . 
 Some of Denmark 's more widely recognized contemporary photographers are : 
 <unk> <unk> ( 1925 – 2010 ) was a Danish court photographer who is remembered both for her portraits of artists performing in Danish theatres but also for her many portraits of Queen Margrethe and other members of the Danish royal family . Realizing that people in such positions tend to act as if masked , she sought to portray the person behind the mask , although she often succeeded in maintaining a little of the secrecy . As a portrait photographer , she was gentle , intuitive and confident . Her life 's work is a result of a constant , concentrated effort . 
 Per Bak Jensen ( born 1949 ) seeks to capture timelessness or " the being of places " in his work . A pioneer of modern landscape photography , his topics are unusual : a field of corn stubble , thistles , or twigs lying in the snow . Much of his recent work includes photographs from Iceland and Greenland , some with stark images of minerals and rocks . While he is extremely attentive to angle , light and exposure , he never manipulates his photographs once they have been taken . He has successfully exhibited across Denmark for many years and more recently in New York , London and Paris . 
 <unk> Clement ( born 1946 ) graduated as a film director but soon turned to still photography , publishing his first book <unk> af <unk> ( Shadows of the Moment ) in 1978 . He has since become an active documentary photographer , focusing on people from both Denmark and elsewhere . His earlier work is black and white but since 2000 he has also worked with colour . 
 Kirsten Klein ( born 1945 ) studied portrait and museum photography before specializing in landscapes . Her black @-@ and @-@ white photographs often make use of older techniques such as <unk> and platinum printing . Concentrating on landscapes , she conveys a sensitive , poetic and often melancholic mood . Since 1976 , she has lived on the Danish island of Mors where she has photographed the ever @-@ changing countryside and coastline . 
 Steen <unk> ( born 1961 ) began his career in Copenhagen in 1984 photographing Greenpeace meetings and demonstrations . In 1987 , while in the United States , he was contacted by a Danish gossip magazine where he learnt the technique of photographing celebrities . Since the late 1990s , he has been a court photographer , following the lives of the Crown Prince , the Crown Princess and their family . This has allowed him to travel widely in China and the Far East . One of his recent interests is Denmark and the Danes , examining " what they do best in a great little country " . 
 Asger Carlsen ( born 1973 ) , who now lives in New York , has had considerable success with the cleverly doctored black @-@ and @-@ white images presented in his book Wrong . Everyday scenes suddenly become depictions of a surreal alternate reality , bordering on hallucinations . Carlsen explains his approach as " an expression of never really belonging anywhere . " 
 Astrid Kruse Jensen ( born 1975 , educated in the Netherlands and Scotland ) specializes in photographs taken at night which evoke the zone between reality and imagination . Carefully combining the effects of artificial light with the surrounding darkness , she creates mysterious images of lakes , swimming pools and solitary figures in the twilight . Since 2003 , she has participated in key exhibitions in Denmark and elsewhere . 
 Jacob Aue Sobol ( born 1976 ) studied at <unk> , the Danish School of Art Photography . His first book Sabine presents vivid pictures of his Greenlandic girlfriend and the remote village where she lives . For his series on the Gomez Brito family from Quiché in Guatemala , he won the 2005 World Press Photo prize for Daily Life Stories . Commenting on his book I , Tokyo , Miranda Gavin appreciates how " the sensitivity of his approach shines through the work and sets him apart as one of a new generation of photographers with the ability to allow eroticism and danger to seep through his images without becoming sordid or clichéd . " 
 Klaus <unk> ( born 1974 ) lives in London . His <unk> project was published in 2007 and featured documentary photography with a global perspective exploring peculiar hybrid cultures around the planet , such as Snow Polo in St. <unk> , Gay Rodeo in LA , Underwater Striptease in Chile , Underground Gardening in Tokyo and more . 
 = = Photographic museums and galleries in Denmark = = 
 National Museum of Photography , the Royal Library , Copenhagen . 
 <unk> Center , Copenhagen 
 <unk> , Copenhagen 
 Danish Museum of Photographic Art , Odense . 
 <unk> Esbjerg , Esbjerg 
 Galleri Image , Aarhus 
 Danmarks <unk> , Herning 
 = A Little Kiss = 
 " A Little Kiss " is the two @-@ part fifth season premiere of the American television drama series Mad Men . Officially counted as the first two episodes of the season , it figures as the 53rd and 54th overall episodes of the series . It was written by series creator and executive producer Matthew Weiner , and directed by Jennifer Getzinger . It originally aired on the AMC channel in the United States on March 25 , 2012 . 
 The premiere centers on Don Draper 's fortieth birthday , opening on Memorial Day weekend 1966 . The office prepares for Don 's surprise party while also dealing with the Heinz Beans account recently brought into the agency . The relationship between Megan and Don turns bitter after she performs a sensual dance during the party , while Peggy and Pete both suffer through professional conflict with their fellow co @-@ workers . 
 " A Little Kiss " was the first Mad Men episode to air in 17 months following heated contract negotiations between AMC and Matthew Weiner . A consequence of the hiatus saw the show switch from airing in the Summer / Fall to the Spring for the remainder of its run . Christopher Stanley ( Henry Francis ) , Jessica Paré ( Megan Draper ) , and Jay R. Ferguson ( Stan Rizzo ) were all added as main cast members beginning with the premiere . The theme of the episode relates to the boredom and discontent among the main characters as they settle into their rather uneventful lives . The episode was well received by television critics and , at a runtime of 90 minutes , is the longest episode of Mad Men to date . It was also the highest rated episode of Mad Men to date with 3 @.@ 54 million viewers tuning in , a substantial jump over the fourth season average owing in large part to the lengthy time between seasons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part I = = = 
 On the street below the Young & Rubicam office , African American protesters are picketing in support of equal @-@ opportunity employment . Several employees lean out the office window and drop bags of water on them . The protesters and journalists then enter the office to catch the employees ready with water @-@ filled bags . 
 At his new apartment , Don Draper ( Jon Hamm ) cooks breakfast for Sally ( Kiernan Shipka ) , Bobby ( Mason Vale Cotton ) and Gene . He only gets to see them for a short time before he returns them to Betty and Henry ’ s impressive ( but quite old ) home . Don is now married to Megan , and turning forty ( Dick Whitman 's birthday having been several months earlier and Don Draper 's about to occur ) . Megan , who now works under Peggy Olson ( Elisabeth Moss ) in creative , is planning a big surprise party for his birthday . Peggy , knowing Don 's aversion to birthdays , is reserved about the idea , but Megan insists that no one could dislike parties . 
 Roger Sterling ( John Slattery ) shows Don and Pete Campbell ( Vincent Kartheiser ) a newspaper article shaming Y & R for the water @-@ bomb stunt . Roger suggests running a mock ad touting Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce as an equal @-@ opportunity employer . 
 Pete arrives at a lunch meeting with representatives from Mohawk Airlines and unexpectedly finds Roger sharing drinks with them . Roger had spied on Pete 's appointment calendar . Pete is overcome with anger over Roger ’ s antics , especially since the charismatic Roger makes a much better impression . 
 During a presentation for Heinz , Peggy pitches an ambitious , cutting @-@ edge " ballet of beans " ad , which does not impress the Heinz executives . Don enters to assure the company men that his firm will think of a new pitch . Peggy protests that he did not fight hard enough for her idea , and complains to Stan that Don has changed . 
 On the evening of the surprise party ( which is inadvertently given away by Roger ) , Megan presents her birthday gift : She sings a French song , " Zou Bisou Bisou " , and dances provocatively . The guests clap and whistle , although Don seems unimpressed . Peggy , while talking to Don and Megan , makes a snide remark about having to return to the office later , since she is the only one really working on the weekend . After the party , Don , tired of the day , collapses on the bed fully clothed . Megan asks if he enjoyed the party ; he tells her not to waste money on such things . Not fazed by his demeanor , she teases and kisses him , wanting to talk about the party . He declines and insists on going to sleep , so she leaves the room upset . 
 = = = Part II = = = 
 The next morning , Lane Pryce ( Jared Harris ) finds a man 's wallet in a cab . Inspecting it , he becomes fascinated with a photo of a young woman named Delores . He later telephones the wallet ’ s owner but reaches Delores , the owner ’ s girlfriend . He flirts with her on the phone , and she promises the wallet be retrieved . The owner of the wallet comes to Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce in order to retrieve it . Lane secretly removes Delores ’ photo and the owner does not notice . 
 Joan Harris ( Christina Hendricks ) has given birth to a son named Kevin , who is now a few months old . Her mother , Gail Holloway ( Christine Estabrook ) , has come to stay with her to help with the baby but constantly argues with Joan over the subject of Joan returning to work , saying that Joan 's husband is a doctor . Insisting that the company needs her , Joan does not want to break her promise to go back . Gail shows Joan the company 's newspaper ad and claims that it is evidence that they intend to replace her . Joan stops by the office with baby Kevin in tow . In Lane ’ s office , she tearfully asks if they are planning to replace her . He assures her that the ad is a poor joke and that everyone is eagerly awaiting her return . 
 Megan overhears some particularly lewd comments from Harry about her dance , eventually ranting to Peggy about the office ’ s cynical culture . She tells her that Don did not appreciate the surprise party . Peggy apologizes for her rude comment at the party and Megan goes home early . Peggy goes to Don ’ s office to apologize to him as well . After hearing that Megan went home early , Don also leaves for the day . At the apartment , he asks Megan why she left work . She then <unk> and angrily cleans up the mess left from the party in just her black bra and panties . Don tries to initiate sex , but Megan says no and forcefully pushes him away several times . Don grabs her roughly , saying she " [ wants ] it so bad right now " , and the two have sex on the floor . Afterwards , Megan complains that she is not liked at the office and wonders if she ought to stop working there . Don tells her he does not care about work - he only cares about her . 
 Pete is given Harry 's office , which is larger and has windows , in order to impress his clients . As revenge for Roger crashing his earlier meeting with Mohawk Airlines , Peter later tricks Roger into going on a 6 : 00 a.m. meeting with Coca @-@ Cola that doesn ’ t exist . 
 At the office the next morning , Don and Megan enter the reception area to find a large group of African @-@ American women and men . They are responding to the newspaper ad , not aware it was a joke . The receptionist interrupts with a piece of traditional African art , sent from Y & R. Realizing that the applicants have seen the artifact , Cooper sends Lane into the reception area . He dismisses the men , by saying they are only seeking secretaries , and collects resumes from the women . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Little Kiss " was directed by Jennifer Getzinger and written by series creator Matthew Weiner . This was the second episode to be solely written by Weiner and directed by Getzinger , the other being the fourth season episode " The Suitcase " . Although the first to be aired of the season , it was actually produced after the following episode " Tea Leaves " , due to January Jones ' pregnancy . Despite the long break , 85 percent of the crew from the fourth season returned for the fifth . " There 's a sense of boredom , there 's a sense of anxiety , there 's a sense of discontent with the <unk> " , Weiner said , in regards to the positions of the characters at the beginning of the new season . Weiner considered the main question of the first episode " What is Don Draper like when he is happy ? " , with the twist of the first episode being Don 's disinterest in work . The episode was expanded from its regular runtime of 47 minutes into a 90 @-@ minute episode aired over two hours , after Weiner realized the story broken for the premiere was " 85 percent too big " . " We just put everything into it that we had . I think when you see it in its completeness , you 'll get it . " 
 Intense contract negotiations between the end of the fourth and fifth season led Matthew Weiner to quit during the downtime between Season 4 and Season 5 . AMC and Weiner were locked in intense negotiations , with AMC asking Weiner to cut two main cast members every season starting with the fifth , a shorter running time to make room for more commercials , and more product placement within the series . During the negotiations , Weiner said , " First of all , the number that 's been published is not true . Second of all , I offered to have less money , to save the cast , and to leave the show in the running time that it 's supposed to be . The harder that I 've fought for the show , the more money that they 've offered me . " After conversations with the network stalled , Weiner gave up hope on returning to the series . " I quit ... during the negotiation . I had come to terms with the fact that it was over ... In the most protective and demanding way , I did not feel that it was worth going back to work to make a show that was not the show I 'd been making . I had this argument with my wife , where I said : ' You don 't understand - it 's not just a matter of changing the show . I don 't want to go to work and do it different . I just figured out how it works ' ... [ But ] in the end , everything worked out . " AMC eventually relented , signing a new deal with Weiner that keeps him on board as showrunner for the fifth and sixth season , with a strong possibility for a final seventh season . 
 Weiner explained that the delay in the airing of the series and the 17 @-@ month break between the fourth and fifth season was not his decision . Although , he did admit that the plan to keep Mad Men off the air in 2011 was in place before the negotiations . He said , " There was a plan in place in 2010 that the show would not be on the air in 2011 . You don 't just throw in Breaking Bad because Mad Men is not available . They have four shows . They do them one at a time , and God bless them for the fact that Breaking Bad got an audience , because of where they were this summer . I 'm very happy about that , because people should see that show . " 
 = = = " The Look of Love " song change = = = 
 The original screener of " A Little Kiss " sent out to critics included the use of the Dusty Springfield song " The Look of Love " . However , critics soon pointed out that " The Look of Love " was not released until 1967 , six months after the time period that " A Little Kiss " takes place . When critics pointed this out to showrunner Matthew Weiner , he sent out a letter to critics , which was reprinted in many publications and websites . Weiner 's letter included him telling reporters that , " Although we take license for artistic purposes with the end @-@ title music , we never want the source music to break from the time period we are trying to recreate . As someone who has a deep appreciation for details , I want to thank you for bringing this to our attention . It ’ s a privilege to work on a show that generates an ongoing dialog with you and our amazing fans so please — keep those notes and comments coming ! " The 1966 Dusty Springfield song " You Don 't Have To Say You Love Me " was used during the end titles , though this was not a replacement for " The Look of Love " . An article by The New York Times indicated that " The Look of Love " was originally played by the band at Don Draper 's fortieth birthday party . 
 = = = Young & Rubicam protest incident = = = 
 In an unusual departure for the series , the opening scene of the season premiere was largely a re @-@ creation of a true event that occurred at the Young & Rubicam advertising agency . The original story detailing the event was published on Page 1 of the May 28 , 1966 edition of The New York Times . The " Goldwater ' 68 " poster seen in the window of Young & Rubicam during " A Little Kiss " was also present on the day of the real event , including another poster that read " If you want money , get a job " ( echoed by one character 's scream of " Get a job ! " at the protesters in the premiere ) . 
 The incident was notable for water bombs thrown from the executive floor , which housed the Young & Rubicam advertising agency . The two water balloons struck 19 @-@ year @-@ old James Hill , who slipped and fell on pavement , but was not seriously hurt . The other hit 9 @-@ year @-@ old Mike Robinson . His mother , Mrs. Esme Robinson , along with other Black protestors and a New York Times reporter , came to the executive floor to complain . Mike Robinson , Esme Robinson , protestor Vivian Harris , and Times reporter John Kifner were all portrayed in the opening scene . The dialogue in the scene was also taken directly from the original article . Vivian Harris originally said the , " And they call us savages " line , which television critic Mike Hale called " unfortunately <unk> " and fellow critic Matt Zoller Seitz called " a terrible line " when they reviewed the premiere , apparently unaware that it was a real quote . On the day of the real event , Young & Rubicam office manager Frank Coppola apologized to the women for the incident , saying that " we have 1 @,@ 600 people in this building and I can 't control all of them . I 've ordered all of the windows closed and I have men patrolling all the floors to make sure this doesn 't happen again . " Coppola 's assurance that the windows were closed is similar to character Don Draper 's idea of " Our windows don 't open " in Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce 's mocking want ad seen later in the episode . 
 After the head researcher for Mad Men , Allison Hill , found the original article , she handed it to showrunner Matthew Weiner , who was " blown away " . “ I just loved the level of outrage from the participants in the protest . It was so eloquently said , and it struck to the heart of the conflict . They were being lampooned . This was a very serious issue for them and a joke to everyone else , " Weiner said . The original New York Times reporter , John Kifner , does not remember the actual event , mentioning that he did " a lot of poverty and racial stuff . " He could not remember the original article , but was greatly excited when he heard that his story inspired the premiere . The current chief executive of Young & Rubicam , David Sable , did not know whether the original employees were fired , but found their actions " completely repulsive and not in line with the values of our company " . 
 = = = " Zou Bisou Bisou " = = = 
 The episode includes a scene where Megan Draper serenades Don with a rendition of " Zou Bisou Bisou " , which is a French Yé @-@ yé song originally released in 1960 by Gillian Hills . Creator Matthew Weiner prepared Jessica Paré for her performance of " Zou Bisou Bisou " and gave her a detailed list of notes to help her . She worked with choreographer Marianne Ann Kellogg during three six @-@ hour sessions to work out the dance routine . It took the actress about a week and a half to learn the entire routine . She recorded the actual song in a studio . Paré said to reporters the day after the original episode airing , “ It ’ s been gathering a lot of really great attention . I can ’ t believe I ’ m new on the show and one of the first things I have to do is an entire song and dance routine for the entire cast of Mad Men . ” Weiner characterized the dance as a symbol of the oncoming generation gap and " open sexuality " . 
 Olivia Fleming of Daily Mail praised the surprise 40th birthday party scene saying " … sultry style icon , Megan Draper , captured America 's attention … seducing the audience - if not her new husband Don Draper . " She also noted the performance 's " … unyielding <unk> and high voltage sexuality . " Alexandra <unk> of The Wall Street Journal said " One of the most talked @-@ about scenes … was Megan Draper ’ s sultry performance … " Slate 's Haglund described the song as " The centerpiece of the Mad Men season 5 premiere " . Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone described the scene as " a highlight of the two @-@ hour episode " , stating that " Megan sings … for her husband , who can barely suppress his embarrassment and discomfort . " Bill Keveney of USA Today said " Paré … had fans buzzing … with her character 's sexy rendition … " Patrick Kevin Day of the Los Angeles Times stated that the scene " … has people talking " , describing it as follows : " Pare … serenades her husband … with the sexy , slinky number " Zou Bisou Bisou " while wearing a barely there miniskirt . " Lori Rackl of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted that the performance was the talk the premiere and said : " Showing a lot of leg — and chutzpah — the new Mrs. Megan Draper ( Jessica Paré ) delivered a sexy serenade … purring the early ’ 60s French pop song " Zou Bisou Bisou . " The … performance made the unflappable Don Draper blush and his co @-@ workers ’ jaws hit the floor … " Lauren Moraski of CBS News said " Probably one of the best scenes … took place when the new Mrs. Don Draper ( Jessica Paré as Megan ) sang an awkward @-@ turned @-@ sultry version of the French ' 60s pop song " Zou Bisou Bisou " … " Erin Carlson of The Hollywood Reporter described Paré 's performance as " bizarre , come @-@ hither burlesque " , noting that she " … stunned partygoers who openly ogled her while the ad exec ( Jon Hamm ) squirmed with polite embarrassment . " Ethan Sacks of the New York Daily News described the scene as " The sexy scene in which Megan serenades Don … with the song and transitions into a lap dance … " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " A Little Kiss " was the most watched @-@ episode of Mad Men to date , with 3 @.@ 5 million viewers and 1 @.@ 6 million viewers in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . Before the fifth season , Mad Men had never gotten above a 1 @.@ 00 in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . The premiere 's core viewer demographic was adults aged 25 – 54 at 1 @.@ 7 million viewers . This was an increase from the same core group during the season four premiere at 1 @.@ 4 million viewers . Charlie Collier , AMC ’ s president , said that " For each of the five Mad Men seasons Matthew Weiner and his team have crafted a beautifully told story and each season a larger audience has responded ; a rare accomplishment . We couldn ’ t be more proud of this program , the brilliant writers , cast and crew , and the entire team on each side of the camera . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " A Little Kiss " received very approving reviews from the television critic community . USA Today writer Robert Bianco gave it four out of four stars , praising the high level of achievement in the writing and directing as well as the cast led by the " shockingly under @-@ <unk> Jon Hamm , playing a man who is his own deeply flawed invention and letting us see the effort and pain behind the charade . But there 's not a weak performer on view Sunday , from the preternaturally assured Kiernan Shipka as Sally to old pro Robert Morse as Bert . " TV Guide critic Matt Roush opined that " the civil rights movement provides ironic bookends for the episode , reflecting how insular the universe is for these smug but deeply flawed purveyors of the American dream , none more memorable and maddening than Don Draper ( Jon Hamm ) , the alpha hunk who appears to have it all . But some things never change in the world of Mad Men : the high quality of acting , writing , production design and detail . " Newsday reviewer Verne Gay gave it an " A " grade , citing that " Mad Men is back and back in all the right ways -- the humor , the writing , the period details , and best of all , the flawless attention to these characters and their cluttered interior worlds . " Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said that " the premiere suggests that the only other show that belongs with it in the discussion for the best drama on television is the same one we were talking about last season . At the top level , there is Breaking Bad , and there is also — finally , thankfully , exceptionally — Mad Men , and then there is everything else . " 
 TV Fanatic ’ s Dan Forcella gave the two @-@ hour season premiere 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars by saying , " Honestly , the first 45 minutes or so were basically just setting the scene for the new season , so it was a smart move to make this premiere two hours long . After that , though , everything began to pick up . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club rated this episode an A- and commented on the series ' take on the 1960s , saying : " The ' 60s are both incredibly important to the show and something almost incidental to what makes it work so well . It ’ s a show , on the one hand , about how people deal with sweeping social change , even when it 's happening way , way off their radar ( as we see in the final scene of tonight 's episode ) , but it ’ s also a show about what it means to live through a decade . " Lori Rackl of Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the season five premiere four stars : " After a dark and often depressing season four , it 's refreshing to start things off on a more jovial , lighter note . That 's not to say the premiere is devoid of angst , disappointment and drama . It 's just buoyed by an unusually high amount of humor . " The Los Angeles Times ' Robert Lloyd spoke about the series ' continued success : " It works because it 's less about who we were then — it 's a fantasy of who we were then , really — than about who we are now . " 
 Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times , however , was one of the very few reviewers to give the season premiere a low score : " A show that became a hit because it seemed so original has been so co @-@ opted that it now looks like a cliché . The personalities on Mad Men don 't change , but the times do . At this point , the context may be more interesting than the characters . " On Twitter , Hollywood Reporter critic Tim Goodman characterized Stanley 's critique as a " bullshit ramble @-@ review " , saying that Stanley " just wants us to know she 's above the material she 's covering . " In his review , Goodman was laudatory , saying that " the party , more than anything else , was a central defining moment of where we 're going . Everything about it was different . Newer . We 're not in 1960 anymore . And if you think about it , the show we all know and love is about to change as well . It 's going to look different , above and beyond the characters changing . " Time writer James Poniewozik wrote a cooler review saying that , " I ’ m glad to have Mad Men back , but “ A Little Kiss ” was not a great episode . Mad Men return episodes generally aren ’ t : they take their time and do a lot of table setting . " Poniewozik was simultaneously intrigued and unsettled by Megan 's addition as " essentially a new female lead " and reasoned that Weiner used Megan 's " unfamiliarity as an advantage and as a storytelling device . The very fact that she is an unknown quantity among these very well @-@ known quantities may give us a chance to see everyone we think we know differently — through the eyes of a relative stranger . " Chuck Barney of the Contra Costa Times said the premiere was off to a " methodical start " that reintroduced us to the " enigmatic characters " but that " Eventually , it gains traction , weaving threads of heartfelt poignancy with doses of dark humor . What hasn 't changed is the quality of the endeavor . Mad Men remains a show that often feels more like literature than TV . The top @-@ notch acting is still intact , as is the attention to aesthetic detail . So , after that excruciating delay , are we still in love with this show ? Truly , deeply -- madly . " David <unk> of the San Francisco Chronicle called the premiere a " stunner " and compared to the character of Don Draper to legendary American characters like Jake Barnes , Charles Foster Kane , Tony Soprano , Huck Finn , Natty <unk> , Elmer Gantry and " most of all , to F. Scott Fitzgerald 's creation of Jimmy Gatz , who assumed an entirely new identity as Jay Gatsby in 1925 . " 
 = Phantom Power ( Super Furry Animals album ) = 
 Phantom Power is the sixth album by Welsh indie rock band Super Furry Animals , released on 21 July 2003 by Epic Records in the United Kingdom . The record was originally conceived as a ten song concept album using D @-@ A @-@ D @-@ D @-@ A @-@ D guitar tuning , but the band chose to abandon this idea during recording as they didn 't want to constrain themselves . The group did attempt to create a " more coherent " album than their past efforts by choosing songs which worked well together . Phantom Power was recorded at the band 's own studio , AV Happenings , in Cardiff with the Super Furries producing and engineering themselves for the first time . The album features a range of musical styles , from country rock to techno , although many of the tracks are based around the acoustic guitar . According to chief songwriter and vocalist Gruff Rhys , the album 's lyrics deal with " broken relationships and war " . 
 The album , like their previous record Rings Around the World , was simultaneously released on CD , vinyl and DVD . The DVD featured a surround sound mix of the album along with animations , commentary by Mario Caldato Jr . ( who mixed the record ) and remixes . The majority of these remixes were re @-@ released as the album Phantom Phorce in 2004 . Phantom Power was well received , with many critics suggesting it was the best album of the band 's career . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 Phantom Power was originally conceived as a ten song cycle in the " unconventional " D @-@ A @-@ D @-@ D @-@ A @-@ D guitar tuning . Singer Gruff Rhys wrote many of the songs on the album in this tuning and in the key of D major during the space of a few days . These tracks , which included the " Father Father " instrumentals , " Golden Retriever " , " Hello Sunshine " , " Cityscape Skybaby " and " Out of Control " , were then demoed at the house of regular producer Gorwel Owen with overdubs added at the band 's own office @-@ block based studio , AV Happenings , in Cardiff . 
 The group took a hands @-@ on approach to the actual recording sessions for Phantom Power , engineering and producing themselves for the first time . Recording largely took place at AV Happenings during the second half of 2002 , with the band working through the night so as not to disturb staff who worked in other parts of the building during the day . According to bassist Guto Pryce this involved a fair amount of trial and error as the band " didn 't really know what [ they ] were doing " . <unk> booths were improvised by setting up tents in the office corridors : " we 'd record a guitar and it 'd sound rubbish and we had to figure out why . So we started experimenting with different tent designs . In the end it was the wigwam that was easiest to put up and sounded best " . The band had to take these booths down before office workers arrived in the morning , a process that guitarist Huw Bunford has described as " ghosts in the night ... a bit clandestine " . A brief two @-@ week session with Gorwel Owen at Rockfield Studios saw some of the album 's more " straight ahead " tracks recorded with live vocals before the band returned to AV Happenings and " messed around " with them . When the album was almost finished the band enlisted the services of Tony <unk> who engineered sessions during which several vocal parts were recorded . 
 The ten song D @-@ A @-@ D @-@ D @-@ A @-@ D concept was eventually abandoned with Pryce stating " we don 't like constraining ourselves and if you 've got a concept , you 're doing that . And we had some other really nice tunes so we just chose the best songs " . According to Rhys the only plan the group stuck to was to make a " more coherent " record : " In the past ... we 'd put ideas kind of side by side , and on this record we wanted all those sounds to be more blended " . Following arguments over the track listing of previous album Rings Around the World , after a " lot of songs " were recorded necessitating four months worth of discussions about which tracks to leave off the record , the group recorded just 16 largely acoustic based songs during the sessions for Phantom Power . Rhys 's initial batch of songs were augmented by , among others , the Huw Bunford penned " Sex , War & Robots " , the first time the guitarist had had one of his songs included on a Super Furry Animals album and also the first time he had sung lead vocals for the group , " Slow Life " , which grew out of an electronic piece of music keyboardist Cian Ciaran had been working on for several years and " The Piccolo Snare " which was partly written in the studio . 
 = = Music = = 
 After the more produced Rings Around the World , which relied heavily on computers and electronics , the group were keen to make Phantom Power " a little more human " with guitarist Huw Bunford stating : " with technology you can do anything these days , but sometimes less is more " . Many songs on the album are acoustic based and bass player Guto Pryce has claimed that they sounded " pretty good right from the start " which also contributed to the decision to avoid " over @-@ tweak [ ing ] them in the studio " . Despite this the group did work electronic loops into several tracks after Ciaran bought a large number of " sound effect and light music " vinyl records from a man who worked in the same building . According to Rhys : " he knocked on the door just as we were beginning the album : " hey , I 've got these records to sell , are ya interested ? " And Cian went down to check them out and gave him a hundred pounds on the spot and carried 700 albums back to our tiny room " . 
 The album showcases an eclectic range of sounds from the country rock of " Sex , War & Robots " , featuring pedal steel guitar , to the heavy metal and punk of " Out of Control " and the glam rock of first single " Golden Retriever " . " Slow Life " , a track which singer Gruff Rhys has described as the " most sonically impressive " song on Phantom Power , features techno influences and is based on a piece of electronic music written by keyboardist Cian Ciaran several years earlier . Ciaran encouraged the band to jam on top of his original track to produce a fusion of techno and guitar @-@ pop . " The Undefeated " is inspired by ska and reggae music , although the group removed a " cheesy white reggae " section from the song because it sounded " fucking horrible " and actively tried not to make it sound too much like a ska or reggae track as they felt they " couldn 't pull it off " . Many tracks feature close vocal harmonies , with all the band apart from Pryce contributing . These harmonies give the album a California / West Coast of America feel , with comparisons being drawn to the work of The Beach Boys , particularly on the song " Venus and Serena " . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 Singer and chief lyric writer Gruff Rhys has claimed that Phantom Power is about " broken relationships and war " with " a positive outlook to the future " . As " BBC News 24 addicts " Rhys and the band absorbed " fucked up war images " from the Iraq War during the making of the album which affected the way songs were written : " We seem to be living in such a heavy time . We 're just absorbing all the words thrown at us from the TV and regurgitating them back . " Frustration with the George Bush administration and its foreign policy had an impact on the record with Rhys claiming that he feels qualified to address the subject as United States foreign policy " effectively decides what the foreign policy is in the UK " . 
 The two most overtly " political " tracks on Phantom Power are " The Piccolo Snare " and " Liberty Belle " . " The Piccolo Snare " is about " societies torn apart by war and the waste of human life " . The track uses the vocabulary of the Falklands War ( <unk> , Skyhawks etc . ) but Rhys claims it is applicable to any war . " Liberty Belle " tells the story of two cartoon characters devised by Rhys , ' Liberty Belle ' and ' Memory Lane ' , the former representing the " bells of freedom " , specifically the American Dream , and the latter representing " history 's harsh lessons " which Liberty Belle has failed to learn . The song is told from the perspective of a " bird living almost in a parallel universe to humans , oblivious to the gravity of the games which are being played around us " , something which Rhys admits to feeling himself much of the time . " Venus and Serena " uses a story of a child who talks to his pet tortoises , Venus and Serena , as he can 't communicate with his elders to make a similar point : that people feel alienated from their elected leaders . Both " Out of Control " and " Slow Life " feature regurgitated media buzzwords , with " Out of Control 's " " flippant " lyrics designed to create the feel of " an over @-@ dramatic theme to a current affairs programme " . " Bleed Forever " deals specifically with the nuclear fallout from the Chernobyl disaster which fell over North Wales , allegedly causing an increase in incidents of leukaemia among children in the area . 
 However , Rhys has been keen to point out that the record is not a forcefully political one , claiming that most of the band 's songs are " fragments of daily life ; occasionally politics are a part of that . Super Furry Animals is about exploration , not political campaigning " . " Valet Parking " , for example , is a song about " the glories of pan @-@ European travel " , documenting a road trip from Cardiff to Vilnius , " Golden Retriever " is about " the relationship between [ Gruff Rhys 's ] girlfriend 's two dogs - a male and a female " and " The Undefeated " , inspired by a poor run of results for the Welsh football team , is about " underdogs and <unk> " . 
 = = DVD = = 
 The DVD of Phantom Power contains the 14 songs featured on the CD version of the album in surround sound , 16 remixes , commentary by Mario Caldato Jr. who mixed the record and provided one of the remixes , and song lyrics . 
 According to singer Gruff Rhys , the concept behind the DVD was based on the success of platform games : the listener can play the album as if it were a game and spend " months ... instead of weeks " exploring the content . Unlike the DVD version of previous album Rings Around the World , which featured videos for every track , the songs on the DVD are accompanied by slowly moving animations . Rhys has stated that the Super Furry Animals wanted to use " really bland images " as viewers began to place too much emphasis on the videos on Rings Around the World and the band wanted them to concentrate on the music . 
 Keyboardist Cian Ciaran stated at the time of Phantom Power 's release that the band would issue a DVD with every future album , claiming that " this is just the way we make records now " . However , the band 's next two albums , Love Kraft and Hey Venus ! , were not made available on DVD and , in a 2008 interview with Uncut , Rhys suggested that the release had been something of a failure : " no one gave a shit because people just want to rock n ' roll ! " 
 The remixes on the DVD version of Phantom Power vary from radical reworkings such as Killa Kella 's beatbox treatment of " Golden Retriever " and <unk> 's " unrecognisable " version of " Sex , War and Robots " , to the likes of Mario Caldato Jr 's take on " Liberty Belle " and High Llamas ' " Valet Parking " which are merely " spruced up " . The majority of the remixes were reissued on CD as the album Phantom Phorce in 2004 . According to drummer Dafydd Ieuan the band didn 't have the money to pay the artists involved for their remix work so , in order to provide them with royalties , promised to release an album featuring the tracks on their own label , Placid Casual . 
 Hidden footage of the band firing machine guns can be reached by selecting the song " The Undefeated " , waiting 22 seconds until the lettering starts to blink and pressing ' Enter ' ( ' Enter ' must be pressed before the lettering blinks for a second time at 24 seconds ) Guitarist Huw Bunford has described this footage as being " exactly how it looked on the tin ... noisy , full of testosterone , with pumped up guys in the woods trying to kill furry animals ! " 
 = = Release = = 
 Phantom Power was released on CD , vinyl and DVD on 21 July 2003 in the United Kingdom on Sony 's Epic imprint . The album reached # 4 in the UK Albums Chart . In America the album was released on 22 July 2003 by Beggars Banquet US . Phantom Power was released on 21 July 2003 in Japan with two additional tracks , " Summer Snow " and " Blue Fruit " , added after " Slow Life " at the end of the album . " Golden Retriever " was released as the first single from the album , reaching # 13 in the UK Singles Chart , followed by " Hello Sunshine " in October 2003 which peaked at # 31 . The Slow Life EP was released as a free download from the website of the band 's record label , Placid Casual , on 12 April 2004 , featuring the title track , " Lost Control " ( a remix of " Out of Control " ) , and the Goldie Lookin Chain collaboration , " Motherfokker " . The majority of the remixes from the DVD version of Phantom Power were released as Phantom Phorce on Placid Casual on 19 April 2004 . Initial copies of this album came bundled with a CD version of the Slow Life EP . Phantom Power has been certified silver in the United Kingdom , denoting sales of more than 60 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Phantom Power received generally positive reviews from critics with a score of 87 on Metacritic , denoting " universal acclaim " . Drowned in Sound described the album as " another fine , esoteric wonder of an LP " , while the NME claimed it is the group 's " most focussed , energetic pop record since Radiator " and went on to state that " for a band to be hitting such form six albums into a steady career is astonishing " . Q called it " the band 's best work to date , as accessible as it is inventive " ; The Times agreed , calling Phantom Power " the Furries ’ most satisfying album to date ... one to cherish . " Several critics commented on the " summery pop " nature of the record with Tiny Mix Tapes likening the album to " the sun shining through following a large and brooding thunderstorm " and The Times calling it " mellow summer listening " despite the " grim view of the world " expressed in Gruff Rhys 's lyrics . The NME found that Phantom Power compares favourably with the band 's previous release , Rings Around the World , losing some of that album 's mainstream polish . AllMusic agreed , expressing relief that the band had loosened up following Rings ... , which the website described as " often sounding constrained by its polished widescreen aspirations " . Irish website entertainment.ie saw Phantom Power as " a highly polished affair , filled with the widescreen classic pop that Gruff Rhys and co. carry off so effortlessly ... thankfully free of the techno experiments that marred so much of their previous work " . 
 There was some criticism of the album with The Guardian accusing the band of " treading water " , the album suffering from <unk> as the group 's sixth release despite being a " lovely record " . Stylus Magazine expressed similar views , claiming that Phantom Power " feels very much like business as usual for the Welsh wizards , as if they 've made just another album " . In a 2008 interview with Uncut Rhys described Phantom Power as his favourite Super Furries album , although he conceded that all the band 's records " have their moments " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Hurricane Klaus = 
 Hurricane Klaus was a minimal Atlantic hurricane that dropped heavy rainfall across the Lesser Antilles in October 1990 . The eleventh tropical cyclone and sixth hurricane of the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season , Klaus developed from a tropical wave on October 3 a short distance east of Dominica . It drifted northwestward , and quickly intensified to attain hurricane status on October 5 . Though its closest approach to the Lesser Antilles was within 12 miles ( 19 km ) , the strongest winds remained to its northeast due to strong wind shear , which caused Klaus to steadily weaken . After deteriorating into a tropical depression , Klaus briefly restrengthened over the Bahamas before dissipating on October 9 under the influence of developing tropical storm , Marco . 
 Heavy rainfall on Saint Lucia destroyed about 15 % of its yearly banana crop . Damage was heaviest on Martinique , where seven casualties occurred and 1 @,@ 500 people were left homeless as the heavy rainfall caused severe flooding on the island , resulting in some landslides . The remnant moisture of Klaus entered the southeastern United States , dropping heavy rainfall and causing four casualties ; the same area was affected with more precipitation a few days later by Tropical Storm Marco . Due to the damage caused by the storm , the name Klaus was retired from the list of tropical cyclone names . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 27 . It tracked westward to the south of a subtropical ridge , becoming convectively active , and a low @-@ level circulation was observed as it passed south of the Cape Verde islands on September 28 . The organization of the convection oscillated over the subsequent days , and a few times the system showed signs of developing into a tropical depression . As it approached the Lesser Antilles it organized further , and despite unfavorable upper @-@ level wind shear the system developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen on October 3 while located about 115 miles ( 185 km / h ) east of Dominica . Located in an area of weak steering currents , the depression drifted to the northwest , and about six hours after first developing the cyclone intensified into a tropical storm ; the National Hurricane Center designated it with the name Klaus . 
 Upon becoming a tropical storm , Klaus was located in an area of 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) of wind shear , although concurrently it was located over warm water temperatures of 83 @.@ 1 ° F ( 28 @.@ 4 ° C ) . Tracking through a highly baroclinic environment , the storm became better organized , and at 1200 UTC on October 5 Klaus attained hurricane status about 30 miles ( 50 km ) east of Antigua ; shortly thereafter , it passed 12 miles ( 19 km ) east of Barbuda , its closest point of approach to the Lesser Antilles . Klaus reached peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum central pressure of 985 @.@ 0 mbar ( 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) , though most of its deep convection and strong winds remained to its northeast due to wind shear . At the time the hurricane was forecast to continue tracking to the north @-@ northwest . However , after weakening to a tropical storm on October 6 , Klaus turned westward . 
 Klaus continued tracking just north of the Lesser Antilles , and after continuing to deteriorate from the wind shear , the cyclone weakened to a tropical depression on October 8 to the north of Puerto Rico . Later that day , convection redeveloped over the center , and Klaus re @-@ attained tropical storm status as it accelerated toward the northeast Bahamas ; it briefly reached winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . A low pressure area to its west over Cuba had been steadily intensifying and building toward the surface , and on October 9 it developed into a tropical depression ; the cyclone became the dominant system , eventually becoming Marco , and Klaus dissipated under the influence of the system late on October 9 . The remnant moisture continued to the northwest , reaching the coast of South Carolina by October 11 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Shortly after Klaus attained tropical storm status early on October 4 , a tropical storm warning was issued for the northern Leeward Islands from Saint Martin to Antigua , which was upgraded to a hurricane warning as its quick strengthening became apparent ; additionally , the government of France issued a tropical storm warning for Guadeloupe . A hurricane watch was issued for the Virgin Islands , though it was dropped as Klaus began to weaken . In Guadeloupe , officials advised citizens to transport livestock to safer areas , and also to avoid potentially flooded areas . Prior to its arrival , schools were closed in Martinique , Sint Maarten , and Antigua . The VC Bird International Airport was closed during the passage of the hurricane . 
 Later in its duration , the government of The Bahamas issued a tropical storm warning for the central and later northern Bahamas , though it was discontinued as the cyclone dissipated . Due to Hurricane Klaus , Space Shuttle Columbia 's launch was delayed . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Klaus dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across the Lesser Antilles , potentially as high as 15 inches ( 380 mm ) ; the hurricane affected many areas struck by Hurricane Hugo in the previous year . On Barbados , flooding from the rainfall blocked a few roads and forced a few families to move to safer areas ; lightning from the outskirts of the storm left a portion of the island without power . High winds and rainfall affected the island of Saint Lucia , which destroyed about 15 % of the nation 's banana crop for the year ; damage totaled about $ 1 million ( 1990 USD ) . 
 The rainfall resulted in severe flooding on Martinique , which accrued to almost 10 feet ( 3 m ) in some locations ; two sisters drowned near Saint @-@ Joseph after a bridge was washed away . Several landslides were reported on the island . The passage of the cyclone left damaged and power and telephone systems . 750 people evacuated their homes in Le Lamentin due to flooding , and a total of 1 @,@ 500 residents were left homeless on the island . Offshore , rough conditions damaged a fishing vessel , leaving its two passengers drifting on the boat for 25 days before being rescued about 640 miles ( 1035 km ) to the north @-@ northwest of Martinique . In all , seven people were killed on the island . 
 On Dominica , winds from the hurricane damaged power lines and downed trees in the northern portion of the island . High winds on Antigua damaged a few roofs , and also downed communications from two radio networks . The outer rainbands of the storm dropped light rainfall on the United States Virgin Islands , reaching about 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) on Saint Thomas ; wind gusts peaked at 33 mph ( 53 km / h ) on Saint Croix . Moderate rainfall continued into the Turks and Caicos Islands , with Grand Turk reporting a total of 4 inches ( 100 mm ) in 36 hours . 
 On the east coast of Florida , Klaus produced 15 foot ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) waves and tides of 3 feet ( 1 m ) above normal . Beach erosion was reported along the east coast , due to persistent easterly winds . As the remnant moisture of Klaus entered the southeastern United States , it produced heavy rainfall between 10 – 15 inches ( 250 – 380 mm ) of rainfall in South Carolina , with slightly lower totals in North Carolina . In South Carolina , the rainfall caused a dam to burst , killing four people . About two days after the remnants of Klaus entered the southeastern United States , Tropical Storm Marco made landfall on northwestern Florida , dropping more heavy rainfall and causing heavy damage across the region . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Due to its impact on Martinique , the government of France requested the retirement of the name Klaus ; the World Meteorological Organization retired the name from the list of tropical cyclone names in the following year and replaced it with the name Kyle . 
 = New Jersey Route 57 = 
 Route 57 is a state highway located in Warren County in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 21 @.@ 10 mi ( 33 @.@ 96 km ) from an interchange with U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) in Lopatcong Township to an intersection with Route 182 and County Route 517 ( CR 517 ) in Hackettstown . The route passes through mostly rural areas of farmland and mountains in Warren County . It also passes through Washington , where Route 57 crosses Route 31 . The route is designated a scenic byway , the Warren Heritage Scenic Byway , by the state of New Jersey due to the physical environments it passes through as well as from historical sites along the way such as the Morris Canal . 
 The current alignment of Route 57 was designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 in 1917 . In 1927 , Route 24 was designated along this route between the Phillipsburg area and Penwell in Mansfield Township while a spur of Route 24 called Route S24 replaced pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 between Penwell and US 46 in Hackettstown . When New Jersey renumbered its state highways in 1953 , the portion of Route S24 between Penwell and CR 517 in Hackettstown became a part of Route 24 to complete a gap in that route while Route S24 north of there became Route 57 . A never @-@ built segment of Route 57 running from the intersection of Route 24 and Route 57 to US 46 east of Hackettstown was legislated in 1965 . Around 1970 , Route 57 was designated along Route 24 west of Hackettstown while the portion of Route 57 in Hackettstown became Route 182 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 57 begins at an interchange with US 22 in Lopatcong Township , where the only movements possible here between the two highways are westbound Route 57 to westbound US 22 and vice @-@ versa . The road heads to the east on the Morris and Essex Turnpike , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route heads through a mix of businesses and farm fields , with Norfolk Southern 's Washington Secondary rail line paralleling the road to the south . The railroad line eventually runs farther to the south of Route 57 before the route crosses County Route 519 ( Uniontown Road ) . 
 Past this intersection , the road heads northeast through farmland within the Pohatcong Creek valley , situated between Pohatcong Mountain to the south and Scotts Mountain to the north . It enters Greenwich Township , where the route crosses County Route 637 ( Liberty Road / North Main Street ) before passing through residential areas . Route 57 heads into farmland with intermittent residences , crossing into Franklin Township . The route continues to New Village , where residences become more dense . A short distance after the intersection with County Route 603 ( Edison Road ) , Route 57 heads back into farm fields . The road reaches the residential community of Broadway , where it comes to a junction with County Route 643 ( Asbury Broadway Road ) . Route 57 continues through agricultural areas with more residences and businesses , crossing into Washington Township , where it intersects County Route 648 ( Little Philadelphia Road ) and County Route 623 ( Brass Castle Road ) . 
 Past this intersection , Route 57 enters Washington Boro , where it becomes Washington Avenue . Here , the road passes residences and businesses before heading into the commercial downtown of Washington . It crosses Route 31 and passes through a mix of residences , businesses , and industrial establishments . It crosses back into Washington Township , where Route 57 becomes the Morris and Essex Turnpike again , crossing over the Norfolk Southern rail line before intersecting County Route 630 ( Washburn Avenue ) and County Route 651 ( McCullough Road ) in Port Colden . From here , the road heads east into a mix of agricultural and residential areas with some businesses , entering Mansfield Township . Here , the route is known as the Admiral John D. Bulkeley Memorial Highway , named after Vice Admiral John D. Bulkeley , a United States Navy officer who served in World War II . 
 In Mansfield Township , the road passes through the residential community of Anderson and intersects County Route 632 ( Anderson Road ) and County Route 628 ( Port Murray Road ) . From here , Route 57 turns northeast and parallels the Musconetcong River , heading through wooded areas around Upper Pohatcong Mountain with some farmland . In Stephensburg , the road passes through a wooded residential region and intersects County Route 652 ( Watters Road ) . Past this intersection , the road continues alongside the wooded Musconetcong River , with residential and commercial development increasing past the Hazen Road intersection . Route 57 enters Hackettstown , where it becomes the Morris and Essex Turnpike before coming to its terminus at an intersection with the southern terminus of Route 182 and County Route 517 , which continues south from this intersection as well as north along Route 182 . 
 From milepost 2 @.@ 07 ( 3 @.@ 33 km ) to its eastern terminus , Route 57 is designated a scenic byway , the Warren Heritage Scenic Byway , by the state of New Jersey due to its mountain and valley scenery , historic districts , and the adjacent Morris Canal , which was built in 1831 and had the greatest elevation change among all canals across the world . 
 = = History = = 
 The present @-@ day alignment of Route 57 was legislated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 , a route that was designated to run from Paterson west to Phillipsburg in 1917 . A one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) stretch of the road in Franklin Township was the first concrete road built in New Jersey , having been constructed in 1912 . The concrete was supplied by Thomas Edison 's Portland cement company and some of the original concrete is still in use on the road today . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , this portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 west of Penwell in Mansfield Township was legislated as a part of Route 24 , a route that was to run from Phillipsburg to Newark , while the portion between Penwell and U.S. Route 46 in Hackettstown was designated as Route S24 , a spur of Route 24 . 
 The portion of Route S24 between Penwell and County Route 517 in the southern part of Hackettstown ( Route 57 ’ s current eastern terminus ) became part of mainline Route 24 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering in order to complete the gap that existed in that route between Penwell and Long Valley . The portion of Route S24 from this point north to U.S. Route 46 was designated as Route 57 . In 1965 , a portion of Route 57 was designated to bypass Hackettstown , running from its intersection with Route 24 to U.S. Route 46 east of Hackettstown ; this was never built . Around 1970 , Route 24 west of Hackettstown became part of Route 57 while the portion of Route 57 that had existed between Route 24 and U.S. Route 46 was designated Route 182 . 
 In the 2000s , the New Jersey Department of Transportation worked with communities along Route 57 to create a land use and transportation plan for the area surrounding the route , as part of their Future In Transportation plan . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Warren County . 
 = SMS Irene = 
 SMS Irene was a protected cruiser or <unk> of the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) and the lead ship of the Irene class . She had one sister , Prinzess Wilhelm ; the two ships were the first protected cruisers built by the German Navy . Irene was laid down in 1886 at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin , launched in July 1887 , and commissioned into the fleet in May 1888 . The cruiser was named after Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine , sister @-@ in @-@ law of Kaiser Wilhem II . As built , the ship was armed with a main battery of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns and had a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Irene saw extensive service with the German fleet in the first years of her career , frequently escorting Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht on cruises throughout Europe . In 1894 , she was deployed to East Asian waters ; she was in dock for engine maintenance in November 1897 when Otto von Diederichs seized the naval base Kiaochou Bay , and so she was not present during the operation . She was present in the Philippines in the immediate aftermath of the Battle of Manila Bay between American and Spanish squadrons during the Spanish – American War in 1898 . Irene eventually returned to Germany in 1901 . She remained in service until early 1914 , when she was retired from front @-@ line service and converted into a submarine tender . She served in this capacity until 1921 , when she was sold for scrap and broken up the following year . 
 = = Design = = 
 Irene was the first protected cruiser built by the German navy . She was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Elisabeth " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1886 . She was launched on 23 July 1887 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the German navy on 25 May 1888 . The ship was 103 @.@ 7 meters ( 340 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 74 m ( 22 @.@ 1 ft ) forward . She displaced 5 @,@ 027 t ( 4 @,@ 948 long tons ; 5 @,@ 541 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal <unk> 2 @-@ cylinder double @-@ expansion steam engines powered by four coal @-@ fired cylindrical double @-@ boilers . These provided a top speed of 18 kn ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 490 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 610 km ; 2 @,@ 870 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . She had a crew of 28 officers and 337 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with four 15 cm K L / 30 guns in single pedestal mounts , supplied with 400 rounds of ammunition in total . They had a range of 8 @,@ 500 m ( 27 @,@ 900 ft ) . Irene also carried ten shorter @-@ barreled 15 cm K L / 22 guns in single mounts . These guns had a much shorter range , at 5 @,@ 400 m ( 17 @,@ 700 ft ) . The gun armament was rounded out by six 3 @.@ 7 cm revolver cannon . She was also equipped with three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the deck and the third was in the bow , below the waterline . In 1893 , the ship was modernized in Wilhelmshaven in 1903 ; work lasted until 1905 . The ship 's armament was significantly improved ; the four L / 30 guns were replaced with a new model with an increased range of 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) . Eight 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns were installed in place of the L / 22 guns , and six 5 cm SK L / 10 QF guns were added . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In the summer of 1888 , Irene joined the fleet that steamed to Great Britain to celebrate the coronation of Kaiser Wilhelm II . She was assigned to the I Division , along with the ironclad corvettes Sachsen and Baden and the casemate ironclad Oldenburg . The Kaiser 's brother , Prince Heinrich commanded the Division , his flag flying in Irene . The fleet then held training maneuvers in the North Sea under command of Rear Admiral Friedrich Hollmann . Over the winter of 1889 – 1890 , Irene and the II Division of the fleet went into the Mediterranean to escort the Kaiser 's yacht , Hohenzollern . Prince Heinrich remained in command of Irene during the cruise . The Kaiser made state visits to Turkey and Italy , and called in ports throughout the region , including Athens and Venice . Irene and the rest of the squadron returned to Germany in April 1890 . 
 In August 1890 , Irene again escorted Hohenzollern to Britain , to participate in the Cowes Regatta . Directly thereafter , the two ships steamed to the island of Helgoland to celebrate the ceremonial transfer from Britain ; there , the entire German fleet joined Irene and Hohenzollern for the ceremonies . In late November 1894 , Irene was dispatched to Casablanca to protest the murder of a German businessman in the city . She then proceeded on to Asian waters to join the German naval presence in the region in the aftermath of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War . Under Rear Admiral Paul Hoffmann , Irene became the flagship of the Cruiser Division , along with three older cruisers . By 1895 , she had been joined by her sister Prinzess Wilhelm , the rebuilt old ironclad Kaiser , the light cruiser Cormoran , the corvette Arcona , and the gunboat Iltis . 
 In 1896 , Otto von Diederichs arrived in Asia to command the Cruiser Division ; he spent the year reconnoitering the region for a suitable naval base . Late in the year , Irene had to put into Hong Kong for extensive engine maintenance , which was completed on 30 November . She rejoined the fleet on 3 December . In the meantime , Diederichs had completed the seizure of the Kiaochou Bay concession ; the Cruiser Division was sent reinforcements and promoted to the East Asia Squadron . Irene was assigned to the I Division of the Squadron . In the Spring of 1898 , Irene was sent to Shanghai for periodic maintenance . 
 During the Spanish – American War in 1898 , Irene steamed to Manila in the Philippines in the aftermath of the Battle of Manila Bay ; she arrived in the harbor on 6 May . By 27 June , Irene had been joined by several other German warships , including Kaiserin Augusta , Diederichs 's flagship . On the 27th , Irene was steaming into Manila Bay when she was stopped by the American revenue cutter Hugh McCulloch . On 5 July , Diederichs dispatched Irene to survey Subic Bay and to evacuate any German nationals in the area that were threatened by Filipino insurgents . While steaming off Isla Grande , Irene encountered the rebel ship Companie de Filipinas , which was threatening the Spanish garrison at Isla Grande . The rebel commander came aboard Irene to inform her captain of his activities ; <unk> informed him that any act of war committed under the rebel flag was an act of piracy under international law . The rebels therefore agreed to return to port . <unk> inspected both the Spanish garrison on the island and the nearby rebel base in Olongapo . After unsuccessfully searching for German nationals in the area , Irene evacuated the noncombatants on Isla Grande on 7 July ; while steaming out of Subic Bay , Irene encountered the American warships Raleigh and Concord without issue . 
 The American press exaggerated the encounter between Irene and the American ships , which prompted Diederichs to decide to send Irene away from the area to deflate tensions between the two countries . After returning to Manila and debarking the non @-@ combatants , Irene was ordered to depart the Philippines . Irene relieved Arcona in Kiaochou , which was in turn ordered to steam to the Caroline and Mariana Islands to observe the American capture of Guam . Irene coaled in Mariveles before departing for Kiaochou on 9 July . While in Kiaochou , Irene conducted crew training . She returned to Manila in November , but remained there only briefly , before she was replaced by Kaiserin Augusta . Irene returned to Germany after 1901 ; in 1903 she went into drydock at the Imperial Shipyard in Wilhelmshaven for modernization , which was completed by 1905 . She was stricken on 17 February 1914 and used as a submarine tender , based in Kiel . In 1916 , she was transferred to Wilhelmshaven . She remained there until 26 November 1921 , when she was sold for scrapping for 909 @,@ 000 Marks . She was broken up the following year in Wilhelmshaven . 
 = Climatic regions of Argentina = 
 Due to its vast size and range of altitudes , Argentina possesses a wide variety of climatic regions , ranging from the hot subtropical region in the north to the cold subantarctic in the far south . Lying between those is the Pampas region , featuring a mild and humid climate . Many regions have different , often contrasting , microclimates . In general , Argentina has four main climate types : warm , moderate , arid , and cold in which the relief features , and the latitudinal extent of the country , determine the different varieties within the main climate types . 
 Northern parts of the country are characterized by hot , humid summers with mild , drier winters , and highly seasonal precipitation . Mesopotamia , located in northeast Argentina , has a subtropical climate with no dry season and is characterized by high temperatures and abundant rainfall because of exposure to moist easterly winds from the Atlantic Ocean throughout the year . The Chaco region in the center @-@ north , despite being relatively homogeneous in terms of precipitation and temperature , is the warmest region in Argentina , and one of the few natural areas in the world located between tropical and temperate latitudes that is not a desert . Precipitation decreases from east to west in the Chaco region because eastern areas are more influenced by moist air from the Atlantic Ocean than the west , resulting in the vegetation transitioning from forests and marshes to shrubs . Northwest Argentina is predominantly dry , hot , and subtropical although its rugged topography results in a diverse climate . 
 Central Argentina , which includes the Pampas to the east , and the Cuyo region to the west , has a temperate climate with hot summers and cool , drier winters . In the Cuyo region , the Andes obstruct the path of rain @-@ bearing clouds from the Pacific Ocean ; moreover , its latitude coincides with the subtropical high . Both factors render the region dry . With a wide range of altitudes , the Cuyo region is climatically diverse , with icy conditions persisting at altitudes higher than 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . The Pampas is mostly flat and receives more precipitation , averaging 500 mm ( 20 in ) in the western parts to 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 47 in ) in the eastern parts . The weather in the Pampas is variable due to the contrasting air masses and frontal storms that impact the region . These can generate thunderstorms with intense hailstorms and precipitation , and are known to have the most frequent lightning , and highest convective cloud tops , in the world . 
 Patagonia , in the south , is mostly arid or semi – arid except in the extreme west where abundant precipitation supports dense forest coverage , glaciers , and permanent snowfields . Its climate is classified as temperate to cool temperate with the surrounding oceans moderating temperatures on the coast . Away from the coast , areas on the plateaus have large daily and annual temperature ranges . The influence of the Andes , in conjunction with general circulation patterns , generates one of the strongest precipitation gradients ( rate of change in mean annual precipitation in relation to a particular location ) in the world , decreasing rapidly to the east . In much of Patagonia precipitation is concentrated in winter with <unk> occasionally , particularly in the mountainous west and south ; precipitation is more evenly distributed in the east and south . One defining characteristic is the strong winds from the west which blow year @-@ round , lowering the perception of temperature ( wind chill ) , while being a factor in keeping the region arid by favouring evaporation . 
 = = Definition of the regions = = 
 The vast size , and wide range of altitudes , contribute to Argentina 's diverse climate . Consequently , there is a wide variety of biomes in the country , including subtropical rain forests , semi @-@ arid and arid regions , temperate plains in the Pampas , and cold subantarctic in the south . In general , Argentina has four main climate types : warm , moderate , arid , and cold in which the relief features , and the latitudinal extent of the country , determine the different varieties in the main climate types . Despite the diversity of biomes , about two @-@ thirds of Argentina is arid or semi @-@ arid . Argentina is best divided into six distinct regions reflecting the climatic conditions of the country as a whole . From north to south , these regions are Northwest , Chaco , Northeast , Cuyo / Monte , Pampas , and Patagonia . Each climatic region has distinctive vegetation . 
 = = Mesopotamia = = 
 The region of Mesopotamia includes the provinces of Misiones , Entre Ríos and Corrientes . It lies between the Uruguay and Paraná rivers , which serve as natural borders for the region . 
 It has a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa according to the Köppen climate classification ) . whose main features are high temperatures and abundant rainfall throughout the year . This year @-@ round rainfall occurs because most of the region lies north of the subtropical high pressure belt even in winter , exposing it to moist easterly winds from the Atlantic Ocean throughout the year . Water deficiencies and extended periods of drought are uncommon , and much of the region has a positive water balance ( i.e. the precipitation exceeds the potential evapotranspiration ) . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Mesopotamia is the wettest region in Argentina with average annual precipitation ranges from less than 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 in ) in the southern parts , to approximately 1 @,@ 800 mm ( 71 in ) in the eastern <unk> is slightly higher in summer than in winter , and generally decreases from east to west and from north to south . Summer ( December – February ) is the most humid season , with precipitation ranging from 300 to 450 mm ( 12 to 18 in ) . Fall ( March – May ) is the rainiest season , with many places receiving over 350 mm ( 14 in ) . Most of the rainfall during summer and fall is caused by convective thunderstorms . Winter ( June – August ) is the driest season , with a mean precipitation of 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) throughout the region . Most of the winter precipitation is the result of synoptic scale , low pressure weather systems ( large scale storms such as extratropical cyclones ) , particularly the sudestada , which often bring long periods of precipitation , cloudiness , cooler temperatures , and strong winds . Snowfall is extremely rare and mainly confined to the uplands of Misiones Province where the last significant snowfall occurred in 1975 in Bernardo de Irigoyen . Spring ( September – November ) is similar to fall with a mean precipitation of 340 mm ( 13 in ) . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Mean annual temperatures range from 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) in the south to 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) in the north . Summers are hot and humid while winters are mild . The mean January temperature throughout most of the region is 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) except in the uplands of Misiones Province where they are lower owing to its higher elevation . During heat waves , temperatures can exceed 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) in the summer months , while in the winter months , cold air masses from the south can push temperatures below freezing , causing frost . However , such cold fronts are brief , and are less intense than in areas further south or at higher altitudes . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Chaco = = 
 The Chaco region in the center @-@ north completely includes the provinces of Chaco , and Formosa . Eastern parts of Jujuy Province , Salta Province , and Tucumán Province , and northern parts of Córdoba Province and Santa Fe Province are part of the region . As well , most of Santiago del Estero Province lies within the region . 
 The region has a subtropical climate . Under the Köppen climate classification , western parts have a semi @-@ arid climate ( Bs ) while the east has a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) . Chaco is one of the few natural regions in the world located between tropical and temperate latitudes that is not a desert . Precipitation and temperature are relatively homogeneous throughout the region . The general atmospheric circulation influences the climate of the region , primarily by two permanent high pressure systems - the South Pacific High and the South Atlantic High - and a low pressure system that develops over northeast Argentina called the Chaco Low . The interaction between the South Atlantic High and the Chaco Low generates a pressure gradient that brings moist air from the east and northeast to eastern coastal and central regions of Argentina . In summer , this interaction strengthens , favouring the development of convective thunderstorms that can result in heavy rainfall . In contrast , winters are dry due to these systems weakening , and the lower insolation that weakens the Chaco Low , and the northward displacement of westerly winds . During the entire year , the South Pacific High influences the climate by bringing cold , moist air masses originating in Patagonia leading to cold temperatures and frost , particularly during winter . Summers feature more stable weather than winter since the South Atlantic and South Pacific highs are at their southernmost positions , making the entrance of cold fronts more difficult . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Mean annual precipitation ranges from 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 47 in ) in the eastern parts of Formosa Province to a low of 450 to 500 mm ( 18 to 20 in ) in the west and southwest . Most of the precipitation is concentrated in the summer and decreases from east to west . Summer rains are intense , and torrential rain is common , occasionally causing floods and soil erosion . During the winter months , precipitation is sparse . Eastern areas receive more precipitation than western areas since they are more influenced by moist air from the Atlantic Ocean . This penetrates the eastern areas more than the west , bringing it more precipitation . As a result , the vegetation differs with eastern areas being covered by forests , savannas , marshes , and subtropical wet forest , while western areas are dominated by medium and low forests of mesophytic and xerophytic trees , and a dense understory of shrubs and grasses . The western part has a pronounced dry winter season while the eastern parts have a slightly drier season . In all parts of the region , precipitation is highly variable from year to year . The eastern part of the region receives just enough precipitation to have a positive water balance . By contrast , the western parts of the region have a negative water balance ( the potential evapotranspiration exceeds the precipitation ) owing to lower precipitation . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 The Chaco region is the hottest in Argentina , with a mean annual temperature of 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . With mean summer temperatures reaching 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) , the region has the hottest summers in the country . Winters are mild and brief , with mean temperatures in July ranging from 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) in the northern parts to 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) in the southernmost parts . Absolute maximum temperatures can reach up to 49 ° C ( 120 ° F ) while during cold waves , temperatures can fall to − 6 ° C ( 21 ° F ) . Eastern areas are more strongly influenced by maritime climate than western areas , leading to a smaller thermal amplitude ( difference between average high and average low temperatures ) . This results in absolute maximum and minimum temperatures being 43 ° C ( 109 ° F ) and − 2 @.@ 5 ° C ( 27 @.@ 5 ° F ) in the east compared to more than 47 ° C ( 117 ° F ) and − 7 @.@ 2 ° C ( 19 @.@ 0 ° F ) in the west . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Northwest = = 
 Northwest Argentina consists of the provinces of Catamarca , Jujuy , La Rioja , and western parts of Salta Province , and Tucumán Province . Although Santiago del Estero Province is part of northwest Argentina , much of the province lies in the Chaco region . 
 Northwest Argentina is predominantly dry , hot , and subtropical . Owing to its rugged topography , the region is climatically diverse , depending on the altitude , temperature , and distribution of precipitation . Consequently , vegetation differs within these different climate types . In general , the climate can be divided into two main types : a cold arid or semi @-@ arid climate at the higher altitudes , and warmer subtropical climate in the eastern parts of the region . Under the Köppen climate classification , the region has 5 different climate types : semi – arid ( BS ) , arid ( BW ) , temperate climate without a dry season and with a dry season ( Cf and CW respectively ) , and an alpine climate at the highest altitudes . 
 The atmospheric circulation is controlled by the two semi – permanent South Atlantic and South Pacific highs , and the Chaco Low . During summer , the interaction between the South Atlantic High and the Chaco Low brings northeasterly and easterly winds that carry moisture to the region , particularly in the northern parts . The movement of moist air into the region during summer results in very high precipitation . Most of the precipitation comes from the east since the Andes block most moisture from the Pacific Ocean . Southern parts of the region are influenced by cold fronts travelling northward . These cold fronts are responsible for producing precipitation during summer . For example , in Tucumán Province , cold fronts are responsible for 70 % of the rainfall in that province . Furthermore , the intertropical convergence zone ( or doldrums ) reaches the region during the summer months , leading to enhanced precipitation . During the winter months , the intertropical convergence zone , the South Pacific , and the South Atlantic highs move northward while the Chaco Low weakens , all of which results in the suppression of rain during the winter . With the Andes blocking most rain bearing clouds from the Pacific Ocean , along with atmospheric circulation patterns unfavourable for rain , this results in a dry season during winter . The Chaco Low attracts air masses from the South Pacific High , creating a dry and cold wind , particularly during winter . At the highest altitudes , westerly winds from the Pacific Ocean can penetrate during the winter months , leading to snowstorms . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Precipitation is highly seasonal and mostly concentrated in the summer months . It is distributed irregularly owing to the country 's topography although it generally decreases from east to west . As moist air reaches the eastern slopes of the mountains , it rises and cools adiabatically , leading to the formation of clouds that generate copious amounts of rain . The eastern slopes of the mountains receive between 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 mm ( 39 to 59 in ) of precipitation a year although some places receive up to 2 @,@ 500 mm ( 98 in ) of precipitation annually owing to orographic precipitation . In the south , the orographic effect is enhanced by advancing cold fronts from the south , resulting in increased precipitation . The high rainfall on these first slopes creates the thick Yungas jungle that extends in a narrow strip along these ranges . During fall , the jungles are covered by fog and complete cloud cover . Beyond the first slopes of the Andes into the valleys , the air descends , warming adiabatically , and becoming drier than on the eastern slopes . The north – south orientation of the mountains , which increase in altitude to the west , and a discontinuous topography , creates valleys with regions of relatively high orographic precipitation in the west and drier regions in east . 
 The temperate valleys , which include major cities such as Salta and Jujuy , have an average precipitation ranging between 500 to 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 20 to 39 in ) . For example , in the Lerma Valley , which is surrounded by tall mountains , ( only the northeastern part of the valley is surrounded by shorter mountains ) , precipitation ranges from 695 mm ( 27 in ) in Salta to 1 @,@ 395 mm ( 55 in ) in San Lorenzo , just 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) away . Rainfall in the temperate valleys is mainly concentrated in the summer months , often falling in short but heavy bursts . 
 Valleys in the southern parts of the region are drier than valleys in the north due to the greater height of the Andes and the Sierras Pampeanas on the eastern slopes compared to the mountains in the north ( ranging from 3 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 900 m ( 9 @,@ 800 to 22 @,@ 600 ft ) ) , presenting a significant orographic barrier that blocks moist winds from the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . These valleys receive less than 200 mm ( 8 in ) of precipitation per year , and are characterized by sparse vegetation adapted to the arid climate . 
 The area further west is the Puna region , a plateau with an average altitude of 3 @,@ 900 m ( 12 @,@ 800 ft ) that is mostly a desert due the easterly winds being blocked by the Andes and the northwest extension of the Sierras Pampeanas . Precipitation in the Puna region averages less than 200 mm ( 8 in ) a year while potential evapotranspiration ranges from 500 to 600 mm ( 20 to 24 in ) a year , owing to the high insolation , strong winds , and low humidity that exacerbates the dry conditions . This results in the Puna region having a water deficit in all months . The southeast parts of the Puna region are very arid receiving an average of 50 mm ( 2 in ) , while in the northeastern area , average annual precipitation ranges from 300 to 400 mm ( 12 to 16 in ) . Although easterly winds are rare in the Puna region , they bring 88 % – 96 % of the area 's precipitation . Snowfall is rare , averaging less than five days of snow per year . Due to the aridity of these mountains at high altitudes , the snowline can extend as far up as 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level . The El Niño – Southern Oscillation influences precipitation levels in northwest Argentina . During an El Niño year , westerly flow is strengthened , while moisture content from the east is reduced resulting in a drier rainy season . In contrast , during a La Niña year , there is enhanced easterly moisture transport , resulting in a more intense rainy season . Nonetheless , this trend is highly variable both spatially and temporally . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Temperatures in northwest Argentina vary by altitude . The temperate valleys have a temperate climate , with mild summers , and dry and cool winters with regular frosts . The diurnal range in cities is fairly wide , particularly in the winter . In the Yungas jungle to the east , the climate is hot and humid with temperatures that vary significantly based on latitude and altitude . Mean annual temperatures in the Yungas range between 14 to 26 ° C ( 57 to 79 ° F ) . 
 The mean annual temperatures in the Quebrada de Humahuaca valley range from 12 @.@ 0 to 14 @.@ 1 ° C ( 53 @.@ 6 to 57 @.@ 4 ° F ) , depending on altitude . In the Calchaquí Valleys in Salta Province , the climate is temperate and arid with large thermal amplitudes , long summers , and a long frost free period which varies by altitude . In both the Quebrada de Humahuaca and Calchaquí valleys , winters are cold with frosts that can occur between March and September . 
 In the valleys in the south in La Rioja and Catamarca Provinces , along with the southwest parts of Santiago del Estero Province , temperatures during the summer are very high averaging 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) in January , while winters are mild averaging 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) . Temperatures can exceed 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) during the summer , particularly in the central valley of Catamarca ( Valle Central de Catamarca ) and the valley of La Rioja Capital which lie at lower altitudes . During winter , cold fronts from the south bringing cold Antarctic air can cause temperatures to fall between − 8 to − 14 ° C ( 18 to 7 ° F ) with severe frosts . In contrast , the Zonda wind , which occurs more often during the winter months , can raise temperatures up to 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) with strong gusts , sometimes causing crop damage . 
 Temperatures are much colder in the Puna region , with a mean annual temperature of less than 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) owing to its high altitude . The Puna region is characterized by being cold but sunny throughout the year , with frosts that can occur in any month . The diurnal range is large , with a thermal amplitude that can exceed 40 ° C ( 72 ° F ) due to the low humidity and the intense sunlight throughout the year . Absolute maximum temperatures in the Puna region can reach up to 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) while absolute minimum temperatures can fall below − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Cuyo = = 
 The Cuyo region includes the provinces of Mendoza , San Juan , and San Luis . Western parts of La Pampa Province ( as shown in map ) also belong in this region , having similar climatic and soil characteristics to it . 
 It has an arid or semi @-@ arid climate . The wide range in latitudes , combined with altitudes ranging from 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) to nearly 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) , means that it has a variety of different climate types . In general , most of the region has a temperate climate , with higher altitude valleys having a more milder climate . At the highest altitudes ( over 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) ) , icy conditions persist year round . With very low humidity , abundant sunshine throughout the year , and a temperate climate , the region is suitable for wine production . 
 The Andes prevent rain @-@ bearing clouds from the Pacific Ocean from moving in , while its latitude puts it in a band of the sub @-@ tropical high pressure belt keeping the region dry . Droughts are often frequent and prolonged . The Cuyo region is influenced by the subtropical , semi – permanent South Atlantic High to the east in the Atlantic , the semi @-@ permanent South Pacific High to the west of the Andes , and the development of the Chaco Low and westerlies in the southern parts of the region . Most of the precipitation falls during the summer due to the stronger interaction between the Chaco Low and the South Atlantic High . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Average annual precipitation ranges between 100 to 500 mm ( 4 to 20 in ) though this varies from year to year . More than 85 % of the annual rainfall occurs from October to March , which constitutes the warm season . Eastern and southeastern areas of the region receive more precipitation than western areas since they receive more summer rainfall . As such , most of Mendoza and San Juan Provinces receive the lowest annual precipitation , with mean summer precipitation averaging less than 100 mm ( 4 in ) and in rare cases , no summer rainfall . Further eastward , in San Luis Province , mean summer rainfall averages around 500 mm ( 20 in ) and can exceed 700 mm ( 28 in ) in some areas . Higher altitude locations receive precipitation in the form of snow during the winter months . In the Cuyo region , annual precipitation is highly variable from year to year and appears to follow a cycle between dry and wet years in periods of about 2 , 4 – 5 , 6 – 8 , and 16 – 22 years . In wet years , easterly winds caused by the subtropical South Atlantic High are stronger , which causes more moisture to flow towards this region ; during the dry years , these winds are weaker . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Summers in the region are hot and generally very sunny , averaging as much as 10 hours of sunshine per day . The average temperature in January is 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) in most of the region . In contrast , winters are dry and cold and average around 7 – 8 hours of sunshine per day . July temperatures range from 7 to 8 ° C ( 45 to 47 ° F ) . Since this region has a wide range of altitudes ranging from 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) to nearly 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) , temperatures can vary widely with altitude . The Sierras Pampeanas , which cross into both San Juan and San Luis Provinces , have a milder climate with mean annual temperatures ranging from 12 to 18 ° C ( 54 to 64 ° F ) . In all locations , at altitudes over 3 @,@ 800 m ( 12 @,@ 500 ft ) , permafrost is present , while icy conditions persist year round at altitudes over 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . The region is characterized by a large diurnal range with very hot temperatures during the day followed by cold nights . 
 The Zonda wind , a foehn wind characterized by warm , dry air can cause temperatures to exceed 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . In some cases , such as in 2003 , they can exceed 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) . This wind often occurs before the passage of a cold front across Argentina , and tends to occur when a low pressure system brings heavy rain to the Chilean side , and when an upper level trough allows the winds to pass over the Andes to descend downwards . As such , the temperature may rise as much as 20 ° C ( 36 ° F ) in a few hours , with humidity approaching 0 % during a Zonda wind event . In contrast , cold waves are also common , owing to the Andes channeling cold air from the south , allowing cold fronts to come frequently during the winter months , causing cool to cold temperatures with temperatures that can fall below freezing . Temperatures can dip below − 10 to − 30 ° C ( 14 to − 22 ° F ) at the higher altitudes . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Pampas = = 
 The Pampas includes all of Buenos Aires Province , eastern and southern Córdoba Province , eastern La Pampa Province , and southern Santa Fe Province . It is subdivided into two parts : the humid Pampas to the east , and the dry / semi – arid Pampas to the west . 
 This region 's land is appropriate for agricultural and livestock activities . It is mostly a flat area , interrupted only by the <unk> and Ventana hills in its southern portion . The climate of the Pampas is temperate and humid with no dry season , featuring hot summers and mild winters ( Cfa / Cfb according to the Köppen climate classification ) . The weather in the Pampas is variable due to the contrasting air masses and frontal storms that impact the region . Maritime polar air from the south produces the cool pampero winds , while warm humid tropical air from the north produces sultry <unk> - a gentle wind usually from the northeast formed by trade winds , and the South Atlantic High that brings cloudy , hot , and humid weather and is responsible for bringing heat waves . The Pampas are influenced by the El Niño – Southern Oscillation which is responsible for variations in annual precipitation . An El Niño year often leads to higher precipitation , while a La Niña year leads to lower precipitation . The Pampas are moderately sunny , ranging from an average of 4 – 5 hours of sunshine per day during the winter months to 8 – 9 hours in summer . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 Precipitation decreases from east to west , and ranges from 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 47 in ) in the northeast , to under 500 mm ( 20 in ) in the south and west . Most regions receive 700 to 800 mm ( 28 to 31 in ) of precipitation per year . Precipitation is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year in the easternmost parts , while in the western parts most of the precipitation is concentrated during the summer months and winters are drier . In many places precipitation , which mostly occurs in the form of convective thunderstorms , is high during summer . These thunderstorms form when cold air from the south , caused by the pampero wind , meets humid tropical air masses from the north , and are some of the most intense storms in the world , with the most frequent lightning and the highest convective cloud tops . These severe thunderstorms produce intense amounts of precipitation and hailstorms , and can cause both floods and flash floods . As well , the Pampas is the most consistently active tornado region outside the central and southeastern United States . Autumn and spring bring periods of very rainy weather followed by dry , mild stretches . Places in the east receive rainfall throughout autumn , whereas in the west it quickly becomes very dry . Winters are drier in most places due to weaker easterly winds , and stronger southerly winds , which prevent moist air from coming in . In winter , most of the precipitation occurs from frontal systems associated with cyclogenesis and strong southeasterly winds ( sudestada ) , which bring long periods of precipitation , and cloudiness , particularly in the southern and eastern parts . As such , precipitation is more evenly distributed in the eastern parts than the western parts , which are further away from these frontal systems . Dull , grey , and damp weather characterize winters in the Pampas . Snowfall is extremely rare ; when it does snow , it usually lasts for only a day or two . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Annual temperatures range from 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) in the northern parts to 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) in the south . Summers in the Pampas are hot and humid ; coastal areas are moderated by the cold Malvinas Current . Heat waves that can bring temperatures in the 36 to 40 ° C ( 97 to 104 ° F ) range for a few days . These are usually followed by a day or two of strong pampero winds from the south , which bring cool , dry air . Autumn arrives in March and brings periods of mild daytime temperatures and cool nights . Generally , frost arrives in early April in the southernmost areas , and in late May in the north and ends by mid @-@ September - although the dates of the first and last frosts can vary from year to year . Frost is rarely intense , nor prolonged , and does not occur in some years . Winters are mild with frequent frosts and cold spells . Temperatures are usually mild during the day and cold during the night . Occasionally , tropical air masses from the north may move southward , providing relief from the cool , damp temperatures . On the other hand , the sudestada and the pampero winds bring periods of cool to cold temperatures . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Patagonia = = 
 Chubut , Neuquén , Río Negro , Santa Cruz , and Tierra del Fuego are the provinces that make up Patagonia . 
 The Patagonian climate is classified as arid to semi @-@ arid and temperate to cool temperate . The exception is the Bosque Andino Patagónico , a forested area located in the extreme west and southern parts of Tierra del Fuego Province , which has a humid , wet , and cool to cold climate . One defining characteristic is the strong winds from the west which blow year round ( stronger in summer than in winter ) . These favor evaporation , and are a factor in making the region mostly arid . Mean annual wind speeds range between 15 to 22 km / h ( 9 to 14 mph ) , although gusts of over 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) are common . There are three major factors that influence the climate of this region : the Andes , the South Pacific and the South Atlantic Highs , and higher insolation in eastern than in western areas . 
 The Andes play a crucial role in determining the climate of Patagonia because their north – south orientation creates a barrier for humid air masses coming from the Pacific Ocean . Since the predominant wind is from the west and most air masses come from the Pacific Ocean , the Andes cause these air masses to ascend , cooling adiabatically . Most of the moisture is dropped on the Chilean side , resulting in abundant precipitation , while in much of the Argentine side , the air warms adiabatically and becomes drier as it descends . As a result , the Andes create an extensive rain @-@ shadow in much of Argentine Patagonia , causing most of the region to be arid . South of <unk> , the Andes are lower in elevation , reducing the rain shadow effect in Tierra del Fuego Province , allowing forests to thrive on the Atlantic coast . 
 Patagonia is located between the subtropical high pressure belt , and the subpolar low pressure zone , meaning it is exposed to westerly winds that are strong , since south of <unk> S , there is little land to block these winds . Being located between the <unk> South Pacific and the South Atlantic Highs at around <unk> , and the Subpolar Low at <unk> <unk> S , the movement of the high and low pressure systems , along with ocean currents , determine the precipitation pattern . During winter , both the South Pacific and South Atlantic highs move to the north , while the Subpolar Low strengthens , which , when combined with higher ocean temperatures than the surrounding land , results in higher precipitation during this time of the year . Due to the northward migration of the South Pacific High , more frontal systems can pass through , allowing for more precipitation to occur . During summer , the South Pacific High migrates southward , preventing the passage of fronts , and cyclones that can cause precipitation to occur , resulting in lower precipitation during this time of the year . Northeastern areas , along with southern parts of the region , are influenced by air masses from the Atlantic Ocean , resulting in precipitation being more evenly distributed throughout the year . Most precipitation comes from frontal systems , particularly stationary fronts that bring humid air from the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Cold fronts usually move from west to east , or from southwest to northeast , but rarely from the south . Because of this , these cold fronts do not result in the cold being intense since they are moderated as they pass over the surrounding oceans . In the rare cases when cold fronts move northwards from the south ( Antarctica ) , the cold air masses are not moderated by the surrounding oceans , resulting in very cold temperatures throughout the region . In general , the passage of cold fronts is more common in the south than in the north , and occurs more in winter than in summer . The movement of warm , subtropical air into the region occurs frequently in summer up to <unk> . When warm subtropical air arrives in the region , the air is dry , resulting in little precipitation , and causes temperatures to be higher than the those observed in northeast Argentina . 
 = = = Precipitation = = = 
 The influence of the Pacific Ocean , general circulation patterns , and the topographic barrier caused by the Andes , results in one of the strongest precipitation gradients in the world . Precipitation decreases steeply from west to east , ranging from 4 @,@ 000 mm ( 160 in ) in the west on the Andean foothills at <unk> , to 150 mm ( 6 in ) in the central plateaus . For example , while mean annual precipitation is more 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 in ) at the Andean foothills , in less than 100 km ( 62 mi ) to the east , precipitation decreases to 200 mm ( 8 in ) . The high precipitation in the Andes in this region supports glaciers and permanent snowfields . 
 Most of the region receives less than 200 mm ( 8 in ) of precipitation per year , although some areas can receive less than 100 mm ( 4 in ) . In northern Río Negro Province and eastern Neuquén Province , mean annual precipitation is around 300 mm ( 12 in ) while south of <unk> , precipitation increases southwards , reaching up to 600 to 800 mm ( 24 to 31 in ) . There is a narrow transition zone running down from <unk> to <unk> that receives about 400 mm ( 16 in ) of precipitation a year . Much of northwestern Patagonia in the Andes , corresponding to the northern parts of the Bosque Andino Patagónico region , receives abundant precipitation in winter with occasional droughts in summer , allowing it to support forests with dense coverage . With the exception of certain areas such as Puerto Blest , no major towns receive more than 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 in ) of precipitation a year . The southern parts of the Bosque Andino Patagónico region receive only 200 to 500 mm ( 8 to 20 in ) resulting in less dense forest coverage . The lower precipitation , compared to the northern parts , is due to the winds being more intense and drier , favouring <unk> . 
 The aridity of the region is due to the combination of low precipitation , strong winds , and high temperatures in the summer months , each of which cause high evaporation rates . Mean evapotranspiration ranges from 550 to 750 mm ( 22 to 30 in ) , which decreases from northeast to southwest . In most of Patagonia , precipitation is concentrated in the winter months with the exception of northeastern and southern areas of the region which have a more even distribution of precipitation throughout the year . As a result , except for these areas , the winter maxima in precipitation results in a strong water deficit in the summer . Most precipitation events are light ; each event usually results in less than 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) . Thunderstorms are infrequent in the region , occurring an average of 5 days per year , only during summer . In Tierra del Fuego , thunderstorms are non @-@ existent . Snowfall occurs on 5 to 20 days per year , mainly in the west and south . These snowfall events can result in strong snow storms . 
 Despite the low precipitation , Patagonia is cloudy , with the mean cloud cover ranging from 50 % in eastern parts of Neuquén Province and northeast Río Negro Province to 70 % in Tierra del Fuego Province ; the region has one of the highest percentages of cloud cover in Argentina . In general , mountainous areas are the cloudiest , and coastal areas are cloudier than inland areas . Northern areas are sunnier ( 50 % possible sunshine ) than the southern parts of the region such as western Santa Cruz and Tierra del Fuego Provinces ( less than 40 % possible sunshine ) . The southernmost islands receive some of the lowest average annual sunshine hours in the world . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Temperatures are relatively cold for its latitude due to the cold Malvinas Current and the high altitude . For example , in Tierra del Fuego temperatures are colder than at equal latitudes in the northern hemisphere in Europe since they are influenced by the cold Malvinas Current rather than the warm North Atlantic Current . A characteristic of the temperature pattern is the NW – SE distribution of isotherms due to the presence of the Andes . 
 The warmest areas are in northern parts of Río Negro and Neuquén Provinces where mean annual temperatures range from 13 to 15 ° C ( 55 to 59 ° F ) , while the coldest are in western Santa Cruz and Tierra del Fuego Provinces where mean annual temperatures range from 5 to 8 ° C ( 41 to 46 ° F ) . On the Patagonian plateaus , mean annual temperatures range from 8 to 10 ° C ( 46 to 50 ° F ) which decreases towards the west . The daily and annual range of temperatures on these plateaus is very high . The Atlantic Ocean moderates the climate of coastal areas resulting in a lower annual and daily range of temperatures . Towards the south , where land masses are narrow , the Pacific Ocean influences coastal areas in addition to the Atlantic Ocean , ensuring that the cold is neither prolonged nor intense . At higher altitudes in the Andes , stretching from Neuquén Province to Tierra del Fuego Province , mean annual temperatures are below 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) . Generally , mean annual temperatures vary more with altitude than with latitude since the temperature gradient for latitude is relatively moderate owing to ocean currents . Summers have a less uniform distribution of temperature , and in the months December to January mean temperatures range from 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) in northern Río Negro Province and eastern parts of Neuquén Province to 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) in Tierra del Fuego . Winters have a more uniform temperature distribution . In July , mean temperatures are above 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) in all of extra – Andean Patagonia , ranging from 7 ° C ( 45 ° F ) in the north to around 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) in <unk> . 
 Being exposed to strong westerly winds can decrease the perception of temperature ( wind chill ) , particularly in summer . The wind lowers the perception of the mean annual temperature by 4 @.@ 2 ° C ( 7 @.@ 6 ° F ) throughout the region . The annual range of temperatures in Patagonia is lower than in areas in the Northern Hemisphere at the same latitude owing to the maritime influences of the sea . In Patagonia , the annual range of temperatures ranges from 16 ° C ( 29 ° F ) in the north and decreases progressively southwards to 4 ° C ( 7 ° F ) on the southernmost islands . This contrasts with an annual range of more than 20 ° C ( 36 ° F ) in North America at latitudes above <unk> . Absolute maximum temperatures can exceed 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) in the northern Río Negro Province and Neuquén Province , while in much of the region , they can exceed 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . Further south in Tierra del Fuego Province , absolute maximum temperatures do not exceed 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , while in the southernmost islands , they do not exceed 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . Absolute minimum temperatures are more than − 15 ° C ( 5 ° F ) in coastal areas , while in the central Patagonian plateaus , they can reach below − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) . 
 = = = Statistics for selected locations = = = 
 = = Books = = 
 = SM UB @-@ 6 = 
 SM UB @-@ 6 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The submarine was interned after running aground in neutral Dutch waters , and was scuttled by her crew at Hellevoetsluis . 
 UB @-@ 6 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in November . UB @-@ 6 was a little more than 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 142 tonnes ( 125 and 140 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 6 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched in March 1915 and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 6 in April . 
 UB @-@ 6 spent her entire career in the Flanders Flotilla and sank HMS Recruit , the first warship credited to the flotilla in May 1915 . Through September 1916 , the U @-@ boat accounted for fourteen additional ships sunk , two ships damaged , and one ship seized as a prize . On 12 March 1917 , UB @-@ 6 ran aground near the Maas River in the Netherlands due to a navigational error by her commander ; the submarine and crew were interned by the neutral country and taken to Hellevoetsluis . Six days later , UB @-@ 6 was scuttled by her crew , which remained interned for the rest of the war . The wreck of UB @-@ 6 was ceded to France in 1919 and broken up at Brest in July 1921 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . UB @-@ 6 was part of the initial allotment of eight submarines — numbered UB @-@ 1 to UB @-@ 8 — ordered on 15 October from Germaniawerft of Kiel , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . 
 UB @-@ 6 was laid down by Germaniawerft in Kiel on 22 November . As built , UB @-@ 6 was 28 @.@ 10 metres ( 92 ft 2 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Daimler 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 6 @.@ 47 knots ( 11 @.@ 98 km / h ; 7 @.@ 45 mph ) , surfaced , and 5 @.@ 51 knots ( 10 @.@ 20 km / h ; 6 @.@ 34 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 650 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 060 km ; 1 @,@ 900 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 6 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 6 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @.@ 8 @-@ centimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) Deck gun . UB @-@ 6 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 After work on UB @-@ 6 was complete at the Germaniwerft yard , UB @-@ 6 was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In early 1915 , the sections of UB @-@ 6 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three @-@ week process . After UB @-@ 6 was assembled and launched sometime in March , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 6 on 8 April under the command of Kapitänleutnant ( Kptlt . ) Erich Haecker , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . On 19 April , UB @-@ 6 joined the other UB I boats then comprising the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote des Marinekorps U @-@ Flotille Flandern ) , which had been organized on 29 March . When UB @-@ 6 joined the flotilla , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . 
 The UB I boats of the Flanders Flotilla were initially limited to patrols in the Hoofden , the southern portion of the North Sea between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . Although UB @-@ 4 had made both the first sortie and sunk the first ship of the flotilla in April , UB @-@ 6 sank the first warship credited to the flotilla . On 1 May , Haecker spotted two old Royal Navy destroyers , Brazen and Recruit , about 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) southwest of the Galloper light vessel . Just before noon , Haecker launched a torpedo that hit Recruit and split the 335 @-@ tonne ( 330 @-@ long @-@ ton ) displacement ship in half , killing 34 men ; 26 men were rescued . One month later , on 1 June , UB @-@ 6 sank what would be her largest ship , the British cargo ship <unk> , of 3 @,@ 303 gross register tons ( GRT ) . <unk> was en route to Hull from Alexandria with a load of onions and cottonseed when UB @-@ 6 sank her at the mouth of the Thames ; eight crewmen lost their lives in the attack . 
 In late June , Korvettenkapitän Karl <unk> , head of the Flanders Flotilla , used UB @-@ 6 to test a theory that British defenses in the Straits of Dover — anti @-@ submarine nets and mines — were not insurmountable . On the evening of 21 June , UB @-@ 6 departed Zeebrugge for a round @-@ trip to Boulogne . UB @-@ 6 sailed past Dunkirk on the surface and made Boulogne in the early morning of the 22nd , having to crash dive once during the voyage when discovered by a British destroyer . UB @-@ 6 immediately made the return trip and arrived safely at Zeebrugge later the same day . Three other UB I boats , UB @-@ 2 , UB @-@ 5 , and UB @-@ 10 , soon followed with patrols in the Channel , but bad weather and fog hampered the boats and none had any success . Even though no ships were sunk during these forays into the English Channel , by successfully completing their voyages , the submarines helped further prove the feasibility of defeating the British countermeasures in the Straits of Dover . 
 On 12 July , while patrolling between 18 and 23 nautical miles ( 33 and 43 km ; 21 and 26 mi ) off Lowestoft , UB @-@ 6 attacked five British fishing vessels , sinking four of them . All four of the sunken ships were smacks — sailing vessels traditionally rigged with red ochre sails — which were stopped , boarded by crewmen from UB @-@ 6 , and sunk with explosives . Two weeks later , UB @-@ 6 torpedoed and sank the 406 @-@ ton Firth 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ; 4 @.@ 6 mi ) from the Aldborough <unk> Buoy . UB @-@ 6 sank the 57 @-@ ton Leander , another smack , on 11 August . 
 Germany 's submarine offensive was suspended on 18 September by the chief of the Admiralstab , Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , in response to American demands after the sinking of the Cunard Line steamer Lusitania in May 1915 and other high profile sinkings in August and September . Holtzendorff 's directive ordered all U @-@ boats out of the English Channel and the South @-@ Western Approaches and required that all submarine activity in the North Sea be conducted strictly along prize regulations . It would be five months before UB @-@ 6 would sink another ship . 
 In mid @-@ November , Oberleutnant zur See ( Oblt.z.S. ) Ernst Voigt succeeded Haecker as commander of UB @-@ 6 ; it was the first U @-@ boat command for the 25 @-@ year @-@ old Voigt . Under his command , UB @-@ 6 sank her next vessel in January 1916 . The 57 @-@ ton smack Crystal was boarded and sunk by explosives 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) southeast of Southwold on the 27th . 
 = = Victims Gallery = = 
 = = Second submarine offensive = = 
 By early 1916 , the British blockade of Germany was beginning to have an effect on Germany and her imports . The Royal Navy had stopped and seized more cargo destined for Germany than the quantity of cargo sunk by German U @-@ boats in the first submarine offensive . As a result , the German Imperial Navy began a second offensive against merchant shipping on 29 February . The final ground rules agreed upon by the German Admiralstab were that all enemy vessels in Germany 's self @-@ proclaimed war zone would be destroyed without warning , that enemy vessels outside the war zone would be destroyed only if armed , and — to avoid antagonizing the United States — that enemy passenger steamers were not to be attacked , regardless of whether in the war zone or not . 
 UB @-@ 6 's first attack in the new offensive came on 17 March , when the U @-@ boat torpedoed the Swedish ship Ask near the North Hinder lightship . The 1 @,@ 041 @-@ ton ship was en route to London from <unk> with a load of timber , but did not sink ; there were no reports of casualties on the damaged ship . The attack on Ask was followed up two weeks later by the sinking of another Swedish ship . The 1 @,@ 115 @-@ ton Hollandia was at anchor 0 @.@ 25 nautical miles ( 460 m ) from the Galloper lightship when UB @-@ 4 torpedoed her on the last day of March . Hollandia was in ballast and in the process of sailing from Rouen to Rotterdam when sent under without loss of life . 
 In March , UB @-@ 6 's commander , Voigt , was assigned to the newly commissioned UB @-@ 23 , and replaced on UB @-@ 6 by Kapitänleutnant Karl Neumann , the former commander of two of the submarine 's sister ships , UB @-@ 2 and UB @-@ 13 . In his U @-@ boat career , Neumann sank over 100 @,@ 000 tons of shipping , but none at the helm of UB @-@ 6 . In July , Neumann was succeeded by Oberleutnant zur See Karsten von Heydebreck , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old , first @-@ time U @-@ boat captain , who was Voigt 's classmate in April 1908 cadet class . 
 Near the end of April 1916 , Admiral Reinhardt Scheer , the newest commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the German High Seas Fleet , called off the merchant shipping offensive and ordered all boats at sea to return , and all boats in port to remain there . As with the end of the first offensive in August 1915 , UB @-@ 6 would not sink any more ships for the next five months . 
 = = Grand Fleet ambush attempts = = 
 In mid @-@ May , Scheer completed plans to draw out part of the British Grand Fleet . The German High Seas Fleet would sortie for a raid on Sunderland , luring the British fleet across " ' nests ' of submarines and mine @-@ fields " . In support of the operation , UB @-@ 6 and five other Flanders boats set out at midnight 30 / 31 May to form a line 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ; 21 mi ) east of Lowestoft . This group was to intercept and attack the British light forces from Harwich , should they sortie north to join the battle . Unfortunately for the Germans , the British Admiralty had intelligence reports of the departure of the submarines which , coupled with an absence of attacks on shipping , aroused British suspicions . 
 A delayed departure of the German fleet for its sortie ( which had been redirected to the Skagerrak ) and the failure of several of the U @-@ boats stationed to the north to receive the coded message warning of the British advance caused Scheer 's anticipated ambush to be a " complete and disappointing failure " . In UB @-@ 6 's group , only UB @-@ 10 sighted the Harwich forces , and they were too far away to mount an attack . The failure of the submarine ambush to sink any British capital ships allowed the full Grand Fleet to engage the numerically inferior High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland , which took place 31 May – 1 June . 
 Later in August , the Germans set up another ambush for the British fleet , when they drew up plans for another High Seas Fleet raid on Sunderland ( as had been the original intention in May ) . The German fleet planned to depart late in the day on 18 August and shell military targets the next morning . As in May , UB @-@ 6 was part of a group intended to attack the Harwich forces . As one of five boats forming the second line of boats from the Flanders Flotilla , UB @-@ 6 was stationed off Texel by the morning of 20 August . Once again , British intelligence had given warning of the impending attack and ambush , causing the Grand Fleet to sortie at 16 : 00 on 18 August , five hours before the German fleet sailed . Faulty intelligence caused Scheer initially to divert from Sunderland , and then to eventually call off the whole operation . Although U @-@ boats to the north sank two British light cruisers , UB @-@ 6 and her group played no part in the action . 
 On 10 September , UB @-@ 6 was patrolling off the Maas lightship and torpedoed the 400 @-@ ton Norwegian steamer <unk> , with a general cargo for London ; there were no casualties . While patrolling in the same area on the 23rd , UB @-@ 6 sank four Belgian lighters . The following day , the Dutch ship Batavier II was seized as a prize and sailed into Zeebrugge by a prize crew from UB @-@ 6 . Batavier II was the last success for Heydebreck in command of UB @-@ 6 ; he was assigned to command the newly commissioned minelaying submarine UC @-@ 63 in January 1917 . Oberleutnant zur See Oskar <unk> , another member of the April 1908 cadet class , replaced Heydebreck on UB @-@ 6 . 
 = = Unrestricted submarine warfare = = 
 The British blockade of Germany , which prevented neutral shipping from reaching German ports , had severely limited imports of food and fuel into Germany . Among the results were an increase in infant mortality and as many as 700 @,@ 000 deaths attributed to starvation or hypothermia during the war . With the blockade having such dire consequences , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare to begin on 1 February 1917 to help force the British to make peace . The new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat . 
 On 10 March , UB @-@ 6 departed Zeebrugge to patrol off the Mass lightship . Two days later , UB @-@ 6 entered Dutch territorial waters after <unk> made a navigational error , and ran aground at the mouth of the Maas River . Because the Netherlands was neutral during the war , and UB @-@ 6 did not leave Dutch territorial waters within 24 hours as required by international law , the submarine and her crew were interned by the Dutch . The Germans protested , but because UB @-@ 6 's grounding was merely the result of an error and not because of distress , the Dutch could not release the submarine . UB @-@ 6 was taken to the port of Hellevoetsluis for internment , where , on 18 March , UB @-@ 6 's crew scuttled her . The crew of UB @-@ 6 was interned for the duration of the war . After the end of the war , UB @-@ 6 's wreck was surrendered to France , taken to Brest , and broken up in July 1921 . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = 55 Cancri f = 
 55 Cancri f ( abbreviated 55 Cnc f ) , also designated <unk> Cancri f and named Harriot , is an extrasolar planet approximately 41 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Cancer ( the Crab ) . 55 Cancri f is the fourth known planet ( in order of distance ) from the star 55 Cancri and the first planet to have been given the designation of " f " . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning name was Harriot for this planet . The winning name was submitted by the Royal Netherlands Association for Meteorology and Astronomy of the Netherlands . It honors the astronomer Thomas Harriot . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The initial presentation of this planet occurred at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in April 2005 , however it was another two and a half years before the planet was to be published in a peer @-@ reviewed journal . It is the first known planet outside our solar system to spend its entire orbit within what astronomers call the " habitable zone " . Furthermore , its discovery made 55 Cancri the first star other than the Sun known to have at least five planets . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 55 Cancri f is located about 0 @.@ 781 AU away from the star and takes 260 days to complete a full orbit . A limitation of the radial velocity method used to detect 55 Cancri f is that only a minimum mass can be obtained , in this case around 0 @.@ 144 times that of Jupiter , or half the mass of Saturn . A Keplerian fit to the radial velocity data of 55 Cancri A indicates that the orbit is consistent with being circular , however changing the value in a range between 0 and 0 @.@ 4 does not significantly alter the chi @-@ squared statistic of the fit , thus a representative eccentricity of 0 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 2 was assumed . In a Newtonian model which takes interactions between the planets into account , the eccentricity comes out as 0 @.@ 0002 , almost perfectly circular . 
 Astrometric observations made with the Hubble Space Telescope suggest that the outer planet 55 Cancri d is inclined at 53 ° with respect to the plane of the sky . The inner planets b and e are inclined at 85 ° . The inclination of f is unknown . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Since the planet was detected indirectly through observations of its star , properties such as its radius , composition and temperature are unknown . With a mass half that of Saturn , 55 Cancri f is likely to be a gas giant with no solid surface . It orbits in the so @-@ called " habitable zone , " which means that liquid water could exist on the surface of a possible moon . 
 It is not known if the composition and appearance is more like Saturn or Neptune . Based on its temperature , it should be a Sudarsky Class II planet , covered in water clouds . 
 = Acting white = 
 In the United States , acting white is a pejorative term , usually applied to African Americans , which refers to a person 's perceived betrayal of their culture by assuming the social expectations of white society . Success in education in particular ( depending on one 's cultural background ) can be seen as a form of " selling out " by being disloyal to one 's culture . 
 The term is controversial , and its precise meaning is hard to define . Some minority students are discouraged from achieving in school by the negative prejudices of ethnic peers ; such a view has been expressed in articles in The New York Times , Time magazine , and The Wall Street Journal — and by public figures and academics across the political spectrum . 
 = = History of usage = = 
 The question of whether or not " acting white " attitudes are prevalent has been debated in academic literature . The African @-@ American comedian and media figure , Bill Cosby , used the term in what became a noted May 2004 speech when he challenged the black community against the idea that gaining education was " acting white " . Black people accused of " acting white " are sometimes referred to as Black Anglo @-@ Saxons , a term coined by comedian Paul Mooney . The 2008 election of Barack Obama as President of the United States resulted in a public discussion that the acting white attitude may be waning , as he represented a model of African @-@ American achievement . 
 = = Case studies and research = = 
 Not all scholars define acting white in the same way . Most definitions include a reference to situations where some minority adolescents ridicule their peers for engaging in behaviors perceived to be characteristic of whites . In this scenario , they equate " white behavior " with high grades in school , a result researchers can quantify , but the term is not limited to this . 
 In 1986 , <unk> Fordham co @-@ authored with Nigerian sociologist John Ogbu a study that concluded that high @-@ performing African @-@ American students in a Washington , D.C. , high school borrowed from hegemonic white culture as part of a strategy for achievement , while struggling to maintain a black identity . Ogbu made a related claim in his 2003 book , Black American Students in an Affluent Suburb : A Study of Academic Disengagement , concluding that black students ' own cultural attitudes sometimes hindered academic achievement and that these attitudes are too often neglected . Ogbu had earlier written in his seminal work Minority Education and Caste ( 1978 ) , that school disengagement among caste @-@ like minorities occurs because white society limits the job @-@ success of their parents and others in their communities by a glass ceiling . In his new book , he said that non @-@ whites " failed to observe the link between educational achievement and access to jobs . " 
 In 1997 the scholars Philip J. Cook and Jens Ludwig published a report finding that blacks do not face any stronger social pressures than whites to succeed in school , nor do they have greater feelings of alienation towards education in general . They noted anecdotal and ethnographic research confirming that minority students hold these views , but they concluded that these are not inherently <unk> and do not substantially affect student behavior in the classroom . They labeled the issue " something of a distraction " from what they saw as more important educational reforms . 
 Though Ogbu 's 1978 study 's conclusion was widely discussed , a 2003 work also challenged its validity . In 2003 , <unk> Tyson , a sociologist , and William Darity , Jr . , an economist , of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , conducted an 18 @-@ month study at 11 North Carolina schools . The study concluded that white and black students have essentially the same attitudes about scholastic achievement ; students in both groups want to succeed in school and show higher levels of self @-@ esteem when they do better in school . They compared attitudes identified as acting white to the normal adolescent pains experienced in John Hughes ' movies . 
 A 2006 study titled An Empirical Analysis of " Acting White " by Roland G. Fryer , Jr . , at Harvard University and Paul Torelli suggested that the phenomenon probably had little to no effect on students achieving at average levels , but might explain a significant role in the disparities between black and white students at high achievement levels . Fryer has also written that , in contrast to Fordham and Ogbu 's theory , " acting white " prejudices are actually more common the more integrated the school , with historically black schools free of any effects . He found that groups such as Italian immigrants in Boston ’ s West End and the Maori of New Zealand display similar behaviors . He concluded that there is necessarily a trade @-@ off between doing well and rejection by your peers when you come from a traditionally low @-@ achieving group , especially when that group comes into contact with more outsiders . 
 A fundamental drawback of much of the research so far is that the people studied have been asked to rate their own popularity in the eyes of others , which naturally brings those scores into question . Roland G. Fryer , Jr. has remarked , " Asking teenagers whether they ’ re popular is like asking them if they ’ re having sex . " 
 Stuart Buck , a lawyer , also explored this issue in Acting White : The Ironic Legacy of Desegregation ( 2010 ) . He said that segregated black schools had featured teachers , counselors , and others of the same race as the student population , and the adults often acted as mentors to the students . Integration of many public schools since the mid- to late @-@ 20th century may have resulted in schools in which black students perceived they were controlled or dominated by whites . A black student trying to achieve high educational success may then be considered as trying to leave the minority group . 
 Margaret Beale Spencer and Vinay <unk> ( 2008 ) argue that usage of the term " acting white " by black teenagers does not reflect their cultural values ; rather , it is a manifestation of their racial identity development , experienced in conjunction with normal adolescent hassles and peer pressure . Spencer and <unk> employ William E. Cross 's ( 1991 ) <unk> framework and contend that black teenagers ' use of " acting white " in relation to academic achievement is similar to white teenagers ' use of the term " nerd " : the only difference is that black teenagers express it in racialized terms , as in addition to normal teenage peer pressure , they are grappling with racial identity and what it means to be " black " . Expressions such as " acting white " may or may not reflect black teenagers ' cultural values , and their usage is sometimes counterintuitive : for example , Ogbu ( 2003 ) himself documented one instance where a black teenage girl with natural hair was accused of " acting white " by her black peers because " like white people , she did not have to process her hair . " These kind of examples show that accusations of " acting white " are not fundamentally about black cultural attributes ( although such accusations may reflect these attributes ) . Rather , " acting white " is just a manifestation of racial identity development for black children and teenagers , who are learning and defining for themselves what it means to be " black " — in conjunction with normal adolescent peer pressure and hassles . That is also why such accusations are less common among black adults , who have come to greater resolution regarding racial identity issues . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 Political observer John McWhorter has commented , " [ t ] <unk> have a variety of identities open to them for trying on anti @-@ Establishment postures . White kids can be <unk> or goths . Black kids can be ' nonwhite ' . " He interpreted those kids as black " nerds " . He stated that the acting white attitude developed as the creation of an " other " among newly integrated African @-@ American kids . 
 In their 2003 study , Tyson and Darity said that school staff and faculty who hold racist attitudes about the ability of black students use the acting white disparagement as a cover for disparities in student performance . Shelby Steele wrote in The Content of Our Character that what he identified as middle @-@ class black values are falsely viewed by the majority of blacks as " white , " while they are colorblind . He argued that this attitude is distinct from other issues of young blacks in poverty . 
 Kenji Yoshino , a New York University School of Law professor , in his Covering : The Hidden Assault on Our Civil Rights ( 2006 ) , criticizes social pressures to conform to mainstream white culture . He said this violated African Americans ' civil rights , and they can uphold their own social distinctions . He said they should be able to freely choose to identify with white culture if they wish . Anne Arnett Ferguson , a professor at Smith College , wrote in 2001 that white culture " ruthlessly excludes African American cultural modes as relevant and meaningful " . She highlighted the insistence in schools of standard English over Black Vernacular English as an example . 
 Clarence Page remarked on The News Hour with Jim Lehrer in 2004 : 
 In African American folklore , the sea crab ranks among the dumbest of creatures who also offers a valuable lesson . When you catch a bucket or a basketful , you never have to put a lid on because when one of the creatures tries to get out , the others will just pull it back in . Some of our fellow human beings aren 't much smarter than that . When they see you working hard to achieve your dreams , they 'll make fun of you just for trying . 
 = = Accusations of " acting white " = = 
 = = = Barack Obama = = = 
 Public figures arouse controversy . Before he was elected as President , Senator Barack Obama , was criticized in 2007 as " acting white " by Jesse Jackson in relation to a specific case involving blacks . Also before Obama 's election , Ralph Nader , a longtime activist , in 2008 characterized the senator as " talking white " . However , one must note that Obama is also a Mixed @-@ race American , with a White / European mother and Kenyan father ; he also has Cherokee descent . Kenyans are a different ethnic group than the various groups modern day African Americans are descended from . 
 Also , note that " talking white " is a form of a dialect . Who President Obama is speaking with may determine the dialect he chooses to use . 
 Obama 's presidential victory in the 2008 election and public image prompted a public discussion about whether he would shift the ground of critics of ' acting white . ' Commentators John McWhorter and Stephen J. <unk> have said that it might . <unk> of the Israelite School of Universal Practical Knowledge , described by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a black supremacist sect , did not consider Obama to be black but " African of white descent " and advised African Americans not to vote for him . 
 Obama strongly criticized the idea that achievement was limited to " acting white " in his keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention . He said that " children can ’ t achieve unless we raise their expectations and turn off the television sets and eradicate the slander that says a black youth with a book is acting white . ” 
 = = = Russell Wilson = = = 
 Seattle Seahawks football player Russell Wilson came under fire in 2014 when anonymous sources alleged that the feeling in the Seahawks locker room was that Wilson lacked " blackness . " CBS Sports cited this conflict as a possible reason for the trading of star player Percy Harvin from the Seahawks to the New York Jets . 
 = = = Matthew Clark III = = = 
 Socially conscious Texas Hip @-@ Hop artist , Matthew Clark III addressed the diminutive effects African @-@ American adolescents face when being accused of " Acting White " in his autobiographic song " Acting White " " " ( 2015 ) . In his song he depicts the average struggles of young black children that don 't fit the stereotypical mold society wishes to place them in . He describes the struggles of dealing with police harassment , being made fun of for dressing differently , enunciating his words , being accused of stealing in stores , and his aspirations to be like Dr. Martin Luther King Jr . 
 = Battle of Kapyong = 
 The Battle of Kapyong ( Korean : <unk> , 22 – 25 April 1951 ) , also known as the Battle of <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> Zhàn Dòu ) , was fought during the Korean War between United Nations ( UN ) forces — primarily Australian and Canadian — and the Chinese communist People 's Volunteer Army . The fighting occurred during the Chinese Spring Offensive and saw the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade establish blocking positions in the Kapyong Valley , on a key route south to the capital , Seoul . The two forward battalions — 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) and 2nd Battalion , Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry ( 2 PPCLI ) — occupied positions astride the valley and hastily developed defences . As thousands of South Korean soldiers began to withdraw through the valley , the Chinese infiltrated the brigade position under the cover of darkness , and assaulted the Australians on Hill 504 during the evening and into the following day . 
 Although heavily outnumbered , the 27th Brigade held their positions into the afternoon before the Australians were finally withdrawn to positions in the rear of the brigade , with both sides having suffered heavy casualties . The Chinese then turned their attention to the Canadians on Hill 677 , but during a fierce night battle they were unable to dislodge them . The fighting helped blunt the Chinese offensive and the actions of the Australians and Canadians at Kapyong were important in assisting to prevent a breakthrough on the United Nations Command central front , and ultimately the capture of Seoul . The two battalions bore the brunt of the assault and stopped an entire Chinese division during the hard fought defensive battle . The next day the Chinese withdrew back up the valley , in order to regroup . Today , the battle is regarded as one of the most famous actions fought by the Australian and Canadian armies in Korea . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 The United Nations counter offensive between February and April 1951 had been largely successful , with the US Eighth Army pushing the Chinese north of the Han River during Operation Killer , while Seoul was recaptured in mid @-@ March during Operation Ripper and UN forces once again approached the 38th parallel . Regardless , the strained relationship between General Douglas MacArthur and US President Harry S. Truman led to MacArthur 's dismissal as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , and his replacement by General Matthew B. Ridgway . Consequently , on 14 April 1951 , General James Van Fleet replaced Ridgway as commander of the US Eighth Army and the United Nations forces in Korea . Ridgway flew to Tokyo the same day to replace MacArthur . Meanwhile , the offensive continued with a series of short thrusts . Operation Courageous , in late March , pushed forward to the Benton Line , 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) south of the 38th parallel , while Operation Rugged in early @-@ April pushed just north of the 38th parallel to the Kansas Line . Finally , in mid @-@ April a further advance moved the US Eighth Army to the Utah Line . 
 Following the Battle of <unk> @-@ San the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade had enjoyed a period in corps reserve as the UN forces had continued to push steadily northwards . By April 1951 , the brigade consisted of four infantry battalions , one Australian , one Canadian and two British , including : the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ; the 2nd Battalion , Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry ; the 1st Battalion , Middlesex Regiment and the 1st Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders . Brigadier Basil Coad had departed for Hong Kong on compassionate leave on 23 March and the brigade was now under the command of Brigadier Brian Arthur Burke . In direct support was the 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery ( 16 RNZA ) with its 3 @.@ 45 @-@ inch ( 88 mm ) 25 pounder field guns . 3 RAR was now under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Bruce Ferguson , who had replaced Lieutenant Colonel Floyd Walsh following his dismissal in the wake of the Battle of Pakchon on 5 November 1950 . 2 PPCLI was commanded at this time by Lieutenant Colonel James Riley Stone . Deployed in the central sector , the brigade was part of the US IX Corps which also included the US 24th Division , South Korean 2nd Division , US 7th Division and the South Korean 6th Division , under the overall command of Major General William M. Hoge . 
 During this time 27th Brigade was attached to the US 24th Division , advancing north through the <unk> valley in late @-@ March , reaching the Benton Line on 31 March . The brigade was then released , advancing with IX Corps up the deep and narrow valley of the Kapyong River , 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to the east . From 3 April , the 27th Brigade moved further up the river , advancing 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) over the next twelve days as part of Operation Rugged . Although the valley was not held in strength by the Chinese , it was skilfully defended by small groups of infantry dug @-@ in on the hilltops that overlooked it . Advancing along the flanking hills and ridges the brigade captured successive positions , while encountering heavy resistance before reaching the Kansas Line on 8 April . Following a brief operational pause , the advance 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to the Utah Line began on 11 April , the day after MacArthur 's dismissal . Chinese resistance strengthened noticeably and the brigade 's initial objectives were not captured by the Middlesex until 13 April . 
 The approach to the Utah Line was dominated by two 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) hills — the ' Sardine ' feature 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) north , and ' Salmon ' a further 800 metres ( 870 yd ) north . The Middlesex were repulsed during repeated attempts to capture Sardine on 14 April , before the task was allocated to 3 RAR . A Company , 3 RAR subsequently captured the crest , killing 10 Chinese and wounding another 20 for the loss of eight Australians wounded . The following morning , Salmon was captured by C Company without firing a shot , amidst light resistance . Chinese shelling after its capture resulted in two men wounded , while airstrikes then broke up an attempted Chinese counter @-@ attack . Meanwhile , 2 PPCLI continued their advance on the right flank , capturing the ' <unk> ' feature ( Hill 795 ) on 15 April . Facing a spirited Chinese delaying action on successive positions , the Canadians did not capture their final objective — the ' Trout ' feature ( Hill 826 ) — until the following morning . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 After reaching the Utah Line , 27th Brigade was withdrawn from the front on 17 April , handing over its positions to the South Korean 6th Division . Burke subsequently ordered his battalions into reserve positions north of the previously destroyed village of Kapyong , on the main road from Seoul to the east coast . Intelligence indicated that a new Chinese offensive was imminent , and while the brigade settled in to rest it remained on three hours notice to move to support IX Corps . Having been on operations continuously for the past seven months , the British intended to relieve the bulk of the brigade during its period in reserve . The two British battalions — the Argylls and the Middlesex — would be replaced by two fresh battalions from Hong Kong , while Burke and the headquarters of 27th Brigade would be replaced by Brigadier George Taylor and the headquarters of 28th Brigade in late @-@ April . The Canadians were scheduled to transfer to the newly raised 25th Canadian Brigade in May as part of Canada 's increased commitment to the war . Advance parties from Brigade Headquarters and the Argylls departed for Seoul en route for Hong Kong on 19 April , while the remaining British battalions were scheduled to depart two weeks later . 3 RAR would not be rotated and remained a part of the brigade for the entire war , operating on an individual reinforcement system instead . 
 Meanwhile , planning began for Operation Dauntless , a drive 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) into the Iron Triangle — a key communist concentration area and communications junction in the central sector between Chorwon and Kumwha in the south and Pyonggang in the north . Contingency planning also included precautions against a further Chinese offensive , in which the US Eighth Army would conduct a delaying defence on successive positions . Further indications of an imminent communist offensive — including the visible strengthening of Chinese and North Korean artillery and logistic systems — led Ridgway to order Van Fleet not to exploit any opportunities beyond the Wyoming Line . Confident nonetheless , Ridgway widened the scope of the offensive , designating a secondary objective line in the eastern sector known as the Alabama Line . Fate would intervene however , and Van Fleet launched his offensive on 21 April only to be met by a much stronger Chinese and North Korean offensive the following night . 
 The First Chinese Spring Offensive — also known as the Chinese Fifth Phase Campaign , First Impulse — envisioned the total destruction of the US I and IX Corps above the Han River , involving three Chinese Army Groups — the 3rd , 9th , and 19th Army Groups — and three North Korean corps — the I , III and V Corps — under the overall command of Peng Dehuai , the commander of the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army in Korea . With the immediate objective of capturing Seoul , the offensive commenced on 22 April on two broad fronts : the main thrust across the Imjin River in the western sector held by the US I Corps involving 337 @,@ 000 troops driving towards Seoul , and the secondary effort involving 149 @,@ 000 troops attacking further east across the Soyang River in the central and eastern sectors , falling primarily on the US IX Corps , and to a lesser extent on the US X Corps sector . A further 214 @,@ 000 Chinese troops supported the offensive ; in total more than 700 @,@ 000 men . As part of the preparation , the battle hardened 39th and 40th Armies of the 13th Army Group were transferred to the 9th Army Group under the overall command of Song Shi @-@ Lun , and Commander Wen <unk> of the 40th Army was given the mission of destroying the South Korean 6th Division while blocking any UN reinforcements towards the Imjin River at Kapyong . 
 Facing the Chinese offensive were 418 @,@ 000 UN troops , including 152 @,@ 000 South Koreans , 245 @,@ 000 Americans , 11 @,@ 500 British Commonwealth and 10 @,@ 000 troops from other UN countries . However , with the US Eighth Army not strong enough to prevent large penetrations along its line , masses of Chinese infantry soon swept around its flanks , surrounding entire formations in an attempt to cut off their withdrawal . Standing directly in the path of the main Chinese attack towards Seoul in the I Corps sector was the 29th British Brigade . The brigade 's stand on the Imjin River held off two Chinese divisions for two days and ultimately helped prevent the capture of Seoul , but resulted in heavy casualties in one of the bloodiest British engagements of the war . During the fighting , most of the 1st Battalion , Gloucestershire Regiment were killed or captured during a stubborn resistance at the Battle of the Imjin River that saw the commanding officer — Lieutenant Colonel James Carne — awarded the Victoria Cross after his battalion was surrounded . Ultimately the 29th Brigade suffered 1 @,@ 091 casualties in their defence of the Kansas Line , and although they destroyed a large portion of the Chinese 63rd Army and inflicted nearly 10 @,@ 000 casualties , the loss of the Glosters caused a controversy in Britain and within the United Nations Command . Meanwhile , further east , in the IX Corps sector , the Chinese 118th Division , 40th Army and the 60th Division , 20th Army prepared to attack the South Korean 6th Division on the night of 22 April . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = South Korean collapse , 22 – 23 April 1951 = = = 
 The South Koreans were holding positions at the northern end of the Kapyong Valley , having advanced 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) since relieving the 27th Brigade . However , anticipating a Chinese attack , the divisional commander — General Chang Do Yong — had halted his advance at 16 : 00 and ordered his two forward regiments — the 19th and the 2nd Infantry Regiments — to tie @-@ in and develop defensive positions . Meanwhile , the 7th Infantry Regiment occupied reserve positions immediately behind the forward regiments . Suffering a reputation for unreliability in defence the South Koreans had been bolstered by the attachment of the New Zealand guns and a battery of 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) M101 howitzers from the US 213th Field Artillery Battalion . Regardless , left with only one hour to halt its advance and step up defences , the forward South Korean units were only able to occupy a series of hill @-@ top positions while leaving the valleys and flanks exposed . Two Chinese divisions — the 118th and the 60th Division — struck at 17 : 00 , easily infiltrating through numerous gaps between the badly organised defensive positions . Under pressure all along the front , the defenders gave ground almost immediately and soon broke . Abandoning their weapons , equipment and vehicles , they disintegrated and began to stream south out of the mountains and through the valley , and by 23 : 00 Chang was forced to admit that he had lost all communication with his units . At 04 : 00 the decision was made to withdraw the New Zealanders to prevent their loss , however following reports that the South Koreans were making a stand they were ordered back up the valley the next morning with the Middlesex accompanying them as protection . By dusk it was clear that the South Koreans had in fact collapsed , and the guns were withdrawn again . 
 Meanwhile , the US 1st Marine Division was holding firm against the Chinese 39th Army to the east , and the withdrawal of the South Koreans had left their flank exposed . However , with the Chinese 39th and 40th Armies only tasked with protecting the eastern flank of the 9th Army Group against possible counterattacks from the 1st Marine Division , the Chinese did not exploit this opportunity and the Americans remained relatively unmolested . Yet with the forward UN positions in both the US I Corps and US IX Corps sectors increasingly untenable as the Chinese exploited gaps between formations , Van Fleet ordered a withdrawal to the Kansas Line in the mid @-@ morning . Hoge subsequently ordered the US Marines to form a new defensive position beyond the <unk> River , between the Hwachon Reservoir and the new position to be occupied by the South Korean 6th Division . Hoge 's plan relied on the South Koreans reforming and offering some resistance , and although a rearguard of 2 @,@ 500 men was belatedly established it was in no condition to fight . Fearing a breakthrough , Hoge warned out the 27th Brigade , as the corps reserve , to establish defensive positions north of Kapyong on the afternoon of 23 April as a precaution in the event the South Koreans were unable to hold , tasking them with blocking the two approaches to the village and to prevent the Chinese from cutting Route 17 , a key route south to Seoul and an important main supply route . 
 The brigade was by now reduced to three battalions , as the Argylls had been withdrawn to Pusan just prior to the battle , in preparation for their embarkation . The Middlesex were also on stand @-@ by for embarkation , and were kept in reserve . As such , with the width of the valley precluding the establishment of continuous linear defensive , Burke was forced to place his two available battalions on the high points on either side of it , with 3 RAR occupying Hill 504 to the east of the river and 2 PPCLI occupying Hill 677 to the west . Meanwhile , <unk> San ( Hill 794 ) to the north @-@ west — a massive hill nearly 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) high — was left undefended by necessity . Together these three hills formed a naturally strong defensive position , well suited to blocking a major advance . Regardless , the brigade position suffered from a number of deficiencies , being exposed without flank protection , while the central sector was not occupied because the Middlesex were away to the north with the guns . Likewise , until the return of the New Zealanders the brigade would have little artillery support ; as such if large Chinese forces arrived before these two units returned the forward companies would be without support and would have to accept the probability that they would be cut @-@ off . 3 RAR — whose line of communications ran 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) through the exposed central sector of the valley — would be particularly exposed . 
 Each of the battalions were deployed across the summits and slopes in separate company @-@ sized defensive positions , creating a series of strong @-@ points across a 7 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) front . Due to the large amount of ground to be defended each of the companies were spread widely , and were unable to offer mutual support . Instead each platoon would support each other , with each company adopting all @-@ round defence . Brigade Headquarters remained in the valley , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) to the south . With the New Zealand gunners still forward supporting the South Koreans , US IX Corps placed a battery of 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) howitzers from the US 213th Field Artillery Battalion and the twelve 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) M2 mortars of B Company , 2nd Chemical Mortar Battalion , under the command of 27th Brigade . Fifteen Sherman tanks from A Company , US 72nd Heavy Tank Battalion , were also in support . 
 The Canadians subsequently occupied Hill 677 and began digging @-@ in , deploying their six Vickers medium machine @-@ guns in sections to add depth , and using defensive fire tasks to cover the gaps in their positions . Meanwhile , the Australians occupied Hill 504 , with D Company holding the summit itself , A Company the spur @-@ line which ran down to the north @-@ west , and B Company the small hill by the river , while C Company was in reserve on the rear spur . In response to US IX Corps requirements Burke directed Ferguson to site his headquarters in the low ground of the valley in the vicinity of the hamlet of <unk> @-@ ni , so as to control the withdrawing South Koreans . However , this would limit Ferguson 's situational awareness and his ability to control the battle , while also leaving them exposed to infiltration . The afternoon was spent on the lightly scrub @-@ covered slopes digging @-@ in and building <unk> where the rocky ground proved too hard . In only a few hours the Australians managed to prepare hasty defensive positions , although defensive fire tasks were unable to be registered as the artillery Forward Observers were unable to reach the company positions until after dark . 
 The American tank company commander — Lieutenant Kenneth W. Koch — deployed his platoons in support of the Australians . The road skirted the eastern flank of Hill 504 , and it offered the best area for the employment of armour . One platoon of five tanks occupied a northern outpost position forward of B Company to prevent the Chinese using the road ; another platoon occupied the high ground to the west , with B Company ; while the final platoon and Koch 's command tank was deployed near Battalion Headquarters , covering a ford by which the road crossed the Kapyong River , approximately 800 metres ( 870 yd ) south of B Company . Perhaps unwisely the tanks were deployed without infantry support . The command relationship between the Australians and their armoured support was also complicated , as the Americans were not under command as they might normally have been , rather Koch was free to conduct his own battle . Regardless , armed with a 76 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) cannon and one .50 calibre and two .30 calibre machine @-@ guns , the Sherman tanks were formidable assets and bolstered the defence considerably . In contrast , the Chinese had no tanks at Kapyong , while their infantry had only a few 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 89 mm ) anti @-@ tank rockets with which to counter them . 
 By 20 : 00 that evening a large number of South Koreans were retreating in disarray through a gap in the line held by the brigade , the majority of them moving through the Australians . The South Korean 6th Division later regrouped in positions behind 27th Brigade , but was now reduced to less than half its original strength . Meanwhile , as the 20th Army veered to the west as part of the Chinese main effort against Seoul , the Chinese 118th Division continued its secondary advance down the Kapyong Valley , closely pursuing the retreating South Koreans . Racing down the northeast running valley , the 354th Regiment reached the Australian positions by about 22 : 00 . Intent on capturing the important crossroads of Route 17 south of Kapyong , and most likely unaware of the location of the Australian blocking position , the Chinese vanguard remained in the low ground , splitting as they approached a long , low north @-@ south running ridge that rose like an island in the mouth of the valley . 
 = = = Night battle , 23 / 24 April 1951 = = = 
 Having successfully prevented the US 1st Marine Division from reinforcing the Imjin River front , the Chinese 40th Army turned its attention towards the 27th Brigade on 23 April . The battle started during the night of 23 / 24 April , and continued until late the following day as an entire Chinese division — the 118th Division , totalling perhaps 10 @,@ 000 men under the command of Deng Yue — engaged the two forward battalions of 27th Brigade . The initial Chinese attack at Kapyong engaged 3 RAR on Hill 504 , while in the early part of the battle the Middlesex and New Zealand gunners were all but cut off . However , the resistance of the Australians ultimately allowed them to safely withdraw and the Middlesex then moved into a reserve position astride the western bank of the river in order to provide depth to the brigade defence . The two battalions of the Chinese 354th Regiment launched repeated attacks on the two forward Australian companies on the northwest spur of Hill 504 . Assault after assault of massed Chinese troops kept up the attack throughout the night , but the strong defence of the Australians on the brigade 's right flank held them back , before they turned their attention to the Canadians the following day . 
 Using the retreating South Korean troops to cover their movements , the Chinese had infiltrated the brigade position in the initial stages of the battle , penetrating between A and B Companies , 3 RAR astride the road , and largely surrounding the latter before moving into the rear positions . The Australians struggled to distinguish the Chinese from the South Koreans in the dark , although the Korean Service Corps porters attached to the battalion were able to provide valuable assistance to the defenders distinguishing the Chinese by the sounds of their voices . At 21 : 30 the Chinese launched their first attack on the forward platoon of American tanks , which had been posted on the road without infantry support . The initial moves were easily repelled , however a stronger attack an hour later forced the tanks to withdraw after two of the tank commanders were killed , including the platoon commander . The Chinese then proceeded to assault the Australians on two different axes : one against the two forward companies in front of Hill 504 , and the other through the valley astride the road around Battalion Headquarters . Finally , by 23 : 00 the New Zealand artillery had returned to the brigade , although they provided only limited support throughout the rest of the night . 
 Probes began on the A and B Company positions , and a number of assaults occurred during the night . Utilising indirect fires , the Chinese charged forward in waves , only to be beaten back by the Australians ' Bren light machine @-@ guns , Owen submachine @-@ guns , rifle fire and grenades , before again regrouping and attacking again . B Company — under the command of Captain Darcy Laughlin — supported by tanks , drove off each assault , inflicting heavy casualties while emerging almost unscathed . Laughlin 's command post was fired upon by a number of Chinese that had infiltrated the company position , but they were swiftly driven out . An outpost on the northern knoll reported Chinese massing on their flanks at 23 : 00 , and although heavy artillery was directed against the attackers , the section was forced to break contact and withdraw to the main defensive position . The main Chinese assault began at 00 : 50 , falling on 4 Platoon but was broken up after an hour of heavy fighting . A second assault was mounted on 6 Platoon at 03 : 30 , following a feint against 5 Platoon . With determination the Chinese swept forward , penetrating the Australian perimeter before being ejected by an equally determined counter @-@ attack by 6 Platoon with Sherman tanks in support . At 04 : 00 a small outpost to the rear of the company position was attacked by more than 50 Chinese . Held by just four men under the command of Lance Corporal Ray Parry , the Australians fought off four separate attacks , killing more the 25 and wounding many more over the space of twenty minutes . Parry was later awarded the Military Medal for his actions . A final assault on B Company was made just on dawn at 04 : 45 by about 70 Chinese , and was again repulsed . 
 Further up the ridge , A Company — under Major Ben O 'Dowd — faced a tougher task , and came under heavy attack . The first probes began at 21 : 30 , targeting 1 Platoon which was the lowest of the three platoons on the west flank . The initial moves were then followed up by major Chinese assaults from three sides over the next three hours . Despite suffering many casualties the Chinese continued their attack , closing in and attacking the Australians with hand grenades . The Australians also suffered numerous casualties , with more than half the platoon killed or wounded , including all three Bren gunners . Fighting back with small arms fire , they held against repeated assaults , which increased in frequency and strength as the Chinese assaulted over heaps of their own dead and wounded . By 01 : 00 O 'Dowd ordered the survivors of 1 Platoon to withdraw through Company Headquarters into a new position in between 2 and 3 Platoons . For his leadership Lieutenant Frederick Gardner was later Mentioned in Despatches . The Chinese attacks then continued against 3 Platoon , lasting until 04 : 30 , although they were not made with the same weight as the previous assaults . 
 By dawn it was clear that they had succeeded in penetrating the perimeter through a gap between the Australian platoons , and they began to engage them with machine @-@ guns from a <unk> position covered from fire by a steep dip in the ridgeline , and concealed by thick scrub . In the growing light , 1 and 3 Platoon were soon pinned down and suffered a number of casualties as they attempted to gain better fire positions with which to engage their attackers . At 06 : 00 a fighting patrol was dispatched to make contact with Company Headquarters , and as the section passed over a false crest on their way down the spur line they encountered the Chinese positions by chance . Attacking immediately , six Chinese were killed for the loss of one Australian , and the threat to A Company was eliminated . O 'Dowd then launched a counter @-@ attack with 3 Platoon assaulting the Chinese occupying the original 1 Platoon position . By 07 : 00 they had regained the feature and the Chinese were forced to withdraw under heavy fire from the Australians on the high ground , who again exacted a heavy toll . The night 's fighting had cost A Company dearly however , and among the dead were the two New Zealand forward observers . In total they suffered more than 50 casualties — half their original strength . Meanwhile , on the right flank , D Company — under Captain Norm Gravener — held the summit of Hill 504 and was not heavily engaged during the night , while C Company — commanded by Captain Reg Saunders — was attacked only once . 
 Located 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) to the rear , Battalion Headquarters found itself heavily pressed however . Protected only by a section of Vickers medium machine @-@ guns , two 17 pounder anti @-@ tank guns , the Assault Pioneer Platoon and the Regimental Police under the Headquarters Company commander — Captain Jack Gerke — the fighting flared around 22 : 00 as the Chinese infiltrated the position among the retreating South Koreans . They bypassed the headquarters and the American tanks nearby , surrounding the defenders and establishing blocking positions on the road to the south . During the night the Chinese attempted to mount the tanks and destroy them with grenades and satchel charges , but were driven off by fire . Later , one of the tanks received a direct hit from a 3 @.@ 5 inch rocket , while the forward perimeter was struck heavily by attacking waves of Chinese , and was forced back with heavy casualties . Receiving fire from Chinese soldiers occupying several houses in the village of <unk> @-@ ni , the Shermans engaged the road block and several houses , killing more than 40 Chinese in one house alone . However , at 04 : 00 a company from the Middlesex battalion had to be dispatched to help restore the situation . 
 At dawn the Chinese intensified their attack on the headquarters ' perimeter , killing and wounding the bulk of the Medium Machine Gun section and the Assault Pioneer Platoon and driving them off the high ground they had been occupying . By 05 : 00 the Chinese on the heights were able to fire directly into Battalion Headquarters below , and Ferguson made the decision to withdraw 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to a new position inside the Middlesex perimeter . Gerke ordered his men to withdraw gradually , moving one vehicle at a time back along the road , as those that remained provided covering fire . The withdrawal was successfully completed , and with Headquarters Company finally assembled inside the Middlesex perimeter , Gerke was then ordered to secure a key ford across the Kapyong River , 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) east , as a possible withdrawal route for the battalion should it later have to retire from Hill 504 . However , during the withdrawal two Australians were left behind and were subsequently captured by the Chinese : Private Robert Parker , the battalion despatch rider , and Private Horace Madden , one of the signallers . For his conduct while in captivity Madden was posthumously awarded the George Cross , following his death from malnutrition and ill @-@ treatment . Ferguson 's caravan , a converted two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half tonne trunk , became bogged during the withdrawal and had to be destroyed . Meanwhile , the New Zealand gunline had also been probed during the early morning and was forced to redeploy at 03 : 00 , while the American mortar company had simply fled , abandoning most of their weapons and vehicles . 
 Communications between 3 RAR and Brigade Headquarters had failed early , while those with the forward companies were also poor . This was mostly due to the large number of South Koreans retreating through their position tearing out the line from the Command Post , as well the effect of heavy vehicle traffic and gunfire on the exposed line . Likewise , direct radio communication with the forward companies on the battalion command net with the new Type 31 VHF radios was obstructed by the rugged terrain due to the sitting of Battalion Headquarters in low ground relative to the forward companies and the requirement for line @-@ of @-@ sight . The forward companies were able to maintain communications with each other , but not with Battalion Headquarters , while the company level nets also functioned well . Ultimately contact was maintained between Ferguson and Burke through a radio set in the Middlesex Battalion Headquarters , while messages to the forward companies relied on line and a slow relay through C Company . These issues had only further complicated the conduct of the defence on the first night , with the co @-@ ordination of the forward battle falling to O 'Dowd . The next morning , O 'Dowd finally managed to get through on a radio phone to a general in the US 1st Marine Division . The officer was incredulous , thinking it was a Chinese agent speaking . He told O 'Dowd that the unit no longer existed and that it had been wiped out the night before . O 'Dowd replied " I 've got news for you . We 're still here and we 're staying here . " 
 The Chinese attacks had been launched quickly and aggressively , placing their light machine @-@ guns on the flank in support and attempting to close to attack the Australian perimeter with grenades . Contrary to some contemporary western accounts , the Chinese did not use human wave tactics , rather , using a tactic known as ' one @-@ point @-@ two sides ' , they used massed forces and infiltration to achieve local numerical superiority and to penetrate the gaps between the forward companies , before attempting to envelop the Australians while drawing their fire to the front , away from their threatened flanks . They would normally attempt to close with UN defensive positions using darkness or poor visibility to cover their movement and to counter American air superiority , before attacking using massed force , co @-@ ordinated with close fire support . However , although normally well @-@ planned and closely supported by machine @-@ gun , mortar and artillery fire , Chinese attacks in Korea were often inflexible in execution once launched . This was mostly due to the lack of radio communications below battalion @-@ level , with the Chinese instead relying on with whistle blasts , bugle calls and runners for command and control , and although their 60 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) and 81 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) mortars had provided particularly effective indirect fire support , these problems were again evident during the fighting at Kapyong . Later , it was estimated that more than 500 Chinese were killed by the Australians and the American tanks that supported them . 
 Meanwhile , on Hill 677 the Canadians had spent the night of 23 / 24 April in their pits listening to the sounds of the fighting on the Australian front . However , by early morning Chinese activity increased and with the situation deteriorating on the Patricia 's right flank , Stone withdrew B Company from their position forward of the feature 's summit in order strengthen this flank in the event the Australians were forced to withdraw . Under the command of Major Vince Lilley , the company subsequently moved to occupy positions east of Battalion Headquarters , on the high ground overlooking the valley road . 
 = = = Day battle , 24 April 1951 = = = 
 As daylight broke , the Chinese now found themselves highly exposed in the open ground in front of the Australians . A and B Company supported by artillery , mortars and tanks poured heavy fire onto the hapless Chinese , forcing them to withdraw leaving hundreds of casualties behind on the slopes . With the Australians remaining in possession of their original defensive locations the immediate situation had stabilised , although they were now effectively cut @-@ off 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) behind the front . Ammunition , food and medical supplies were now extremely low throughout the forward area , and with casualty evacuation increasingly difficult , the battalion was at risk of being overrun unless it could be concentrated , resupplied and supported . As such in order to avoid each company being isolated and overwhelmed in a series of Chinese attacks , at 07 : 15 B Company was ordered to leave its position and join the other companies on the high ground to form a defendable battalion position . The Australians subsequently withdrew as instructed , taking several dozen Chinese prisoners with them that had been captured earlier by a standing patrol . The New Zealand gunners covered their movement across the open valley , laying a smoke screen to conceal the withdrawal , while the American tanks also provided support . As they moved across the valley the Australians exchanged a number of shots with a small groups of Chinese who were still hiding in dead ground and in the riverbed , as well as numerous dead from the fighting the previous night . 173 Chinese dead were counted on the B Company perimeter by the Australians before they departed . 
 With B Company successfully occupying its new positions , Ferguson moved forward to the hillside below his forward companies aboard a Sherman tank . Just after 09 : 00 , a group of Chinese launched an attack at the top of the spur held by C Company . The attack was repulsed , and no further assaults were made against C Company during the day , although they endured sniper fire and mortar bombardment for several hours . Realising the importance of B Company 's previous position to a planned counter @-@ offensive , two hours after their withdrawal , Ferguson order Laughlin to re @-@ occupy the position which they had just vacated . 27th Brigade would now be reinforced by American troops and their move forward would be facilitated if the Chinese were cleared from the small hill that commanded the road through the valley . Likewise , the defence of this position the previous evening had prevented a Chinese assault on the western flank of Hill 504 . As such at 09 : 30 the order to withdraw was rescinded and B Company were tasked to re @-@ occupy the position . In preparation for the company assault on the summit , Laughlin tasked 5 Platoon to assault a small knoll halfway between C Company and the old B Company position . A frontal assault was launched at 10 : 30 , with two sections attacking and one in fire support . Strongly held by a Chinese platoon well dug @-@ in in bunkers , the defenders allowed the Australians to approach to within 15 metres ( 16 yd ) before opening fire with machine @-@ guns , rifles and grenades . 5 Platoon suffered seven casualties , including the platoon commander , and they were forced to withdraw under the cover of machine @-@ gun and mortar fire . 
 4 Platoon — under Lieutenant Leonard Montgomerie — took over the attack , while a number of American tanks moved in to provide further support . Conducting a right flanking attack , the Australians suffered a number of casualties as they moved across the open ground . Advancing to within 30 metres ( 33 yd ) of the forward trenches , the Chinese fire increased . Montgomerie launched a desperate bayonet charge , while a section under Corporal Donald Davie broke in on the right . Amid fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting the Australians cleared the Chinese from the trenches , losing three men . Davie 's section was then heavily engaged by machine @-@ guns from the rear trenches , and he moved quickly to assault these with his remaining men . Montgomerie reorganised the platoon , and they fought from trench to trench using bayonets and grenades . The Australians then began taking fire from another knoll to their front and leaving his rear sections to clear the first position , Montgomerie led Davie 's section onto the second knoll . Against such aggression the Chinese were unable to hold , and although the majority bravely fought to the death , others fled across the open ground . By 12 : 30 the knoll had been captured by the Australians , with 57 Chinese dead counted on the first position and another 24 on the second . A large Chinese force was now detected occupying the old B Company position and the Australians were effectively halted halfway to their objective . Before Laughlin could prepare his next move he was ordered to withdraw by Ferguson , and the attempt to dislodge the Chinese was subsequently abandoned . During the fighting the tanks had provided invaluable support , moving ammunition forward to B Company , and helping to evacuate the wounded . The entire operation had cost the Australians three killed and nine wounded . For his actions Montgomerie was awarded the Military Cross , while Davie received the Military Medal . 
 Meanwhile , the Chinese shifted their attention to D Company , launching a series of relentless assaults against the summit . D Company 's position was vital to the defence of Hill 504 , commanding the high ground and protecting the Australian 's right flank . Commencing at 07 : 00 the Chinese assaulted the forward platoon — 12 Platoon — launching attacks at thirty @-@ minute intervals until 10 : 30 . Using mortars to cover their movement they attacked on a narrow front up the steep slope using grenades , however the Australians beat the Chinese back , killing more than 30 for the loss of seven wounded during six attacks . The New Zealand artillery again played a key role in defeating the Chinese attempts , bring down accurate fire within 50 metres ( 55 yd ) of the Australian positions . However , throughout the fighting the supply of ammunition for the guns had caused severe problems , as the Chinese offensive had depleted the stock of 25 pounder rounds available forward of the airhead in Seoul . Despite improvements , problems with the logistic system remained and each round had to be used effectively in response to the directions of the artillery Forward Observers which controlled their fire . Although badly wounded Corporal William Rowlinson was later awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for his leadership , while Private Ronald Smith was awarded the Military Medal . Lance Corporal Henry Richey was posthumously Mentioned in Despatches after being fatally wounded attempting to evacuate the last of the Australian casualties . 
 Despite their previous failures , the Chinese launched another series of attacks from 11 : 30 and these attacks continued for the next two hours , again targeting 12 Platoon under the command of Lieutenant John Ward . Failing to break through again , the Chinese suffered heavy casualties before the assault ended . From 13 : 30 there was another lull in the fighting for an hour and a half , although D Company continued to endure Chinese mortar , machine @-@ gun and rifle fire . Believing that the battle may continue into the night , Gravener made the decision to pull 12 Platoon back in order to adopt a tighter company perimeter , lest his forward platoon be overrun and destroyed . The movement was completed without incident , and shortly after the newly vacated position was assaulted by a large Chinese force which had failed to detect the withdrawal . The Chinese moved quickly as they attempted to establish their position on the northern end of the ridge , only to be heavily engaged by Australian machine @-@ gun and rifle fire , and artillery . 
 On the Canadian front , B Company , 2 PPCLI completed its redeployment by 11 : 00 hours . The battalion now occupied a northward facing arc curving from the summit of Hill 677 in the west to the high ground closest to the river . D Company held the summit on the battalion 's left , C Company the central forward slope , while A and B Company held the right flank . The high grass and severe terrain of Hill 677 limited the ability of each company to provide mutual support however , while at the same time it afforded any attacking force limited avenues of approach , and even less cover or concealment for an assault . 24 April passed with little activity , with the Chinese continuing to focus on the Australians across the river . Meanwhile , the Canadians continued to strengthen their defences as reports of growing Chinese concentrations came in from the forward companies . Each company was allocated a section of Vickers medium machine @-@ guns , as well as three 60 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) mortars . Defensive fire tasks were registered , while additional ammunition was pushed out to the forward companies in the afternoon . 
 = = = 3 RAR withdraws , evening 24 April 1951 = = = 
 Although originally intending on holding until the Australians could be relieved by the US 5th Cavalry Regiment , Burke had decided during the morning to withdraw 3 RAR , and this had prompted the cancellation of B Company 's assault . With the Australians facing encirclement , and mindful of the fate that had befallen the Glosters , Burke had ordered a fighting withdrawal back to the Middlesex area to new defensive positions in rear of the brigade . Indeed , despite holding Chinese at bay throughout the morning and afternoon , the increasing difficulty of resupply and casualty evacuation made it clear that the Australians would be unable to hold Hill 504 for another night in its exposed and isolated positions . Planning for the withdrawal had begun as the Chinese renewed their assault on D Company around 11 : 30 , while Ferguson and O 'Dowd discussed the withdrawal by radio at 12 : 30 . With the Chinese dominating the road south Ferguson ordered his companies to withdraw along a ridge running 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south @-@ west from Hill 504 , just east of the Kapyong River . The Middlesex position lay a further 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south @-@ west of the foot of the ridge and could be reached by the ford secured earlier by Gerke , which would act as the battalion check point for the withdrawal . O 'Dowd , as the senior company commander , was subsequently appointed to plan and command the withdrawal . Ferguson saw his role as ensuring that O 'Dowd received the support he needed to achieve a clean break , and had as such decided not to move forward to lead the withdrawal himself . 
 Command of A Company was temporarily handed over to the second @-@ in @-@ command , Captain Bob Murdoch . Present at Pakchon in November 1950 , O 'Dowd understood first @-@ hand the dangers of withdrawing while in contact . The challenge was to protect the forward platoons as they withdrew from being followed up by the Chinese occupying the old B Company positions and from D Company 's position after they broke contact . The Australians would also have to clear the withdrawal route of any blocking forces , while at the same time the evacuation of a large number of wounded and Chinese prisoners would hamper their movement . As such the timing of the withdrawal would be critical to its success . Consequently , the lead company would not move until mid @-@ afternoon so that the rearguard would be able to use the protection of darkness to break contact , while at the same time offering good observation and fields of fire during the daylight to support the initial moves . Orders were delivered at 14 : 30 . B Company would lead the withdrawal down the ridge line , carrying any wounded that still required evacuation , as well as clearing the route and securing the ford near the Middlesex position . C Company would wait for the artillery to neutralise the Chinese on the old B Company position , before moving to establish a blocking position behind D Company . A Company would then withdraw to a blocking position behind C Company , in order to allow Gravener and Saunders to establish a clean break . Finally , D Company would withdraw through both C and A Company and set up a blocking position to delay any follow up and allow those companies to withdraw . 
 After 15 : 00 an airstrike was called in to dislodge the surviving Chinese in front of D Company . However , the attack by two US Marine Corps F4U Corsairs was mistakenly directed at the Australians themselves after their positions were wrongly marked by the spotter plane . Two men were killed and several badly burnt by napalm before the attack was broken off after the company second @-@ in @-@ command — Captain Michael Ryan — ran out under Chinese fire waving a marker panel . The company medical orderly — Private Ronald <unk> — was subsequently awarded the Military Medal for his efforts assisting the wounded despite his own injuries . The Chinese quickly attempted to exploit the chaos , moving against D Company 's long exposed eastern flank . 11 Platoon on the main ridge forward of the summit was subjected to a frontal assault ; however , unaffected by the napalm they broke up the Chinese attack and inflicted heavy casualties on them . Regardless , further Chinese attempts to infiltrate the Australian positions continued into the afternoon . 
 The withdrawal was scheduled to begin shortly following the misdirected airstrike , and was to be preceded by an artillery bombardment with high explosive and smoke at 16 : 00 . The American tanks were subsequently moved forward to provide cover , and when the New Zealand artillery failed to fire at the appointed hour , they provided the direct fire support . Still in contact , the Australians began to pull back , fighting a number of well @-@ disciplined , rearguard actions as the companies leapfrogged each other . Meanwhile , the New Zealand artillery kept the Chinese at bay , after it finally commenced firing . B Company had taken 39 Chinese prisoners during the earlier fighting , and unable to leave these behind they were used to carry many of the Australian wounded , and much of their equipment as well . O 'Dowd 's fear that the Chinese might have blocked the withdrawal route were not realised , and B Company moved back along the ridge and down to the ford without incident , reaching the Middlesex area after dark . C Company was the next to withdraw , departing at 16 : 30 , just after suffering another casualty from sniper fire . Saunders led his company up the spur and then south down the main ridge without incident , followed by A Company during the next hour with the Chinese in close pursuit . 
 Murdoch had been concerned lest he and his men should be engaged when they reached the Kapyong River in an exhausted condition and with little ammunition . Luck was with the Australians , and due to difficulties of communication and navigation along the ridge line in the dark , elements of A Company had become separated and the last two platoons descended to the river too early to strike the ford . However , reaching a deserted part of the bank they realised their mistake and immediately turned west again , following the river @-@ bank to the ford . The Chinese did not follow this sudden final turn and plunged on into the river , giving A Company an unexpected opportunity to break free . The Chinese were subsequently detected by the Canadians on Hill 677 and were fired on , although fortunately for them the Canadian fire did not hit the Australians . This possibility had been foreseen earlier ; however , problems with the radio relay between the Canadians and Australians meant that there had been no guarantee that the withdrawing force would not be mistaken for Chinese as they crossed the river . 
 Only D Company — which had been holding the summit and had withdrawn last — was heavily engaged and was unable to move at the scheduled time . The Chinese launched a determined assault , preceding it with heavy machine @-@ gun and mortar fire , before attempting to overrun the forward pits . Once again the Australians repelled the Chinese assault and Gravener decided to begin to thin out his position before the situation deteriorated further . With one platoon covering their movement , D Company subsequently withdrew , closely pursued by the Chinese . During the rapid withdrawal after the final Chinese attack , Private Keith <unk> was accidentally left behind after being knocked unconscious and buried in a forward pit by a mortar round . He regained consciousness some hours later and was subsequently captured by the Chinese who had by then occupied Hill 504 and were digging @-@ in . Finally , the Australians succeeded in achieving a clean break after dark , and D Company was able to safely withdraw . By 23 : 30 the battalion was clear , completing its withdrawal in good order and intact , and suffering only minimal casualties . Regardless , the previous 24 hours of fighting had been costly for the Australians , resulting in 32 killed , 59 wounded and three captured ; the bulk of them in A Company and Battalion Headquarters . Yet their stout defence had halted the assault on the brigade 's right flank , and had inflicted far heavier casualties on the Chinese before being withdrawn . Significantly for the Australians 25 April was Anzac Day ; however , following their successful withdrawal the Chinese turned their attention to the Canadians on the left flank . 
 = = = Defence of Hill 677 , 24 – 25 April 1951 = = = 
 Despite the withdrawal from Hill 504 that evening , 27th Brigade had been reinforced on the afternoon of 24 April by the arrival of the 5th US Cavalry Regiment . The Americans had been dispatched earlier in the day to ensure that Kapyong remained in UN hands , and one of the battalions was subsequently deployed to the southwest of the D Company , 2 PPCLI on the summit of Hill 677 in order to cover the left flank . A second American battalion occupied a position across the river , southeast of the Middlesex . Likewise , despite heavy casualties in one of the Australian companies and battalion headquarters 3 RAR had emerged from the intense battle largely intact and had successfully withdrawn in an orderly fashion . Meanwhile , one of the replacement British battalions , the 1st Battalion , King 's Own Scottish Borderers , had also arrived during the 24th and it took up positions with the Australians around Brigade Headquarters . With six UN battalions now holding the valley the Chinese faced a difficult task continuing the advance . 
 Having dislodged the defenders from Hill 504 , the 354th Regiment of the Chinese 118th Division would attempt to capture the dominating heights of Hill 677 held by the Canadians . Although unaware of the arrival of American reinforcements , the Chinese had detected the redeployment of B Company , 2 PPCLI however , and at 22 : 00 that evening they commenced an assault on the Canadian right flank . Although the initial moves were easily beaten back by automatic fire and mortars , a second Chinese assault an hour later succeeded in overrunning the right forward platoon . The Canadians successfully withdrew in small groups back to the company main defensive position , where they eventually halted the Chinese advance . During the fighting the Canadians ' 60 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) mortars had proven vital , their stability allowing for rapid fire out to 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 yd ) and an ability to accurately hit narrow ridgelines at maximum range . The next morning 51 Chinese dead were counted around the B Company perimeter . Shortly following the second assault on B Company was repelled , another large Chinese assault force was detected fording the river in the bright moonlight . Laying down heavy and accurate artillery fire , the New Zealand gunners forced the Chinese to withdraw , killing more than 70 . 
 Meanwhile , a large Chinese force of perhaps company strength was detected in the re @-@ entrant south of B Company , moving toward Battalion Headquarters , and Lilley warned Stone of the impending assault . Six M3 Half @-@ tracks from Mortar Platoon had been positioned there before the battle , each armed with a .50 calibre and a .30 calibre machine @-@ gun . Stone held fire until the Chinese broke through the tree @-@ line just 180 metres ( 200 yd ) from their front . Opening fire with machine @-@ guns and mortar fire at their minimum engagement distance , the Chinese suffered severe casualties and the assault was easily beaten off . The Chinese had telegraphed their intentions prior to the assault by using tracer fire for direction , and had used bugles to co @-@ ordinate troops in their forming up positions . Such inflexibility had allowed the Canadians to co @-@ ordinate indirect fires and took heavy toll on the attackers in the forming up positions . 
 The Chinese had been unable to successfully pin @-@ point the Canadian defensive positions , having failed to carry out a thorough reconnaissance prior to the attack . The severe terrain had also prevented the assaulting troops from adopting a low profile during their final assault , however in the darkness the Canadian rifle fire was ineffective , forcing them to resort to using grenades and rocket launchers . The Chinese mortars and artillery was particularly ineffective however , and very few rounds fell on the Canadian positions during the evening . Indeed , in their haste to follow up the collapse of the South Korean 6th Division , the Chinese 118th Division had left the bulk of its artillery and supplies well north of scene of the fighting . Meanwhile , what mortar ammunition they did have had been largely used up on the Australians during the previous evening . In contrast , the New Zealand gunners provided effective fire support and had been able to break up a number of Chinese assaults before they had even reached the Patricias . The Chinese now turned their attention to D Company holding the summit of Hill 677 , on the battalion 's left flank . 
 At 01 : 10 a large Chinese force was detected forming up on a spur to the west towards Hill 865 and they were engaged by Bren light machines guns and defensive fires . Assaulting 10 Platoon under the cover of machine @-@ gun and mortar fire , the Chinese were soon effectively engaged by Vickers machine @-@ guns from 12 Platoon firing in mutual support . Switching their axis of assault to 12 Platoon , the Chinese succeeded in overrunning one of the Canadian sections and a medium machine @-@ gun , killing two of its crew who had remained at their post firing until the last moment . The Canadians fought back , engaging the Chinese as they attempted to turn the Vickers on them , rendering it inoperable before calling in pre @-@ arranged defensive fires on to the newly lost position . With the supporting artillery firing at the ' very slow ' rate to conserve ammunition , the weight of the Chinese assaults soon prompted the Canadians to request it be increased to the ' slow ' rate of two rounds per gun per minute , so that 24 rounds fell every 30 seconds within a target area of 180 metres ( 200 yd ) . 
 With the Chinese infiltrating the Canadian perimeter through the gaps between platoons , D Company was close to being surrounded . The company commander — Captain <unk> Mills — was subsequently forced to call down artillery fire onto his own position on several occasions during the early morning of 25 April to avoid being overrun . The tactic succeeded and the exposed Chinese were soon swept off the position , while the dug @-@ in Canadians escaped unharmed . The Chinese persisted however , launching a number of smaller attacks during the rest of the night , but these were again repulsed by artillery and small arms fire . By dawn the attacks on the Canadian positions had abated , and with D Company remaining in control of the summit they were able to recover the previously abandoned machine @-@ gun at first light . Meanwhile , on the right flank B Company was also able to re @-@ occupy the platoon position it had been forced to relinquish earlier the previous evening . The Chinese had suffered heavily during the night , with perhaps as many as 300 killed by the Patricias . 
 = = = Fighting concludes , 25 April 1951 = = = 
 Although the Chinese had continued to mount small attacks , UN forces were now in control of the battle . Regardless , the Chinese had succeeded in establishing blocking positions on the roads south of the Canadians , temporarily cutting them off from resupply . Anticipating that the battle would continue into the evening , Stone requested that food , ammunition and water be airdropped directly onto Hill 677 and by 10 : 30 the required supplies — including 81 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) mortar ammunition — were dropped by four American C @-@ 119 Flying Boxcars flying from an airbase in Japan . Anticipating a renewed Chinese effort , the Canadians continued to improve their defensive position . Meanwhile , the Middlesex sent out patrols during the morning in order to clear the Chinese that had infiltrated behind Hill 677 during the evening , and although the Chinese blocking positions were relatively weak it was not until 14 : 00 that patrols from B Company , 2 PPCLI reported the road clear . Stone subsequently requested that further supplies and reinforcements be sent forward by vehicle as rapidly as feasible . 
 The remainder of the day was relatively quiet for the Canadians , although they were subjected to periodic harassing fire from the Chinese . D Company received heavy machine @-@ gun fire from Hill 865 to the west , in particular . Regardless , the Chinese made no further attempt to attack , and confined themselves to limited patrolling activities across the front . Later the Patricias , with American tanks in support , cleared the remaining Chinese from the northern slopes of Hill 677 , while several concentrations of Chinese were again broken up by heavy artillery fire and airstrikes . The American battalion on the south @-@ west flank of the Canadians was subsequently relieved by the Middlesex , following which the 5th US Cavalry Regiment launched an assault to recover Hill 504 . The Chinese resisted until 16 : 00 , before the 118th Division suddenly withdrew . American patrols north of the feature met no resistance , while the Americans were also able to patrol east along Route 17 to <unk> without contact . By last light the situation had stabilised on the Kapyong Valley front . Having left their supplies of food and ammunition far behind during the advance two days earlier , the Chinese had been forced to withdraw back up the Kapyong Valley in the late afternoon of 25 April in order to regroup and replenish following the heavy casualties incurred during the fighting . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 With vastly superior numbers the Chinese had attacked on a broad front , and had initially overrun a number of the forward UN positions . Regardless , the 27th Brigade had ultimately prevailed despite being outnumbered by a factor of five to one . Indeed , despite their numerical advantage the Chinese had been badly outgunned and they could not overcome the well @-@ trained and well @-@ armed Australians and Canadians . The battlefield was littered with the corpses of Chinese soldiers , a testament to the discipline and firepower of the defenders . And yet , despite their ultimate defeat the battle once again demonstrated that the Chinese were tough and skillful soldiers capable of inflicting heavy casualties on the Australians and forcing their eventual withdrawal , albeit both intact and orderly . As a result of the fighting Australian losses were 32 killed , 59 wounded and three captured , while Canadian casualties included 10 killed and 23 wounded . American casualties included three men killed , 12 wounded and two tanks destroyed , all from A Company , 72nd Heavy Tank Battalion . The New Zealanders lost two killed and five wounded . In contrast , Chinese losses were far heavier , and may have included 1 @,@ 000 killed and many more wounded . The Canadians were finally relieved on Hill 677 by a battalion of the 5th US Cavalry Regiment on the evening 26 April . 
 2 PPCLI , 3 RAR and A Company , 72nd Heavy Tank Battalion were all subsequently awarded the US Presidential Unit Citation for their actions during the Battle of Kapyong . The New Zealand gunners — without whom the Australians and Canadians may have suffered a similar fate to that of Glosters at the Imjin — were awarded the South Korean Presidential Unit Citation . Although the Canadians and Australians had borne the brunt of the fighting , the Middlesex — despite the imminence of their replacement — had shown no evidence of hesitancy or lack of aggression when recalled into the fighting early in the battle . For their leadership , Ferguson and Stone were both awarded the Distinguished Service Order , while Koch was awarded both the American Distinguished Service Cross and the British Military Cross for the vital part his tanks had played in the fighting . The Royal Australian Regiment , Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry and the Middlesex Regiment were subsequently granted the battle honour " Kapyong " . Today , the battle is regarded one as the most famous actions fought by the Australian and Canadian armies in Korea . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 By 29 April , the First Chinese Spring Offensive was halted by UN forces at a defensive line north of Seoul , known as the " No @-@ Name Line " ; in total a withdrawal of 56 kilometres ( 35 mi ) in the US I and IX Corps sectors , and 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) in the US X Corps and South Korean III Corps sectors . Although the main Chinese blow had fallen on US I Corps , the resistance by British Commonwealth forces in the battles at the Imjin River and at Kapyong had helped to blunt its impetus , with the defence mounted by the 27th Brigade stopping the Chinese from isolating the US I Corps from the US IX Corps , thereby helping to halt the Chinese advance on Seoul and preventing its capture . The Chinese had now nearly exhausted their resources of men and material , and were approaching the limit of their supply lines . Many Chinese soldiers were now tired , hungry and short of equipment and during the fighting at Kapyong they had demonstrated a greater willingness to surrender than in previous encounters , with 3 RAR alone taking 39 prisoners , only eight of them wounded . Contingent on the rapid attainment of its objectives , the attempted Chinese coup de main ultimately failed amid heavy casualties and they had little recourse but to abandon their attacks against the US I and IX Corps . The Chinese had suffered at least 30 @,@ 000 casualties during the period 22 – 29 April . In contrast , US casualties during the same period numbered just 314 killed and 1 @,@ 600 wounded , while Commonwealth , South Korean and other UN contingents brought the total to 547 killed , 2 @,@ 024 wounded and 2 @,@ 170 captured ; the disparity highlighting the devastating effect of enormous UN firepower against massed infantry . Undeterred by these setbacks , the Second Chinese Spring Offensive began on 16 May to the east of Kapyong , only to suffer their worst defeat at the Battle of the Soyang River . 
 27th Brigade was replaced by the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade and Brigadier George Taylor took over command of the new formation on 26 April . With the Chinese offensive losing momentum , the new Commonwealth formation was subsequently pulled back into IX Corps reserve to the southwest of Kapyong , near the junction of the <unk> and <unk> rivers . 3 RAR was transferred to 28th Brigade , while the 1st Battalion , The King 's Own Scottish Borderers and the 1st Battalion , The King 's Shropshire Light Infantry replaced the Argylls and Middlesex regiments . Later , the Patricias were transferred to the newly arrived 25th Canadian Brigade on 27 May . After protracted negotiations between the governments of Australia , Britain , Canada , India , New Zealand and South Africa , agreement had been reached to establish an integrated formation with the aim of increasing the political significance of their contribution , as well as facilitating the solution of the logistic and operational problems faced by the various Commonwealth contingents . The 1st Commonwealth Division was formed on 28 July 1951 , with the division including the 25th Canadian , 28th British Commonwealth and 29th British Infantry Brigades under the command of Major General James Cassels , and was part of US I Corps . For many of the Australians Kapyong was to be their last major battle before completing their period of duty and being replaced , having endured much hard fighting , appalling weather and the chaos and confusion of a campaign that had ranged up and down the length of the Korean Peninsula . Most had served in the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) during the Second World War and this combat experience had proven vital . Regardless , casualties had been heavy , and since the battalion 's arrival from Japan in September 1950 the Australians had lost 87 killed , 291 wounded and five captured . 
 = Final Fantasy VIII = 
 Final Fantasy VIII ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Eito ) is a 1999 role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) . It is the eighth major installment in the Final Fantasy series . The game was the series ' second 3D installment and the first to consistently use realistically proportioned characters , and introduced a new magic system to the Final Fantasy franchise which removed magic point @-@ based spell @-@ casting . Set on an unnamed fantasy world with science fiction elements , the game follows the story of a group of young mercenaries , led by Squall Leonhart , who are part of an organization named SeeD . Initially traveling to different countries to stop the sorceress Edea , their goal changes to stop a sorceress from the future named Ultimecia from compressing time . 
 The development of Final Fantasy VIII began in 1997 , during the English localization process of Final Fantasy VII . It was produced by Shinji Hashimoto , and directed by Yoshinori Kitase . The music was scored by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu , and in a series first a vocal piece was written as the game 's theme , " Eyes on Me " , performed by Faye Wong . The game was positively received by critics , who praised the originality and scope of the game . It was voted the 22nd @-@ best game of all time in 2006 by readers of the Japanese magazine Famitsu . The game was a commercial success ; 13 weeks after its release , Final Fantasy VIII had earned more than US $ 50 million in sales , making it the fastest @-@ selling Final Fantasy title of all time until Final Fantasy XIII , a multi @-@ platform release . The game shipped 8 @.@ 15 million copies worldwide by March 31 , 2003 . Originally for the PlayStation , it was later ported to Windows @-@ based personal computers and became available on PlayStation Network as a PSone Classics title in 2009 . As of December 2013 , it has sold over 8 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous games in the Final Fantasy series , Final Fantasy VIII consists of three main modes of play : the world map , field map , and battle screen . Like previous titles , players navigate a single character across a small scale rendering of the game world between various towns and dungeons , which is rendered in 3D like Final Fantasy VII . Along with getting around traditionally by foot , by Chocobo , and by airship , Final Fantasy VIII also allows players to travel by car , by train , and via a Mobile Garden . Players must make progress in the game 's story to obtain the airship and Mobile Garden , while chocobos can be acquired from special forests on the world map . Cars , which are similar to chocobos in that they can avoid fights , must be rented from cities that offer them and characters must carry reserve fuel with them to prevent them running out , while trains can be only be used by boarding at stations in settlements or on the world map , and paying a fee for the ride . On the field map , players navigate controllable 3D characters around one or more 2D pre @-@ rendered backgrounds , which represent environmental locations such as towns or forests . The battle screen is a 3D model of a location such as a street or room , where turn @-@ based fights between playable characters and CPU @-@ controlled enemies take place when triggered on either the world map or field map . 
 While common features from previous titles remain , such as the menu @-@ driven interfaces , other elements received extensive changes or were removed , with Final Fantasy VIII including brand new features that are exclusive to it . One such new feature is the Junction system , which relinquishes the need for the typical weapon and armor systems used in previous titles in place of a system that allows for extensive optimization of a character 's stats and abilities . Another new feature is the inclusion of a collectible card @-@ based minigame called " Triple Triad " . 
 = = = Junction System & Magic = = = 
 Final Fantasy VIII uses a unique battle system known as the " Junction System " , which acts as a substitute for armour and accessories used in previous titles , allowing a player to enhance the characters ' statistics and determine what Commands a character will use in battles . The system is based upon the game 's version of the classic summon @-@ able monsters of the Final Fantasy series , referred to in @-@ game as " Guardian Forces " ( or " GFs " ) , wherein assigning at least one GF onto a character via " junctioning " allows for enhancements of stats through magic spells , the allocation of different Character / Party abilities , and the ability to use Battle Commands beyond the default of " Attack " ; all GFs can allow a character to use various different Commands , with the most common being " Magic " , " GF " ( to summon the junctioned GF in battle ) , " Item " and " Draw " ( to draw magic spells from a draw point or an enemy ) . While whatever GF ( s ) are junctioned to a character , determines what stats can be enhanced and what commands and abilities can be set , what kind of enhancement is made to each stat available depends on what magic spells are junctioned to it , that the character has acquired . Whereas in previous titles , characters bought or acquired spells on their journeys and used magic points to cast them , characters in Final Fantasy VIII acquire spells by drawing and stocking them from either Draw Points in the game 's environments or from enemies , or refining them from items ; spells drawn from enemies can be cast , rather than stocked . Each character can stock magic into a quantified inventory , but are limited to carrying around 32 distinct spells , and 100 of each spell . 
 <unk> magic to a stat to enhance it , improves a character and makes them more effective in battles ; improving Strength , for example , increases the amount of damage done to an enemy , while improving speed , charges a character 's ATB gauge more quickly . How much of an enhancement is made depends on the spell junctioned to a stat , for example , junctioning Fire to Strength garners a better improvement than Cure . Players can also perform Elemental Junctions , which can enhance a character 's physical attack with an element type while improving their defences to element types , even nullifying or absorbing elemental damage , as well as performing Status Junctions , which can allow a character to inflict a status ailment on enemies or defend against such ailments being inflicted on them . Such junctions rely on a % value , to determine how effective it is ; players can only junction one elemental and status ailment spell to attack , but up to four for defence . Players can either manually assign spells , or have them automatically assigned depending on the type of allocation - Attack will ensure a character makes strong physical attacks , Magic will ensure they inflict stronger magical damage , and Defence ensures they boost the Hit Points more . 
 = = = Guardian Forces = = = 
 The most common use of summoned creatures was always to summon one to perform a single devastating attack during battle and / or action , so expanding their use by providing them additional roles in Final Fantasy VIII was a significant departure for the Final Fantasy series . In the game , a GF serves as not only a powerful ally for the character / party in battles , but also as a potent support asset in and out of battles ; in addition to their role in the Junction System , GFs can also earn EXP to increase their levels to improve them when summoned in battles , and can acquire AP to help them learn additional abilities to those they know ; by default , a GF acquired either from the field or drawn from certain fights , will usually already have a number of abilities learned and be set at a level close to the active party 's average level . Abilities that a GF can use to further assist the player during the game , are divided into five categories - Junction Abilities , Commands Abilities , Character / Party Abilities , GF Abilities & Menu Abilities . Learning new Junctions provides more stats that can be enhanced by magic spells , learning new Commands provide additional battle commands for a character to use , while learning Character / Party abilities provide additional abilities for use during battles and the game 's environments . Learning GF abilities provide enhancements to their HP and to their attack power if they do damaging attacks . Learning Menu abilities provides the means for players to refine items and card into new items or magic spells , along with other useful benefits . A GF can learn a new ability by acquiring AP from battles , though the amount needed varies depending on the ability itself , or can be taught one through an item acquired by players during the game , even if they cannot learn it themselves with AP . All GFs have a limit on the amount of abilities they can learn - upon reaching this limit , they cannot learn a new one without forgetting one they currently know . 
 GFs work differently to summon @-@ able monsters when used in battles ; not only must a character have a GF junctioned to them to use it , but they must also have the " GF " command assigned as well in order to summon them . In battle , when a GF is summoned by a character , the character 's name , HP , and ATB gauge is replaced by the GF 's name , HP and Summon Gauge , until it is summoned and performs its attack / action . Until the Summon Gauge is emptied completely , the GF takes the place of the character and receives any damage directed to them ; if the GF loses all their HP before the gauge is empty , it is KO 'ed and cannot be summoned until revived . 
 = = = Weapons & Limit breaks = = = 
 Whereas players had to often buy new weapons to replace existing ones for better damage and other improvements in previous titles , each major character in Final Fantasy VIII carries a unique weapon which cannot be replaced , but can be upgraded to a stronger version , affecting its appearance , power , and the % value of landing a hit . In order to upgrade a weapon , players must visit a " Junk Shop " ( the game 's equivalent of the traditional weapon shop ) in any of the world 's towns and cities , and not only pay a small fee , but also provide the necessary materials for it which are detailed within a series of in @-@ game weapon magazines . These materials are acquired from either enemies in battle or refining items . 
 In addition to a unique weapon , each character also has a unique special attack , or " Limit Break " , which operate in a similar manner to the Desperation Attacks of Final Fantasy VI . Unlike in Final Fantasy VII , where a character had to receive sufficient damage to trigger a limit , Limit Breaks are triggered when a character 's health is low or the character is under the influence of the spell Aura , can be prevented from triggering if the player is under certain status afflictions , and is merely an option besides attack when available . For one character , Rinoa , most of her Limit Breaks activate randomly under certain conditions and are not triggered by low health or Aura . 
 Final Fantasy VIII is the first game in the series to introduce interactive elements to complement some characters Limit Break animations . These interactive elements range from selecting a target and making simple button presses , to well @-@ timed button inputs or performing button combos , with successful application resulting in more damage being done . For other characters , even temporary additions , their Limit Breaks either require simple activation or making choice of what to use . For the main characters , their Limit Breaks are influenced or improved in certain ways - Squall learns a new finishing move by upgrading his weapon ; Quistis learns new abilities by using certain items acquired ; Irvine needs ammo to use his , but can use different types ; Zell and Rinoa learn new moves from certain in @-@ game magazines , though the latter must have her dog learn it while being part of the active party . 
 = = = Experience Points System & Level @-@ Scaling = = = 
 Final Fantasy VIII uses a levelling @-@ up system quite that is quite different from the traditional one used in previous games in the series . While the system has similarities to those in previous games , in which characters are awarded EXP after battling and defeating enemies , who are predominantly encountered randomly , and which contribute to the continued strengthening and level @-@ gaining of the characters , the system used in the games has major differences . Whereas gaining new levels required ever @-@ increasing amounts of EXP to achieve ( e.g. , getting to level 2 might require 200 experience points , level 3 might require 400 , etc . ) , in Final Fantasy VIII a level is earned after accumulating 1000 EXP , while improvements to stats through level @-@ gain is minimal at best , emphasizing the need to rely on the game 's Junction System instead for better stats . The amount of EXP earned in a battle is the same for each character , except the one who inflicts the final blow that wins it ; that character receives a small bonus to the EXP that they earned . Furthermore , Bosses do not give any EXP , but do give significant amounts of AP . 
 Just as the characters level up and become stronger , so too do the enemies around the game world . Most enemies are scaled up in level to the average level of the active party , making them tougher in battles , which is in direct contrast to previous titles in the Final Fantasy series , in fact most RPGs , where enemies from previously visited locations in the game are often weak and easily defeated . However , some enemies do not receive level @-@ scaling , and as such remain at static levels ; some can be at weaker levels , others at higher , stronger levels . Enemies at higher levels become capable of inflicting and withstanding significantly more damage , may have additional special attacks , and will often carry either additional or new levels of magic spells on them . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Most of Final Fantasy VIII is set on an unnamed fantasy world with one moon . The game primarily consists of modern elements , but does contain some futuristic elements . The planet contains five major landmasses , with Esthar , the largest , covering most of the eastern portion of the map . Galbadia , the second @-@ largest continent , lies to the west , and contains many of the game 's locations . The northernmost landmass is Trabia , an Arctic region . Positioned roughly in the middle of the world map lies Balamb , the smallest continent , the island on which the game begins . The remaining landmass is small and mostly desolate , riddled with rough , rocky terrain caused by the impact of a " Lunar Cry " , an event where monsters from the moon fall to the planet . The southernmost landmass includes an archipelago of broken sections of land that have drifted apart . Islands and marine structures flesh out the rest of the game world , and a handful of off @-@ world locations round out the game 's playable areas . 
 The six primary protagonists of Final Fantasy VIII are : Squall Leonhart , a loner who keeps his focus on his duty to avoid vulnerability ; Rinoa Heartilly , an outspoken and passionate young woman who follows her heart in all situations ; Quistis Trepe , an instructor with a serious , patient attitude ; Zell Dincht , a martial artist with a passion for hot dogs ; Selphie Tilmitt , a cheerful girl who loves trains and pilots the airship Ragnarok ; and Irvine Kinneas , a marksman and consummate ladies ' man . Temporarily playable characters include Laguna Loire , Kiros Seagill , and Ward Zabac , who appear in " flashback " sequences , and antagonists Seifer Almasy and Edea Kramer . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 When the game begins , Squall and Seifer duel in a training session outside the Balamb Garden military academy , scarring each other in the process . Meanwhile , Galbadia invades the Dollet Dukedom , forcing Dollet to hire assistance from the Balamb Garden branch of " SeeD " , Garden 's elite mercenary force . SeeD uses the mission as a final exam for its cadets ; with the help of his instructor , Quistis , Squall passes the mission 's prerequisite and is grouped with Seifer and Zell . Seifer disobeys orders and abandons his team , forcing Selphie to accompany Squall and Zell for the duration of the mission . After the mission , SeeD halts the Galbadian advance ; Squall , Zell , and Selphie graduate to SeeD status , while Seifer is disciplined for his disobedience . During the graduation party , Squall meets Rinoa , whose personality is apparently the opposite of his . When assigned with Zell and Selphie to help Rinoa 's resistance faction in Galbadian @-@ occupied Timber , Squall learns that a sorceress named Edea is behind Galbadia 's recent hostilities . Under orders from Balamb and Galbadia Gardens , Squall and his comrades — joined by Rinoa , Quistis , and Irvine — attempt to assassinate Edea . However , the sorceress thwarts the attempt , stabbing Squall in the shoulder with an ice shard , and the party is detained . During the attempt , Squall 's party also learns that Seifer has left Garden to become Edea 's second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 After the team escapes along with a conscious Squall , Edea launches a missile attack on Trabia Garden . Fearing that Balamb Garden is the next target of Edea 's plan , the team splits into two units . Squall 's group returns to Balamb to warn of the attack , but must first stop an internal Garden conflict incited by NORG , SeeD 's financier . Selphie 's team travels to the Missile Base to stop the launch , but fails . Squall inadvertently activates Balamb Garden 's " mobile fortress " form , allowing the facility to evade the missiles ; however , unable to control the Garden , it collides with the docks at Fishermans ' Horizon . While local technicians repair the Garden , the Galbadian Army invade in search of a girl named Ellone , who had been staying at Balamb Garden until recently . Ellone eventually escapes to Esthar , the world 's technological superpower . During Squall 's meeting with Ellone , he learns that she had been " sending " him and his allies into flashbacks set 17 years in the past in a vain effort to alter the present . The scenes center on Laguna and his two friends , Kiros and Ward . During the flashbacks , Laguna changes from a Galbadian soldier to the defender of a country village , then moves from being the leader of a resistance movement against Sorceress Adel to the President of Esthar . 
 Meanwhile , Squall confronts his personal anxieties fueled by ongoing developments , such as Headmaster Cid appointing him as SeeD 's new leader , and his increasing attraction to Rinoa . While investigating Trabia Garden 's wreckage , Squall and his comrades learn that they , along with Seifer and Ellone , were all raised ( except for Rinoa ) in an orphanage run by Edea ; after eventual separation , they later developed amnesia due to their use of Guardian Forces . It is also revealed that Cid and Edea had established Garden and SeeD primarily to defeat corrupt sorceresses . After these revelations , the forces of Balamb Garden and the Galbadian Army , led by Squall and Seifer respectively , engage in battle above the orphanage . After Balamb defeats Galbadia , the player learns that Edea is merely an unwilling tool for " Ultimecia " , a powerful sorceress from the future who wishes to compress time into a single moment ; it is for this reason she has sought Ellone . Edea loses a decisive battle against the SeeD , forcing Ultimecia to transfer her powers to Rinoa ; Edea survives , but Rinoa enters a coma . Squall becomes obsessed with waking her and goes to Esthar to find Ellone , as he believes that she can help save Rinoa . 
 While Rinoa is being treated on Esthar 's space station , Ultimecia uses her to free Sorceress Adel from her orbital prison . Ultimecia then orders Seifer to activate the Lunatic Pandora facility , inciting a rain of creatures from the moon that sends Adel 's containment device to the planet . Having selected Adel as her next host , Ultimecia abandons Rinoa in outer space . Squall rescues her , and they return to the planet on a derelict starship . Upon their landing , delegates from Esthar isolate Rinoa for fear of her sorceress abilities , forcing Squall to rescue her . They are met by the President of Esthar who reveals himself to be Laguna and apologizes for the incident and announces Dr. Odine 's plan to let Ultimecia possess Rinoa , have Ellone send Rinoa ( and thus Ultimecia as well ) to the past and then retrieve only Rinoa back to the present , enabling Ultimecia to achieve Time Compression , as it would allow Squall 's group to confront Ultimecia in her time . To do this , Squall 's team infiltrates Lunatic Pandora , defeats Seifer and Adel , and has Rinoa inherit Adel 's sorceress powers . Time Compression is thus initiated ; Squall and his allies travel to Ultimecia 's era and defeat her . 
 With Ultimecia defeated , the universe begins returning to normal ; however , Squall is nearly lost in the flow of time as he witnesses the origins of the game 's story , ghostly , sporadic apparitions of Rinoa , and a faceless portrait of himself . When a dying Ultimecia travels back in time to pass her powers to Edea , Squall informs Edea of the concepts of Garden and SeeD that she will create . Afterward , he is able to properly recollect his memories and thus return to the present with Rinoa 's help . The end cinematic depicts the events after Squall 's return to the present . Seifer , no longer a Garden member , is once again reunited with Raijin and Fujin ; Laguna visits Raine 's grave ( and remembers his proposal to her ) along with Ellone , Ward , and Kiros ; and a celebration takes place in the Garden , with Squall and Rinoa sharing a kiss under the moonlight . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Final Fantasy VIII began in 1997 , during the English @-@ language translation of Final Fantasy VII . As with much of the production of Final Fantasy VII , series creator and veteran Hironobu Sakaguchi served as the executive producer , working primarily on the development of Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within and leaving direction of Final Fantasy VIII to Yoshinori Kitase . Shinji Hashimoto was assigned to be the producer in Sakaguchi 's place , while the game and battle system were designed by Kitase and Hiroyuki Ito , respectively . The card game Triple Triad was conceived and implemented by programmer <unk> Yasui . The concept was derived from trading cards which is a popular hobby in some parts of Japan . Triple Triad was meant to keep the player 's interest during long stretches without cutscenes . Originally , it was simply about collecting cards but Yasui considered this too disconnected from the main game and " begged " for the inclusion of an ability to transform cards into items . The game 's total development costs approximately ¥ 3 billion , with a crew of about 180 people , many of whom had previously worked on VII . 
 = = = Visual design = = = 
 From the beginning , Kitase knew he wanted a thematic combination of fantasy and realism . To this end , he aimed to include a cast of characters who appeared to be ordinary people . Character designer and battle visual director Tetsuya Nomura and art director Yusuke Naora strove to achieve this impression through the inclusion of realistically proportioned characters — a departure from the super deformed designs used in the previous title . Additionally , Naora attempted to enhance the realism of the world through predominantly bright lighting effects with shadows distributed as appropriate . Other measures taken included implementing rental cars for travel in @-@ game , and the use of motion capture technology to give the game 's characters lifelike movements in the game 's full motion video sequences . The FMV sequences were created by a team of roughly 35 people , with the total cinematic run @-@ time being estimated at over an hour , approximately 20 minutes longer than the FMV sequences in VII . 
 In an interview with Famitsu , Naora described that the game was generally designed to be a " bright , fresh Final Fantasy . " The designers felt a need to invert the atmosphere of previous games in the series , which had feelings of " light emerging from darkness " . This decision was easy for the developers to make , because most of them had worked on Final Fantasy VII and felt that a new direction was acceptable . The world designs were also developed with the knowledge that most of the staff were now used to computer graphics , which was not the case with Final Fantasy VII . The developers also noted that with Final Fantasy VIII , they attempted to " mix future , real life and fantasy . " As part of a theme desired by Kitase to give the game a foreign atmosphere , various designs were given to its locations using the style of internationally familiar places , while also maintaining a fantasy atmosphere . Inspiration ranged from ancient Egyptian and Greek architecture , to the city of Paris , France , to an idealized futuristic European society . Flags were also given to some factions , their designs based on the group 's history and culture . 
 To maintain a foreign atmosphere , the characters of the game were designed to have predominantly European appearances . The first Final Fantasy VIII character created was Squall . Desiring to add a unique angle to Squall 's appearance and emphasize his role as the central character , Nomura gave him a scar across his brow and the bridge of his nose . As there was not yet a detailed history conceived for the character , Nomura left the explanation for Squall 's scar to scenario writer Kazushige Nojima . Squall was given a gunblade , a fictional revolver – sword hybrid that functions primarily as a sword , with an added damaging vibration feature activated by use of its gun mechanism , similar to a <unk> . His character design was complemented by a fur lining along the collar of his jacket , incorporated by Nomura as a challenge for the game 's full motion video designers . Additionally , some designs Nomura had previously drawn , but had not yet used in a Final Fantasy game , were incorporated into Final Fantasy VIII . These were the designs of Edea , Fujin and Raijin . The latter two had originally been designed for use in Final Fantasy VII , but with the inclusion of the Turks characters in that game , it was felt that Fujin and Raijin were unnecessary . Nomura had designed Edea before the development of Final Fantasy VII , based on the style of Yoshitaka Amano . For the Guardian Forces , Nomura felt they should be unique beings , without clothes or other human @-@ like concepts . This was problematic , as he did not want them to " become the actual monsters " , so he took great care in their design . Leviathan was the first GF , created as a test and included in a game demo . After it received a positive reaction from players , Nomura decided to create the remaining sequences in a similar fashion . 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 The plot of Final Fantasy VIII was conceived by Kitase , with the stories for the characters provided by Nomura and the actual scenario written by Nojima . During the game 's pre @-@ production , Nomura suggested the game be given a " school days " feel . Nojima already had a story in mind in which the main characters were the same age ; their ideas meshed , taking form as the " Garden " military academies . Nojima planned that the two playable parties featured in the game ( Squall 's present day group and Laguna 's group from the past ) would be highly contrasted with one another . This idea was conveyed through the age and experience of Laguna 's group , versus the youth and naïveté of Squall 's group . Nojima has expressed that the dynamic of players ' relationships with the protagonist is important to him . Both Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy VIII feature reserved , quiet protagonists in the form of Cloud Strife and Squall . With Final Fantasy VIII , however , Nojima worked to give players actual insight into what the character was thinking ; a direct contrast with his handling of Final Fantasy VII , which encouraged the player to speculate . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 In March 1999 , one month after the game 's release , Final Fantasy VIII Ultimania was published , a book that features an in @-@ depth guide to Final Fantasy VIII and interviews with the developers . An origami book was released in November 1999 . On September 22 , 1999 , a CD @-@ ROM titled Final Fantasy VIII Desktop Accessories was released . It contains desktop icons , computer wallpapers , screensavers , and an e @-@ mail application . It additionally features a stand @-@ alone edition of the Triple Triad minigame , which allowed players to compete against one another via a local area network . 
 Also in 1999 , the ballroom dance scene of Final Fantasy VIII was featured as a technical demo for the PlayStation 2 . In 2000 , a PC version was released for Windows . This port featured smoother graphics , enhanced audio , and the inclusion of Chocobo World , a minigame starring Boko , a Chocobo featured in one of the side @-@ quests in Final Fantasy VIII . For most North American and European players , the PC version of the game was the only means of playing Chocobo World , as the game was originally designed to be played via the PocketStation , a handheld console never released outside Japan . In 2009 , Final Fantasy VIII was added to the PlayStation Store on the PlayStation Network . 
 On December 18 , 2012 , the game was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package . A remastered PC version was announced May 17 , 2013 , and was released on Steam December 5 , 2013 . 
