 = = = Music = = = 
 Regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu wrote the soundtrack for Final Fantasy VIII . He tried to base the songs off of the emotional content of when they would be played , asserting that expressing the emotions he desires is more important than improving skills : " I think it will be a shame if we won 't be able to cry as we play our own game " . He could not determine a character 's emotions solely based on the plot , instead using images of appearance and attire — " It 's important to know when their emotions are at their height , but it usually takes until a month before release for them to finish the ending dialog ... ! " In response to a question by IGN music stating that the music of Final Fantasy VIII was very dark and perhaps influenced by the plot of the game , Uematsu stated " the atmosphere of music varies depending on story line , of course , but it 's also my intention to put various types of music into one game " . The absence of character themes found in the previous two games was due to Uematsu finding those of Final Fantasy VI and Final Fantasy VII ineffective . Uematsu considers it reasonable to have character themes if each character has a " highlight " in the game , but he found Final Fantasy VIII only focused on Squall Leonhart and Rinoa Heartilly as a couple , resulting in the " Eyes on Me " theme . 
 The original soundtrack was released on four compact discs by DigiCube in Japan on March 10 , 1999 , and by Square EA in North America as Final Fantasy VIII Music Collection in January 2000 . It was republished worldwide by Square Enix on May 10 , 2004 . An album of orchestral arrangements of selected tracks from the game was released under the title Fithos Lusec Wecos Vinosec Final Fantasy VIII on November 19 , 1999 , by DigiCube , and subsequently published on July 22 , 2004 , by Square Enix . The pieces were arranged and conducted by Shirō Hamaguchi for a live orchestra . A collection of piano arrangements performed by Shinko Ogata was released under the title Piano Collections : Final Fantasy VIII by DigiCube on January 21 , 2000 , and subsequently re @-@ published by Square Enix on July 22 , 2004 . 
 The score is best known for two songs : " Liberi Fatali " , a Latin choral piece that is played during the introduction to the game , and " Eyes On Me " , a pop song serving as the game 's theme , performed by Chinese singer Faye Wong . Near the end of the production of Final Fantasy VII , the developers suggested to use a singer , but abandoned the idea due to a lack of reasoning based on the game 's theme and storyline . However , Nobuo Uematsu thought a ballad would closely relate to the theme and characters of Final Fantasy VIII . This resulted in the game 's developers sharing " countless " artists , eventually deciding on Wong . Uematsu claims " her voice and mood seem to match my image of the song exactly " , and that her ethnicity " fits the international image of Final Fantasy " . After negotiations were made , " Eyes on Me " was recorded in Hong Kong with an orchestra . The song was released as a CD single in Japan and sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies , setting the record for highest @-@ selling video game music disc ever released in that country at the time . " Liberi Fatali " was played during the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens during the women 's synchronized swimming event . 
 The music of Final Fantasy VIII has appeared in various official Final Fantasy concerts . These include 2002 's 20020220 Music from FINAL FANTASY , in which the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra played " Liberi Fatali " , " Don 't Be Afraid " , " Love Grows " , and " The Man with the Machine Gun " , the 2004 Tour de Japon series , which featured " The Oath " , the Dear Friends series that began that same year and included " Liberi Fatali " and " Love Grows " , and the 2005 More Friends concert , which included " Maybe I 'm a Lion " . More recent concerts include the Voices – Music from Final Fantasy 2006 concert showcasing " Liberi Fatali " , " Fisherman 's Horizon " , and " Eyes on Me " and the international Distant Worlds concert tour that continues to date , which includes " Liberi Fatali " , " Fisherman 's Horizon " , " Man with the Machine Gun " , and " Love Grows " . Several of these concerts have produced live albums as well . Music from the game has also been played in non Final Fantasy @-@ specific concerts such as the Play ! A Video Game Symphony world tour from 2006 onwards , for which Nobuo Uematsu composed the opening fanfare that accompanies each performance . 
 = = Other appearances and cameos = = 
 Final Fantasy VIII has made a cameo appearance in real @-@ life media . In the 2000 film version of Charlie 's Angels , two young boys are seen playing the game at night , with Squall and Quistis fighting a battle in Balamb Garden 's Training Center , and one of them about to summon the Guardian Force <unk> . At this time , the character Dylan ( played by Drew Barrymore ) appears at the patio door to ask for help and clothing after having just escaped an attempt on her life . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Fantasy VIII received critical acclaim . Within two days of its North American release on September 9 , 1999 , Final Fantasy VIII became the top @-@ selling video game in the United States , a position it held for more than three weeks . It was also a bestseller in Japan and the UK . It grossed a total of more than $ 50 million in the 13 weeks to follow , making it the fastest @-@ selling Final Fantasy title . In Japan , it sold roughly 2 @.@ 5 million units within the first four days of release . More than 6 million units were sold in total by the end of 1999 . As of March 31 , 2003 , the game had shipped 8 @.@ 15 million copies worldwide : 3 @.@ 7 million in Japan and 4 @.@ 45 million abroad . The opening cut scene in Final Fantasy VIII was ranked second on Game Informer 's list of " Top 10 Video Game Openings " , and first by IGN . GameSpy listed it as the 15th best cinematic moment in video games . IGN additionally named the game 's ending the third best of any game for the PlayStation , while UGO.com named it one of the series ' best and most memorable moments . Final Fantasy VIII was voted by readers of Japanese magazine Famitsu as the 22nd best game of all time in 2006 , and named one of the 20 essential Japanese role @-@ playing games by Gamasutra , stating " [ t ] here 's a lot that Final Fantasy VIII does wrong , but there 's even more that it does right " . 
 Reviews of the gameplay have been mixed . IGN felt that it was the weakest aspect of the game , citing its Guardian Force attack sequences as " incredibly cinematic " but tedious , sentiments echoed by Electronic Gaming Monthly . They also regarded the battle system as intensely complicated , yet refreshingly innovative and something that " RPG fanatics love to obsess over " . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine claims that the game 's Junction system is a major flaw due to repetitive stocking of spells , while the video game magazine Edge commented that the battle system consists of a " bewildering " number of intricate options and techniques that " most gamers will [ ... ] relish " . GameSpot praised the game 's battle system , commenting that the " possibilities for customization [ with the Junction system ] are immense " . 
 In general , Final Fantasy VIII has been compared favorably to its predecessors . Though questioning the game 's lack of voice overs for its characters , Game Revolution praised its storyline and ending . For their part , Edge labeled Final Fantasy VIII " a far more accomplished game than FFVII " . On the other hand , the magazine also felt that the game 's length left its story unable to " offer consistently strong dialogue and sub @-@ plots " . Additionally , it found some of the story 's plot twists " not ... suitably manipulated and prepared " , leaving it " hard not to greet such ... moments with anything but indifference " . Overall , Edge considered Final Fantasy VIII to be " yet another outstanding edition of <unk> 's far @-@ from @-@ final fantasies " , summarizing it as " aesthetically astonishing , rarely less than compelling , and near peerless in scope and execution " . Electronic Gaming Monthly offered similar comments , stating that the game 's character development " is the best of any RPG 's " and that " Final Fantasy VIII is the pinnacle of its genre . " UGO.com stated that while no other game in the series had stirred the controversy that Final Fantasy VIII had and that it was flawed , Final Fantasy VIII was a " daring , groundbreaking game [ ... ] decidedly the most original console @-@ style RPG ever created " . In 2002 , IGN named the game the seventh best title for the PlayStation of all time , placing higher on the list than Final Fantasy VII and described as " [ taking ] all of its strong points , and [ making ] them better " . 
 The PC port received mixed reception . Maximum PC praised the full motion video sequences as " phenomenal " , adding that while the gameplay took getting used to , they enjoyed the teamwork emphasized by it , and that the game 's visual presentation added to its appeal . GameSpy stated that while the game was not a " huge leap forward " from the previous title , its gameplay and visual appeal worked for its benefit , though that on a computer the pre @-@ rendered backgrounds appeared blurry and the controls at time difficult with a keyboard . GameSpot criticized the game for not taking advantage of the capabilities afforded to computers at the time , describing the PlayStation version as both looking and sounding superior , and recommending that the title was " not worth buying period " for the PC . UGO.com also described the port as inferior to its original counterpart , adding that its presentation was in turn detrimental to the reception the game received as a whole . Computer Gaming World praised some of the changes made to the game in light of previous titles and the inclusion of the Triple Triad sub @-@ game , though heavily criticized the port as " lazy " and " disappointing " , stating that it only served to emphasize the original game 's flaws . Despite their complaints however , they named it the twentieth best game of 2000 . 
 = Secrets and Lies ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Secrets and Lies " is the eighth episode of the second season of 30 Rock , and the twenty @-@ ninth overall . It was written by Ron Weiner and directed by Michael Engler . The episode first aired on December 6 , 2007 on the NBC network in the United States . Guest stars in this episode include <unk> Bean , James Carville , Paul Eichel , Edie Falco , Melissa Gallagher , Jabari Gray , Blaine Horton , John Lutz , Erich McCall , Andrew Polk , Reshma Shetty , Tom Treadwell and Darlene Violette . 
 In this episode , Celeste " C.C. " Cunningham ( played by Edie Falco ) wishes to go public with her relationship with Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) . Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) gets angry when she thinks Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) lets Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) do anything he likes . Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) and James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) feud over Toofer 's status as a Harvard University alumnus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack is worried when his girlfriend C.C. , the Democratic congresswoman for the state of Vermont , tells him that she wants to go public with their relationship . The pair had been avoiding this because C.C. is suing the Sheinhardt Wig Company , the fictional parent company of NBC . During their secret relationship , Jack and C.C. had been sneaking to each other 's house in disguises , including C.C. as a plumber named Mr. <unk> . C.C. confides in Liz ( after she finds out about their relationship ) , and Jack confides in political consultant James Carville , who gives Jack advice on how two important people from opposite political positions can make their relationship work " Cajun style , " without regard for how others perceive them . Eventually , Jack takes C.C. to dinner in the GE executive dining room where he reveals his relationship to the other executives , leading to the other executives making some bizarre revelations of their own . 
 When Jenna wins an award for her work on Mystic Pizza : The Musical : The Movie , in the category of " Best Actress in a Movie Based on a Musical Based on a Movie " , Tracy is annoyed that he never wins any awards of his own and storms off the set . To get him back to work , Liz tells him that he has won a Pacific Rim Emmy Award for his work on TGS . Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) helps Liz stage a fake acceptance speech for Tracy , which is also attended by Tracy 's co @-@ stars , Jenna and Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) , despite it taking place in the middle of the night . During his acceptance speech Tracy thanks everybody who works on the show , except for Jenna , and then pulls Jenna 's dress down in a Japanese practice he claims is called " <unk> . " An enraged Jenna claims Liz is willing to jump through hoops for Tracy , but not her . As a result , she becomes disobedient and uncooperative and starts her own entourage , much like Tracy . Liz becomes fed @-@ up with Jenna 's new behavior , reveals to her that she in fact " coddle [ s ] the crap " out of her as well as Tracy . Liz then reveals that Jenna did not win an award for Mystic Pizza : The Musical : The Movie and that the " award " statue was actually a cookie . This is enough for Jenna to happily return to work . 
 After a night of performing stand up at Harvard University , Frank comes into work wearing a Harvard sweatshirt , even though he did not attend the university . Outraged by this , Harvard alumnus Toofer tells him to take it off . When Frank refuses , and then comes into work the next day in full Harvard regalia , Toofer retaliates by dressing up as Frank . Unable to back down for fear of their coworkers mocking them , their argument is eventually mediated " Cajun style " by James Carville , who then proceeds to also demonstrate how to steal candy from a vending machine ... " Cajun style . " 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was performed live on stage at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre . The performance , which was titled 30 Rock — On Strike ! , was to display support for the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , which began on November 5 , 2007 . The performance took place on November 19 , 2007 . All the main cast members of the series were in attendance , although due to other commitments , guest star Edie Falco was unable to appear in her role as Celeste " C.C. " Cunningham . In her place was the Saturday Night Live head writer , Paula Pell . As guest star James Carville was also unable to attend , an unnamed 30 Rock writer filled in for him . Other 30 Rock writers , including Donald Glover , also played the smaller , " bit " parts . During the " commercial breaks " , cast member Jack McBrayer and recurring cast member John Lutz improvised fake comedic advertisements for various products . Sheinhardt Wig Company t @-@ shirts , which were signed by the cast of 30 Rock , were also raffled off during the performance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Secrets and Lies " brought in an average of 5 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode also achieved a 2 @.@ 7 / 7 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The 2 @.@ 7 refers to 2 @.@ 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. , and the 7 refers to 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast in the U.S .. This episode ranked first in the male 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , growing 4 % from its lead @-@ in of the My Name Is Earl episode " Early Release . " 
 Robert Canning of IGN wrote that the episode " came close to fulfilling [ its ] potential , but was unable to keep the rapid @-@ fire comedic pace going for the entire episode . " He added that the second half of the show was not " a complete loss , but , man , that first act just steamrolled viewers with hilarious bit after hilarious bit . " Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide thought that the " unexpected treat this week was guest star James Carville , who 's [ sic ] presence as confidant to Jack not only made sense , but Carville also had a lot of fun lampooning himself ' Cajun style ' and all . And look at how well his advice for Frank and <unk> [ sic ] worked ! " 
 = Cigarette Smoking Man = 
 Cigarette Smoking Man ( abbreviated CSM or C @-@ Man ; sometimes referred to as Cancer Man or the Smoking Man ) is a fictional character and the primary antagonist of the Fox science fiction @-@ supernatural television series The X @-@ Files , at least from the second to seventh series , and again in the tenth . He serves as the arch @-@ nemesis of FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder . In the show 's sixth season , his name is said to be C.G.B. Spender , but Dana Scully suggests this is one of " hundreds of aliases " ; the show 's characters and fans continue to refer to him by variations of " the Smoking Man " because he is almost always seen chain @-@ smoking Morley cigarettes . 
 Although he utters only four audible words in the entire first season of the show , the Smoking Man eventually develops into the series ' primary antagonist . In his early appearances , he is seen in the offices of Section Chief Scott Blevins and Assistant Director Walter Skinner , Mulder and his partner Dana Scully 's supervisors . An influential man working for the powers that be , he is a key member in a government conspiracy known only as the Syndicate , who are hiding the truth of alien existence and their plan to colonize Earth . His power and influence remained strong , even after most of the Syndicate was destroyed . 
 The Smoking Man is portrayed by Canadian actor William B. Davis . When Davis first received the role , the character was written as an extra for the pilot episode . He returned for small cameo appearances during the first season , making increasingly more appearances in the seasons that followed . Davis never received an award for his portrayal alone , but he was nominated for ensemble awards . 
 TV Guide included him in their 2013 list of The 60 <unk> Villains of All Time . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 The birth date , birthplace , and most of the history of the Smoking Man is never categorically confirmed . One possible version of his past is provided during the fourth season episode " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , where the conspiracy theorists known as The Lone Gunmen claim Smoking Man was born in Baton Rouge , Louisiana , on August 20 , 1940 . In the same episode , he is claimed to have a long history in black ops and American intelligence , was involved in the training of Cuban rebels in the Bay of Pigs , and was the assassin of both John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King , Jr . However , X @-@ Files writer , Frank Spotnitz , has stated that this version of events is only one possibility and is not accepted canon . 
 In his first appearance in the series , he oversees FBI agent Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) briefing and debriefing , and later disposes of evidence Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Scully had brought back from their investigation of an alien abduction . With the Smoking Man hiding truth from the public , Mulder seeks to reveal it to the public and the truth about the disappearance of his sister , Samantha . This leads to a rivalry that lasts until the end of the series . 
 In later seasons , it is revealed that he is a member of a group known as the Syndicate , a shadowy organization within the United States government . The episode " Two Fathers " reveals his birthname or alias as C.G.B. Spender , and that he was formerly married to Cassandra Spender , with whom he had a son , Jeffrey Spender . He recruits FBI Special Agent Diana Fowley to be a subordinate of his because she has a close relationship with Mulder . In " One Son " , Jeffrey finds out that his father , the Smoking Man , forced his mother Cassandra to undergo medical treatments that led to several nervous breakdowns during his childhood years . When the Smoking Man finds out , he seemingly kills Jeffrey . Knowing of the colonization plan , the Alien rebels return to Earth to try to persuade the Syndicate to join their side against their war with the Colonists . Not believing in the strength of the Alien rebels , the Syndicate members meet at El Rico Air Base to be transported to a spaceship to survive the colonization . However , the rebels appear instead of the Colonists and kill all remaining chief members of the Syndicate . Together with Fowley , the Smoking Man escapes the destruction of the Syndicate . Later in the sixth season , there is more evidence that suggested that the Smoking Man is Mulder 's biological father . Eventually in " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " , Fowley comes in disagreement with him . Because of his plans to kill Mulder , Fowley helps Scully in her investigation to locate Mulder , which leads to her death . After the destruction of the Syndicate , the Smoking Man starts to operate as he wishes . However , his cancer resurfaces , and he begins using a wheelchair . In the end , Alex Krycek and Marita Covarrubias betray him in the episode " Requiem " , throwing him down a flight of stairs , where they presume him to be dead . 
 Until the ninth season episode " William " , the Smoking Man is presumed dead . It is learned that his attempted murder of his son failed , which led him to subject his son to terrible experiments . In the series finale , " The Truth " , Mulder and Scully travel through remote New Mexico and reach a pueblo where a " wise man " reputedly lives : he is , in fact , the Smoking Man . His condition has worsened since his disappearance , and he lives a primitive life in hiding from the " New " Syndicate . After taunting Mulder and Scully , he reveals to Scully what Mulder already knew , that the alien re @-@ colonization of Earth is set for December 22 , 2012 . Shortly after , Smoking Man is again apparently killed by a rocket shot from a helicopter ordered by Knowle Rohrer . 
 For the next 14 years , he is presumed dead . However , he appears again at the end of " My Struggle " ( 2016 ) , the first episode of The X @-@ Files miniseries , stating that the X @-@ Files have been reopened . He is still smoking , even though he has had a tracheotomy . In the season finale , " My Struggle II " , the Smoking Man puts into motion the conspiracy he had been working on all these years , releasing chemtrails into the atmosphere which trigger immune system breakdowns throughout the American population , which had been infected by the Spartan virus through mandatory flu vaccinations . Out of fondness for Mulder , he offers him the cure to the disease , but is rebuffed . The United States is thrown into chaos as the Syndicate plan for depopulation gets underway . The series ends on a cliffhanger . 
 = = Spin @-@ off media = = 
 Prior to the tenth televised series of The X @-@ Files in 2016 , Chris Carter worked with IDW Publishing in 2013 to produce a comic book continuation of the show . It hints that The Smoking Man is alive and indirectly feeding information to both Mulder and The Lone Gunmen . Carter later said that the story from these comics would be disregarded in future television productions . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Kim Manners , a director of several X @-@ Files episodes , said that the Smoking Man was the show 's version of Darth Vader . Some X @-@ Files fans have categorized the Smoking Man as evil , making him out to be the villain . Series creator Chris Carter , on the other hand , once called him " the devil " , producing a mixed reaction among fans . Some fans , along with the portraying actor , see him as a hero , as he is forced to make choices others are not . 
 On the surface , it may seem that the Smoking Man merely tries to hide information from Mulder and Scully , but there is much more to him . He is involved in the Syndicate , a shadow organization which includes members of the United States government that exists to hide from the public the fact that aliens are planning to colonize Earth . The Smoking Man often ruthlessly protects the secrets of the conspiracy , and serves as the main antagonist to Mulder , who has an equally consuming devotion to reveal the truth in the first seven seasons . His stated justification is a desire to prevent the alien colonization for as long as possible ; in the episode " One Breath " , he tells Mulder that he is in the conspiracy ( which he calls " the game " ) because he believes that the secrets he keeps could , if publicly revealed , threaten the social order that preserves society : " If people were to know of the things that I know ... it would all fall apart " . He is at times shown working towards that goal , particularly in connection with developing a vaccine to protect people from the " black oil " , a parasitic agent which the alien Colonists use to propagate themselves . 
 = = Development = = 
 When first cast for the role , portraying actor William B. Davis thought a show about the paranormal would not last for long . Before joining The X @-@ Files cast , Davis had not smoked a cigarette in twenty years . For the first two episodes he appeared in , he smoked " real " cigarettes , but later changed to herbal cigarettes , giving the reason that it was " dangerous " for his health . In at least one early script draft from the " Pilot " , a Special Agent named Lake Drazen is present at the meeting near the start of the episode , having chosen Scully for an assignment to evaluate the validity of Mulder 's work on the X @-@ Files . The scene was eventually deleted and replaced , and several crew members have hinted that Agent Drazen became the Smoking Man . 
 Kim Manners said that it seemed all the prominent pieces created for The X @-@ Files were created by " accident " . According to Manners , Davis was nothing more than an extra leaning on a shelf . At the start , the producers of the show were not sure about making the Smoking Man the main antagonist . Paul Rabwin commented once that he did not know if Davis could handle the role , because he was not sure if he was a " good enough " actor for the role . Manners later commented that Davis knew that the Smoking Man had two different characters , the first being the one played by Davis and the second was the cigarettes . He further stated that the cigarette smoke could tell a " whole story " by itself , thanks to Davis ' talent . 
 Fans of the series were active in debating if the Smoking Man was actually dead after the events of the season five premiere " Redux " . In his first response , Chris Carter said he had left clues in the episode , and he later officially announced that the character would appear in The X @-@ Files movie . In one of his last comments on the matter , he said , " Not that we haven 't brought deceased characters back before , in flashbacks or more paranormal ways . The great thing about The X @-@ Files is that anything can happen . " 
 The Smoking Man is the only character in the series , in addition to Mulder and Scully , to appear in both the first episode , " pilot " and the last , " The Truth " of the series . Portraying actor William B. Davis was listed as CIA Agent in the first season episode " Young at Heart " , instead of his usual character , the Smoking Man . Actor Chris Owens for a time portrayed the Smoking Man as a young man in flashbacks . He later plays his son , Jeffrey Spender . Young Cigarette Smoking Man was first played by Craig Warkentin , with Davis 's voice dubbed over in " Apocrypha " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While not being nominated for any of his work alone on The X @-@ Files , William B. Davis and several other cast members were nominated in the category " Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series " by the Screen Actors Guild Awards in 1997 , 1998 and 1999 but did not win . The character was regularly voted " The <unk> Villain " on television polls during the 90s . TV Guide listed Cigarette Smoking Man 20th in their " 25 Greatest TV Villains " list . According to the portraying actor , the character had garnered protest from " pro @-@ smokers " . Entertainment Weekly writer Jennifer Armstrong cited the character as an example of the old tradition of having only " bad guys " smoking on television . 
 Davis was included in Entertainment Weekly 's list of the 50 Biggest Emmy <unk> , the list 's author saying that the presence of the " Cigarette Smoking Man " was as important as " black oil , alien implants , and Scully 's skepticism " . The Malaysian newspaper the New Straits Times called the Smoking Man one of the most " intriguing " characters of the show . However , Christianity Today said that the mystery behind the Smoking Man had evaporated by the late season episodes . Likewise , Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly felt that " the monotonous evil of Cancer Man " had " become actively annoying " in later seasons of the show , being that his lurking presence did not seem as mysterious anymore . Salon reviewer Jeff Stark felt the show was at its best when you " didn 't exactly know the motivations of the Smoking Man " . 
 = Polish – Prussian alliance = 
 The Polish – Lithuanian and Prussian alliance was a mutual defense alliance signed on 29 March 1790 in Warsaw between representatives of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Kingdom of Prussia . It was signed in the brief period when Prussia was seeking an ally against either Austria or Russia , and the Commonwealth was seeking guarantees that it would be able to carry out significant governmental reforms without foreign intervention . 
 From the beginning , the alliance was much more valuable to the Commonwealth than to Prussia . Soon after the treaty was signed , the international situation , and changes within the Commonwealth , made the treaty much less valuable to the Prussian side . Meanwhile , the Commonwealth embarked on a series of major internal reforms , seeing the alliance as a guarantee that it had the backing of a powerful neighbor in this process – where in fact Prussia felt those reforms were not in its best interest , and felt threatened by them . When Russia invaded the Commonwealth in May 1792 , Prussia refused a request to honor the alliance and intervene , arguing that it was not consulted with regard to the 3rd May Constitution , which invalidated the alliance . A few months later , in 1793 , Prussia aided Russia in the suppression of the Kościuszko Uprising . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( also known as the Republic of Poland ) had been a major European power since its formation in the late 16th century and was still one of the largest states on the European continent in the latter part of the 18th century . Over time , its state machinery had become increasingly dysfunctional . By the early 17th century , the magnates of Poland and Lithuania controlled the state — or rather , they managed to ensure that no reforms would be carried out that might weaken their privileged status ( the so @-@ called " Golden Freedoms " ) . Tentative reforms began in the late 18th century ; however , any idea of reforming the Commonwealth was viewed with suspicion not only by its magnates but also by neighboring countries , which were content with the state of the Commonwealth 's affairs and abhorred the thought of a resurgent and democratic power on their borders . With the Commonwealth Army only numbering around 16 @,@ 000 , it was easy for its neighbors to intervene directly : the Imperial Russian Army numbered 300 @,@ 000 ; the Prussian Army and Imperial Austrian Army , 200 @,@ 000 . All of those powers had already annexed about a third of the Commonwealth territory and population ( 211 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 81 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and four to five million people ) in the First Partition of Poland in 1772 – 1773 . 
 However , events in the world appeared to play into the reformers ' hands . Poland 's neighbors were too occupied with wars to intervene forcibly in Poland , with Russia and Austria engaged in hostilities with the Ottoman Empire ( the Russo @-@ Turkish War ( 1787 – 92 ) and the Austro @-@ Turkish War ( 1787 – 91 ) ) ; the Russians also found themselves fighting Sweden ( the Russo @-@ Swedish War ( 1788 – 90 ) ) . 
 In the context of the Austrian Empire 's war with the Ottoman Empire , and similar Russian Empire 's war , Polish king Stanisław August Poniatowski , attempted to draw Poland into the Austro @-@ Russian alliance , seeing a war with the Ottomans as an opportunity to strengthen the Commonwealth . Due to internal Russian politics , this plan was not implemented . Spurned by Russia , Poland turned to another potential ally , the Triple Alliance , represented on the Polish diplomatic scene primarily by the Kingdom of Prussia . This line of reasoning gained support from Polish politicians such as Ignacy Potocki and Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski . 
 Within the Triple Alliance , Prussia was hoping for some territorial gains in the Baltic region , through war ( with Russia ) or diplomacy ( from the Commonwealth ) , or a combination of the above . With regard to the Balkans , the Triple Alliance aimed at restraining the Russian Empire , as well as the its ally , the Austrian Empire , and there were expectations of a war between the Alliance and Russia ( and possibly Austria ) around 1791 . 
 = = Negotiations = = 
 Prussia tried to take opportunity of the Russian Empire 's wars with the Ottoman Empire and Sweden and move the weak Commonwealth into its sphere of influence . Some factions in the Commonwealth deemed this as an opportunity to shake free from decades of Russian control . That said , Prussia did not expect much from the alliance , not even that it would pass . When the treaty was first proposed to the Great Sejm by Prussian ambassador Ludwig Heinrich <unk> on 13 October 1788 , Prussians expected that it would cause long and fruitless debate which only outcome would be to ensure the weakening of Russian ( and to a lesser degree , Austrian ) position in Poland . Overall , for Prussia , the alliance with Poland was only one of several potential options ; but for some Polish politicians it became a new , and increasingly , only available strategy . The reception of Prussian proposal by the Sejm exceeded their expectations , and it has significantly strengthened the Patriotic Party . For the next year or so , Prussians decided to delay taking any clear action , keeping their options open . <unk> was also reprimanded for allowing things to go too far , and another Prussian diplomat , Girolamo Lucchesini , was sent to Warsaw to aid him . 
 One of the Prussian playing @-@ for @-@ time requests to the Patriotic Party was that before the treaty is signed , they need to see more reforms within the Commonwealth government . In October 1789 , the changing international situation ( primarily the military defeats of the Ottoman Empire ) suddenly and temporarily increased the value of an alliance with Poland for Prussia . In the meantime , the previously anti @-@ royalist Patriotic Party has begun drifting closer to the king . In February and March 1790 , concrete proposals were exchanged between Warsaw and Berlin . Some difficulties were centered around Prussian demands for the cession of Gdańsk and Toruń , and tariffs , but a threat of a Polish @-@ Austrian alliance , recently brought forward by Austria , caused Prussia to withdraw most of the demands the Polish side was finding difficult to accept . 
 = = Treaty and its unraveling = = 
 The treaty was finally signed on 29 March 1790 , and ratified on 23 April . It was a defensive treaty , as each country promised to aid the other in case of being invaded . 
 Several factors , however , soon reduced the value of the treaty for Prussia . Treaty of Reichenbach of July 27 , 1790 , meant that Prussia was no longer considering a war with Austria ; the Polish – Prussian alliance now had only an anti @-@ Russian angle . Then , on September 9 , the Great Sejm , despite some opposition , declared that Commonwealth territories could not be divided . As Prussia was expecting to receive Gdańsk and Toruń from the Commonwealth as a compensation in a subsequent treaty ( with Commonwealth being compensated through territorial gains from another neighbor ) , the Sejm declaration that meant that no territory could be traded to another state made the Commonwealth a much less valuable party for Prussian long @-@ term goals . Already in fall and winter of 1790 , Prussian diplomacy begun negotiations with Russians , and hinting at its abandoning of Poland . 
 Potocki attempted to offer another deal to Prussia , namely , to support Prince Louis Charles of Prussia candidature for the Polish throne , but Frederick William II of Prussia , advised by Ewald Friedrich von <unk> refused this offer , as it did not seem profitable enough to Prussia , which was interested more in territorial gains than in a potentially strengthened Commonwealth , which could ask for the return of the territories lost in the First Partition . The passing of the Constitution of 3 May , 1791 , although officially applauded by Frederick Wilhem II , who sent a congratulatory note to Warsaw , caused further worry in Prussia . Prussian statesman Ewald von Hertzberg expressed the fears of European conservatives : " The Poles have given the coup de grâce to the Prussian monarchy by voting a constitution " , elaborating that strong Commonwealth would likely demand the return of the lands Prussia acquired in the First Partition . Finally , the Prussian @-@ Russian relations stabilized with the end of the Triple Alliance , which was cemented by the British @-@ Netherlands @-@ Prussian @-@ Russian treaty of 26 July 1791 , in which the Triple Alliance de facto capitulated to all Russian demands . In the meantime , similar negotiations of a Polish – Swedish alliance , never realized , fell through as well . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Treaty of Jassy in January 1792 ended the Russian war with the Ottomans , and in April of that year the First Coalition wars began , forcing Prussia to move the bulk of its forces west to deal with revolutionary France . Russia , angered by Poland 's attempt to move out of its influence , invaded Poland in May . Around that time , Prussian policy was already set against Poland ; rather than discussing how to aid it , Frederic Wilhelm and his ministers were discussing how to convince Austria and Prussia to a new partition . Lucchesini has already made several declarations that Prussia cannot aid the Commonwealth , and in June that year , Potocki 's mission to Berlin received a confirmation of that , motivated on the grounds that the Constitution of 3 May changed Polish state so much that Prussia does not consider its obligations binding . Prussian Foreign Minister , Friedrich Wilhelm von Schulenburg @-@ Kehnert , has clearly and with rare candor told Potocki that Prussia did not support the constitution , but could not say so initially , as to not allow any Polish @-@ Russian reconciliation , and now will not even help as a mediator , as it is not in Prussian 's interest of the state to see Commonwealth strengthened so that it could threaten Prussia in some future . 
 When in January 1793 a Prussian corps entered Greater Poland , it was not as a Commonwealth ally , but instead to guarantee Prussia 's share of spoils in the Second Partition of Poland . Prussian forces were acting in support of the Prussian @-@ Russian treaty on the partition has been that month . Subsequently , Prussian forces assisted Russians in several key battles of the Kościuszko Uprising , such as in the defeat of Tadeusz Kościuszko 's forces at the battle of <unk> . By 1795 , Commonwealth would cease to exist , with Prussia acquiring Gdańsk , Toruń and other territories it desired ( see Prussian partition ) . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The issue of the Polish – Prussian alliance was subject to a comprehensive study as early as the 1890s , when Polish historian Szymon Askenazy published his work on the subject ( <unk> polsko @-@ <unk> , 1900 ) focusing on the diplomatic and international aspects . Askenazy argued that the alliance fell more due to inept Polish diplomacy than to the Prussian realpolitik agenda ; this view is not supported by majority of historians , and noted by Jerzy Łojek ( who admits that himself , at the same time declaring himself , in his <unk> i <unk> Konstytucji 3 maja ( 1986 ) as sharing Askenazy 's minority viewpoint ) . The question of to what degree the alliance was realistic , and to what degree it represented a Prussian diplomatic feint which mislead Commonwealth politicians is still debated by modern historians . Similarly , as Piotr Wandycz has noted , the advantages and disadvantages of this alliance have been debated by the historians for over a century . 
 = Valley Parade = 
 Valley Parade , also known as the Coral Windows Stadium through sponsorship rights , is an all @-@ seater football stadium in Bradford , West Yorkshire , England . It was built in 1886 , and was the home of Manningham Rugby Football Club until 1903 , when they changed code from rugby football to association football and became Bradford City . It has been Bradford City 's home since , although it is now owned by former chairman Gordon Gibb 's pension fund . It has also been home to Bradford ( Park Avenue ) for one season , and Bradford Bulls rugby league side for two seasons , as well as host to a number of England youth team fixtures . 
 Football architect Archibald Leitch was commissioned to redevelop the ground when Bradford City were promoted to the First Division in 1908 . From then , the stadium underwent few changes until 1985 , when it was the scene of a fatal fire on 11 May 1985 , when 56 supporters were killed and at least 265 were injured . It underwent a £ 2 @.@ 6 million redevelopment and was re @-@ opened in December 1986 . The ground underwent significant changes in the 1990s and early 2000s and now has a capacity of 25 @,@ 136 . The record attendance of 39 @,@ 146 was set in 1911 for an FA Cup tie against Burnley , making it the oldest surviving attendance record at a Football League ground in the country . 
 = = History = = 
 Manningham Rugby Football Club , formed in 1876 , originally played games at Cardigan Fields , in the Carlisle Road area of Bradford . When their ground was sold to facilitate the construction of Drummond School , the club required a new home . Consequently , they bought one @-@ third of the Valley Parade site in Manningham , taking a short @-@ term lease out on the rest of the land in time to play there for the 1886 – 87 season . The new ground and the road it was built upon both adopted the name of the local area , Valley Parade , a name deriving from the steep hillside below Manningham . The land was previously a quarry , and formed part of a greater site owned by Midland Railway Company . 
 The club spent £ 1 @,@ 400 appointing designers to oversee the excavation and levelling of the land , and moved a one @-@ year @-@ old stand from Carlisle Road to the highest part of the new ground . The original ground comprised the relocated stand , a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity stepped enclosure with the players ' changing rooms beneath the stand , the playing area , a cinder athletics track and fencing to limit the total capacity to 18 @,@ 000 . The playing field was made of ballast , ashes , soil and sods . The ground was officially opened on 27 September 1886 for a game against Wakefield Trinity which was watched by a capacity crowd , but construction work meant most of Manningham 's early games were away fixtures . 
 Manningham RFC continued playing until 1903 , when financial difficulties , caused by relegation at the turn of the century , prompted club officials to change codes from rugby football to association football . The first association football game to be played at Valley Parade was a promotional fixture on 6 April 1903 between a side of West Yorkshire footballers and Sheffield United 's 1903 FA Cup winning side . The game had been organised to stimulate interest in the sport in Bradford and attracted 8 @,@ 000 fans . The new football club , Bradford City , were elected to The Football League 's Division Two the following month . Bradford City 's first game at Valley Parade came on 5 September 1903 against Gainsborough Trinity , drawing a crowd of 11 @,@ 000 . As a result of alterations first implemented in 1897 , City players originally changed in a shed behind one end of the ground , and visiting teams used the old rugby club dressing rooms at the back of the nearby Belle Vue Hotel . However , after City 's 5 – 1 defeat by Manchester United on 10 February 1906 , United player Bob Bonthron was attacked as he left the ground . As a result , The Football Association closed the ground for 14 days , ordering City to switch its changing rooms to the nearby Artillery Barracks for the 1906 – 07 season . Several supporters faced criminal proceedings for the incident . 
 After Bradford City won the Division Two championship in 1907 – 08 , the club hurried through a reconstruction programme of the ground to prepare for the club 's first season in Division One . Football architect Archibald Leitch was commissioned to design new terracing in the paddock — a standing area in front of the 5 @,@ 300 @-@ seater main stand which was built in 1908 — and build a Spion Kop at the north side of the ground and an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity stand at the Midland Road end opposite the main stand . Further work was performed to lower the railings , erect barriers , move the pitch and add extra turnstiles . The changing rooms were also moved , with a tunnel leading from the rooms underneath the Kop along the main stand side of the ground . The total project cost £ 9 @,@ 958 , and raised the capacity to 40 @,@ 000 . The work was not completed until midway through the 1908 – 09 season . The first match after work was finished took place on Christmas Day 1908 , when 36 @,@ 000 fans saw City host Bristol City . The improvements allowed Bradford City to set their record attendance of 39 @,@ 146 on 11 March 1911 against Burnley during the club 's FA Cup winning run . It is the longest surviving attendance record at any league ground in the country . 
 On 17 March 1932 , Bradford City paid Midland Railway Company £ 3 @,@ 750 for the remaining two @-@ thirds of the site to become outright owners of the ground , which was now 45 years old . The stadium had remained virtually unchanged since 1908 , and did so until 1952 , when the capacity of the ground was reduced after examinations of the foundations were ordered following the 1946 Burnden Park disaster . The investigation resulted in the closure of half the Midland Road stand . The stand 's steel frame was then sold to Berwick Rangers for £ 450 and a smaller replacement stand was built at Valley Parade in 1954 . Six years later , the stand had to be demolished for a second time because of continuing foundation problems . It was another six years before all four stands at Valley Parade were able to be opened for the first time . To enable construction of a new stand on the Midland Road side of the ground , the club directors moved the pitch 3 yards ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) closer to the main stand . The new stand was then the narrowest stand in the league . Further improvements were made to the stand in 1969 , ready for the club 's FA Cup tie with Division One side Tottenham Hotspur on 3 January 1970 , which ended in a 2 – 2 draw in front of 23 @,@ 000 fans . The cost of the work forced the club to sell Valley Parade to Bradford Corporation for £ 35 @,@ 000 , but it was bought back by 1979 for the same price . 
 During the period from 1908 to 1985 , the club carried out a number of other lesser work to the rest of the ground . It also included the introduction of floodlights in English football . Valley Parade 's first floodlights cost £ 3 @,@ 000 and were lamps mounted on telegraph poles running along each side of the ground . They were originally used against Hull City on 20 December 1954 . The floodlights were replaced in 1960 and again used for the first time against Hull City , but when one fell over in 1962 , an FA Cup game with Gateshead had to go ahead with only three pylons , prompting an FA inquiry . In 1985 , football ground writer Simon Inglis described the view from the main stand , which was still the same as when it was developed in 1908 , as " like watching football from the cockpit of a Sopwith Camel " because of its antiquated supports and struts . 
 On 11 May 1985 , one of the worst sporting disasters occurred at Valley Parade . Fifty @-@ six people died and at least 265 were injured when the main stand was engulfed by fire . The fire started 40 minutes into the club 's final game of the 1984 – 85 season against Lincoln City and destroyed the main stand in just nine minutes . For the next season and the first five months of the 1986 – 87 season , Bradford City played home games at Leeds United 's Elland Road , Huddersfield Town 's Leeds Road and Bradford Northern 's Odsal Stadium , while Valley Parade was rebuilt . Huddersfield @-@ based firm J <unk> carried out the £ 2 @.@ 6 million work , which included funding from insurance pay @-@ outs , Football League stadium grants , club funds and a £ 1 @.@ 46 million Government loan obtained by two Bradford MPs , Geoffrey Lawler and Max Madden . A new 5 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater main stand was built , longer than the structure which had burned down . The Kop was also covered for the first time and increased to a 7 @,@ 000 capacity . Other minor work was carried out to the ground 's other two stands . On 14 December 1986 , 582 days after the fire , The Hon Sir Oliver Popplewell , who had conducted the inquiry into the fire , opened the new stadium before an exhibition match against an England international XI . It was first used for a league game on Boxing Day when City lost 1 – 0 to Derby County . 
 The two stands which were not altered after the fire were both improved during the 1990s . The Bradford end of the ground was made a double @-@ decker , all @-@ seater stand , with a new scoreboard , in 1991 . City 's promotion to Division One in 1996 meant that chairman Geoffrey Richmond announced the construction of a 4 @,@ 500 seater stand on the Midland Road side . It was first used for a Yorkshire derby against Sheffield United on Boxing Day 1996 , before being officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 27 March 1997 . Richmond continued his plans to redevelop the ground as City continued to rise through the league . The roof of the Kop , which was the largest safe @-@ standing terrace in the country at the time , was removed and the capacity reduced during City 's 1998 – 99 promotion season , to prepare for a summer £ 6 @.@ 5 million rebuilding programme . The Kop was converted into a two @-@ tier 7 @,@ 500 @-@ seat capacity stand . An additional 2 @,@ 300 @-@ seat capacity corner section was built , which filled in the corner between the main stand and Kop . When opened in December 2000 it took the capacity of Valley Parade to more than 20 @,@ 000 for the first time since 1970 . A suite of offices and a shop were added at the same time . Once the work was completed , a second tier was added to the main stand at the cost of £ 6 @.@ 5 million . It was opened in 2001 , increasing the main stand 's capacity to 11 @,@ 000 , and the ground 's capacity to 25 @,@ 000 . 
 Richmond also planned to increase the main stand 's capacity by a further 1 @,@ 800 seats by building new changing rooms and office blocks , and add a second tier to the Midland Road stand , to increase the ground capacity to more than 35 @,@ 000 . However , the club went into administration in May 2002 , and Richmond was replaced by new co @-@ owners Julian Rhodes and Gordon Gibb . The following year , Valley Parade was sold to Gibb 's pension fund for £ 5 million , with the club 's offices , shop and car park sold to London @-@ based Development Securities for an additional £ 2 @.@ 5 million . Bradford City 's annual rent bill in 2011 to Gibb 's pension fund is £ 370 @,@ 000 . The total budget for the year , including other rent payments , rates , maintenance and utility bills is £ 1 @.@ 25 million . 
 The ground has been renamed a number of times for sponsorship reasons . Sponsors have included The Pulse radio station , Bradford & Bingley and <unk> . The ground has been named the Coral Windows Stadium since July 2007 in a three @-@ year deal , but is still commonly known throughout football as Valley Parade . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium is divided into five all @-@ seater stands , the JCT600 Stand , the Kop , the Midland Road Stand , the North West Corner and the TL Dallas Stand . All five stands are covered except for a small part of the main stand , and all but the Midland Road Stand being two @-@ tiered . Most of the stands are cantilever structures , and because of the ground 's location on the hillside , the Midland Road Stand overhangs the road . 
 Many of the stands have more traditional names , but have since been renamed because of sponsorship deals . The JCT600 Stand is the ground 's main stand , and is often called the latter by fans , but is also known as the Sunwin stand owing to the former sponsor . The Kop , was the former standing area , and its name was derived , like at many stadia across the country , from the Battle of Spion Kop . The East Stand , sponsored by Northern Commercials , is also named the Midland Road stand , because of the road on that side of the ground . The TL Dallas Stand is also known as the Bradford end , because it is nearest to the city centre . 
 The total capacity of Valley Parade is 25 @,@ 136 . The largest stand is the JCT600 Stand , which holds 9 @,@ 004 supporters , followed by the Kop , which has a capacity of 7 @,@ 492 . The Midland Road Stand holds 4 @,@ 500 , and the North West Corner 2 @,@ 300 . The TL Dallas Stand is the smallest of the five stands with a capacity of 1 @,@ 840 . The stadium includes 134 seats for media representatives . 
 The Sunwin Stand has further room for expansion , and is unusual because it only runs three @-@ quarters of the length of the pitch . The rest of this side is taken up by a brick building , situated in the south west corner of the stadium , which houses the club changing rooms and the security offices . The Sunwin Stand also includes the ground 's 17 executive boxes and conference facilities , which have capacity for up to 700 people . A second function room , called the Bantams Bar , in the Kop , has room for another 300 people . There is also more office space , a club store , ticket office and museum in the car park behind the Kop . From early 2010 , the area near the store will also include a dental surgery , which will be run by NHS Bradford and Airedale in partnership with the football club . 
 Visiting team fans sat in the TL Dallas Stand from 1995 to 2008 , but have also been given other parts of the ground for larger matches . In March 2008 , the club announced that the TL Dallas Stand would be made available for home fans for the 2008 – 09 season . The decision came after an overwhelmingly positive text message poll from the club 's supporters to use the Bradford End of the ground . Visiting team fans have been accommodated in the end blocks of the East Stand since the start of the 2008 – 09 season . Since the 2013 @-@ 14 Season away fans have moved back to the TL Dallas stand . 
 = = Fire disaster = = 
 On 11 May 1985 , a crowd of 11 @,@ 076 attended Bradford City 's final Division Three game of the 1984 – 85 season against Lincoln City . The Bradford side had secured the Division Three title the week before when they defeated Bolton Wanderers 2 – 0 . The league trophy was presented to City 's skipper Peter Jackson before the Lincoln game . The score was still 0 – 0 after 40 minutes of the game , when a small fire was noticed three rows from the back of the ground 's main stand . The flames became more visible within minutes , and police started to evacuate people in the stand less than six minutes later . Club chairman Stafford Heginbotham , who was in the main stand , described the effect and his reaction to the disaster : " The fire just spread along the length of the stand in seconds . The smoke was choking . We couldn 't breathe . It was to be our day . " The game was stopped , and the wooden roof caught fire . The fire spread the length of the stand , and timber and the roof began to fall onto the crowds . Black smoke enveloped the rear passageways , where fans were trying to escape . Ultimately , the fire killed 56 spectators , ranging from 11 @-@ year @-@ old children to the 86 @-@ year @-@ old former chairman of the club , Sam Firth . At least 265 further supporters were injured . The few existing narrow escape routes led to locked doors in some cases , and the only escape for most spectators was directly onto the field . The match was abandoned and never replayed , with The Football League ordering the scoreline at the time of abandonment to stand . 
 Sir Oliver Popplewell published his inquiry into the fire in 1986 , which introduced new safety legislation for sports grounds across the country . Forensic scientist David Woolley believed the cause of the fire was from a discarded cigarette or match , which had dropped through gaps between the seating to a void below the stand where rubbish had built up . A number of police officers and 22 spectators were later awarded bravery awards for their deeds on the day . 
 The old wooden roof of the stand was due to be replaced the day after the Lincoln match , because it did not meet the safety regulations required for Division Two , where the team would be playing in the following season . Instead , it took until July 1986 for rebuilding work to begin . The ground was used for reserve team fixtures from September 1985 , but only journalists and club officials were present to watch . Bradford City 's senior team played home games at other grounds in West Yorkshire for 19 months while Valley Parade was rebuilt . The new ground cost £ 2 @.@ 6 million to rebuild , and was reopened in December 1986 . 
 More than £ 3 @.@ 5 million was raised for victims of the fire and their families through the Bradford Disaster Appeal Fund . Memorials have been erected at the ground and at Bradford City Hall , the latter of which was provided by Bradford 's twin town of Hamm , in Germany . The disaster is also marked by an annual remembrance ceremony on 11 May at Bradford City Hall , and an annual Easter @-@ weekend youth tournament , contested between Bradford , Lincoln and other teams from across Europe . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Valley Parade hosted its first international football game just two months after its first Football League match . The game 's governing bodies wanted to promote the sport in the West Riding of Yorkshire , so chose Valley Parade to host a game between an English League side and an Irish League side , despite the ground not being up to standard . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 spectators attended the match on 10 October 1903 , which the English League won 2 – 1 . Over the next 20 years the ground hosted a number of other representative games , including an England international trial , the 1904 FA Amateur Cup Final and an under @-@ 15s schoolboy international between England and Scotland . But it was not until 6 April 1987 that the ground hosted another international when England under @-@ 18s drew 1 – 1 with Switzerland . Other under @-@ 18 fixtures have been played since , the last of which was between England and Belgium in November 2000 . It hosted two England under @-@ 21 international friendlies . The first was against Denmark ’ s under @-@ 21 ’ s on 8 October <unk> hosts thrashed the visitors 4 - 1 . The other was against Italy ’ s under @-@ 21 ’ s 26 March 2002 @.@ it ended in a 1 - 1 draw with 21 @,@ 642 in attendance . Valley Parade 's next international came seven years later when Bradford City hosted an under @-@ 19s European Championship qualifying game , in which England defeated Slovakia 4 – 1 . The England women 's team have also played at Valley Parade , including their first home match under the auspices of The Football Association in 1994 against Spain . 
 Bradford ( Park Avenue ) have played 29 games at Valley Parade , including a 2 – 0 friendly victory over Swiss side AC Lugano in 1962 , and all their home fixtures in 1973 – 74 , their last season before extinction . Bradford 's rugby league side Bradford Northern played a number of fixtures at Valley Parade between 1920 and 1937 , as well as three games in the 1980s and 1990s . Northern became Bradford Bulls with the advent of the Super League , and played two seasons at Valley Parade in 2001 and 2002 during redevelopment of their home ground at Odsal . 
 During , before and after the years of the First World War the 1 / 2nd and 2 / 2nd West Riding Brigade Royal Field Artillery ( Territorial Force ) had its headquarters at Valley Parade . 
 = = Records = = 
 The record attendance at Valley Parade is 39 @,@ 146 , for Bradford City 's FA Cup fourth round tie against Burnley on 11 March 1911 . The highest league attendance of 37 @,@ 059 , was for a Bradford derby match between Bradford City and Bradford ( Park Avenue ) on 17 September 1927 in Division Three ( North ) . The record all @-@ seated attendance record at Valley Parade is 24 @,@ 321 , set on 7 March 2015 in the FA Cup Sixth Round draw with Reading , surpassing the previous record of 23 @,@ 971 , set on 10 December 2012 in the Football League Cup victory over Arsenal . The lowest attendance for a league home match at Valley Parade is 1 @,@ 249 , on 15 May 1981 , for a Division Four fixture with Hereford United . The record gate receipts that Bradford City have received are £ 181 @,@ 990 for the Premier League game with Manchester United on 13 January 2001 . 
 Official attendance figures for league games were not kept by The Football League until 1925 . City 's official highest average attendance at Valley Parade since then is 18 @,@ 551 for the 1928 – 29 promotion season from Division Three ( North ) , although the club reported an average of 22 @,@ 585 in 1920 – 21 . It was not until City were promoted to the Premier League in 1999 that the club again recorded average attendances of higher than 18 @,@ 000 . City recorded an average of 18 @,@ 030 in 1999 – 2000 , and 18 @,@ 511 the following season . 
 During their two years at Valley Parade , the Bradford Bulls recorded their highest attendance on 4 March 2001 against St Helens with a crowd of 16 @,@ 572 . The Bulls averaged 11 @,@ 488 in 2002 for Super League VII . The highest crowd for a Bradford Northern fixture at Valley Parade was 20 @,@ 973 on 13 February 1926 for a Challenge Cup game against Keighley , which finished 2 – 2 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bradford is served by two railway stations . They are Bradford Interchange , which is also the city 's main bus terminus , and 1 mile ( 2 km ) away from the ground , and Bradford Forster Square , which is 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) away from the ground . Bradford Interchange connects to Leeds railway station for Virgin Trains East Coast and CrossCountry train services , Grand Central provide a direct service to London , and provides First Bradford and Transdev in Keighley buses to the ground . Forster Square , which provides train services operated by Northern Rail , also connects to Leeds . The stadium has no parking facilities available to supporters on matchdays . In 2000 , as part of the expansion of Valley Parade , the club drew up a green transport plan in a bid to ease traffic congestion around the ground . Proposals included a new railway station on the line between Leeds and Bradford Forster Square , and a discounted bus service . No station has ever been built , and a discounted bus route was withdrawn because of low patronage . 
 = Pilot ( The Office ) = 
 " Pilot " is the first episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's first episode overall . The episode premiered in the United States on NBC on March 24 , 2005 . The episode 's teleplay was adapted by Greg Daniels from the original script of the first episode of the British version written by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant . The episode was directed by Ken Kwapis . 
 In this episode , a documentary crew arrives at the Scranton , Pennsylvania offices of Dunder Mifflin to observe the employees and learn about modern management . Manager Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) tries to paint a happy picture in the face of potential downsizing from corporate . The office also gets new employee Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) as a temporary worker , while Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) pranks antagonist Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) . 
 " Pilot " debuted The Office as a midseason replacement for the 2004 – 05 season . The episode was primarily adapted from the first episode of the British series , although it was partially re @-@ scripted in an attempt to " Americanize " the new show . Although the episode was a ratings success , receiving a 5 @.@ 0 / 13 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 , and garnering 11 @.@ 2 million viewers overall , the episode received mixed reviews , with many critics criticizing it as a complete copy of the original . 
 = = Plot = = 
 We are introduced to Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , the regional manager of Dunder Mifflin , a paper @-@ production company that is currently under threat of facing downsizing . The news is delivered to him by the Vice President of Northeast Sales , Jan Levinson @-@ Gould , who , along with the other employees , can barely tolerate Michael ’ s foolish antics . 
 We are also introduced to a few of the other workers in the office , such as Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , a socially awkward salesman and part @-@ time , volunteer sheriff ’ s deputy , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , another salesman who enjoys playing pranks on Dwight , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , the receptionist on whom Jim harbors an obvious crush , and Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) , a temporary worker . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode debuted the series as a midseason replacement for the 2004 – 05 season . The pilot is a direct adaptation of the first episode of the British version . Daniels had decided to go through this route because " completely starting from scratch would be a very risky thing to do " due to the show being an adaptation . Although the episode was primarily adapted from the first episode of the British series , it was partially re @-@ scripted in an attempt to " Americanize " it . Jokes such as Dwight 's stapler being put in Jell @-@ O by Jim were transferred verbatim from the original series , while others were only slightly changed . Although later reshot , a scene in which Jim tapes pencils to his desk was originally filmed as a parallel to a scene in the British version , in which Tim Canterbury stacks up cardboard boxes in front of Gareth Keenan to restrict Keenan 's view of Canterbury . The table reading for the pilot episode of The Office was held on February 10 , 2005 . " Pilot " was filmed almost six months prior to beginning of filming on the second episode of the season , " Diversity Day " . The Office used no laugh tracks in the " Pilot " , wanting its " deadpan " and " absurd " humor to fully come across . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 NBC programmer Kevin Reilly originally suggested Paul Giamatti to producer Ben Silverman for the role of Michael Scott , but the actor declined . Martin Short , Hank Azaria and Bob Odenkirk were also reported to be interested . In January 2004 , Variety reported Steve Carell , of the popular Comedy Central program The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , was in talks to play the role . At the time , he was already committed to another NBC mid @-@ season replacement comedy , Come to Papa , but the series was quickly canceled , leaving him fully committed to The Office . Carell later stated he had only seen about half of the original pilot episode of the British series before he auditioned . He did not continue watching for fear that he would start copying Gervais ' characterizations . Rainn Wilson , who was cast as the power @-@ hungry sycophant Dwight Schrute , watched every episode of the series before he auditioned . Wilson had originally auditioned for Michael , a performance he described as a " terrible Ricky Gervais impersonation " ; however , the casting directors liked his audition as Dwight much more and hired him for the role . 
 John Krasinski and Jenna Fischer were virtual unknowns before being cast in their respective roles as Jim and Pam , the central love interests . Krasinski had attended school with , and was a friend of B. J. Novak . Krasinski recalled accidentally insulting Greg Daniels while waiting to audition for the series , telling him , " I hope [ the show 's developers ] don 't screw this up . " Daniels then introduced himself and told Krasinski who he was . Fischer prepared for her audition by looking as boring as possible , creating the original Pam hairstyle . In an interview on NPR 's Fresh Air , Fischer recalled the last stages of the audition process for Pam and Jim , with the producers partnering the different potential <unk> and Jims ( four of each ) together to gauge their chemistry . When Fischer finished her scene with Krasinski , he told her that she was his favorite Pam , to which she reciprocated that he was her favorite Jim . Many actors originally filmed as extras in this episode would later go on to become supporting cast members in later episodes , and the two women wearing blue sweaters towards the back of the room at the staff meeting scene were actual accountants that worked on the production staff . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Pilot " premiered on NBC on March 24 , 2005 . The episode received a 5 @.@ 0 / 13 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 , meaning that 5 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds viewed the episode . The episode garnered 11 @.@ 2 million viewers overall . " Pilot " ranked as the number one show in the key 18 – 49 demographic , outperforming all five of its network competitors . In addition , the episode ranked as the third most @-@ watched show for that evening . With over 11 million views , it is the second most watched episode of the series , after the fifth season episode " Stress Relief , " which attracted 22 @.@ 9 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Pilot " received mixed reviews after its premiere . Many sources deemed it another failed American reincarnation of a British show . A reviewer form the Deseret Morning News said , " Maybe , after The Office dies a quick death on NBC , the network will decide that trying to Americanize British TV comedies isn 't such a great idea . " The New York Daily News said the show was " neither daring nor funny " , adding that " NBC 's version is so diluted there 's little left but muddy water " . The Los Angeles Times complained that Steve Carell , who portrays Scott and also appeared in the movie Anchorman : The Legend of Ron Burgundy , was " too cartoon " and said : " Lost in translation is the sadness behind the characters . " 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C + and felt that it was a lackluster copy of the original . He noted that " the fatal flaw of this episode — though it could ’ ve been a proviso in the licensing agreement signed by Gervais and Merchant — involves dropping reminders of the U.K. Office ’ s pilot left and right " , and that " this episode pales in comparison " to the original British version . However , Adams complimented the character of Pam , noting that " she ’ s also the embodiment of a certain grounded , de @-@ glamorized look and tone these early episodes sold well — before subsequent seasons dropped them along with the most obvious concessions to the ' workplace documentary ' conceit . " 
 Although many perceived the first episode to have been a failure , some outlets praised the new show . While berating the show for coming across " slowly and painfully " , the Boston Globe said that " it is funny " . In relation to past failed shows adapted from British shows , the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette stated " Despite botching the American remake of the <unk> Coupling , NBC makes a pretty good effort in its version of The Office in duplicating the original 's ethos while injecting it with an American sensibility . " 
 = Pail closet = 
 A pail closet or pail privy was a room used for the disposal of human excreta , under the pail system ( or Rochdale system ) of waste removal . The closet was a small outhouse ( privy ) which contained a seat , underneath which a portable receptacle was placed . This bucket ( pail ) , into which the user would defecate , was removed and emptied by the local authority on a regular basis . The contents would either be incinerated or composted into fertiliser . 
 Although the more advanced water closet ( flush toilet ) was popular in wealthy homes , the lack of an adequate water supply and poor sewerage meant that in 19th @-@ century England , in working @-@ class neighbourhoods , towns and cities often chose dry conservancy methods of waste disposal . The pail closet was an evolution of the midden closet ( privy midden or midden closet ) , an impractical and unsanitary amenity considered a nuisance to public health . The pail system was popular in France and England , particularly in the historic Lancashire town of Rochdale , from which the system commonly took its name . The pail closet was not without its own problems ; if the pail was not emptied on a regular basis , it overflowed and became unhygienic . Some manufacturers lined the pail with absorbent materials , and other designs used mixtures of dry earth or ash to disguise the smell . 
 Improved water supplies and sewerage systems in England led directly to the replacement of the pail closet during the early 20th century . Municipal collection of pail toilets ( <unk> ) continued in Australia into the second half of the twentieth century . In the western world , it has now been almost completely replaced by the flush toilet . 
 = = Before the pail closet = = 
 Pail closets were used to dispose of human excreta , dirty water , and general household waste such as kitchen refuse and sweepings . The pail closet system was one of several methods of waste disposal in common use in the 19th century , others of which were the privy midden system , the pail system , and the dry @-@ earth system . 
 = = = Middens = = = 
 By 1869 , Manchester had a population of about 354 @,@ 000 people who were served by about 10 @,@ 000 water closets ( flush toilets ) and 38 @,@ 000 <unk> . An investigation of the condition of the city 's sewer network revealed that it was " choked up with an accumulation of solid filth , caused by overflow from the middens . " ( Middens and <unk> both refer to <unk> , ash pits , or refuse heaps . ) Such problems forced the city authorities to consider other methods of dealing with human excretion . Although the water closet was used in wealthy homes , concerns over river pollution , costs and available water supplies meant that most towns and cities chose more labour @-@ intensive dry conservancy systems . Manchester was one such city and by 1877 its authorities had replaced about 40 @,@ 000 middens with pail and midden closets , rising to 60 @,@ 000 by 1881 . The soil surrounding the old middens was cleared out , connections with drains and sewers removed and dry closets erected over each site . A contemporary estimate stated that the installation of about 25 @,@ 000 pail closets removed as much as 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) of urine and accompanying faeces from the city 's drains , sewers and rivers . 
 The midden closet was a development of the privy , which had evolved from the primitive " fosse " ditch . Midden closets were still used in the latter part of the 19th century but were rapidly falling out of favour . A Mr Redgrave , in a speech to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1876 , said that the midden closet represented " ... the standard of all that is utterly wrong , constructed as it is of porous materials , and permitting free <unk> of filth into the surrounding soil , capable of containing the entire dejections from a house , or from a block of houses , for months and even years " . The 1868 Rivers Pollution Commission reported two years later : " privies and <unk> are continually to be seen full to overflowing and as filthy as can be ... These middens are cleaned out whenever notice is given that they need it , probably once half @-@ yearly on an average , by a staff of night @-@ men with their attendant carts . " 
 Midden closets were , therefore , generally insanitary and were also difficult to empty and clean . Later improvements , such as a midden closet built in Nottingham , used a brick @-@ raised seat above a concave receptacle to direct excreta toward the centre of the pit — which was lined with cement to prevent leakage into the surrounding soil . This closet was also designed with a special opening through which <unk> material could be scattered over the top of the pit . A special ventilation shaft was also installed . The design offered a significant improvement over the less advanced midden privy , but the problems of emptying and cleaning such pits remained and thus the pail system , with its easily removable container , became more popular . 
 = = The pail system = = 
 = = = Geographic spread = = = 
 The pail system was used throughout Europe , in French cities such as Marseille and Le Havre , and English towns and cities such as Leeds , Birmingham , and Manchester , but it was popular in the town of Rochdale , from which the Rochdale system of pail collection took its name . It was widespread in Australia too . 
 = = = The Rochdale system = = = 
 The Rochdale system was first used in 1869 . It used a wooden tub , or pail ( sometimes half of a petroleum barrel ) , which was placed under the closet seat . The pails were often circular ( to aid cleaning ) , and were designed to be easily handled and of a size that encouraged regular collections . The top of the pail carried a cast iron rim about 3 inches deep to receive a tight @-@ fitting inner lid . The pails were collected on a weekly basis during the day . Each pail was secured by its lid and loaded onto a sealed 24 @-@ bay wagon to be taken to a depot where they were emptied , cleaned and returned . While the pail was removed from the closet , a replacement was installed in its place . In 1874 , Rochdale Corporation employed five such wagons in full @-@ time service , collecting from 3 @,@ 354 privies spread across the town . By contrast , with a much larger population , Manchester Corporation employed 73 wagons . By 1875 , 4 @,@ 741 pails were in use , and in 1876 the number was 5 @,@ 566 . A separate cart accompanied the wagon to collect other household refuse which was collected from a separate chamber in the pail closet . 
 About 9 @,@ 000 long tons ( 9 @,@ 100 t ) of night soil were collected in Rochdale each year , from a population of about 64 @,@ 000 — roughly 313 lb ( 142 kg ) per person . At the depot , the night soil was emptied into a storage tank . The pails were washed in a large trough using a mixture of chloride of lime and water . The night soil was then dried in revolving cylinders , using furnace heat from other borough refuse , before being transferred to so @-@ called drying plates . Gases were burnt in a furnace , the fumes escaping up a 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) chimney . Clinker from the remains of burnt refuse was used to make mortar . The manure works was a filthy environment , filled with dust . <unk> were paid 7 ¼ d , firemen 6 ½ d , and general labourers 4 ½ d . The fertiliser was transported from the works via railway to local filtration plots for disposal . 
 Some pails were supplied with deodorants such as iron sulphate . Manchester Corporation attempted to remove the smell of putrefaction by attaching cinder @-@ sifters to their closets so that fine ash could be poured on top of the excrement . The Goux system , invented in the 1860s by Pierre Nicholas Goux , a landowner near Paris , and widely used in France , overcame some of the more common problems associated with pail closets by lining the pail with an absorbent material . The Rochdale Corporation experimented with Goux 's design for several months but settled instead on a system which used smaller pails . Goux 's system did , however , find a home in Halifax , where it was used in more than 3 @,@ 000 closets after 1870 . The wooden pails used in Halifax were oval in cross @-@ section ( about 24 by 19 inches ) and 16 inches deep . Each was lined at the sides and bottom with a mixture of refuse , such as straw , grass , street sweepings , wool , hair , and even seaweed . This lining , which was formed by a special mould and to which sulphate of lime was added , was designed to help remove the smell of urine , slow putrefaction and keep the excreta dry . <unk> were collected between 7 am and 5 : 30 pm . Members of the public occasionally complained about the smell , which usually occurred when a pail was left to overflow , such as in winter 1875 when severe weather conditions prevented the horse @-@ pulled collection wagons from reaching the closets . 
 = = = Other systems = = = 
 In some areas , an earth closet was used . Invented by Henry Moule , this system used a metal container as with the pail system , but small amounts of a mixture of peat , dry earth and ashes were used to cover the excreta , removing any smells almost immediately . These <unk> were often applied with a small scoop or shovel , but more elaborate systems existed where the powder was kept in a box near the seat , with a small handle to control the amount deposited on the excrement . Charcoal — which could be obtained cheaply from street @-@ sweepings — and sawdust were also used to good effect . The process was more expensive than the simpler pail system . The mixture of earth and excreta could often be dried and re @-@ used , but the fear of infections spread by bacteria meant that it was sometimes used instead as a garden fertiliser . 
 Earth closets were usually housed in a separate building from the main structure and were well ventilated . As with the pail system , earth closet containers were designed to be emptied frequently . The earth closet was popular and was used in private houses , military camps , hospitals and extensively in India . It remained in use well into the 1930s . 
 = = Disadvantages = = 
 From a sanitary perspective , the pail system of waste removal was imperfect . <unk> and other general waste were often left above ground for hours , sometimes even days at a time . In his report on the Goux system used in Salford , the epidemiologist John <unk> Radcliffe commented : " In every instance where a pail had been in use over two or three days , the capacity of absorption of the liquid dejections , claimed by the patentee for the absorbent material , had been exceeded ; and whenever a pail had been four or five days a week in use , it was filled to the extent of two thirds or more of its cavity , with liquid dejections , in which the solid excrement was floating . " 
 The pail closet contained several important design considerations . In his 1915 essay to the American Public Health Association , author Richard Messer described some of the more commonly encountered problems : 
 Any of these [ pails ] should be provided with handles and be held in place by guide pieces nailed to the floor . Too often no mention is made of the latter in the specifications . Wooden boxes are unsatisfactory for they soon become leaky due to warping , are too heavy to handle and hold excreta long enough to permit the breeding of flies . To keep flies away from the receptacle is a difficult matter . The hinged door at the rear , being exposed to weather , soon warps , leaving openings around the edges , the self @-@ closing seat cover fails to operate properly due to rusty hinges and the front door is seldom kept closed ... The lack of proper attention in regard to cleaning is perhaps the principal drawback to this style of privy and one which makes it practically a failure for general use . In towns it is becoming more and more difficult to find anyone willing to do this kind of work and in rural districts the privy is usually neglected . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 Following the successes seen in various northern towns , about 7 @,@ 000 pail closets were introduced in 1871 in Leicester , where the implementation of water closets had been hindered by the refusal of the water company to provide adequate supplies . The use of pail closets reduced the demand placed upon the area 's inadequate sewerage system , but the town suffered with difficulties in the collection and treatment of the night soil . Initially , night soil was collected by contractors , but after 1873 the local authority became responsible . The authority found dealing with the night soil an expensive and difficult business and , following legal proceedings against the corporation in 1878 , transport of night soil was transferred from the railway system to canal barges . This , however , led to complaints that the canal was being polluted . In 1886 , the authority found that the River Soar was badly polluted by sewage and so they built a sewage farm at Beaumont Leys . By the end of the 19th century , this and the construction of a new sewer system enabled all pail closets to be phased out and replaced by water closets . In Manchester , faced with phenomenal population growth , the council attempted to retain the pail closet system , but following the exposure of the dumping of 30 – 60 long tons ( 30 – 61 t ) of human faeces into the Medlock and Irwell rivers at their Holt Town sewage works , the council was forced to change their plans . Originally they had intended to build incinerators , but public objections to the dumping of waste into rivers forced the council instead to purchase Carrington Moss in 1886 , and Chat Moss in 1895 , which were both developed as refuse disposal sites . But by the 1930s neither site was still receiving night soil , the water closet having replaced dry conservancy in Manchester . 
 = = = Decline and end = = = 
 In Coventry , the number of pail closets in use declined from about 712 in 1907 , to 92 in 1912 , and only 16 by 1926 . 
 Pail toilets with municipal collection persisted in Australia well into the second half of the twentieth century . Brisbane , its third most populous city , relied on " dunny carts " until the 1950s ( one source says until the 1970s ) ; because the population was so dispersed , it was difficult to install sewerage . Tar , creosote , and disinfectant kept the smell down . Academic George Seddon claimed that " the typical Australian back yard in the cities and country towns " had , throughout the first half of the twentieth century , " a dunny against the back fence , so that the pan could be collected from the dunny lane through a trap @-@ door " 
 = Yu Narukami = 
 Yu Narukami ( <unk> <unk> , Narukami Yū ) is a fictional character introduced in Atlus 's role @-@ playing game Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 4 . As the protagonist of the game , Yu is a silent character whose thoughts and actions are decided by the player . He appears as a high school student who moves to Inaba to live with his uncle and cousin while his parents are busy working . Shortly after arriving to Inaba , Yu starts investigating a murder case alongside his school mates and explores an alternate dimension where he obtains a power known as " Persona " to confront the " Shadows " , the creatures who have murdered the first victims . Yu has also appeared in other works related to Persona 4 , including an anime adaptation called Persona 4 : The Animation , a manga version , and several sequels and spin @-@ offs to the game . For these works , Yu received his own characterization and development in the stories . He has been voiced by Daisuke Namikawa in Japanese and Johnny Yong Bosch in English . 
 The protagonist of Persona 4 was designed by Shigenori Soejima who aimed to create an ambiguous character who could appeal to most players by way of reflecting several feelings towards them and through his mannerisms . For the anime , director Seiji Kishi expressed difficulties in giving the character emotions without damaging what the original staff created . Nevertheless , Yu 's characterization in the anime has been a subject of praise due to his portrayal as a mostly silent teenager whose few lines are related to the plot and in some cases , a source of comedy . 
 = = Character creation and traits = = 
 Character designer Shigenori Soejima made Yu with the idea that his entire personality be decided and portrayed by the player 's in @-@ game actions and decisions . As a result , he wanted Yu to look more ambiguous than Makoto Yuki , the protagonist of Shin Megami Tensei : Persona 3 . Soejima compared Yu to the Blue Ranger from the Power Rangers franchise as such character tends to stand silent to follow the orders from his leader . His character design stayed relatively similar to its initial conception , with his tone and facial expressions changing the most . The feature Soejima focused on most was his eyes : he thought that having his eyes under the fringe of his hair would make him " look cool . " The collar of his school uniform was made to stand a bit taller than other characters ' . In order to emphasize his being from a city , Yu was given a distinct , stylish haircut to contrast with other citizens of Inaba , a small town Yu moves to in the game . While designing the character , Soejima noted " the main character needs to be well @-@ rounded enough to be likeable , but also needs that extra little something to make him stand out from the rest of the cast . " He made a " baby face " sketch of the character so that he and the staff could discover Yu 's " special something " and discuss what would make him stand out as the protagonist . 
 Yu 's voice acting has been handled by Daisuke Namikawa in Japanese and Johnny Yong Bosch in English . Bosch felt uneasy about voicing Yu due to the fact he also voiced another character from the game , Tohru Adachi . However , when he initially learned that the protagonist would have very few lines , his worry evaporated . It was first planned that Yu 's voice actor for the anime would be recast , because he and Adachi would begin to interact several more times . However , in the end Bosch remained as the voice of Yu to avoid disappointing the game players . In order to solve the problem of having both of his characters sound too similar , he decided to speak in a lower register for Yu . 
 = = = Differences in adaptations = = = 
 In the initial Persona 4 game , the main player @-@ controlled character is known simply as the " Protagonist " or " Hero " , whose name is decided by the player . The name " Yu Narukami " was first given to the character in the 2011 anime adaptation , Persona 4 : The Animation , and has since been used in official games where the character is unable to be named by the player , beginning with Persona 4 Arena . Prior to this , he was given the name of Sōji Seta in the game 's manga adaptation . In an interview , game director Katsura Hashino drew attention to the way in which the Protagonist remains silent and emotionless throughout the game . This leaves the player to interpret the Protagonist 's emotional reactions subjectively at any particular point . Hashino elaborated on this particular character trait becoming an obstacle for Persona 4 : The Animation 's director Seiji Kishi , since the character would undoubtedly have to speak and show some level of emotion . In the same interview , Kishi admitted the difficulty of transitioning the silent Protagonist into the anime without destroying what Hashino had already established . 
 A unique gesture of Yu 's in the anime occurs when he <unk> his school jacket when summoning a Persona for the first time . Kishi noted this as being a " key " moment of " opening something that was closed . " However , he refrained from explaining its deeper meaning , leaving it instead as something for the viewers to ponder and hence helping them enjoy the adaptation much more . Another aspect made possible in the anime was Yu 's cool and composed nature during battle scenes . Hashino elaborated that it was possible to create such an attitude by having the fighting solely done by the Personas , thus establishing Yu as an emotionally strong character — something which " would have lost its significance if he was given a weapon . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Persona 4 = = = 
 In Persona 4 , Yu Narukami is a high school student who moves to the countryside of Inaba to live with his uncle Ryotaro Dojima and cousin Nanako Dojima for a year as a result of his parents working abroad , and attends <unk> High School where he meets most of the game 's cast . Upon learning of the Midnight Channel 's connection with the murders in Inaba , Yu gains access to the TV world , where he investigates the case alongside his friends and is appointed as their leader as a result of his experience . There he awakens his initial Persona , Izanagi ( <unk> ) , a swordsman wearing a black coat , which he uses to fight <unk> of humans ' negative feelings , the Shadows . 
 Yu also has the unique " Wild Card " ( <unk> , <unk> ) ability , which allows him to swap Personas for use in battle . This is tied with the Social Links ( Community ( <unk> , <unk> ) in Japan ) mechanic : each bond Yu makes with other characters grants him access to more and much stronger Personas , each named after one of the Major Arcana of the Tarot deck . Yu 's own Arcana is The Fool , representing the group as a whole and personified by Izanagi , which later becomes the Judgement , when the Investigation Team realizes that Taro Namatame is not responsible for his actions and begin to seek out the real culprit behind the Inaba events ( This bond is represented by the Persona Lucifer ( <unk> , <unk> ) in the anime ) . After closing the serial murder case , Yu learns he gained his powers from the goddess Izanami who had been posing as the Moel gas station attendant and aims to transform people into Shadows . Yu defeats Izanami by transforming Izanagi into Izanagi @-@ no @-@ Okami ( <unk> , Izanagi @-@ no @-@ Ōkami ) , representing The World , thanks to the power he gained from his many friends through Social Links . He then returns to his hometown , saying farewell to his friends . 
 = = = In Persona 4 : Arena = = = 
 In the fighting game Persona 4 Arena , Yu returns to Inaba and goes to the TV World alongside his friends to investigate a fighting tournament promoted in the Midnight Channel . As the group is unable to find the mastermind behind the competition , the Investigation Team decides to search for him . He fights using Izanagi , though during its strongest attack it transforms in Izanagi @-@ no @-@ Okami . His moveset was balanced for the sequel to make him more versatile as a result of comments regarding his character being too strong in the first game . The author behind Arena 's manga , <unk> , said that Yu was his favorite character and that whenever he draws him he thinks " Yu is so cool ! " <unk> also mentioned having trouble making the fight scene between Yu and Akihiko Sanada from Persona 3 as " Both characters wouldn 't easily lose to anyone . " 
 = = = Persona 4 adaptations = = = 
 In the Persona 4 manga , he is named Sōji Seta ( <unk> <unk> , Seta Sōji ) and is depicted as a distant but otherwise friendly teenager due having to move frequently as a result of his parents ' changing careers . He is also a supporting character in the manga Persona 4 : The Magician with the name of Yu Narukami . In the events of The Animation , Yu faces his own Shadow that reveals his repressed fear of moving away from Inaba and losing his friends , a fact that Yu accepts and acknowledges as the truth , enabling him to best Margaret in combat so he can face Izanami 's true form . He later appears in Persona 4 : The Golden Animation , which focuses on new events not featured in the previous series , showcasing some slight differences in personality from that of the previous series . In the live stage production , he was portrayed by Toru Baba and his name was chosen by the audience . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Yu appears alongside Persona 3 's protagonist in the 2014 game , Persona Q : Shadow of the Labyrinth , in which he joins forces with the Persona 3 cast to escape the mysterious labyrinth that they have been trapped inside of , while at the same time working to restore the memories of the mysterious Zen and Rei . Yu will also appear in the upcoming rhythm game , Persona 4 : Dancing All Night , where his friend Rise Kujikawa asks for his help . Yu also appears in Square Enix 's arcade card game Lord of Vermilion Re : 2 as a summon spell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Yu Narukami 's character has generally been well received . His role has been noted for allowing the player to build a unique " self " during the game while questioning their real @-@ life identity . Additionally , the protagonist 's relationships with his relatives with whom he starts living were praised for adding more variants to the relationships with these ones focusing on family relationships . Kotaku 's Jason Schreier got to call him " suave , handsome , and charming . He 's friends with everyone , all the girls want to be with him , and in general he 's just an all @-@ around badass . " 
 The character 's role in the anime adaptation of Persona 4 earned similar response . A reviewer from T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews commented that Yu " seems to be the aggregate of all the quirkiest possible choices you could make in the game , " making him likable character for his diverse scenes . When first watching the Persona 4 anime , Elliot Page from UK Anime Network noted that although Yu was not a silent character as in the video game , he had little dialogue and the pacing managed to make up for it . In a later review , Andy Hanley from the same site said he liked how the protagonist was handled , as the staff used his " blank state " to create comedic interactions . Briana Lawrence from the Fandom Post shared similar feelings , stating that the staff " somehow managed to give a silent protagonist a personality that 's not only believable , but likable . " Lawrence appreciated how the character was developed across the series thanks to all the bonds he forms into a " snarky , lovable main character who can keep a straight face while being kicked off a cliff . " While also commenting how Yu manages to reinforce both the comical and " spooky " elements of the plot , Blu @-@ ray 's Jeffrey Kauffman noted he " remains something of a cipher throughout the series " with the possibility of having the viewer relate with him . 
 In contrast to most reviewers , Richard Eisenbeis from Kotaku had mixed opinions about the character . Calling him " one of the oddest characters in any work of fiction ever " , Eisenbeis found that his lack of backstory made it difficult for the viewer to predict his actions . However , he noted that , as well as being entertaining to watch , by the series ' end , Yu had " become a character in his own right . " However , he criticised Yu 's characterization in Persona 4 Arena and its sequel for being a stereotypical lawful @-@ good hero and less than a bland compared to the new character Sho Minazuki and Rise 's development . Additionally , he was rated sixth in the category " Best Male Character " from the Newtype anime awards from 2012 . 
 = William Charles Osman Hill = 
 William Charles Osman Hill ( 13 July 1901 – 25 January 1975 ) was a British anatomist , primatologist , and a leading authority on primate anatomy during the 20th century . He is best known for his nearly completed eight @-@ volume series , Primates : Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy , which covered all living and extinct primates known at the time in full detail and contained illustrations created by his wife , Yvonne . Schooled at King Edward VI Camp Hill School for Boys in Birmingham and University of Birmingham , he went on to publish 248 works and accumulated a vast collection of primate specimens that are now stored at the Royal College of Surgeons of England . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 William Charles Osman Hill was born on 13 July 1901 . He was educated first at King Edward VI Camp Hill School for Boys in Birmingham , and later obtained his degrees from the University of Birmingham . During medical school , also at the University of Birmingham , he won three junior student prizes and the Ingleby Scholarship in Midwifery . He obtained his primary medical degrees in 1924 , and the same year took on the role of lecturer in zoology . Osman Hill earned his MD with honours in 1925 . He also earned his Ch . B while in medical school . 
 = = Career = = 
 Upon graduation , Osman Hill continued his role as a lecturer at the University of Birmingham under an apprenticeship until 1930 , but teaching anatomy instead of zoology . In 1930 , his career took shape when he moved to Sri Lanka , then known as Ceylon , to become both Chair of Anatomy and Professor of Anatomy at the Ceylon Medical College ( more recently named Faculty of Medicine of the University of Colombo or Colombo Medical School ) . His position allowed him to pursue anthropological studies of the indigenous <unk> people and comparative anatomy of primates . During this time , he began developing a private menagerie of exotic and native species . Consisting mostly of a variety of primates and parrots , the collection reported included several types of cockatoo ( family Cacatuidae ) , red @-@ fan parrots ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> parrots ( <unk> <unk> ) , star tortoises ( genus Geochelone ) , leopard tortoises ( <unk> pardalis ) , Galápagos tortoises ( Chelonoidis nigra ) , and ruddy mongooses ( Herpestes smithii ) . Osman Hill held this position in Ceylon for 14 years , returning to the UK after being appointed as Reader in Anthropology at the University of Edinburgh in 1945 . Upon his departure from Ceylon , his menagerie was divided between the London Zoo and the National Zoological Gardens of Sri Lanka . 
 Five years later in 1950 , he became <unk> for the Zoological Society of London and remained there for twelve years . When he left the London Zoo in 1962 , the old <unk> that has been his office was closed , many preserved biological specimens were discarded , and the era of anatomists working at the London Zoo — starting from the time of Richard Owen — came to a close . Between 1957 and 1958 , Osman Hill also acted as a visiting scholar at Emory University in Atlanta , Georgia . Later in 1958 , primatologist Jane Goodall studied primate behaviour under him in preparation for her studies of wild chimpanzees . In 1962 , he was hired as the assistant director of the Yerkes National Primate Research Center ( <unk> ) in Atlanta after being turned down for the position of director . 
 The Royal Society of Edinburgh honoured him as a fellow in 1955 and for his contributions to science awarded him both its Gold Medal and the <unk> @-@ Brisbane Prize . Upon his retiring from <unk> in 1969 , the Royal College of Surgeons of England made him a Hunterian Trustee . Following retirement , Osman Hill divided his time between his home at Folkestone and his continued work at the University of Turin . His relentless work in anatomy ended only during the final stages of his terminal illness , after he had suffered three years of increased illness as well as diabetes . 
 = = Publications = = 
 During his career , Osman Hill wrote 248 publications , all academic journal articles or chapters in books based primarily upon his own observations . His first paper , which discussed the comparative anatomy of the pancreas , was published in 1926 . In all , his works , which continued being published until the year of his death , focused on the anatomy and behaviour of humans , primates , and other mammals . 
 Osman Hill is best known for writing Primates : Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy , an eight @-@ volume series that aimed to include all living and extinct primates . Published by Edinburgh University between 1953 and 1974 , the series was the culmination of 50 years of his scientific research and thought . Each volume , starting with the strepsirrhines , covered its subjects exhaustively , including native and scientific nomenclature , anatomical structure , genetics , behaviour and palaeontology . The books were illustrated with both photographs and drawings , most of which were made by his wife , Yvonne . The series was known for its breadth and depth , however it was never completed . Projected as a nine @-@ volume set , Osman Hill died in 1975 , leaving his magnum opus unfinished . With five sections of the final volume written , including material on the taxonomy and most of the anatomy of langurs , it was hoped that his widow would be able to follow through with plans to prepare and publish them . However , she died one year later . 
 This monographic series often received praise for its encyclopaedic content , but was also criticised for occasional omissions , errors , and lack of specificity . 
 = = = Selected publications = = = 
 The eight volumes for which Osman Hill is best remembered were 
 Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy ( 1953 – 1974 ) 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1953 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy I — Strepsirhini . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3 . Edinburgh University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1955 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy II — Haplorhini : <unk> . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3b . Edinburgh University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1957 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy III — <unk> Platyrrhini . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3c . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1960 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy IV — Cebidae , Part A. Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3d . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1962 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy IV — Cebidae , Part B. Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3e . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1966 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy VI — Catarrhini <unk> : <unk> . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1974 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy VII — <unk> ( Cercocebus , Macaca , <unk> ) . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1970 ) . Primates Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy VIII — <unk> ( Papio , <unk> , <unk> ) . Edinburgh Univ Pubs Science & Maths , No 3h . OCLC <unk> . 
 The following is a list of other selected publications written by Osman Hill between 1926 and 1974 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ; Phillips , W. W. A. ( 1932 ) . " A new race of slender loris from the highlands of Ceylon " . Ceylon Journal of Science ( B ) 17 : 109 – 122 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1933 ) . " A monograph of the genus Loris , with an account of the external , cranial and dental characters of the genus : A revision of the known forms ; And the description of a new form from Northern Ceylon " . Ceylon Journal of Science ( B ) 18 : 89 – 132 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1934 ) . " A monograph on the purple @-@ faced leaf @-@ monkeys ( <unk> <unk> ) " . Ceylon Journal of Science ( B ) 19 : 23 – 88 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1942 ) . " The slender loris of the Horton Plains , Ceylon . Loris tardigradus nycticeboides <unk> , nov " . Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society 43 : 73 – 78 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1942 ) . " The highland macaque of Ceylon " . Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society 43 : 402 – 406 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1945 ) . " Notes on the Dissection of Two Dugongs " . Journal of Mammalogy 26 ( 2 ) : 153 – 175 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ; <unk> , R. E. ( 1948 ) . " The caecum of primates . — Its appendages , mesenteries and blood supply " . The Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 26 : 199 – 256 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Hill , W. C. O. ( 1952 ) . " The external and visceral anatomy of the Olive Colobus Monkey ( Procolobus verus ) " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 122 : 127 – 186 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1469 @-@ <unk> 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1953 ) . " Note on the taxonomy of the genus Tarsius " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 123 : 13 – 16 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1953 ) . " Caudal cutaneous specializations in Tarsius " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 123 : 17 – 26 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ; Davies , D. V. ( 1954 ) . " The reproductive organs in Hapalemur and Lepilemur " . Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh ( B ) 65 : 251 – 270 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ; Davies , D. V. ( 1956 ) . " The heart and great vessels in the Strepsirhini " . Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 63 ( 1 ) : 115 – 127 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ; Booth , A. H. ( 1957 ) . " Voice and larynx in African and Asiatic <unk> " . Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society 54 : 309 – 321 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1958 ) . " <unk> , oesophagus , stomach , small and large intestine . Form and position " . In Hofer , H. ; Schultz , A. H. ; Starck , D. <unk> 3 . Basel : <unk> pp. 139 – 207 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1958 ) . " External genitalia " . In Hofer , H. ; Schultz , A. H. ; Starck , D. <unk> 3 . Basel : <unk> pp. 630 – 704 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1959 ) . " The Anatomy of <unk> <unk> ( Thomas ) : A Primitive American Primate " . Transactions of the American Philosophical Society . New Series 49 ( 5 ) : 1 – 116 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1972 ) . Evolutionary Biology of Primates . Academic Press. p . 233 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Osman Hill , W. C. ( 1972 ) . " Taxonomic status of the <unk> Macaca mulatta <unk> and Macaca <unk> Cuvier ( = M. fascicularis Raffles ) " . Journal of Human Evolution 1 ( 1 ) : 49 – 72 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / 0047 @-@ <unk> ( 72 ) <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = = Cryptozoology studies = = 
 In 1945 , Osman Hill published an article entitled " <unk> — An unsolved problem of Ceylon " , in which he speculated that a traditional Vedda story on Sri Lanka about savage dwarf @-@ like humanoids , called <unk> , might have referred to an isolated species of Homo erectus , then referred to as Java Man or Pithecanthropus . He went further to suggest that Homo erectus may also fit the description of the elusive and more well @-@ known cryptid called Orang <unk> from Sumatra . He supported his now @-@ defunct hypothesis by pointing out several shared similarities between the two islands , including comparable wildlife . 
 In the 1950s , he studied photographs of a relic from the <unk> monastery in Nepal called the <unk> Hand , which was claimed to be the hand of a Yeti , and decided that it belonged to an unknown anthropoid . However , after the a few bones from the relic were smuggled out of Nepal and brought to him for examination , he concluded that the bones had belonged to a human . He reportedly changed his mind later and declared the bones belonged to a Neanderthal . In 1961 , Osman Hill published an article entitled " Abominable snowmen : The present position " . After examining the evidence available at the time , he and other researchers decided that although the Yeti might still exist , the evidence was not conclusive . In time , he lost interest in the matter due to a lack of new evidence . 
 Based on his studies of the results of a March 1960 expedition , Osman Hill concluded that " <unk> " , or Bili ape , was a remarkable chimpanzee . Citing older reports of chimpanzees from the dense forests of Malawi , he suggested that the Bili ape represented an undiscovered subspecies of chimpanzee , more similar to the western chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes verus ) , despite being located nearer the eastern chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes <unk> ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Osman Hill is remembered as a " distinguished anatomist " , " eminent primatologist " , and the foremost authority on primate anatomy of his time . However , he did not consider himself a primatologist , but instead related best to old @-@ school anatomists and naturalists , who studied the entire biological world and considered their own observations and recordings as sufficient . To these ends , he used his curiosity and broad knowledge of natural history . 
 Osman Hill was remembered for his skill at dissection , and was noted for his ability to make quick , but accurate sketches of the anatomical features his scalpel revealed . He is also remembered for his work as a " painstaking investigator " , physician , and anthropologist . In his honour , two species have been named after him : Osman Hill 's mangabey ( <unk> <unk> ) and the Colombo wolf snake ( <unk> <unk> ) . The Primate Society of Great Britain named their Osman Hill Medal award after him . The award is given every two years for distinguished contributions to <unk> . 
 He is responsible for describing one subspecies of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur ( Varecia variegata ) , the southern black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur ( V. v. editorum ) in 1952 ; one subspecies of toque macaque ( Macaca <unk> ) , the highland toque macaque ( M. s. <unk> ) in 1942 ; one subspecies of red slender loris ( Loris tardigradus ) , the Horton Plains slender loris ( L. t. nycticeboides ) in 1942 ; and two subspecies of grey slender loris ( Loris <unk> ) , the highland slender loris ( L. l. grandis ) in 1932 and the dry zone slender loris ( L. l. <unk> ) in 1933 . 
 His extensive collection of biological primate specimens , which included tissues and skeletons , is preserved at the Royal College of Surgeons of England . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Osman Hill married his wife , Yvonne Stranger , in 1947 . Yvonne , the only daughter of Harold Stranger KC , MP , was not only his devoted wife , but also a collaborator and illustrator of his works . The couple preferred a small , close @-@ knit circle of friends , and the dinners they hosted for their friends included the best wines and exotic dishes , such as python stew . Yvonne died close to a year after her husband . 
 Osman Hill was described in a memorial published in the International Journal of Primatology ( 1981 ) as being " short and rotund , with twinkling blue eyes , a quiet manner , and a strong sense of humor . " He was particularly remembered for his eagerness to help young researchers . In the Journal of Medical Primatology he was described as an " entertaining companion with a quick and ready wit . " In another memorial , published in the Journal of Anatomy in 1975 , he was described as friendly and tolerant , as well as " a merry man , vigorous , of humane culture , having the humour and good sense natural to those bred in the Provinces : a good Englishman . " He was known to value simple citizenship and academics , and held small regard for people who " aspired to monarchy . " At Yerkes in Atlanta , some staff members viewed him as " the archetypical English scholar @-@ gentleman who viewed those from the ' colonies ' as a step below the British . " 
 In the British Who 's Who , Osman Hill named field ornithology , botany , photography , and travel as his recreations . Other casual interests included drugstore ice cream , good eating , old buildings , and gardening with his wife . 
 = Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant = 
 The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant began during the turbulent Reconstruction period following the American Civil War . Grant was elected the 18th President of the United States in 1868 and was re @-@ elected to the office in 1872 , serving from March 4 , 1869 , to March 4 , 1877 . Grant was a Republican , and his main supporters were the Radical and Stalwart factions . The United States was at peace with the world throughout the era , and was prosperous until the Panic of 1873 , a severe national depression , that dominated Grant 's second term . Grant bolstered the Executive Branch 's enforcement powers by signing into law the Department of Justice and Office of Solicitor General that was implemented to protect the civil rights of African Americans . Grant expanded federal authority that protected African American civil rights against domestic terrorism in the South . Grant 's presidency represented the Civil War values that included " union , freedom and equality . " Grant 's Reconstruction policy , however , was challenged by the complexities of using the U.S. Army to impose democracy and legal equality regardless of the resistance of Democrats in the South . Grant worked hard to ensure the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment that gave black men the right to vote . Grant 's notable efforts as President included civil rights , civil service reform , and Indian policy . Grant 's foreign policy under Hamilton Fish was successful and improved Anglo @-@ American relations . 
 Grant was opposed by the Liberal faction of the Republican Party , many of them founding fathers of the GOP , who denounced Grant for violating the party 's emphasis on fighting corruption . The Liberals insisted that Reconstruction had been successful , that slavery and secessionism were dead . Liberals demanded that Army troops should be withdrawn from the South so that normal political life could resume . The Liberals nominated long @-@ time Republican spokesman Horace Greeley in 1872 , depriving Grant of the intellectual base of the Republican Party . Greeley was quietly supported by the Democrats , but was decisively defeated by Grant . Rather than develop a cadre of trustworthy political advisers , Grant was overconfident in choosing his Cabinet ; he relied heavily on former Army associates who had a thin understanding of politics and a weak sense of civilian ethics . His presidential reputation was severely damaged by repeated scandals and frauds . 
 Having struggled to be a self @-@ made man , Grant was extremely loyal to himself and his family , while trusting of close military associates that in turn caused dissension among reformers whom he believed were plotting to overthrow his presidency . Grant dismissed three Cabinet members without notice or explanation . Two of his Cabinet secretaries ( War and Navy ) , his personal secretary , and high officials he named to the Treasury department joined federal bribery or tax @-@ evasion syndicates . Corruption charges were rampant in the Department of the Interior in 1874 , until Grant appointed a reformer . Grant often defended the culprits , rather than the integrity of government service , while he attacked their accusers . Middle @-@ class public opinion , a key element in the Republican Party base , turned hostile to Grant . Some scholars , however , maintain that corruption charges were exaggerated during the Grant administration , and that Grant implemented civil service reform and ended the moiety system . 
 Grant played a role in thwarting the Gold Ring in 1869 and the prosecution of the Whiskey Ring in 1875 . His Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont and Postmaster General John A. J. Creswell made sweeping reforms in their respected departments , and several of Grant 's Cabinet initiated civil service in their own departments . After a false start with weak selections , Grant named to his Cabinet leading reformers including Hamilton Fish , Benjamin Bristow , Alphonso Taft , and Amos T. Akerman . Fish , as Secretary of State , negotiated the Treaty of Washington and was successful at keeping the United States out of trouble with Britain and Spain . Bristow , as Secretary of Treasury , ended the corruption of the Whiskey Ring where distillers and corrupt officials made millions from tax evasion . Taft , a brilliant jurist as Attorney General , successfully negotiated for bipartisan panel to peacefully settle the controversial Election of 1876 . Grant and Attorney General Akerman enforced civil rights legislation that protected African Americans and destroyed the Ku Klux Klan . Grant encouraged peaceful Congressional negotiations after the controversial Election of 1876 ; signed the Electoral Commission Act of 1877 ; while the Compromise of 1877 ended Reconstruction . 
 Economically , Grant was a conservative who favored a hard @-@ money , gold @-@ based , anti @-@ inflationary policy that entailed paying off the large national debt with gold . He reduced governmental spending , decreased the federal work force , and reduced the national debt , while tax revenues increased in the Treasury Department . During his second term in office , the Panic of 1873 , caused by rampant railroad speculation , shook the nation 's financial institutions ; banks failed , prices fell , and unemployment surged . Before the Panic there had been eight years of tremendous industrial growth after the Civil War that fueled lavish money making schemes , personal greed , and national corruption . President Grant 's contraction of money supply worsened the panic ; the ensuing major U.S. depression that followed lasted for five years causing massive economic damage to the country . The Panic wiped out both the fortunes of business and corruption . Southern Reconstruction continued that included escalated sectional violence over the status of freedmen and fractured state party alliances and elections . 
 With the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad in 1869 , the West was wide open to expansionism that sometimes was challenged by hostile Native Americans . Grant implemented an innovative peace policy , though not always successful , with Native Americans . Hostilities took place with the Modoc War , the Red River War , and the Great Sioux War that culminated with the famous Battle of Little Bighorn where Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer was killed . In 1874 , millions of buffalo were being slaughtered to make room for settlers and ranchers . Grant , who favored ranchers land use for domestic cattle , rejected legislation that would have limited the slaughter of the bison . After the fatal Modoc peace commission in 1873 , Grant 's Native American policy incorporated the military strategies favored by William T. Sherman and Phil Sheridan . Grant gave legislative support to the early suffragette movement . Corruption was rampant in the Department of Indian Affairs under Secretary of Interior Columbus Delano . However , Grant and Secretary Delano did have success in the establishment of America 's first national park , Yellowstone , and the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation . The Interior Department corruption was cleaned up by Grant 's Secretary Zachariah Chandler in 1875 . Grant 's presidential legacy has suffered due to his heavy @-@ handed use of the U.S. Army to prop up his political allies in southern states . However , since the mid @-@ 1990s his presidential reputation has improved as historians emphasize his enforcement of African American civil rights in the South and his Peace policy towards Indians . 
 = = Presidency 1869 – 1877 = = 
 Grant 's presidency has traditionally been viewed by historians as incompetent and full of corruption . An examination of his presidency reveals Grant had both successes and failures during his two terms in office . In recent years historians have elevated his presidential rating because of his support for African American civil rights . He leaned heavily toward the Radical camp and often sided with their Reconstruction policies , signing into law Force Acts to prosecute the Ku Klux Klan . In foreign policy Grant won praise for the Treaty of Washington , settling the Alabama Claims issue with Britain through arbitration . Economically he sided with Eastern bankers and signed the Public Credit Act that paid U.S. debts in gold specie , but was blamed for the severe economic depression that lasted 1873 – 1877 . Grant , wary of powerful congressional leaders , was the first President to ask for a line item veto . 
 In the century after he left office most historians denounced the Reconstruction policies followed by Grant . More recently , Grant 's support for and enforcement of African Americans civil rights has earned him praise from scholars . While graft and corruption existed in the Southern state governments he supported with the Army , many civil rights advances were made for African Americans . He was vigorous in his enforcement of the 14th and 15th amendments and prosecuted thousands of persons who violated African American civil rights ; he used military force to put down political insurrections in Louisiana , Mississippi , and South Carolina . 
 The depression of 1873 , along with the increasingly unpopular Reconstruction program , weakened his reputation and his party , allowing the resurgent Democrats to gain a majority in the House of Representatives in 1875 . His Presidency was inundated with many scandals caused by low standards and carelessness with his political appointees and personal associates . Nepotism , practiced by Grant , was unrestrained with almost forty family members or relatives who financially benefited from government appointments or employment . 
 Grant and Sumner were often at odds with each other on matters of foreign policy and political patronage . Sumner followed his own foreign policy and detested Grant 's practice of nepotism in making political appointments . One historian , Mary L. Hinsdale , described the Grant Administration as " a most extraordinary array of departures from the normal course " and a " military " rule , in close connection with a select Republican Senatorial group . In an unsuccessful effort to annex the island country of Santo Domingo , Grant bypassed the State Department by sending his military associate Orville E. Babcock to produce the treaty . Grant disregarded the opinion of Attorney General Ebenezer R. Hoar over the <unk> mining claim patents . 
 Grant 's foreign policy was heavily influenced by the able Secretary of State Hamilton Fish . Grant depended on Fish 's advice on domestic issues such as money policy and Reconstruction . His Secretary of Treasury , George Boutwell , was given full charge of national economic policies . In 1874 , Grant began a series of appointments that included reformers and qualified statesmen to his Administration , starting with Benjamin Bristow who prosecuted the Whiskey Ring . With the departure of Orville E. Babcock and William W. Belknap from the White House in 1876 , the Grant Administration took on a civilian rather than " military " style . 
 = = Election of 1868 = = 
 There were two main divisive issues in 1868 . The first was the continued Reconstruction of the South . The Democrats advocated allowing former Confederate soldiers to hold elective offices , and the Republicans endorsed the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution which allowed African Americans to vote . The other controversial issue concerned the redemption of war bonds either in gold or paper money known as greenbacks . The Democrats wanted to redeem the bonds with $ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in greenbacks and the rest with gold . The greenbacks were known as " cheap money " and would be inflationary . The Republicans wanted to pay the redemption of war bonds only with gold , a position attractive to investors and bankers . 
 Finding a popular hero who endorsed their Reconstruction policies , the Republicans nominated Grant and Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax . The Democrats , ignoring politically damaged President Andrew Johnson ( who was a political independent ) , nominated Horatio Seymour – former governor of New York – and Francis P. Blair from Missouri . Seymour was a wealthy conservative who came under GOP attack for weakness during the war and favoring the anti @-@ war Copperheads . The campaigning was nasty , as the Republicans waved the " bloody shirt " of treason against the Democrats @-@ as @-@ Copperheads . Grant himself never campaigned , except for his slogan " Let us have peace " and his apology to Jewish voters for his 1862 General Order No. 11 that banned Jewish merchants from his zone during the Civil War because of alleged profiteering . Grant won with 52 @.@ 7 % of the popular vote and won by a landslide in the Electoral College with 214 votes to Seymour 's 80 votes . Grant was helped by the fact that six southern states were controlled by Radical Republicans who kept many ex @-@ Confederates from voting . 
 = = First Term 1869 – 1873 = = 
 = = = Cabinet = = = 
 Grant took an unorthodox approach to his cabinet choices , declining to consult with the Senate and keeping his choices secret until he submitted them for confirmation . Grant purposely avoided choosing Republican Party leaders in an effort to create national harmony . Out of personal loyalty , Grant appointed his friends Elihu B. Washburne to the State Department and John A. Rawlins as Secretary of War . Washburne served only twelve days before resigning over claims of ill @-@ health ; the plan was designed to give him greater diplomatic clout when Grant appointed him Minister to France . Grant then appointed Hamilton Fish , a conservative New York statesman , as Secretary of State . Fish would be Grant 's most successful appointment . His relationship with Fish grew out of a strong friendship between the two men 's wives . Rawlins later died of tuberculosis and was replaced by William W. Belknap . Grant selected several non @-@ politicians to his cabinet , including Adolph E. Borie and A.T. Stewart , with limited success . Borie served briefly as Secretary of Navy , replaced by George M. Robeson , while Stewart was lawfully prevented from becoming Secretary of Treasury by a 1789 statute and by Senator Charles Sumner 's and Senator Roscoe Conkling 's opposition to amend the law . In place of Stewart , Grant appointed George S. Boutwell , known for his integrity , as Secretary of Treasury . Grant 's other cabinet appointments — Jacob D. Cox ( Interior ) , John Creswell ( Postmaster General ) , and Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar ( Attorney General ) — were well @-@ received and uncontroversial . Some of Grant 's cabinet members did not even know their names were offered to the Senate for confirmation . Grant 's independent , at times problematic , manner in choosing his cabinet started a rift between Republican party veterans who were denied consultation . 
 = = = Modified Tenure of Office Act = = = 
 In March 1869 , President Grant made it known he desired the Tenure of Office Act repealed , stating it was a " stride toward a revolution in our free system " . The Tenure of Office Act was passed by Congress in 1867 , sponsored by Radical Republicans , to curb the power of the President Andrew Johnson in making government office appointments . The controversial law had been invoked during the impeachment trial of Johnson in 1868 . On March 5 , 1869 , a bill was brought before Congress to repeal the act , but Senator Charles Sumner was opposed , unwilling to give Grant a free hand in making appointments . Grant , to bolster the repeal effort , declined to make any new appointments except for vacancies , until the law was overturned , thus , agitating political office seekers to pressure Congress to repeal the law . Under national pressure for governmental reform , a compromise was reached and a new bill was passed that allowed the President to have complete control over removing his own cabinet , however , government appointees needed the approval of Congress within a thirty @-@ day period . Grant , who did not desire a party split over the matter , signed the bill ; afterwards , he received criticism for not getting a full repeal of the law . The unpopular measure was completely repealed in 1887 . Grant was criticized for appointing many family members considered unqualified to highly sought government posts , a practice known as nepotism . 
 = = = Political defections = = = 
 Initially , President Grant was popular among many political and newspaper elite . Political defections began as early as the spring and fall of 1869 when both Charles A. Dana and Henry Adams became critical and discouraged over Grant 's Presidency in the aftermath of the Black Friday scandal . By 1870 , Horace Greeley lost enthusiasm for the Administration with the resignations of Attorney General Ebenezer R. Hoar and Ambassador to Britain John L. Motley . Prominent journalists Samuel Bowles , Horace White , E. L. Godkin , and William C. Bryant became concerned over alleged incompetence and lack of national direction from Grant . Personal animosity remained between Charles Sumner and Grant over the Senate rejection of the Santo Domingo Treaty . The common citizen , however , revered Grant for his gallant service in the Civil War . 
 = = = Reconstruction and civil rights = = = 
 During Reconstruction , Freedmen ( freed slaves ) , were given the vote by Congress and became active in state politics ; fourteen were elected to Congress . In state government they were never governor but did become lieutenant governors or secretaries of state . They formed the voting base of the Republican party along with some local whites ( called " Scalawags " ) and new arrivals from the North ( called " Carpetbaggers " . ) Most Southern whites opposed the Republicans ; they called themselves " Conservatives " or " Redeemers " . Grant repeatedly took a role in state affairs ; for example on December 24 , 1869 , he established federal military rule in Georgia and restored black legislators who had been expelled from the state legislature . 
 Most historians in the 21st century consider Reconstruction to be a failure . However , historian Mark Summers in 2014 has argued that : 
 if we see Reconstruction 's purpose as making sure that the main goals of the war would be filled , of a Union held together forever , of a North and South able to work together , of slavery extirpated , and sectional rivalries confined , of a permanent banishment of the fear of vaunting appeals to state sovereignty , backed by armed force , then Reconstruction looks like what in that respect it was , a lasting and unappreciated success . 
 = = = = Fifteenth amendment = = = = 
 According to biographer , William S. McFeely , Grant and many in the north believed the American Civil War extended democracy to the African American freedmen . Grant used political pressure to ensure the states ratified the Fifteenth Amendment , guaranteeing that " no citizen can be denied the right to vote based upon race , color , or previous condition of servitude " . When it passed he hailed it as " a measure of grander importance than any other one act of the kind from the foundation of our free government to the present day " . Many in the south , however , were determined that the African American males ' right to vote would be unenforceable . 
 = = = = Department of Justice = = = = 
 On June 22 , 1872 , Grant signed a bill into law passed by Congress that created the Department of Justice and to aid the Attorney General , the Office of Solicitor General . Grant appointed Amos T. Akerman as Attorney General and Benjamin H. Bristow as America 's first Solicitor General . Both Akerman and Bristow used the Department of Justice to vigorously prosecute Ku Klux Klan members in the early 1870s . In the first few years of Grant 's first term in office there were 1000 indictments against Klan members with over 550 convictions from the Department of Justice . By 1871 , there were 3000 indictments and 600 convictions with most only serving brief sentences while the ringleaders were imprisoned for up to five years in the federal penitentiary in Albany , New York . The result was a dramatic decrease in violence in the South . Akerman gave credit to Grant and told a friend that no one was " better " or " stronger " then Grant when it came to prosecuting terrorists . Akerman 's successor , George H. Williams , in December 1871 , continued to prosecute the Klan throughout 1872 until the Spring of 1873 during Grant 's second term in office . William 's clemency and moratorium on Klan prosecutions was due in part that the Justice Department , having been inundated by Klan outrage cases , did not have the effective man power to continue the prosecutions . 
 = = = = Naturalization Act of 1870 = = = = 
 On July 14 , 1870 Grant signed into law the Naturalization Act of 1870 that allowed persons of African descent to become citizens of the United States . This revised an earlier law , the Naturalization Act of 1790 that only allowed white persons of good moral character to become U.S. citizens . The law also prosecuted persons who used fictitious names , misrepresentations , or identities of deceased individuals when applying for citizenship . 
 = = = = Force Acts of 1870 and 1871 = = = = 
 To add enforcement to the 15th Amendment , Congress passed an act that guaranteed the protection of voting rights of African Americans ; Grant signed the bill , known as the Force Act of 1870 into law on May 31 , 1870 . This law was designed to keep the Redeemers from attacking or threatening African Americans . This act placed severe penalties on persons who used intimidation , bribery , or physical assault to prevent citizens from voting and placed elections under Federal jurisdiction . 
 On January 13 , 1871 President Grant submitted to Congress a report on violent acts committed by the Ku Klux Klan in the South . On March 20 , President Grant told a reluctant Congress the situation in the South was dire and federal legislation was needed that would " secure life , liberty , and property , and the enforcement of law , in all parts of the United States . " President Grant stated that the U.S. mail and the collection of revenue was in jeopardy . Congress investigated the Klan 's activities and eventually passed the Force Act of 1871 to allow prosecution of the Klan . This Act , also known as the " Ku Klux Klan Act " and written by Representative Benjamin Butler , was passed by Congress to specifically go after local units of the Ku Klux Klan . Although sensitive to charges of establishing a military dictatorship , Grant signed the bill into law on April 20 , 1871 after being convinced by Secretary of Treasury , George Boutwell , that federal protection was warranted , having cited documented atrocities against the Freedmen . This law allowed the President to suspend habeas corpus on " armed combinations " and conspiracies by the Klan . The Act also empowered the president " to arrest and break up disguised night marauders " . The actions of the Klan were defined as high crimes and acts of rebellion against the United States . 
 The Ku Klux Klan consisted of local secret organizations formed to violently oppose Republican rule during Reconstruction ; there was no organization above the local level . Wearing white hoods to hide their identity the Klan would attack and threaten Republicans . The Klan was strong in South Carolina between 1868 and 1870 ; South Carolina Governor Robert K. Scott , who was mired in corruption charges , allowed the Klan to rise to power . Grant , who was fed up with their violent tactics , ordered the Ku Klux Klan to disperse from South Carolina and lay down their arms under the authority of the Enforcement Acts on October 12 , 1871 . There was no response , and so on October 17 , 1871 , Grant issued a suspension of habeas corpus in all the 9 counties in South Carolina . Grant ordered federal troops in the state who then captured the Klan ; who were vigorously prosecuted by <unk> . Gen. Akerman and Sol . Gen. Bristow . With the Klan destroyed other white supremacist groups would emerge , including the White League and the Red Shirts . 
 = = = = Amnesty Act of 1872 = = = = 
 Texas was readmitted into the Union on March 30 , 1870 , Mississippi was readmitted February 23 , 1870 , and Virginia on January 26 , 1870 . Georgia became the last Confederate state to be readmitted into the Union on July 15 , 1870 . All members for the House of Representatives and Senate were seated from the 10 Confederate states who seceded . Technically , the United States was again a united country . 
 To ease tensions , Grant signed the Amnesty Act of 1872 on May 23 , 1872 that gave amnesty to former Confederates . This act allowed most former Confederates , who before the war had taken an oath to uphold the Constitution of the United States , to hold elected public office . Only 500 former Confederates remained unpardonable and therefore forbidden to hold elected public office . 
 = = = Indian affairs and human rights = = = 
 = = = = " Peace Policy " for Indians = = = = 
 Grant 's 1868 campaign slogan , " Let us have peace , " defined his policy toward reconstructing the South and opening a new era in relations with the western Indian tribes . 
 In a major address , Grant stated : 
 The building of rail @-@ roads and the access thereby given to all the agricultural and mineral regions of the country is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of indians . No matter what ought to be the relations between such settlements and the aborigines , the fact is they do not get on together , and one or the other has to give way in the end . A system which looks to the extinction of a race is too <unk> for a Nation to indulge in without without entailing upon the wrath of all Christendom , and without engendering in the Citizen a disregard for human life , and the rights of others , dangerous to society . I see no remedy for this except in placing all the indians on large reservations ... and giving them absolute protection there . 
 The goal of his " peace policy " was to minimize military conflict with the Indians , looking forward to " any course toward them which tends to their civilization and ultimate citizenship " . Indians were to stay on reservations where they would receive government subsidies and training supervised by religious denominations . Indians were no longer allowed to engage in raids or send war parties off the reservations ; the Army 's job was to force them back . The goal was to assimilate the Indians into American society ; any Indian could leave the reservation at any time and join the larger society , and have full citizenship . The Indians on reservations were made U.S. citizens in 1924 . 
 Grant 's Peace Policy was a sharp reversal of federal policy toward Native Americans . " Wars of extermination ... are demoralizing and wicked . " , he told Congress in his second Inaugural Address of 1873 . The president lobbied , though not always successfully , to preserve Native American lands from encroachment by the westward advance of pioneers . The economic forces of western expansionism led to conflicts between Native Americans , settlers , and the U.S. military . Native Americans were increasingly forced to live on reservations . Statistical data of the number of Indian wars per year between 1850 and 1890 , revealed that battles decreased during Grant 's two terms in office from 101 in 1869 to 43 in 1877 . In 1875 there were only 15 battles , the lowest rate since 1853 at 13 battles . 
 In 1869 , Grant appointed his aide General Ely S. Parker , a Seneca Indian , as the first Native American Commissioner of Indian Affairs . During Parker 's first year in office , the number of Indian Wars per year dropped by 43 from 101 to 58 . Chief of the Oglala Sioux Red Cloud wanted to meet President Grant , after learning that Parker was appointed Indian Commissioner . Red Cloud , along with chief of the Brulé Sioux Spotted Tail , came to Washington , D.C. by train and met with Parker and President Grant in 1870 . Grant held no personal animosity towards Native Americans and personally treated them with dignity . When Red Cloud and Spotted Tail first met Grant at the White House on May 7 , 1870 , they were given a bountiful dinner and entertainment equal to what was shown to a young Prince Arthur at a White House visit from Britain in 1869 . At their second meeting on May 8 , Red Cloud informed Grant that Whites were trespassing on Native American lands and that his people needed food and clothing . Out of concern for Native Americans , Grant ordered all Generals in the West to " keep intruders off by military force if necessary " . To prevent Native American hostilities and wars , Grant lobbied for and signed the Indians Appropriations Act of 1870 – 1871 . This act ended the governmental policy of treating tribes as independent sovereign nations . Native Americans would be treated as individuals or wards of the state and Indian policies would be legislated by Congressional statues . 
 Historians have debated issues of " paternalism " and " colonialism " but have glossed over the significance of contingencies , inconsistencies , and political competition involved in forging a substantive federal policy , according to scholar David Sim ( 2008 ) . He examined the peace policy , emphasizing incoherence in its formulation and implementation . . While the Grant administration focused on well @-@ meaning but limited goals of placing " good men " in positions of influence and convincing native peoples of their fundamental dependency on the US government , attempts to create a new departure in federal @-@ native relations were characterized by conflict and disagreement . According to Sim , The muddled creation of what has become known as the peace policy thus tells much about the varied and divergent attitudes Americans had toward the consolidation of their empire in the West following the Civil War . 
 The innovation in Grant 's Native American peace policy was in appointing Quakers as US Indian agents to various posts throughout the nation . This destroyed the power of patronage , as Congress would be reluctant to go after church appointments . On April 10 , 1869 , Congress created the Board of Indian Commissioners . Grant appointed volunteer members who were " eminent for their intelligence and philanthropy " ; a previous commission had been set up under the Andrew Johnson Administration in 1868 . The Grant Board was given extensive power to supervise the Bureau of Indian Affairs and " civilize " Native Americans . After the Piegan Massacre on January 23 , 1870 , when Major Edward M. Baker killed 173 tribal members , mostly women and children , Grant was determined to divide Native American post appointments " up among the religious churches " ; by 1872 , 73 Indian agencies were divided among religious denominations . Quakers or Protestant clergy predominantly controlled most of the central and southern Plains Indian territories , while all other surrounding territories were under the control of appointed military officers . 
 = = = = = Evaluations = = = = = 
 Congressional reaction to the losses suffered by Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer 's unit at the Battle of the Little Big Horn in 1876 was shock and dismay at the failure of the Peace Policy . Grant blamed Custer wholly for the defeat stating that the sacrifice of troops was unnecessary . The Indian appropriations measure of August 1876 marked the end of Grant 's Peace Policy . The Sioux were given the choice of either selling their lands in the Black Hills for cash or not receiving government gifts of food and other supplies . The historian Robert M. Utley ( 1984 ) contended that Grant , as a pragmatist , saw no inconsistencies with dividing up Native American posts among religious leaders and military officers . He added that Grant 's " Quaker Policy " , despite having good intentions , failed to solve the real dilemma of the misunderstandings between " the motivations , purposes , and ways of thinking " between both White and Native American cultures . These inconsistencies were evident in the breakdown of peace negotiations between the U.S. military and the Modoc tribal leaders during the Modoc War from 1872 to 1873 . 
 In 1871 , President Grant 's Indian peace policy , enforced and coordinated by Brig. Gen. George Stoneman in Arizona , required the Apache to be put on reservations where they would receive supplies and agriculture education . The Apache slipped out and occasionally raided white settlers . In one raid , believed to have been conducted by Apache warriors , settlers and mail runners were murdered near Tuscan , Arizona . The townspeople traced this raid to Apache reservation from Camp Grant . 500 Apache lived at the Camp Grant near Dudleyville . Angered over the murders , the Tuscan townspeople hired 92 Papago Indians , 42 Mexicans , and 6 whites to take revenge on the Apache . When the war party reached Camp Grant on April 30 , they murdered 144 Apaches , mostly women and children , in what became known as the Camp Grant Massacre . Twenty @-@ seven captured Apache children were sold into Mexican slavery . In May , an attempt was made by a small federal military party to capture Apache leader Cochise ; during the chase they killed 13 Apache . Grant immediately removed Stoneman of his command in Arizona . 
 Most detrimental to Grant 's Peace Policy was rampant corruption in the Department of the Interior under Secretary of Interior Columbus Delano . During Sec . Delano 's tenor , federal money intended to supply Native American tribes with food and clothing was skimmed off by corrupt Indian agents and clerks , often allied with traders . In addition , persons posing as " Indian Attorneys " charged Indian tribes money for bogus representation in Washington D.C. After newspapers exposed Delano 's delinquency , Grant defended him rather than investigate the matter . Although Sec . Delano supported and defined Grant 's Indian peace policy and was instrumental in the creation of the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in 1872 , he was not a reformer and was careless in his administration of the Department of the Interior . The previous Grant appointment , Secretary Jacob D. Cox , had run the department with efficiency and merit . Cox had been considered to be one of the best secretaries of Interior in the nation 's history . When Cox resigned in 1870 , Grant appointed Delano out of patronage considerations to appease Stalwart party bosses . After Sec . Delano finally resigned in 1875 , his replacement , Sec . Zachariah Chandler , reformed the Department of the Interior , banned " Indian <unk> " , and fired the corrupt clerks working in the Department of Indian Affairs . Grant 's Secretary of War , William W. Belknap , who was in charge of all Indian Trading posts under the Department of War , received illicit profit payments from the Fort Sill Indian <unk> . Sec . Belknap resigned and was replaced by reformer Alphonso Taft . Belknap was impeached by the House ; put on trial in the Senate during the Summer of 1876 and acquitted . 
 = = = = West Point hazing reduced = = = = 
 While President Grant advocated that African Americans enter the West Point Academy , he initially failed in 1870 and 1871 to protect the first African American West Point Academy cadet , James Albert Smith , from racist hazing by other cadets . This lack of protection was influenced by Grant 's son , then West Point cadet Frederick Dent Grant , who participated in the hazing against Smith . Maj. Gen. Thomas H. Ruger , however , was appointed Superintendent of West Point in 1871 , reformed the Academy ; having reduced the amount of hazing of cadets by 1873 and made strong efforts to eradicate the " discreditable " practice . In 1871 , other African Americans eventually followed Smith 's entrance into West Point and Henry O. Flipper , who was admitted to the Academy in 1873 , became the first to graduate from the Academy in 1877 . In 1874 , Smith was forced out of the Academy due to having failed an unconventional private test , in defiance of traditional West Point practice , administrated by Prof. Peter S. Michie . Smith was finally commissioned an officer by West Point in 1997 , one hundred and twenty three years later . 
 = = = = Utah territory polygamy = = = = 
 In 1862 , during the American Civil War President Lincoln signed into law the Morrill bill that outlawed polygamy in all U.S. Territories . Mormons who practiced polygamy in Utah for the most part resisted the Morrill law and the territorial governor . During the 1868 election , Grant had mentioned he would enforce the law against polygamy . Tensions began as early as 1870 , when Mormons in Ogden , Utah began to arm themselves and practice military drilling . By the Fourth of July , 1871 Mormon militia in Salt Lake City , Utah were on the verge of fighting territorial troops , however , <unk> heads prevailed and violence was averted . President Grant , however , who believed Utah was in a state of rebellion was determined to arrest those who practiced polygamy outlawed under the Morrill Act . In October , 1871 hundreds of Mormons were rounded up by U.S. marshals , put in a prison camp , arrested , and put on trial for polygamy . One convicted polygamist received a $ 500 fine and 3 years in prison under hard labor . On November 20 , 1871 Mormon leader Brigham Young , in ill health , had been charged with polygamy . Young 's attorney stated that Young had no intention to flee the court . Other persons during the polygamy shut down were charged with murder or intent to kill . The Morrill Act , however , proved hard to enforce since proof of marriage was required for conviction . On December 4 , 1871 President Grant stated that polygamists in Utah were " a remnant of barbarism , repugnant to civilization , to decency , and to the laws of the United States . " 
 = = = = Comstock Act = = = = 
 In March 1873 , anti @-@ obscenity moralists , led by the YMCA 's Anthony Comstock , easily secured passage of the Comstock Act which made it a federal crime to mail articles " for any indecent or immoral use " . Grant signed the bill after he was assured that Comstock would personally enforce it . Comstock went on to become a special agent of the Post Office appointed by Secretary James Cresswell . Comstock prosecuted pornographers , imprisoned <unk> , banned nude art , stopped the mailing of information about contraception , and tried to ban what he considered bad books . 
 = = = Early suffrage movement = = = 
 During Grant 's presidency the early Women 's suffrage movement led by Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton gained national attention . Anthony lobbied for female suffrage , equal gender pay , and protection of property for women who resided in Washington D.C. In April 1869 , Grant signed into law the protection of married women 's property from their husbands ' debts and the ability for women to sue in court in Washington D.C. In March 1870 Representative Samuel M. Arnell introduced a bill , coauthored by suffragist <unk> Lockwood , that would give women federal workers equal pay for equal work . Two years later Grant signed a modified Senate version of the Arnell Bill into law . The law required that all federal female clerks would be paid the fully compensated salary , however , lower tiered female clerks were exempted . The law increased women 's clerk salaries from 4 % to 20 % during the 1870s , however , the culture of patronage and patriarchy continued . The Republicans , who needed women to campaign for Grant in the 1872 Presidential Election , added to their platform open discussion of women 's rights without actually endorsing women 's rights . 
 = = = Economy and Treasury reform = = = 
 On taking office Grant 's first move was signing the Act to Strengthen the Public Credit , which the Republican Congress had just passed . It ensured that all public debts , particularly war bonds , would be paid only in gold rather than in greenbacks . The price of gold on the New York exchange fell to $ 130 per ounce – the lowest point since the suspension of specie payment in 1862 . 
 On May 19 , 1869 , Grant protected the wages of those working for the U.S. Government . In 1868 , a law was passed that reduced the government working day to 8 hours ; however , much of the law was later repealed that allowed day wages to also be reduced . To protect workers Grant signed an executive order that " no reduction shall be made in the wages " regardless of the reduction in hours for the government day workers . 
 Treasury Secretary George S. Boutwell reorganized and reformed the United States Treasury by discharging unnecessary employees , started sweeping changes in Bureau of Printing and Engraving to protect the currency from counterfeiters , and revitalized tax collections to hasten the collection of revenue . These changes soon led the Treasury to have a monthly surplus . By May 1869 , Boutwell reduced the national debt by $ 12 million . By September the national debt was reduced by $ 50 million , which was achieved by selling the growing gold surplus at weekly auctions for greenbacks and buying back wartime bonds with the currency . The New York Tribune wanted the government to buy more bonds and greenbacks and the New York Times praised the Grant administration 's debt policy . 
 The first two years of the Grant administration with George Boutwell at the Treasury helm expenditures had been reduced to $ 292 million in 1871 – down from $ 322 million in 1869 . The cost of collecting taxes fell to 3 @.@ 11 % in 1871 . Grant reduced the number of employees working in the government by 2 @,@ 248 persons from 6 @,@ 052 on March 1 , 1869 to 3 @,@ 804 on December 1 , 1871 . He had increased tax revenues by $ 108 million from 1869 to 1872 . During his first administration the national debt fell from $ 2 @.@ 5 billion to $ 2 @.@ 2 billion . 
 In a rare case of preemptive reform during the Grant Administration , Brevet Major General Alfred Pleasonton was dismissed for being unqualified to hold the position of Commissioner of Internal Revenue . In 1870 , Pleasonton , a Grant appointment , approved an unauthorized $ 60 @,@ 000 tax refund and was associated with an alleged unscrupulous Connecticut firm . Treasury Secretary George Boutwell promptly stopped the refund and personally informed Grant that Pleasonton was incompetent to hold office . Refusing to resign on Boutwell 's request , Pleasonton protested openly before Congress . President Grant removed Pleasonton before any potential scandal broke out . 
 = = = Yellowstone , buffalo , and conservation = = = 
 Organized exploration of the upper Yellowstone River began in fall 1869 when the Cook – Folsom – Peterson Expedition made a month @-@ long journey up the Yellowstone River and into the geyser basins . In 1870 , the somewhat more official Washburn – Langford – Doane Expedition explored the same regions of the upper Yellowstone and geyser basins , naming Old Faithful and many other park features . Official reports from Lieutenant Gustavus Cheyney Doane and Scribner 's Monthly accounts by Nathaniel P. Langford brought increased public awareness to the natural wonders of the region . Influenced by Jay Cooke of the Northern Pacific Railroad and Langford 's public speeches about the Yellowstone on the East Coast , geologist Ferdinand Hayden sought funding from Congress for an expedition under the auspices of the U.S. Geological Survey . In March 1871 Grant signed into law Congressional legislation appropriating $ 40 @,@ 000 to finance the Hayden Geological Survey of 1871 . Hayden was given instructions by Grant 's Secretary of Interior , Columbus Delano . The expedition party was composed of 36 civilians , mostly scientists , and two military escorts . Among the survey party were artist Thomas Moran and photographer William Henry Jackson . Hayden 's published reports , magazine articles , along with paintings by Moran and photographs by Jackson convinced Congress to preserve the natural wonders of the upper Yellowstone . On December 18 , 1871 , a bill was introduced simultaneously in the Senate , by Senator S.C. Pomeroy of Kansas , and in the House of Representatives , by Congressman William H. <unk> of the Montana Territory , for the establishment of a park at the headwaters of the Yellowstone River . Hayden 's influence on Congress is readily apparent when examining the detailed information contained in the report of the House Committee on Public Lands : " The bill now before Congress has for its objective the withdrawal from settlement , occupancy , or sale , under the laws of the United States a tract of land fifty @-@ five by sixty @-@ five miles , about the sources of the Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers , and dedicates and sets apart as a great national park or pleasure @-@ ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people . " When the bill was presented to Congress , the bill 's chief supporters , ably prepared by Langford , Hayden and Jay Cooke , convinced their colleagues that the region 's real value was as a park area , to be preserved in its natural state . The bill was approved by a comfortable margin in the Senate on January 30 , 1872 , and by the House on February 27 . On March 1 , 1872 , Grant played his role , in signing the " Act of Dedication " into law . It established the Yellowstone region as the nation ’ s first national park , made possible by three years of exploration by Cook @-@ Folsom @-@ Peterson ( 1869 ) , Washburn @-@ Langford @-@ Doane ( 1870 ) , and Hayden ( 1871 ) . 
 In 1872 , around two thousand white buffalo hunters working between Wichita , Kansas , and Arkansas were killing buffalo for their hides by the many thousands . Acres of land were dedicated solely for drying the hides of the slaughtered buffalo . Native Americans protested at the " wanton destruction " of their food supply . By 1874 , 3 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 bison had been destroyed on the western and southern plains of the United States . Concern for the destruction of the buffalo mounted , and a bill in Congress was passed , HR 921 , that would have made buffalo hunting illegal for whites . Taking advice from Secretary Delano , Grant chose to pocket @-@ veto the bill , believing that the demise of the buffalo would reduce Indian wars and force tribes to stay on their respected reservations and to adapt an agricultural lifestyle rather than roaming the plains and hunting buffalo . Ranchers favored the buffalo slaughter to open pasture land for their cattle herds . With the buffalo food supply lowered , Native Americans were forced to stay on reservations . 
 The 1872 Yellowstone Act prohibited fish and game , including buffalo , from " wanton destruction " within the confines of the park . However , Congress did not appropriate funds or legislation for the enforcement against poaching ; as a result , Secretary Delano could not hire people to aid tourists or protect Yellowstone from encroachment . By the 1880s buffalo herds dwindled to only a few hundred , a majority found mostly in Yellowstone National Park . As the Indian wars ended , Congress appropriated money and enforcement legislation in 1894 , signed into law by President Grover Cleveland , that protected and preserved buffalo and other wildlife in Yellowstone . Grant also signed legislation that protected northern fur seals on Alaska ’ s Pribilof Islands . This was the first law in U.S. history that specifically protected wildlife on federally owned land . 
 = = = Foreign policies = = = 
 The foreign @-@ policy of the Administration was generally successful , except for the attempt to annex Santo Domingo . The annexation of Santo Domingo was President Grant 's " not unrealistic " effort to relieve the plight of blacks in the South during Reconstruction and was a first step to end slavery in Cuba and Brazil . The dangers of a confrontation with Britain on the Alabama question were resolved peacefully , and to the monetary advantage of the United States . Issues regarding the Canadian boundary were easily settled . The achievements were the work of Secretary Hamilton Fish , who was a spokesman for caution and stability . A poll of historians has stated that Secretary Fish was one of the greatest <unk> of States in United States history . Fish was appointed Secretary of State by Grant on March 17 , 1869 and served on Grant 's Cabinet until the end of Grant 's second term on March 4 , 1877 . Afterwards Secretary Fish briefly served on President Rutherford B. Hayes Cabinet until March 12 , 1877 . 
 = = = = Dominican Republic annexation treaty = = = = 
 In 1869 , Grant proposed to annex the independent largely black nation of the Dominican Republic , then known as Santo Domingo . Previously in 1868 , President Andrew Johnson had attempted to annex the Dominican Republic and Santo Domingo , but the House of Representatives defeated two resolutions for the protection of the Dominican Republic and Santo Domingo and for the annexation of the Dominican Republic . In July , 1869 Grant sent Orville E. Babcock and Rufus Ingalls who negotiated a draft treaty with Dominican Republic President Buenaventura Báez for the annexation of Santo Domingo to the United States and the sale of Samaná Bay for $ 2 million . To keep the island nation and Báez secure in power , Grant ordered naval ships , unauthorized by Congress , to secure the island from invasion and internal insurrection . Báez signed an annexation treaty on November 19 , 1869 offered by Babcock under federal State department authorization . Secretary Fish drew up a final draft of the proposal and offered $ 1 @.@ 5 million to the Dominican national debt , the annexation of Santo Domingo as an American state , the United States ' acquisition of the rights for Samaná Bay for 50 years with an annual $ 150 @,@ 000 rental , and guaranteed protection from foreign intervention . On January 10 , 1870 the Santo Domingo treaty was submitted to the Senate for ratification . Despite his support of the annexation , Grant made the mistakes of not informing Congress of the treaty or encouraging national acceptance and enthusiasm . 
 Not only did Grant believe that the island would be of use to the Navy tactically , particularly Samaná Bay , but also he sought to use it as a bargaining chip . By providing a safe haven for the freedmen , he believed that the exodus of black labor would force Southern whites to realize the necessity of such a significant workforce and accept their civil rights . Grant believed the island country would increase exports and lower the trade deficit . He hoped that U.S. ownership of the island would urge Cuba , Puerto Rico , and Brazil to abandon slavery . On March 15 , 1870 , the Foreign Relations Committee , headed by Sen. Charles Sumner , recommended against treaty passage . Sumner , the leading spokesman for African American civil rights , believed that annexation would be enormously expensive and involve the U.S. in an ongoing civil war , and would threaten the independence of Haiti and the West Indies , thereby blocking black political progress . On May 31 , 1870 Grant went before Congress and urged passage of the Dominican annexation treaty . Strongly opposed to ratification , Sumner successfully led the opposition in the Senate . On June 30 , 1870 the Santo Domingo annexation treaty failed to pass the Senate ; 28 votes in favor of the treaty and 28 votes against . Grant 's own cabinet was divided over the Santo Domingo annexation attempt , and Bancroft Davis , assistant to Sec . Hamilton Fish , was secretly giving information to Sen. Sumner on state department negotiations . 
 Grant was determined to keep the Dominican Republic treaty in the public debate , mentioning Dominican Republic annexation in his December , 1870 State of the Union Address . Grant was able to get Congress in January , 1871 to create a special Commission to investigate the island . Senator Sumner continued to vigorously oppose and speak out against annexation . Grant appointed Frederick Douglass , an African American civil rights activist , as one of the Commissioners who voyaged to the Dominican Republic . Returning to the United States after several months , the Commission in April 1871 , issued a report that stated the Dominican people desired annexation and that the island would be beneficial to the United States . To celebrate the Commissions return , Grant invited the Commissioners to the White House , except Frederick Douglass . African American leaders were upset and the issue of Douglass not being invited to the White House dinner was brought up during the 1872 Presidential election by Horace Greeley . Douglas , however , who was personally disappointed for not being invited to the White House , remained loyal to Grant and the Republican Party . Although the Commission supported Grant 's annexation attempt , there was not enough enthusiasm in Congress to vote on a second annexation treaty . 
 Unable constitutionally to go directly after Sen. Sumner , Grant immediately removed Sumner 's close and respected friend Ambassador , John Lothrop Motley . With Grant 's prodding in the Senate , Sumner was finally deposed from the Foreign Relations Committee . Grant reshaped his coalition , known as " New Radicals " , working with enemies of Sumner such as Ben Butler of Massachusetts , Roscoe Conkling of New York , and Oliver P. Morton of Indiana , giving in to Fish 's demands that Cuba rebels be rejected , and moving his Southern patronage from the radical blacks and carpetbaggers who were allied with Sumner to more moderate Republicans . This set the stage of the Liberal Republican revolt of 1872 , when Sumner and his allies publicly denounced Grant and supported Horace Greeley and the Liberal Republicans . 
 A Congressional investigation in June , 1870 led by Senator Carl Schurz revealed that Babcock and Ingalls both had land interests in the Bay of Samaná that would increase in value if the Santo Domingo treaty were ratified . U.S. Navy ships , with President Grant 's authorization , had been sent to protect Báez from an invasion by a Dominican rebel , Gregorio Luperón , while the treaty negotiations were taking place . The investigation had initially been called to settle a dispute between an American businessman Davis Hatch against the United States government . Báez had imprisoned Hatch without trial for his opposition to the Báez government . Hatch had claimed that the United States had failed to protect him from imprisonment . The majority Congressional report dismissed Hatch 's claim and exonerated both Babcock and Ingalls . The Hatch incident , however , kept certain Senators from being enthusiastic about ratifying the treaty . 
 = = = = Cuban insurrection = = = = 
 In 1869 , Grant was urged by popular opinion to support rebels in Cuba with military assistance and to give them U.S. diplomatic recognition . Grant and Fish instead attempted to use arbitration with Spain with minister Daniel Sickles negotiating . Grant and Fish wanted Cuban independence and to end slavery without U.S. military intervention or occupation . Fish , diligently and against popular pressure , was able to keep Grant from officially recognizing Cuban independence because it would have endangered negotiations with Britain over the Alabama Claims . The Sickle 's peace negotiations failed in Madrid , but Grant and Fish did not succumb to popular pressure for U.S. military involvement in the Cuban rebellion . Grant and Fish sent a message to Congress , written by Fish and signed by Grant . The message urged strict neutrality not to officially recognize the Cuban revolt , calming national fears . 
 = = = = Treaty of Washington = = = = 
 Historians have credited the Treaty of Washington for implementing International Arbitration to allow outside experts to settle disputes . Grant 's able Secretary of State Hamilton Fish had orchestrated many of the events leading up to the treaty . Previously , Secretary of State William H. Seward during the Johnson administration first proposed an initial treaty concerning damages done to American merchants by three Confederate warships , CSS Florida , CSS Alabama , and CSS Shenandoah built in Britain . These damages were collectively known as the Alabama Claims . These ships had inflicted tremendous damage to U.S. merchant ships during the Civil War and Washington wanted the British to pay heavy damages , perhaps including turning over Canada . 
 In April 1869 , the U.S. Senate overwhelmingly rejected a proposed treaty which paid too little and contained no admission of British guilt for prolonging the war . Senator Charles Sumner spoke up before congress ; publicly denounced Queen Victoria ; demanded a huge reparation ; and opened the possibility of Canada ceded to the United States as payment . The speech angered the British government , and talks had to be put off until matters cooled down . Negotiations for a new treaty began in January 1871 when Britain sent Sir John Rose to America to meet with Fish . A joint high commission was created on February 9 , 1871 in Washington , consisting of representatives from both Britain and the United States . The commission created a treaty where an international Tribunal would settle the damage amounts ; the British admitted regret , not fault , over the destructive actions of the Confederate war cruisers . Grant approved and signed the treaty on May 8 , 1871 ; the Senate ratified the Treaty of Washington on May 24 , 1871 . 
 The Tribunal met in Geneva , Switzerland . The U.S. was represented by Charles Francis Adams , one of five international arbitrators , and was counseled by William M. Evarts , Caleb Cushing , and Morrison R. Waite . On August 25 , 1872 , the Tribunal awarded United States $ 15 @.@ 5 million in gold ; $ 1 @.@ 9 million was awarded to Great Britain . Historian Amos Elwood Corning noted that the Treaty of Washington and arbitration " bequeathed to the world a priceless legacy " . In addition to the $ 15 @.@ 5 million arbitration award , the treaty resolved some disputes over borders and fishing rights . On October 21 , 1872 William I , Emperor of Germany , settled a boundary dispute in favor of the United States . 
 = = = = Korean incident = = = = 
 A primary role of the United States Navy in the 19th century was to protect American commercial interests and open trade to Eastern markets , including Japan and China . Korea had excluded all foreign trade and , the U.S. sought a treaty dealing with shipwrecked sailors after the crew of a stranded American commercial ship was killed . The long @-@ term goal for the Grant Administration was to open Korea to Western markets in the same way Commodore Matthew Perry had opened Japan in 1854 by a Naval display of military force . On May 30 , 1871 Rear Admiral John Rodgers with a fleet of five ships , part of the Asiatic Squadron , arrived at the mouth of the <unk> River below Seoul . The fleet included the Colorado , one of the largest ships in the Navy with 47 guns , 47 officers , and a 571 @-@ man crew . While waiting for senior Korean officials to negotiate , Rogers sent ships out to make soundings of the <unk> River for navigational purposes . 
 The American fleet was fired upon by a Korean fort , but there was little damage . Rogers gave the Korean government ten days to apologize or begin talks , but the Royal Court kept silent . After ten days passed , on June 10 , Rogers began a series of amphibious assaults that destroyed 5 Korean forts . These military engagements were known as the Battle of Ganghwa . Several hundred Korean soldiers and three Americans were killed . Korea still refused to negotiate , and the American fleet sailed away . The Koreans refer to this 1871 U.S. military action as <unk> . President Grant defended Rogers in his third annual message to Congress in December , 1871 . After a change in regimes in Seoul , in 1881 , the U.S. negotiated a treaty – the first treaty between Korea and a Western nation . 
 = = Corruption and reform ( 1869 @-@ 1873 ) = = 
 The main scandals included Black Friday in 1869 and the Whiskey Ring in 1875 . The Crédit Mobilier is not a Grant scandal ; its origins having been in 1864 during the Abraham Lincoln Administration which carried over into the Andrew Johnson Administration . The actual Crédit Mobilier scandal was exposed during the Grant Administration in 1872 as the result of political infighting between Congressman Oakes Ames and Congressman Henry S. McComb . Stocks owned by Ambassador to Britain Robert C. Schenck in the fraudulent Emma Silver Mine is considered a Grant Administration embarrassment rather than a scandal . Although Grant 's Administration had many successes during the first term as President in the economy , civil rights , and foreign policy , scandals associated with the Administration were beginning to emerge publicly . Although Grant himself was not directly responsible for and did not profit from the corruption among subordinates , he was reluctant to believe friends could commit criminal activities . As a result , he failed to take any direct action and rarely reacted strongly after their guilt was established . Grant protected close friends with Presidential power and pardoned persons who were convicted in the Whiskey Ring scandal after serving only a few months in prison . When his second term ended , Grant wrote to Congress that " Failures have been errors of judgment , not of intent " . Nepotism was rampant ; around 40 family relatives financially prospered while Grant was President . 
 = = = Gold Ring thwarted = = = 
 In September 1869 , financial manipulators Jay Gould and Jim Fisk set up an elaborate scam to corner the gold market through buying up all the gold at the same time to drive up the price . The plan was to keep the Government from selling gold , thus driving its price . President Grant and Secretary of Treasury George S. Boutwell found out about the gold market speculation and ordered the sale of $ 4 million in gold on ( Black ) Friday , September 23 . Gould and Fisk were thwarted , and the price of gold dropped . The effects of releasing the gold by Boutwell were disastrous . Stock prices plunged and food prices dropped , devastating farmers for years . 
 = = = Civil service commission = = = 
 Grant was the first U.S. President to recommend a professional civil service , pushed the initial legislation through Congress , and appointed the members for the first United States Civil Service Commission . The temporary Commission recommended administering competitive exams and issuing regulations on the hiring and promotion of government employees . Grant ordered their recommendations in effect in 1872 ; having lasted for two years until December , 1874 . At the New York Custom House , a port that took in hundreds of millions of dollars a year in revenue , persons who applied for an entry position had to take and pass a civil service examination . Chester A. Arthur who was appointed by Grant as New York Custom Collector stated that the examinations excluded and deterred unfit persons from getting employment positions . However , Congress , in no mood to reform itself , denied any long @-@ term reform by refusing to enact the necessary legislation to make the changes permanent . Historians have traditionally been divided whether patronage , meaning appointments made without a merit system , should be labelled corruption . 
 The movement for Civil Service reform reflected two distinct objectives : to eliminate the corruption and inefficiencies in a non @-@ professional bureaucracy , and to check the power of President Johnson . Although many reformers after the Election of 1868 looked to Grant to ram Civil Service legislation through Congress , he refused , saying : " Civil Service Reform rests entirely with Congress . If members will give up claiming patronage , that will be a step gained . But there is an immense amount of human nature in the members of Congress , and it is human nature to seek power and use it to help friends . You cannot call it corruption – it is a condition of our representative form of Government . " Grant used patronage to build his party and help his friends . He protected those whom he thought were the victims of injustice or attacks by his enemies , even if they were guilty . Grant believed in loyalty with his friends , as one writer called it the " Chivalry of Friendship " . 
 = = = Star Route Postal Ring = = = 
 In the early 1870s during the Grant Administration , lucrative postal route contracts were given to local contractors on the Pacific Coast and Southern regions of the United States . These were known as Star Routes because an asterisk was given on official Post Office documents . These remote routes were hundreds of miles long and went to the most rural parts of the United States by horse and buggy . In obtaining these highly prized postal contracts , an intricate ring of bribery and straw bidding was set up in the Postal Contract office ; the ring consisted of contractors , postal clerks , and various intermediary brokers . Straw bidding was at its highest practice while John Creswell , Grant 's 1869 appointment , was Postmaster @-@ General . An 1872 federal investigation into the matter exonerated Creswell , but he was censured by the minority House report . A $ 40 @,@ 000 bribe to the 42nd Congress by one postal contractor had tainted the results of the investigation . In 1876 , another congressional investigation under a Democratic House shut down the postal ring for a few years . 
 = = = New York Custom House Ring = = = 
 Prior to the Presidential Election of 1872 two congressional and one Treasury Department investigations took place over corruption at the New York Custom House under Grant collector appointments Moses H. Grinnell and Thomas Murphy . Private warehouses were taking imported goods from the docks and charging shippers storage fees . Grant 's friend , George K. Leet , was allegedly involved with exorbitant pricing for storing goods and splitting the profits . Grant 's third collector appointment , Chester A. Arthur , implemented Secretary of Treasury George S. Boutwell 's reform to keep the goods protected on the docks rather than private storage . 
 = = = Salary grab = = = 
 On March 3 , 1873 , President Grant signed a law that authorized the President 's salary to be increased from $ 25 @,@ 000 a year to $ 50 @,@ 000 a year and Congressmen 's salaries to be increased by $ 2 @,@ 500 . Representatives also received a retroactive pay bonus for previous two years of service . This was done in secret and attached to a general appropriations bill . Reforming newspapers quickly exposed the law and the bonus was repealed in January 1874 . Grant missed an opportunity to veto the bill and to make a strong statement for good government . Congress sustained Grant 's $ 50 @,@ 000 a year salary . 
 = = Election of 1872 = = 
 Grant remained popular throughout the nation despite the scandals evident during his first term in office . Grant had supported a patronage system that allowed Republicans to infiltrate and control state governments . In response to President Grant 's federal patronage , in 1870 , Senator Carl Schurz from Missouri , a German immigrant and Civil War hero , started a second party known as the Liberal Republicans ; they advocated civil service reform , a low tariff , and amnesty to former Confederate soldiers . The Liberal Republicans successfully ran B.G. Brown for the governorship of Missouri and won with Democrat support . Then in 1872 , the party completely split from the Republican party and nominated New York Tribune editor Horace Greeley as candidate for the Presidency . The Democrats , who at this time had no strong candidate choice of their own , reluctantly adopted Greeley as their candidate with Governor B.G. Brown as his running mate . Frederick Douglass supported Grant and reminded black voters that Grant had destroyed the violent Ku Klux Klan . 
 The Republicans , who were content with their Reconstruction program for the South , renominated Grant and Massachusetts Senator Henry Wilson in 1872 . Wilson , a practical reformer , was intended to <unk> the ticket , and potentially mend the political rift that grew between Grant and Sumner . Grant had remained a popular Civil War hero , and the Republicans continued to wave the " bloody shirt " as a patriotic symbol representing the North . The Republicans favored high tariffs and a continuation of Radical Reconstruction policies that supported five military districts in the Southern states . Grant also favored amnesty to former Confederate soldiers like the Liberal Republicans . Because of political infighting between Liberal Republicans and Democrats , the physically ailing Greeley was no match for the " Hero of Appomattox " and lost dismally in the popular vote . Grant swept 286 Electoral College votes while other minor candidates received only 63 votes . Grant won 55 @.@ 8 percent of the popular vote between Greeley and the other minor candidates . Heartbroken after a hard fought political campaign , Greeley died a few weeks after the election and was able to receive only 3 electoral votes . Out of respect for Greeley , Grant attended his funeral . 
 = = Second Term 1873 – 1877 = = 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 Conservative resistance to Republican state governments grew after the 1872 elections . With the destruction of the Klan in 1872 , new secret paramilitary organizations arose in the Deep South . In Mississippi , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Louisiana , the Red Shirts and White League operated openly and were better organized than the Ku Klux Klan . Their goals were to oust the Republicans , return Conservative whites to power , and use whatever illegal methods needed to achieve them . Being loyal to his veterans , Grant remained determined that African Americans would receive protection . 
 = = = = Colfax Massacre = = = = 
 After the November 4 , 1872 election , Louisiana was a split state . In a controversial election , two candidates were claiming victory as governor . Violence was used to intimidate black Republicans . The fusionist party of Liberal Republicans and Democrats claimed John McEnery as the victor , while the Republicans claimed U.S. Senator William P. Kellogg . Two months later each candidate was sworn in as governor on January 13 , 1873 . A federal judge ruled that Kellogg was the rightful winner of the election and ordered him and the Republican @-@ based majority to be seated . The White League supported McEnry and prepared to use military force to remove Kellogg from office . Grant ordered troops to enforce the court order and protect Kellogg . On March 4 , Federal troops under a flag of truce and Kellogg 's state militia defeated McEnry 's fusionist party 's insurrection . 
 A dispute arose over who would be installed as judge and sheriff at the Colfax courthouse in Grant Parish . Kellogg 's two appointees had seized control of the Court House on March 25 with aid and protection of black state militia troops . Then on April 13 , White League forces attacked the courthouse and massacred 50 black militiamen who had been captured . A total of 105 blacks were killed trying to defend the Colfax courthouse for Governor Kellogg . On April 21 , Grant sent in the U.S. 19th Infantry Regiment to restore order . On May 22 , Grant issued a new proclamation to restore order in Louisiana . On May 31 , McEnry finally told his followers to obey " peremptory orders " of the President . The orders brought a brief peace to New Orleans and most of Louisiana , except , ironically , Grant Parish . 
 = = = = The Brooks @-@ Baxter war in Arkansas = = = = 
 In the fall of 1872 the Republican party split in Arkansas and ran two candidates for governor , Elisha Baxter and Joseph Brooks . Massive fraud characterized the election , but Baxter was declared the winner and took office . Brooks never gave up , and finally in 1874 a local judge ruled Brooks was entitled to the office and swore him in . Both sides mobilized militia units , and rioting and fighting bloodied the streets . There was anticipation who President Grant would side with – either Baxter or Brooks . Grant delayed , requesting a joint session of the Arkansas government to figure out peacefully who would be the Governor , but Baxter refused to participate . Then , on May 15 , 1874 , President Grant issued a Proclamation that Baxter was the legitimate Governor of Arkansas , and the hostilities ceased . In fall of 1874 the people of Arkansas voted out Baxter , and all the Republicans and the Redeemers came to power . A few months later in early 1875 , Grant astonished the nation by reversing himself and announcing that Brooks had been legitimately elected back in 1872 . Grant did not send in troops , and Brooks never regained office ; instead Grant gave him the high @-@ paying patronage job of postmaster in Little Rock . Brooks died in 1877 . The episode brought further discredit to Grant . 
 = = = = Vicksburg riots = = = = 
 In August 1874 , the Vicksburg city government elected a White reform party consisting of Republicans and Democrats . This was done initially to lower city spending and taxes . Despite their early intentions , the reform movement turned racist when the new White city officials went after the county government , which had a majority of African Americans . Rather than using legal means , the White League threatened the life of and expelled Crosby , the black county sheriff and tax collector . Crosby then went to Governor Adelbert Ames to seek help to regain his position as sheriff . Governor Ames told him to take other African Americans and use force to retain his lawful position as Sheriff of Warren County . At that time Vicksburg had a population of 12 @,@ 443 , over half of whom were African American . 
 On December 7 , 1874 , Crosby and an African American militia approached the city . He had declared that the Whites were , " ruffians , barbarians , and political <unk> " . A series of battles occurred that resulted in 29 African Americans and 2 Whites killed . The White militia retained control of the Court House and jail . On December 21 , Grant gave a Presidential Proclamation for the people in Vicksburg to stop fighting . Philip Sheridan in Louisiana dispatched troops who reinstated Crosby as sheriff and restored the peace . When questioned about the matter , Governor Ames denied he had told Crosby to use African American militia . On June 7 , 1875 , Crosby was shot to death by a White deputy while drinking in a bar . The origins for the shooting remained a mystery . 
 = = = = Louisiana revolt and coups = = = = 
 On September 14 , 1874 , the White League and Democratic militia took control of the state house at New Orleans , and the Republican Governor William P. Kellogg was forced to flee . Former Confederate General James A. Longstreet , with 3 @,@ 000 African American militia and 400 Metropolitan police , made a counterattack on the 8 @,@ 000 White League troops . Consisting of former Confederate soldiers , the experienced White League troops routed Longstreet 's army . On September 17 , Grant sent in Federal troops , and they restored the government back to Kellogg . During the following controversial election in November , passions rose high , and violence mixed with fraud were rampant ; the state of affairs in New Orleans was becoming out of control . The results were that 53 Republicans and 53 Democrats were elected with 5 remaining seats to be decided by the legislature . 
 Grant had been careful to watch the elections and secretly sent Phil Sheridan in to keep law and order in the state . Sheridan had arrived in New Orleans a few days before the January 4 , 1875 legislature opening meeting . At the convention the Democrats again with military force took control of the state building out of Republican hands . Initially , the Democrats were protected by federal troops under Colonel Régis de Trobriand , and the escaped Republicans were removed from the hallways of the state building . However , Governor Kellogg then requested that Trobriand <unk> the Republicans . Trobriand returned to the State house and used bayonets to force the Democrats out of the building . The Republicans then organized their own house with their own speakers all being protected by the Federal Army . Sheridan , who had annexed the Department of the Gulf to his command at 9 : 00 P.M. , claimed that the federal troops were being neutral since they had also protected the Democrats earlier . 
 = = = = South Carolina 1876 = = = = 
 During the election year of 1876 , South Carolina was in a state of rebellion against Republican governor Daniel H. Chamberlain . Conservatives were determined to win the election for ex @-@ Confederate Wade Hampton through violence and intimidation . The Republicans went on to nominate Chamberlain for a second term . Hampton supporters , donning red shirts , disrupted Republican meetings with gun shootings and yelling . Tensions became violent on July 8 , 1876 when five African Americans were murdered at Hamburg . The rifle clubs , wearing their Red Shirts , were better armed then the blacks . South Carolina was ruled more by " <unk> and bloodshed " than by Chamberlain 's government . 
 Black militia fought back in Charleston on September 6 , 1876 in what was known as the " King Street riot " . The white militia assumed defensive positions out of concern over possible intervention from federal troops . Then , on September 19 , the Red Shirts took offensive action by openly killing between 30 and 50 African Americans outside Ellenton . During the massacre , state representative Simon Coker was killed . On October 7 , Governor Chamberlain declared martial law and told all the " rifle club " members to put down their weapons . In the meantime , Wade Hampton never ceased to remind Chamberlain that he did not rule South Carolina . Out of desperation , Chamberlain wrote to President Grant and asked for federal intervention . The " Cainhoy riot " took place on October 15 when Republicans held a rally at " Brick Church " outside Cainhoy . Blacks and whites both opened fire ; six whites and one black were killed . Grant , upset over the Ellenton and Cainhoy riots , finally declared a Presidential Proclamation on October 17 , 1876 and ordered all persons , within 3 days , to cease their lawless activities and disperse to their homes . A total of 1 @,@ 144 federal infantrymen were sent into South Carolina , and the violence stopped ; election day was quiet . Both Hampton and Chamberlain claimed victory , and for a while both acted as governor ; Hampton took the office in 1877 , after President Rutherford B. Hayes withdrew federal troops and after Chamberlain left the state . 
 = = = Indian affairs = = = 
 Under Grant 's peace policy , wars between settlers , the federal army , and the American Indians had been decreasing from 101 per year in 1869 to a low of 15 per year in 1875 . However , the discovery of gold in the Black Hills of the Dakota Territory and the completion of the Northern Pacific Railway , threatened to unravel Grant 's peace policy , as white settlers encroached upon native land to mine for gold . Indian wars per year jumped up to 32 in 1876 and remained at 43 in 1877 . One of the highest casualty Indian battles that took place in American history was at the Battle of Little Bighorn in 1876 . Indian war casualties in Montana went from 5 in 1875 , to 613 in 1876 and 436 in 1877 . 
 = = = = Modoc War = = = = 
 In January 1873 , Grant 's Native American peace policy was challenged . Two weeks after Grant was elected for a second term , fighting broke out between the Modocs and settlers near the California @-@ Oregon border . The Modocs , led by Captain Jack , killed 18 white settlers and then found a strong defensive position . Grant ordered General Sherman not to attack the Indians but settle matters peacefully with a commission . Sherman then sent Major General Edward Canby , but Captain Jack killed him . Reverend Eleazar Thomas , a Methodist minister , was also killed . Alfred B. Meacham , an Indian Agent , was severely wounded . The murders shocked the nation , and Sherman wired to have the Modocs exterminated . Grant overruled Sherman ; Captain Jack was executed , and the remaining 155 Modocs were relocated to the Quapaw Agency in the Indian Territory . This episode and the Great Sioux War undermined public confidence in Grant 's peace policy , according to historian Robert M. Utley . 
 = = = = Red River War = = = = 
 In 1874 , war erupted on the southern Plains when Quanah Parker , leader of the Comanche , led 700 tribal warriors and attacked the buffalo hunter supply base on the Canadian River , at Adobe Walls , Texas . The Army under General Phil Sheridan launched a military campaign , and , with few casualties on either side , forced the Indians back to their reservations by destroying their horses and winter food supplies . Grant , who agreed to the Army plan advocated by Generals William T. Sherman and Phil Sheridan , imprisoned 74 insurgents in Florida . 
 = = = = Bureau of Indian Affairs corruption = = = = 
 In 1874 , massive fraud prevailed in the Bureau of Indian Affairs under Secretary of the Interior Columbus Delano . This proved to be the most serious detriment to Grant 's Indian peace policy . Many agents that worked for the department made unscrupulous fortunes and retired with more money than their pay would allow . Secretary Delano had allowed " Indian Attorneys " who were paid by Native American tribes $ 8 @.@ 00 a day plus food and traveling expenses for sham representation in Washington . Other corruption charges were brought up against Secretary Delano and he was forced to resign . In 1875 , Grant appointed Zachariah Chandler as Secretary of the Interior . Chandler vigorously uncovered and cleaned up the fraud in the department by firing all the clerks and banned the phony " Indian Attorneys " access to Washington . Grant 's " Quaker " or church appointments partially made up the lack of food staples and housing from the government . 
 = = = = Great Sioux War = = = = 
 In 1874 gold had been discovered in the Black Hills in the Dakota Territory . White speculators and settlers rushed in droves seeking riches mining gold on land reserved for the Sioux tribe by the Treaty of Fort Laramie of 1868 . In 1875 , to avoid conflict President Grant met with Red Cloud , chief of the Sioux , at Washington , D.C. , and offered $ 25 @,@ 000 from the government to purchase the land . The offer was declined . On November 3 , 1875 at a White House meeting , Phil Sheridan claimed to the President that the Army was overstretched and could not defend the Sioux tribe from the settlers ; Grant capitulated ; ordered Sheridan to round up the Sioux and put them on the reservation . Sheridan used a strategy of convergence , using Army columns to force the Sioux onto the reservation . On June 25 , 1876 , one of these columns , led by Colonel George A. Custer met the Sioux at the Battle of Little Big Horn and was slaughtered . Approximately 253 federal soldiers and civilians were killed compared to 40 American Indians . Custer 's death and the Battle of Little Big Horn shocked the nation . Sheridan avenged Custer , pacified the northern Plains , and put the defeated Sioux on the reservation . On August 15 , 1876 President Grant signed a proviso giving the Sioux nation $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in rations , while the Sioux relinquished all rights to the Black Hills , except for a 40 @-@ mile land tract west of the 103 meridian . On August 28 , a seven @-@ man committee , appointed by Grant , gave additional harsh stipulations for the Sioux in order to receive government assistance . <unk> and " squaw men " were banished from the Sioux reservation . To receive the government rations , the Indians had to work the land . Reluctantly , on September 20 , the Indian leaders , whose people were starving , agreed to the committee 's demands and signed the agreement . 
 During the Great Sioux War , Grant came into conflict with Col. George Armstrong Custer after he testified in 1876 about corruption in the War Department under Secretary William W. Belknap ( see below ) . Grant had Custer arrested for breach of military protocol in Chicago and barred him from leading an upcoming campaign against the Sioux . Grant finally relented and let Custer fight under Brig. Gen. Alfred Terry . Custer was killed at the subsequent Battle of the Little Big Horn , a defeat for the federal army . Two months later , Grant castigated Custer in the press , saying " I regard Custer 's massacre as a sacrifice of troops , brought on by Custer himself , that was wholly unnecessary -- wholly unnecessary . " As the nation was shocked by the death of Custer , Grant 's Peace policy became militaristic ; Congress appropriated funds for 2 @,@ 500 more troops , two more forts were constructed , the army took over the Indian agencies , while Indians were barred from purchasing rifles and ammunition . 
 = = = Visited Colorado Territory = = = 
 Grant was the first President to visit the Colorado Territory in late April 1873 , having traveled by the Union Pacific Railroad , who had made a special presidential car . President Grant stayed at the residence of Governor Samuel H. Elbert , whom Grant had appointed earlier in April . Grant 's presidential party included his wife , daughter Nellie , and his private secretary Orville E. Babcock . At a reception held by Governor Elbert at Guard Hall , Grant was met by many white people who aggressively sought his handshake . Grant met with 30 to 40 Ute Indians , who had desired to see the " Great Father " , and shook their hands . Former Colorado Territory Governors John Evans and Edward M. McCook also met with Grant while he visited the Colorado Territory . President Grant was impressed by Colorado 's " <unk> scenery " and expressed his desire to revisit the territory . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 = = = = Civil Rights Act of 1875 = = = = 
 Throughout his presidency , Grant was continually concerned with the civil rights of all Americans , " irrespective of nationality , color , or religion . " Grant signed the Civil Rights Act of 1875 that allowed citizens access to public eating establishments , hotels , and places of entertainment . This was done particularly to protect African Americans who were discriminated across United States . The bill was also passed in honor of Senator Charles Sumner who had previously attempted to pass a civil rights bill in 1872 . 
 = = = = Polygamy and Chinese prostitution = = = = 
 In October 1875 , Grant traveled to Utah and was surprised that the Mormons treated him kindly . He told Utah territorial governor , George W. Emery , that he had been deceived concerning the Mormons . However , on December 7 , 1875 after his return to Washington , Grant wrote to Congress in his seventh annual state of the Union address that as " an institution polygamy should be banished from the land … " Grant believed that polygamy negatively affected children and women . Grant advocated that a second law , stronger than the Morrill Act , be passed to " punish so flagrant a crime against decency and morality . " 
 Grant also denounced the immigration of Chinese women into the United States for the purposes of prostitution , saying that it was " no less an evil " than polygamy . 
 = = = Secular education = = = 
 Grant believed strongly in the separation of church and state and championed complete secularization in public schools . In a September 1875 speech , Grant advocated " security of free thought , free speech , and free press , pure morals , unfettered religious sentiments , and of equal rights and privileges to all men , irrespective of nationality , color , or religion . " In regard to public education , Grant endorsed that every child should receive " the opportunity of a good common school education , unmixed with sectarian , pagan , or atheist tenets . Leave the matter of religion to the family altar , the church , and the private schools ... Keep the church and the state forever separate . " 
 = = = Support for Jews = = = 
 Grant very much regretted his wartime order expelling Jewish traders . The Jewish community was angry with Grant , and feared for their status in America even though President Lincoln forced Grant to rescind the order immediately . Grant publicly apologized for it in 1868 . When he became president in 1869 , he set out to make amends . Historian Jonathan Sarna argues : 
 Eager to prove that he was above prejudice , Grant appointed more Jews to public office than had any of his predecessors and , in the name of human rights , he extended unprecedented support to persecuted Jews in Russia and Romania . Time and again , partly as a result of this enlarged vision of what it meant to be an American and partly in order to live down General Orders No. 11 , Grant consciously worked to assist Jews and secure them equality .... Through his appointments and policies , Grant rejected calls for a ' Christian nation ' and embraced Jews as insiders in America , part of " we the people . " During his administration , Jews achieved heightened status on the national scene , anti @-@ Jewish prejudice declined , and Jews look forward optimistically to a liberal epoch characterized by sensitivity to human rights and interreligious cooperation . ” 
 = = = Panic of 1873 = = = 
 The Panic of 1873 was a worldwide depression that started when the stock market in Vienna , Austria crashed in June that year . Unsettling markets soon spread to Berlin and throughout Europe . The panic eventually reached New York when two banks went broke – the New York Warehouse & Security Company on September 18 and the major railroad financier Jay Cooke & Company on September 19 . The ensuing depression lasted 5 years , ruined thousands of businesses , depressed daily wages by 25 % from 1873 to 1876 , and brought the unemployment rate up to 14 % . 
 The causes of the panic in the United States included the destruction of credit from over @-@ speculation in the stock markets and railroad industry . Eight years of unprecedented growth after the Civil War had brought thousands of miles of railroad construction , thousands of industrial factories , and a strong stock market ; the South experienced a boom in agriculture . However , all this growth was done on borrowed money by many banks in the United States that have over @-@ speculated in the Railroad industry by as much as $ 20 million . A stringent monetary policy under Secretary of Treasury George S. Boutwell , during the height of the railroad speculations , contributed to unsettled markets . Boutwell created monetary stringency by selling more gold then he bought bonds . The Coinage Act of 1873 made gold the de facto currency metal over silver . 
 On September 20 , 1873 the Grant Administration finally responded . Grant 's Secretary of Treasury William Adams Richardson , Boutwell 's replacement , bought $ 2 @.@ 5 million of five @-@ twenty bonds with gold . On Monday , September 22 , Richardson bought $ 3 million of bonds with legal tender notes or greenbacks and purchased $ 5 @.@ 5 million in legal tender certificates . From September 24 to September 25 the Treasury department bought $ 24 million in bonds and certificates with greenbacks . On September 29 the Secretary prepaid the interest on $ 12 million bonds bought from security banks . From October , 1873 to January 4 , 1874 Richardson kept liquidating bonds until $ 26 million greenback reserves were issued to make up for lost revenue in the Treasury . These actions did help curb the effects of the general panic by allowing more currency into the commercial banks and hence allowing more money to be lent and spent . Historians have blamed the Grant administration for not responding to the crisis promptly and for not taking adequate measures to reduce the negative effects of the general panic . The monetary policies of both Secretary Boutwell and Richardson were inconsistent from 1872 to 1873 . The government 's ultimate failure was in not reestablishing confidence in the businesses that had been the source of distrust . The Panic of 1873 eventually ran its course despite all the limited efforts from the government . 
 Grant 's " cronyism " , as Smith ( 2001 ) calls it , was apparent when he overruled Army experts to help a wartime friend , engineer , James B. Eads . Eads was building a major railroad bridge across the Mississippi at St. Louis that had been authorized by Congress in 1866 , and was nearing completion in 1873 . However , the Army Corps of Engineers chief of engineers , agreeing with steam boat interests , ordered Eads to build a canal around the bridge because the bridge would be " a serious obstacle to navigation . " After talking with Eads at the White House , Grant reversed the order and the 6 @,@ 442 feet ( 1 @,@ 964 m ) long steel arched bridge went on to completion in 1874 without a canal . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 = = = = Vetoes inflation bill = = = = 
 The rapidly accelerated industrial growth in post @-@ Civil War America and throughout the world crashed with the Panic of 1873 . Many banks overextended their loans and went bankrupt as a result , causing a general panic throughout the nation . In an attempt to put capital into a stringent monetary economy , Secretary of Treasury William A. Richardson released $ 26 million in greenbacks . Many argued that Richardson 's monetary policies were not enough and some argued were illegal . In 1874 , Congress debated the inflationary policy to stimulate the economy and passed the Inflation Bill of 1874 that would release an additional $ 18 million in greenbacks up to the original $ 400 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 amount . Eastern bankers vigorously lobbied Grant to veto the bill because of their reliance on bonds and foreign investors who did business in gold . Grant 's cabinet was bitterly divided over this issue while conservative Secretary of State Hamilton Fish threatened to resign if Grant signed the bill . On April 22 , 1874 , after evaluating his own reasons for wanting to sign the bill , Grant unexpectedly vetoed the bill against the popular election strategy of the Republican Party because he believed it would destroy the nation 's credit . 
 = = = = Resumption of Specie Act = = = = 
 On January 14 , 1875 , Grant signed the Resumption of Specie Act , and he could not have been happier ; he wrote a note to Congress congratulating members on the passage of the act . The legislation was drafted by Ohio Republican Senator John Sherman . This act provided that paper money in circulation would be exchanged for gold specie and silver coins and would be effective January 1 , 1879 . The act also implemented that gradual steps would be taken to reduce the amount of greenbacks in circulation . At that time there were " paper coin " currency worth less than $ 1 @.@ 00 , and these would be exchanged for silver coins . Its effect was to stabilize the currency and make the consumers money as " good as gold " . In an age without a Federal Reserve system to control inflation , this act stabilized the economy . Grant considered it the hallmark of his administration . 
 = = = Foreign Policy = = = 
 = = = = <unk> affair = = = = 
 On October 31 , 1873 , a steamer Virginius , flying the American flag carrying war materials and men to aid the Cuban insurrection ( in violation of American and Spanish law ) was intercepted and taken to Cuba . After a hasty trial , the local Spanish officials executed 53 would @-@ be insurgents , eight of whom were United States citizens ; orders from Madrid to delay the executions arrived too late . War scares erupted in both the U.S. and Spain , heightened by the bellicose dispatches from the American minister in Madrid , retired general Daniel Sickles . Secretary of State Fish kept a cool demeanor in the crisis , and through investigation discovered there was a question over whether the Virginius ship had the right to bear the United States flag . The Spanish Republic 's President Emilio Castelar expressed profound regret for the tragedy and was willing to make reparations through arbitration . Fish negotiated reparations with the Spanish minister Senor Poly y <unk> . With Grant 's approval , Spain was to surrender Virginius , pay an indemnity to the surviving families of the Americans executed , and salute the American flag ; the episode ended quietly . 
 = = = = Hawaiian free trade treaty = = = = 
 In December 1874 , Grant held a state dinner at the White House for the King of Hawaii , David Kalakaua , who was seeking the importation of Hawaiian sugar duty @-@ free to the United States . Grant and Fish were able to produce a successful free trade treaty in 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii , incorporating the Pacific islands ' sugar industry into the United States ' economy sphere . 
 = = = = Liberian @-@ Grebo war = = = = 
 The U.S. settled the war between Liberia and the native Grebo people in 1876 by dispatching the USS Alaska to Liberia . James Milton Turner , the first African American ambassador from the United States , requested that a warship be sent to protect American property in Liberia , a former American colony . After Alaska arrived , Turner negotiated the incorporation of Grebo people into Liberian society and the ousting of foreign traders from Liberia . 
 = = Corruption and reform ( 1873 @-@ 1877 ) = = 
 Scandals and frauds continued to be exposed during President Grant 's second term in office . The Democrats along with the Liberal Republicans had gained control of the House of Representatives and held many Committee meetings to stop political graft . The main scandal was the Whiskey Ring where the investigation went up to Grant himself . The Emma Silver mine was a minor embarrassment associated with American Ambassador to Britain , Robert C. Schenck , using his name to promote a worked out silver mine . The Crédit Mobilier scandal 's origins were during the presidential Administrations of Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson , however , political congressional infighting during the Grant Administration exposed the scandal . 
 = = = Scandal cabinet and appointees = = = 
 The most infamous of Grant 's cabinet or other presidential appointees who were involved in scandals or criminal activity : 
 Daniel Butterfield , Assistant Secretary of Treasury – ( Black <unk> 1869 ) ( Forced to resign by Grant . ) 
 William A. Richardson , Secretary of Treasury – ( Sanborn <unk> 1874 ) ( Resigned and appointed Federal Judge by Grant . ) 
 George H. Williams , Attorney General – ( Pratt & <unk> 1875 ) ( Resigned ) 
 Columbus Delano , Secretary of Interior – ( Bogus Agents – 1875 ) ( Resigned ) 
 Orville E. Babcock , Private Secretary – ( Black Friday – 1869 ) ( Whiskey Ring – 1875 ) ( Safe Burglary Conspiracy – 1876 ) ( Acquitted in Saint Louis Whiskey Ring trials by jury due to Grant 's defense testimony in his favor . ) 
 John McDonald , Internal Revenue Supervisor , St. Louis – ( Whiskey Ring – 1875 ) ( Indicted and convicted ; served prison time ; claimed Grant was involved in the Whiskey Ring but did not supply any evidence . ) 
 Horace Porter , Private Secretary – ( Whiskey Ring – 1875 ) 
 William W. Belknap , Secretary of War – ( Trading Post <unk> 1876 ) ( Resigned ; Convicted by House ; acquitted by Senate ; indictments against Belknap in Washington D.C. court were dropped by judge at request of Grant and Attorney General Alphonso Taft . ) 
 George M. Robeson , Secretary of Navy – ( Naval Department <unk> 1876 ) ( Grant defended Robeson in State of the Union address . Grant believed Robeson had kept U.S. Navy as modern as possible during his lengthy tenure . ) 
 = = = Sanborn contracts = = = 
 In June 1874 , Treasury Secretary William A. Richardson gave private contracts to one John D. Sanborn who in turn collected illegally withheld taxes for fees at inflated commissions . The profits from the commissions were allegedly split with Richardson and Senator Benjamin Butler , while Sanborn claimed these payments were " expenses " . Senator Butler had written a loophole in the law that allowed Sanborn to collect the commissions , but Sanborn would not reveal whom he split the profits with . 
 = = = Pratt & Boyd = = = 
 In April 1875 , it was discovered that Attorney General George H. Williams allegedly received a bribe through a $ 30 @,@ 000 gift to his wife from a Merchant house company , Pratt & Boyd , to drop the case for fraudulent customhouse entries . Williams was forced to resign by Grant in 1875 . 
 = = = Delano affair = = = 
 In 1875 , the U.S. Department of the Interior was in serious disrepair with corruption and incompetence . The Secretary of Interior Columbus Delano , discovered to have taken bribes to secure fraudulent land grants , resigned from office on October 15 , 1875 . Delano had also given bogus lucrative cartographical contracts to his son John Delano and Ulysses S. Grant 's own brother , Orvil Grant . Neither John Delano nor Orvil Grant performed any work or were skillfully qualified to hold such surveying positions . The Department of Indian Affairs was being controlled by corrupt clerks and bogus agents who made enormous profits from the exploitation of Native American tribes . Massive fraud was also found in the Patent Office with corrupt clerks who embezzled from the government payroll . Delano who refused to make any reforms resigned under public pressure rather than Grant asking for a resignation . It was another missed opportunity for Grant to support ethics in government . However , on October 19 , 1875 , Grant made another reforming cabinet choice when he appointed Zachariah Chandler as Secretary of the Interior . Chandler cleaned up the Patent Office and the Department of Indian Affairs by firing all the corrupt clerks and banned bogus agents . 
 = = = Whiskey Ring prosecuted = = = 
 In May 1875 , Secretary of Treasury Benjamin H. Bristow discovered that millions of dollars of taxes were being funneled into an illegal ring from whiskey manufacturers . Prosecutions ensued , and many were put in prison . Grant 's private Secretary Orville E. Babcock was indicted and later acquitted in trial . The Whiskey Ring was organized throughout the United States , and by 1875 it was a fully operating criminal association . The investigation and closure of the Whiskey Ring resulted in 230 indictments , 110 convictions , and $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in tax revenues that were returned to the Treasury Department . During the prosecution of the Whiskey Ring leaders , Grant testified on behalf of his friend Babcock . As a result , Babcock was acquitted , however , the deposition by Grant was a great embarrassment to his reputation . The Babcock trial turned into an impeachment trial against the President by Grant 's political opponents . 
 = = = Trading post ring = = = 
 In March 1876 it was discovered under House investigations that Secretary of War William W. Belknap was taking extortion money in exchange for allowing an Indian trading post agent to remain in position at Fort Sill . Belknap was allowed to resign by President Grant and as a result was acquitted in a Senate impeachment trial . Profits were made at the expense of Native Americans who were supposed to receive food and clothing from the government . In late April 1876 , Grant lashed out at Lieut . Col. George A. Custer , after Custer had testified at a Congressional committee one month before against Grant 's brother Orville and Sec . Belknap . There had been rumors Custer had talked with the press concerning the Indian post profiteering . Custer personally went to the White House to clear matters up with the President , however , Grant refused to see him three times . When Custer left Washington on May 3 to return to Fort Lincoln , he had been removed from overall command by Grant and denied any participation of the Sioux Campaign ; having been replaced by Brig. Gen. Alfred Terry . However , at Terry 's insistence , Grant relented and allowed Custer to participate in the campaign against the Sioux on the condition he did not take any pressmen . 
 = = = Cattellism = = = 
 In March 1876 , Secretary of Navy George M. Robeson was charged by a Democratic @-@ controlled House investigation committee with giving lucrative contracts to Alexander Cattell & Company , a grain supplier , in return for real estate , loans , and payment of debts . The House investigating committee also discovered that Secretary Robeson had allegedly embezzled $ 15 million in naval construction appropriations . Since there were no financial paper trails or enough evidence for impeachment and conviction , the House Investigation committee admonished Robeson and claimed he had set up a corrupt contracting system known as " Cattellism " . 
 = = = Safe burglary conspiracy = = = 
 In September 1876 , Orville E. Babcock , Superintendent of Public Works and Buildings , was indicted in a safe burglary conspiracy case and trial . In April , corrupt building contractors in Washington , D.C. were on trial for graft when a safe robbery occurred . Bogus secret service agents broke into a safe and attempted to frame Columbus Alexander , who had exposed the corrupt contracting ring . Babcock was named as part of the conspiracy , but later acquitted in the trial against the burglars . Evidence suggests that <unk> was involved with the swindles by the corrupt Washington Contractors Ring and he wanted revenge on Columbus Alexander , an avid reformer and critic of the Grant Administration . There was also evidence that safe burglary jury had been tampered with . 
 = = Reforming cabinet members = = 
 Grant 's cabinet fluctuated between talented individuals or reformers and those involved with political patronage or party corruption . Some notable reforming cabinet members were persons who had outstanding abilities and made many positive contributions to the administration . These reformers resisted the GOP demands for patronage to select efficient civil servants . Grant 's most successful appointment , Hamilton Fish , after the confirmation on March 17 , 1869 , went immediately to work and collected , classified , indexed , and bound seven hundred volumes of correspondence . He established a new indexing system that simplified retrieving information by clerks . Fish also created a rule that applicants for consulate had to take an official written examination to receive an appointment ; previously , applicants were given positions on a patronage system solely on the recommendations of Congressmen and Senators . This raised the tone and efficiency of the consular service , and if a Congressman or Senator objected , Fish could show them that the applicant did not pass the written test . According to Fish 's biographer and historian Amos Elwood Corning in 1919 , Fish was known as " a gentleman of wide experience , in whom the capacities of the organizer were happily united with a well balanced judgment and broad culture " . 
 Another reforming cabinet member was United States Secretary of Treasury George S. Boutwell who was confirmed by the Senate on March 12 , 1869 . His first actions were to dismiss S.M. Clark , the chief of U.S. Bureau and Engraving , and to set up a system of securing the plates that the paper money was printed on to prevent counterfeiting . Boutwell set up a system to monitor the manufacturing of money to ensure nothing would be stolen . Boutwell prevented collusion in the printing of money by preparing sets of plates for a single printing , with the red seal being imprinted in the Treasury Bureau . Boutwell persuaded Grant to have the Commissioner of Internal Revenue Alfred Pleasanton removed for misconduct over approving a $ 60 @,@ 000 tax refund . In addition to these measures , Boutwell established a uniform mode of accounting at custom houses and ports . Boutwell along with Attorney General , Amos T. Akerman , were two of Grant 's strongest cabinet members who advocated racial justice for African Americans . 
 During Amos T. Akerman 's tenure as Attorney General of the United States from 1870 to 1871 , thousands of indictments were brought against Klansmen to enforce the Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and the Force Acts of 1870 and 1871 . Born in the North , Akerman moved to Georgia after college and owned slaves ; he fought for the Confederacy and became a <unk> during Reconstruction , speaking out for blacks ' civil rights . As U.S. Attorney General , he became the first ex @-@ Confederate to reach the cabinet . Akerman was unafraid of the Klan and committed to protecting the lives and civil rights of blacks . To bolster Akerman 's investigation , Grant sent in Secret Service agents from the Justice Department to infiltrate the Klan and to gather evidence for prosecution . The investigations revealed that many whites participated in Klan activities . With this evidence , Grant issued a Presidential proclamation to disarm and remove the Klan 's notorious white robe and hood disguises . When the Klan ignored the proclamation , Grant sent Federal troops to nine South Carolina counties to put down the violent activities of the Klan . Grant teamed Akerman up with another reformer in 1870 – the first Solicitor General and native Kentuckian Benjamin Bristow – and the duo went on to prosecute thousands of Klan members and brought a brief quiet period of two years in the turbulent Reconstruction era . 
 As perhaps Grant 's most popular cabinet reformer , Benjamin H. Bristow was appointed Secretary of Treasury in June 1874 . Bristow had served ably as Solicitor General of the United States from 1870 to 1872 , prosecuting many Ku Klux Klan 's men who violated African American voting rights . When Bristow assumed office he immediately made an aggressive attack on corruption in the department . Bristow discovered that the Treasury was not receiving the full amount of tax revenue from whiskey distillers and manufacturers from several Western cities , primarily St. Louis , Missouri . Bristow discovered in 1874 that the Government alone was being defrauded by $ 1 @.@ 2 million . On May 13 , 1875 , armed with enough information , Bristow struck hard at the ring , seized the distilleries , and made hundreds of arrests ; the Whiskey Ring ceased to exist . Although President Grant and Bristow were not on friendly terms , Bristow sincerely desired to save Grant 's reputation from scandal . At the end of the Whiskey Ring prosecutions in 1876 , there were 230 indictments , 110 convictions , and $ 3 million in tax revenues returned to the Treasury Department . 
 In 1875 , Grant paired up Secretary of Treasury Benjamin Bristow with U.S. Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont , a Yale graduate . The appointment was popularly accepted by the public as Bristow and Pierrepont successfully prosecuted members of the Whiskey Ring . Before becoming U.S. Attorney General , Pierrepont was part of a reforming group known as the " Committee of Seventy " and was successful at shutting down William M. Tweed 's corrupt contracting Ring while he was a New York U.S. Attorney in 1870 . Although Grant 's reputation was vastly improved , Pierrepont had shown indifference in 1875 to the plight of freedmen by circumventing Federal intervention when White racists terrorized Mississippi 's African American citizens over a fraudulent Democratic election . Every cabinet appointment made by Grant came with a political cost . 
 When President Grant was in a bind to find a replacement for Secretary of War William W. Belknap , who abruptly resigned in 1876 amidst scandal , he turned to his good friend Alphonso Taft from Cincinnati . Taft , who accepted , served ably as Secretary of War until being transferred to the Attorney General position . As Secretary of War , Taft reduced military expenditures and made it so that no post @-@ <unk> would be given to any person except on the recommendation of the officers at the post . Grant then appointed Taft as U.S. Attorney General . Taft was a wise scholar and jurist educated at Yale University , and the Attorney General position suited him the best . During the controversial Presidential Election of 1876 between Rutherford B. Hayes and Samuel J. Tilden , Attorney General Taft and House Representative J. Proctor Knott had many meetings to decide the outcome of the controversial election . The result of the Taft @-@ Knott negotiations , the Electoral Commission Act was passed by Congress and signed into law by Grant on January 29 , 1877 ; it created a 15 panel bipartisan committee to elect the next President . Hayes won the Presidency by one electoral vote two days before the March 4 , 1877 Inauguration . Alphonso Taft was the father of future president William H. Taft . 
 In 1875 , the U.S. Department of the Interior was in serious disrepair with corruption and incompetence . The result was that United States Secretary of Interior Columbus Delano , reportedly having taken bribes to secure fraudulent land grants , was forced to resign from office on October 15 , 1875 . On October 19 , 1875 , in a personal effort of reform , Grant appointed Zachariah Chandler to the position and was confirmed by the Senate in December 1875 . Chandler immediately went to work on reforming the Interior Department by dismissing all the important clerks in the Patent Office . Chandler had discovered that fictitious clerks were earning money and that other clerks were earning money without performing services . Chandler simplified the patent application procedure and as a result reduced costs . Chandler , under President Grant 's orders , fired all corrupt clerks at the Bureau of Indian Affairs . Chandler also banned the practice of Native American agents , known as " Indian Attorneys " who were being paid $ 8 @.@ 00 a day plus expenses for supposedly representing their tribes in Washington . 
 Postmaster General John A. J. Creswell proved to be one of the ablest organizers ever to head the Post Office . He cut costs while greatly expanding the number of mail routes , postal clerks and letter carriers . He introduced the penny post card and worked with Fish to revise postal treaties . A Radical , he used the vast patronage of the post office to support Grant 's coalition . He asked for the total abolition of the franking privilege since it reduced the revenue receipts by five percent . The franking privilege allowed members of Congress to send mail at the government 's expense . 
 = = Election of 1876 = = 
 During the presidential election of 1876 , the Republicans nominated the fiscally conservative Rutherford B. Hayes and the Democrats nominated reformer Samuel Tilden . Results were split . Tilden received 51 % of the popular vote ; Hayes 48 % ; while 20 key electoral votes remained undecided and in dispute . Both Republicans and Democrats claimed victory and the threat of a second civil war was eminent . Grant was watchful ; encouraged Congress to settle the election by commission ; and determined to keep a peaceful transfer of power . On January 29 , 1877 Grant signed the Electoral Commission Act that gave a 15 panel bipartisan commission power to determine electoral votes . The commission gave Hayes 185 electoral votes ; Tilden received 184 . Hayes became the 19th President of the United States after being awarded 3 electoral votes from the state of Colorado . Grant 's personal honesty , firmness , and even handedness reassured the nation and a second civil war was averted . 
 = = Judicial appointments = = 
 Grant appointed four Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States . The first two vacancies occurred in 1869 with the retirement of Robert C. Grier and Congress 's restoration of a ninth seat on the Court . Grant appointed former Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton and Attorney General Ebenezer R. Hoar . Neither man would take his seat : Stanton was confirmed , but died before he took office ; Hoar was widely disliked in the Senate , which defeated his nomination 24 @-@ 33 . Following a cabinet discussion , Grant submitted two more names to the Senate : William Strong and Joseph P. Bradley . Strong was a former justice of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania who retired to take up a private practice in Philadelphia . Bradley , a New Jersey lawyer , also had a successful private practice . Both men were railroad lawyers , and their appointment led to accusations that Grant intended them to overturn the case of Hepburn v. Griswold , which had been decided the same day they were nominated . That case , which was unpopular with business interests , held that the federal debt incurred before 1862 must be paid in gold , not <unk> . Nonetheless , both Strong and Bradley were confirmed and the following year Hepburn was indeed reversed . 
 After Grant 's reelection , another Supreme Court seat opened up with the retirement of Justice Samuel Nelson . Grant nominated Ward Hunt , a New York state judge and friend of Senator Roscoe Conkling , to replace him . Hunt was confirmed in 1873 and , like Nelson , upheld Reconstruction legislation . He served on the court until 1882 . In May 1873 , Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase died suddenly . Grant waited several months before offering the seat to Conkling in November . Conkling declined , as did Senator Timothy Howe of Wisconsin . Grant unsuccessfully tried to enlist Hamilton Fish for the job and considered nominating Caleb Cushing , as well , before submitting the name of his attorney general , George Henry Williams . The Senate had a dim view of Williams 's performance at the Justice Department and refused to act on the nomination . Grant stuck to his choice , but after no action Williams asked that his name be withdrawn in January 1874 . Fish suggested nominating Hoar again , but Grant instead chose Cushing . Cushing was an eminent lawyer and respected in his field , but the emergence of his wartime correspondence with Jefferson Davis doomed his nomination . Grant finally turned to Morrison Waite , a respectable ( if little @-@ known ) Ohio lawyer who had worked on the Alabama claims arbitration . Waite was unanimously approved two days later , on January 21 , 1874 . Waite was an uncontroversial nominee , but in his time on the Court he authored two of the decisions ( United States v. Reese and United States v. Cruikshank ) that did the most to undermine Reconstruction @-@ era laws for the protection of black Americans . 
 = = Administration and Cabinet = = 
 = = = Supreme Court appointments = = = 
 Grant appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States : 
 Edwin M. Stanton – 1869 ( died before taking seat ) 
 William Strong – 1870 
 Joseph P. Bradley – 1870 
 Ward Hunt – 1873 
 Morrison Remick Waite ( Chief Justice ) – 1874 
 = = = States admitted to the Union = = = 
 Colorado – August 1 , 1876 
 Colorado came into the Union just in time to give enough electoral votes for Rutherford B. Hayes to win the Presidential Election of 1876 . 
 = = = Vetoes = = = 
 Grant vetoed more bills then any of his predecessors with 93 vetoes during the 41st through 44th Congresses . 45 were regular vetoes , and 48 of them were pocket vetoes . Grant had 4 vetoes overridden by Congress . 
 = = = Government agencies instituted = = = 
 Department of Justice ( 1870 ) 
 Office of the Solicitor General ( 1870 ) 
 United States Civil Service Commission ( 1871 ) ; Congressional appropriations expired in 1873 , however , the commission continued to function . The Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act in 1883 renewed appropriations and enhanced the federal power and scope of the commission . Grant 's U.S. Attorney General Amos T. Akerman ruled that the Civil Service Commission was Constitutional as long as the purpose was to increase government 's power to higher qualified workers and improve the efficiency of running the government . Akerman stated that the Civil Service Commission did not have the Constitutional power to stop or prevent appointments . 
 Office of the Surgeon General ( 1871 ) 
 Army Weather Bureau ( currently known as the National Weather Service ) ( 1870 ) 
 = = = Presidential succession 1875 @-@ 1877 = = = 
 When Grant 's second term Vice President and Cabinet member Henry Wilson died in office on November 22 , 1875 , by 1792 Statue , President pro tempore of the Senate , then Michigan Republican Senator Thomas W. Ferry , was next in line of succession to the president . On March 2 , 1877 Republican candidate Rutherford B. Hayes was declared by Congress to be elected President having received a majority of electoral votes . President Grant believed an insurrection by the Democratic candidate Samuel J. Tilden 's supporters over the controversial Election of 1876 could take place and wanted to make sure that any Democratic attempt to seize by force Hayes ' public inauguration ceremony would fail . Since March 4 , 1877 was a Sunday , President Grant secretly had Hayes take the oath of office in the Red Room of the White House on March 3 , becoming the first president to take the oath of office in the White House . No disturbance took place and Hayes formally took the oath of president on Monday , March 5 , 1877 . 
 = = Presidential reputation = = 
 Grant was the first President since Andrew Jackson to serve two full terms in office . The 40 years that separated their administrations marks the longest time span between presidents without one serving two terms . The legacy of President Grant is one of American civil rights , international diplomacy , scandals , and a boom @-@ and @-@ bust national economy . In terms of civil rights , Grant had urged the passing of the 15th Amendment and signed into law the Civil Rights Bill of 1875 that gave all citizens access to places of public enterprise . Grant defeated the Klan by sending in the Justice Department , backed by the Army . Grant 's 1868 Presidential campaign slogan " Let us have peace " rang true when his State Department resolved crises with Britain and Spain , implementing the new concept of International Arbitration . 
 The scandals revealed that Grant reacted too readily to protect his team , to cover up misdeeds , and to get rid of whistle blowers and reformers . It was impossible for Grant to morally check all of the corruption generated from the socioeconomic forces of a costly American Civil War , rapid industrialization , and Westward expansionism . His acceptance of gifts from wealthy associates showed poor judgment . He distrusted reformers as <unk> who were interfering with party patronage . He was reluctant to prosecute cabinet members and appointees viewed as " honest " friends , and those who were convicted were set free with presidential pardons after serving a brief time in prison . His associations with these scandals have tarnished his personal reputation while President and afterward . Despite the scandals , by the end of Grant 's second term the corruption in the Departments of Interior ( 1875 ) , Treasury ( 1874 ) , and Justice ( 1875 ) were cleaned up by his new cabinet members . The State <unk> under Secretary Hamilton Fish was run efficiently and virtually free from scandal for Grant 's two terms in office . The Postal Service was cleaned up by reformer Post Master Marshall Jewell ( 1875 ) , who aided Benjamin Bristow shut down the Whiskey Ring . The Department of War was cleaned up by Secretary Alphonso Taft , after the resignation of Secretary William Belknap in 1876 . Grant 's personal Secretary Orville Babcock was out of the White House by 1876 . The Department of Navy , under Secretary George Robeson , remained unreformed , however , Robeson did implement U.S. Naval resurgence after the Virginius Incident in 1873 . 
 Grant 's generous treatment of Robert E. Lee at Appomattox helped give him popularity in the South . Although he kept civil rights on the political agenda , the Republican party at the end of Grant 's second term shifted to pursuing conservative fiscal policies . His weak response to the Panic of 1873 hurt the economy and seriously damaged his party , which lost heavily in 1874 . His personal will often strayed from normal Presidential orthodoxy , and his administration defied the American tradition of a government run without political corruption and favoritism . Grant 's financial policies favored Wall Street , but his term ended with the nation mired in a deep economic depression that Grant could not comprehend or deal with . Revisionist historians during the first half of the Twentieth Century have tended to prop up a romantic view of the Confederacy and the Lost Cause at the expense of downgrading the Union cause and Grant 's Presidency as a corrupt despot . 
 However , the tide is beginning to turn concerning Grant 's presidential legacy . Frank Scaturro , who is credited with spearheading the movement to restore Grant 's Tomb while only a college student , has since written the first book of the modern era which portrays Grant 's presidency in a positive light . President Grant Reconsidered has altered the perception of how history and historians view Grant 's presidency . At the time of its publication the Weekly Standard said that Scaturro 's work was a " convincing case that Grant was a strong and , in many important respects , successful president . It is an argument full of significance for how we see the course of American political history . ... Scaturro 's work ... should prompt a reassessment of the entire progressive @-@ New Deal Tradition . And Presidential Studies Quarterly stated " It would appear that historians and the press have been unkind in their evaluation of Grant 's two term presidency . Scaturro does well in his reconsideration . Now modern scholars are individually evaluating Grant 's Presidency rather than relying on traditional Presidential polls that have given Grant low rankings . Since Scaturro 's publication in 1998 , extensive biographies of President Grant have been written by such notable historians as 2002 finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography Jean Edward Smith , Grant , Josiah H Bunting III , Ulysses S. Grant : The American Presidents Series : The 18th President and most recently H.W. Brands , The Man Who Saved the Union : Ulysses Grant in War and Peace . These venerable historians have indeed reconsidered Grant 's presidency and like Scaturro have reached a much more favorable opinion than early twentieth century works . 
 = = Civil rights record = = 
 Grant proactively used military and Justice Department enforcement of civil rights laws and the protection of African Americans more than any other President . He used his full powers to weaken the Ku Klux Klan , reducing violence and intimidation in the South . He appointed James Milton Turner as the first African American minister to a foreign nation . Grant 's relationship with Charles Sumner , the leader in promoting civil rights , was shattered by the Senator 's opposition to Grant 's plan to acquire Santo Domingo by treaty . Grant retaliated , firing men Sumner had recommended and having allies strip Sumner of his chairmanship of the Foreign Relations Committee . Sumner joined the Liberal Republican movement in 1872 to fight Grant 's reelection . 
 Grant 's presidency was committed to treat Native Americans as individual wards of the state under a " peace " policy and encouraged their citizenship . Native Americans were eventually given full U.S. citizenship in 1924 under the Indian Citizenship Act signed into law by President Calvin Coolidge . Grant signed the Civil Rights Act of 1875 . In his sixth message to Congress , he summed up his own views , " While I remain Executive all the laws of Congress and the provisions of the Constitution ... will be enforced with rigor ... Treat the Negro as a citizen and a voter , as he is and must remain ... Then we shall have no complaint of sectional interference . " In the pursued equal justice for all category from the 2009 CSPAN Presidential rating survey Grant scored a 9 getting into the top ten . 
 = = = By author = = = 
 Brands , H. W. ( 2012 ) . The Man Who Saved The Union Ulysses S. Grant in War and Peace . New York : Doubleday . 
 Brands , H. W. ( December 2012 ) . " Presidents in Crisis Grant : Takes on the Klan " . American History : 42 – 47 . 
 Bolger , <unk> ( June 18 , 2003 ) . " Background History of the United States Naturalization Process " . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 09 @-@ 10 . 
 Boutwell , George S. ( 2008 ) [ First published 1902 ] . Reminiscences of Sixty Years in Public Affairs . New York City : Greenwood Press. pp. 131 – 133 . OCLC 1857 . 
 Bradford , Richard H. ( 1980 ) . The Virginius Affair . Boulder , Colorado : Colorado Associated University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 080 @-@ 0 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Brown , Dee ( 1970 ) . " The War to Save the Buffalo " . Bury My Heart At Wounded Knee . New York City : Henry Holt and Company. pp. 264 – 271 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ 1045 @-@ 9 . 
 Brister , Dan ( November – December 2000 ) . " Between the Bison and the Bullet " . Earth First ! . Retrieved April 15 , 2010 . 
 Bunting III , Josiah ( 2004 ) . " The Original Inhabitants " . Ulysses S. Grant . New York City : Times Books. pp. 117 – 118 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved March 6 , 2010 . Lay summary – WorldCat ( April 12 , 2010 ) . 
 Carpenter , Daniel P. ( 2001 ) . " Chapter Three " . The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy : <unk> , Networks , and Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies , 1862 – 1928 . Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press. pp. 84 – 85 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 1 , 2010 . 
 Chamberlain , Daniel Henry ( 1902 ) . " Charles Sumner and the Treaty of Washington " . Massachusetts Historical Society ( Worcester , Massachusetts : Press of G.G. Davis ) . Chamberlain reviewed speech by Charles Francis Adams to New York Historical Society on November 19 , 1901 . 
 Corning , Amos Elwood ( 1918 ) . Hamilton Fish . New York City : <unk> Publishing Company. pp. 49 – 54 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Eric . " Context for World Heritage Bridges " . International Council on Monuments and Sites . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 26 . 
 Doenecke , Justis D. ( 1981 ) . The Presidencies of James A. Garfield & Chester A. Arthur . Lawrence , Kansas : The Regents Press of <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ 7006 @-@ 0208 @-@ 9 . 
 Donald , David ( 1970 ) . Charles Sumner and the Rights of Man . New York City : Knopf . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Duncan , Russell ( 1986 ) . " Introduction " . Freedom 's shore : Tunis Campbell and the Georgia freedmen . Athens , Georgia : University of Georgia Press. pp. 9 – 10 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8203 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 12 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , Nicole ( June 2009 ) . " Reconstruction and the Making of a Free @-@ Labor South " ( PDF ) . Reviews in American History 37 ( 2 ) : 236 – 242 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1353 / <unk> ISSN 0048 @-@ <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Lay summary – Project MUSE ( April 12 , 2010 ) . ( subscription required ) 
 Garland , Hamlin ( 1898 ) . Ulysses S. Grant : His Life and Character . New York City : Doubleday and McClure Company. p . 438 . ISBN 0 @-@ 548 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gray , John S. ( 1976 ) . Centennial Campaign The Sioux War of 1876 . University of Oklahoma : University of Oklahoma Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8061 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Gross , Linda P. ; Theresa R. Snyder ( 2005 ) . Philadelphia 's 1876 Centennial Exhibition . Arcadia Publishing. pp. 15 – 16 . ISBN 0 @-@ 7385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 23 . 
 Grossman , Mark ( 2003 ) . Political Corruption in America : An Encyclopedia of Scandals , Power , and Greed . Santa Barbara , California : ABC @-@ <unk> pp. 308 – 309 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 57607 @-@ 060 @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 12 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , William Best ( 1935 ) [ First published 1935 ] . " Chapter XI : The End of Reconstruction " . Ulysses S. Grant , Politician . New York City : Dodd , Mead . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 85 @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 12 , 2010 . ( subscription required ) 
 Hinsdale , Mary Louise ( 1911 ) . A History of the President 's Cabinet ( Ph.D. thesis for the faculty of the Department of Literature , Science , and the Arts of the University of Michigan ) . Ann Arbor , Michigan : George Wehr . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . ISSN 0002 @-@ <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 12 , 2010 . 
 Howe , George Frederick ( 1935 ) . Chester A. Arthur A Quarter @-@ Century of Machine Politics . New York , New York : Frederick Unger Publishing Co . 
 Hutton , Paul Andrew , Ph.D. ( 2009 ) [ First published 1985 ] . " Chapter 12 : Reconstructing Louisiana : ' To Charge upon the Liberties of His Fellow @-@ Citizens ' " . Phil Sheridan and his Army . Norman , Oklahoma : University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 262 – 266 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ 2329 @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved February 25 , 2010 . 
 Johnson , Benjamin S. ( 1908 ) . John Hugh Reynolds , ed . " The Brooks @-@ Baxter War " . Publications of the Arkansas Historical Association ( Little Rock , Arkansas : Arkansas Historical Association ) 2 : 122 – 168 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved February 26 , 2010 . 
 Keith , <unk> ( 2007 ) . " Chapter 7 : Battle of the Colfax Courthouse " . The Colfax Massacre : The Untold Story of Black Power , White Terror , & The Death of Reconstruction . New York City : Oxford University Press. p . 100 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 13 , 2010 . 
 Kennedy , Robert C. ( 2001 ) . " George M. Robeson " . <unk> Retrieved April 13 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , David ( 1910 ) . " Chapter VIII – Treasury Relief in Crises , 1873 to 1890 " . The Independent Treasury of the United States and its Relations to the Banks of its Country . Washington , D.C. : U.S. National Monetary Commission , United States <unk> pp. 225 – 235 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved February 2 , 2010 . 
 Kremer , Gary R. ( 1991 ) . " Chapter V : The Preservation of a Noble Experiment " . James Milton Turner and the Promise of America – The Public Life of a Post @-@ Civil War Black Leader . Columbia , Missouri : University of Missouri Press. p . 81 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Lane , Charles ( 2008 ) . " Chapter Six : Black @-@ Letter Law " . The Day Freedom Died : The Colfax Massacre , the Supreme Court , and the Betrayal of Reconstruction . New York City : Henry Holt and Company. p . 124 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Leonard , Lewis Alexander ( 1920 ) . Life of Alphonso Taft . New York City : Hawke Publishing Company . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 28 , 2010 . 
 McFeely , William S. ( 2002 ) [ First published 1981 ] . Grant : A Biography . New York City : W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . OCLC <unk> . , Pulitzer prize , but hostile to Grant 
 <unk> , Gregory F. ( 2003 ) . Encyclopedia of Indian Wars . Missoula , Montana : Mountain Press Publishing Company . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 468 @-@ 7 . 
 Miller , Nathan ( 1997 ) [ First published 1977 ] . " Chapter 6 : The Naval Renaissance " . The U.S. Navy : A History ( 3rd ed . ) . Annapolis , Maryland : Naval Institute Press. pp. 146 – 147 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 55750 @-@ 595 @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved March 30 , 2010 . 
 Morris , Charles R. ( 2005 ) . " Chapter 5 : Mega @-@ Machine " . The <unk> : How Andrew Carnegie , John D. Rockefeller , Jay Gould , and J.P. Morgan Invented the American Super Economy . New York City : Times Books. pp. 137 – 138 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Muench , James F. ( 2006 ) . Five Stars : Missouri 's Most Famous Generals . Columbia , Missouri : University of Missouri Press. p . 74 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ 1656 @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Nevins , Allan ( 1937 ) . Hamilton Fish : The Inner History of the Grant Administration . New York City : Macmillan . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1676 @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 11 , 2010 . ( subscription required ) 
 Oberholtzer , Ellis Paxson ( 1922 ) . " Chapter XI : The Campaign of 1868 " . A history of the United States since the Civil War 2 . New York City : Macmillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 8371 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 12 , 2010 . 
 Oberholtzer , Ellis Paxson . A History of the United States Since the Civil War ( NY : Macmillan , 1926 ) vol 3 : 1872 – 1878 
 Olson , James C. ( 1965 ) . " Chapter 7 : Red Cloud Visits the Great White Father " . Red Cloud and the Sioux problem . Lincoln , Nebraska : University of Nebraska Press. p . 103 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 3 , 2010 . 
 Pierson , Arthur <unk> ( 1880 ) . " Zachariah Chandler : An Outline Sketch of his Life and Public Services " . Detroit Post and Tribune. pp. 343 – 345 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Francis Paul ( 1984 ) . " Chapter 20 : Structures of the Peace Policy " . The Great Father : The United States Government and the American Indians . Lincoln , Nebraska : University of Nebraska Press. pp. 501 – 503 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 4 , 2010 . 
 Rhodes , James Ford ( 1906 ) . History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the Final Restoration of Home Rule at the South in 1877 : v. 7 , 1872 – 1877 . New York : Macmillan . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Rhodes , James G. ( 1906 ) . History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the McKinley @-@ Bryan Campaign of 1896 : vol . 6 : 1866 – 1872 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Rives , Timothy ( Fall 2000 ) . " Grant , Babcock , and the Whiskey Ring " . Prologue 32 ( 3 ) . Retrieved January 18 , 2010 . 
 Salinger , Lawrence M. ( 2005 ) . Encyclopedia of White @-@ collar & Corporate Crime , Volume 2 . Thousand Oaks , California : SAGE Publications. pp. 374 – 375 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7619 @-@ 3004 @-@ 4 . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Scaturro , Frank ( October 26 , 2006 ) . " The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant , 1869 – 1877 " . College of St. Scholastica . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Sim , David ( September 2008 ) . " The Peace Policy of Ulysses S. Grant " . American Nineteenth Century History 9 ( 3 ) : 241 – 268 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . ISSN 1466 @-@ <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Simon , John Y. ( 2002 ) . " Ulysses S. Grant " . In Graff , Henry . The Presidents : A Reference History ( 7th ed . ) . pp. 245 – 260 . 
 Simon , John Y. ( 1997 ) . Ulysses S. <unk> pp. 258 – 259 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8093 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Shearer , Benjamin F. ( 2004 ) . The Uniting States : Alabama to Kentucky . Greenwood Publishing <unk> p . 186 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 21 . 
 Shotwell , Walter G. ( 1910 ) . Life of Charles Sumner . New York City : Thomas Y. Crowell & Company . 
 Smith , Jean Edward ( 2001 ) . Grant . New York City : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . Lay summary – WorldCat ( April 12 , 2010 ) . 
 Trelease , Allen W. ( April 1995 ) [ First published 1971 ] . White Terror : The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction . Baton Rouge , Louisiana : Louisiana State University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Unger , Irwin ( June 1964 ) . The Greenback Era : A Social and Political History of American Finance , 1865 – 1879 . Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Utley , Robert M. ( 1984 ) [ First published 1973 ] . Frontier Regulars : the United States Army and the Indian , 1866 – 1891 . New York City : Macmillan. p . 206 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 13 , 2010 . 
 Utley , Robert M. ( 1984 ) . " Chapter 5 : Grant 's Peace Policy : 1869 – 1876 " . The Indian frontier of the American West , 1846 – 1890 . Albuquerque : University of New Mexico Press. pp. 127 – 133 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 3 , 2010 . 
 Utley , Robert M. ; Mackintosh , Barry ( 1989 ) . Early Problems and Personalities . Washington , D.C. : U.S. Department of the Interior . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved April 19 , 2010 . 
 Wainwright , Nicholas ; Russell <unk> and Edwin Wolf ( 1982 ) . Philadelphia : A 300 @-@ Year History . W.W. Norton & Company. p . 466 . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 23 . 
 Weisberger , Bernard A. ( November 1995 ) . " The Item And " fight ' em " Veto " . American Heritage 46 ( 7 ) . Retrieved 2012 @-@ 07 @-@ 07 . 
 Woodward , C. Vann ( April 1957 ) . " The Lowest Ebb " . American Heritage 8 ( 3 ) . Retrieved 2012 @-@ 07 @-@ 07 . 
 Woodward , Earl F. ( Winter 1971 ) . " The Brooks and Baxter War in Arkansas , 1872 – 1874 " . The Arkansas Historical Quarterly ( Little Rock , Arkansas : Arkansas Historical Association ) 30 ( 4 ) : 315 – 336 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . ISSN 0004 @-@ 1823 . JSTOR <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Wooster , Robert ( 1988 ) . The Military and United States Indian Policy , 1865 – 1903 . New Haven , Connecticut : Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 <unk> , Richard ( 2006 ) . Encyclopedia of the Reconstruction Era : A – L. Westport , Connecticut : Greenwood Press. p . 413 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved March 5 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , Richard ( 1996 ) . State of Rebellion : Reconstruction in South Carolina . Columbia , South Carolina : University of South Carolina Press. pp. 159 – 165 , 170 – 172 , 174 , 176 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 105 @-@ 2 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = By title ( anonymous ) = = = 
 " C @-@ SPAN 2009 Historians Presidential Leadership Survey " . C @-@ <unk> 2009 . Retrieved January 23 , 2010 . 
 " Crédit Mobilier – Credit Mobilier of America " . Encyclopedia Americana 8 . Encyclopedia Americana Corp. 1918 @.@ p . 173 . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 " Henry Wilson , 18th Vice President ( 1873 – 1875 ) " . United States Senate . Retrieved November 30 , 2009 . 
 " Presidential Vetoes ( 1789 to present ) " . Washington , D.C. : Clerk of the United States House of Representatives . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 " South Carolina Governor Robert Kingston Scott " . National Governors Association . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 Illinois Historic Preservation Agency ( March 11 , 2009 ) . " Ulysses S. Grant is Remembered as a Champion of Civil Rights " . Moline ( Illinois ) Dispatch / Rock Island Argus . Retrieved January 23 , 2010 . 
 " The <unk> Timeline " . U.S. Constitution Online . Retrieved January 12 , 2010 . 
 " The Whiskey Ring " . <unk> February 9 , 2009 . Retrieved January 30 , 2010 . 
 " The American Presidency Project Election of 1876 " . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 21 . 
 Ulysses S. Grant Memoirs and Selected Letters . The Library of America . 1990 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 58 @-@ 5 . The source information was taken from the Chronology section in the book . 
 = = = Newspaper articles = = = 
 " Amnesty and Civil Rights " ( PDF ) . The New York Times . May 23 , 1872 . 
 " The Civil Rights Bill " ( PDF ) . The New York Times . March 2 , 1875 @.@ pp. 1 – 2 . 
 " The Conduct of the Finances " . The New York Times . July 17 , 1872 . 
 " The Emma Mine Scandal " ( PDF ) . The New York Times . March 4 , 1876 . 
 " The Safe Burglary Case : Columbus Alexander and Major Richards of the Washington Police Examined " . The New York Times . September 23 , 1876 . 
 " The Safe Burglary Case : Preparing for the trial – Witnesses for the defense summoned " . The New York Times . September 8 , 1876 . 
 <unk> ( October 9 , 1893 ) . " The Pantaloon of the Senate : A Reminiscence of the Emma Mine Scandal " . The New York Times . 
 = = = Yearbooks = = = 
 American Annual Cyclopedia ... 1868 ( 1869 ) , online , highly detailed compendium of facts and primary sources 
 American Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1869 ( 1870 ) , large compendium of facts , thorough national coverage ; includes also many primary documents online edition 
 Appleton 's Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1870 ( 1871 ) 
 American Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1872 ( 1873 ) 
 Appleton 's Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1873 ( 1879 ) online edition 
 Appleton 's Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1875 ( 1877 ) 
 Appleton 's Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1876 ( 1885 ) online edition 
 Appleton 's Annual Cyclopedia ... for 1877 ( 1878 ) 
 = Hell Money = 
 " Hell Money " is the nineteenth episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files and 68th episode overall . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on March 29 , 1996 . It was written by Jeffrey Vlaming and directed by Tucker Gates . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Hell Money " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 9 , being watched by 14 @.@ 86 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a murder in San Francisco 's Chinatown involving masked intruders , strange Chinese symbols , a lottery , and the clandestine selling of body parts . 
 The premise of the episode was based on three major ideas : a pyramid scheme involving body parts , a lottery in a small town , and the corporate beings assembling the destitute in Chinatown . The episode 's writer , Vlaming , developed the latter two ideas and series creator Chris Carter merged all three ideas in the finalized script . The episode contained several elaborate special effects shots , most notably the scene wherein a frog bursts out of a victim 's chest , which was created by using molds to create a fake human torso that was then placed over an actor . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In San Francisco 's Chinatown , a Chinese immigrant , Johnny Lo , makes his way to his apartment . There , he is confronted by someone telling him to " pay the price " , and is overtaken by three figures wearing <unk> masks . A security guard later finds the three figures near a <unk> oven , where Lo is being burned alive . 
 Fox Mulder and Dana Scully investigate Lo 's death , the latest in a series of fatal <unk> in Chinatown ; Mulder believes that ghost activity is behind the deaths , while Scully suspects a cult . The agents collaborate with Glen Chao , a Chinese @-@ American detective with the San Francisco Police Department . When they find a Chinese character written inside the oven , Chao translates it as meaning " ghost . " Mulder also finds a scrap of burned paper in the ashes , which Chao identifies as " hell money " , a symbolic offering to deceased spirits . The agents locate Lo 's apartment , where they find his collection of charms , as well as bloodstains underneath the recently installed carpet . 
 Meanwhile , another immigrant , Hsin , tends to his leukemia @-@ stricken daughter , Kim . To pay for her treatments , Hsin attends an underground lottery in which participants either win money or lose an organ , depending on tiles chosen from a pair of vases . One man wins the lottery but selects a bad tile , and his body is found later that day . Scully performs an autopsy and finds that he had been selling body parts , noticing his numerous surgical scars . The agents question Chao , who claims that the local community maintains a code of silence and does not reveal anything to even him . 
 Chao finds information that leads them to Hsin , who installed the carpet in Lo 's apartment . Hsin has a bandage over his eye , having lost it to the lottery earlier . Returning to his home , Chao is confronted by the three masked figures . The agents visit him at the hospital . Meanwhile , Hsin visits the Hard Faced Man , one of the proprietors of the lottery , wanting to end his participation . The man warns him that ghostly fire will consume him if he leaves the lottery . The agents return to the hospital , finding Chao gone . They trace his blood to that on the carpet in Lo 's apartment , finding a match . This causes the agents to visit Hsin , but find only his daughter at his apartment . 
 The agents find Chao outside a nearby Chinese restaurant and follow him inside . Hsin wins the lottery , but selects the tile representing his heart . Chao comes in and knocks over the table with the vases , revealing the lottery to be fixed . Mulder and Scully stop the Hard Faced Man seconds before he is about to operate on Hsin . They interrogate him , but because no one who participated will testify against him , it is unlikely he will be prosecuted . Hsin is brought to the hospital and his daughter is placed on an organ donor list . Chao disappears , awakening in a crematorium oven before he is burned alive . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Hell Money " was written by Jeff Vlaming , making it his second and last script for the show after the earlier third season episode " 2Shy " . The episode was directed by Tucker Gates , making it the first of only two episodes of The X @-@ Files — the other being the show 's fourth season entry " El Mundo Gira " — to be directed by him . The episode features pre @-@ fame Lucy Liu in a guest star role . Liu would later gain prominence as a cast member of the show Ally McBeal in 1998 . 
 The premise of the episode originated from an idea that executive producer and series creator Chris Carter had about a pyramid scheme involving body parts . Writer Jeff Vlaming combined two additional concepts that he had developed ; the first involved a lottery in a small town and the other concerned corporate beings assembling the destitute in Chinatown . When the initial script for " Hell Money " was submitted , Carter merged the three stories into one . Entertainment Weekly later noted that " the twisted <unk> of this story makes you think it must be based on a true story " , but , according to Carter , the story was completely original . Vlaming had originally hoped that the episode would be one of the rare entries where Scully 's version of the events would be vindicated , but in the end Mulder , once again , put everything together . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode 's exterior scenes were shot in Vancouver , Canada 's Chinatown while the crematorium scenes were shot on a soundstage . Interior shots of the gambling parlor were shot at the Welsh Irish Scottish English ( <unk> ) Hall , a community building in Vancouver . The production staff created a second balcony in the hall exclusively for the episode , with an agreement to tear it down once the episode was filmed . However , after the filming ended , the <unk> Hall 's owners requested that the balcony be left in place " for aesthetic reasons " . The vase and tiles used in the episode were created entirely by the show 's production department . The scene where a frog pops out of a victim 's chest was created by using molds to create a fake human torso , which was then placed over the actor . For a close @-@ up shot , the torso was placed on a table with a hole on it , allowing the show 's animal wrangler to push a live frog through the opening in the torso . Actors Michael Yama and Lucy Liu had to redo all of their dialogue in a Cantonese accent in post production . Their re @-@ recorded lines were dubbed over the original soundtrack . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hell Money " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on March 29 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 9 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . This totaled 14 @.@ 86 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics , ranging from largely positive to negative . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode an A – , calling it " gorgeously shot " , citing the " lush , smoky gaming sequences " in particular . Television Without Pity ranked " Hell Money " the eleventh most nightmare @-@ inducing episode of the show noting , " If there ’ s one thing you don ’ t want to mess with , it ’ s the Chinese mafia . Especially the branch that dresses up like Slipknot and either a ) burns you alive , if you ’ re lucky , or b ) forces you to participate in a haunted organ @-@ harvesting raffle only to slowly carve you up and sell your vital organs on the black market , whether you like it or not . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , and called it a " hard episode to love [ but ] sincere and purposeful " . The two praised the conceit of the episode , arguing that by presenting the situation from the Chinese immigrants — members of an alien culture — and Chao 's point of view , " Mulder and Scully seem clumsy and arrogant . And by implication , the audience are made to feel just as arrogant . " 
 Other reviews were more mixed . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode 5 / 10 , noting " Overall , this episode attempted to make a mundane murder case interesting by forcing the agents to interact with an ' alien ' culture . Unfortunately , the structure of the episode gave the audience answers long before the agents discovered them , making the bulk of the episode an exercise . By not taking the theme far enough or deepening the mystery , the writers ultimately fail to reach their goals . " Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club gave the entry a C + and wrote that the episode " was also fairly bold for its time , providing a whole subplot that 's mostly told through subtitles [ but ] it feels like a series of shocks that are strung together along a pretty standard story setup . " Ultimately , VanDerWerff concluded that , " the major problem with ' Hell Money ' is that it feels , at times , like a backdoor pilot for a new series starring B.D. Wong as corrupt detective Glen Chao . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . She critiqued the fact that the episode lacked a paranormal mystery , noting that the theme of the episode " would fit nicely into any other police drama " . Vitaris described the " three actors in the black suits and ghost masks " as " not very convincing . " 
 Co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin was not a fan of " Hell Money " : he believed that the premise was not really an X @-@ File due to the fact that nothing paranormal happened during the episode . He claimed that if Mulder and Scully were removed from the story , it would not have changed anything and that the two were not affected personally by the case . 
 = 2013 – 14 Norwich City F.C. season = 
 The 2013 – 14 season was the 112th season of football for Norwich City . It was Norwich City 's third campaign in the Premier League since achieving promotion during the 2010 – 11 season and was their 24th season in the top flight of English football . Norwich spent most of the season in the bottom half of the Premier League table , but only in two short periods , in September and October , were they actually in the relegation zone and this is where they slipped back to in the final few matches of the season . They finished the season in eighteenth place in the Premier League and were subsequently relegated to the Championship . Norwich lost in a replay to Fulham in the third round of the FA Cup and to Manchester United in the fourth round of the League Cup . It was a season that saw the sacking of manager Chris Hughton and the appointment of former Norwich player Neil Adams as his replacement with five games left to play . 
 = = Build up to the season = = 
 Expectations were high for Norwich after they finished the previous season eleventh position in the league which was their highest finish in the league since the 1992 – 93 season . The £ <unk> profit made during the 2011 – 12 season and the prospect of becoming debt free also raised the expectations of the fans with the prospect of significant spending on players over the summer 2013 transfer window . 
 = = = Players and club staff = = = 
 = = = Summer transfer window = = = 
 = = = = Transfers out = = = = 
 Following their 11th @-@ place finish in the 2012 – 13 Premier League Norwich started their preparations for their third consecutive season in the top flight by releasing ten players in May 2013 including first team players Chris Martin , Simeon Jackson , Elliot Ward and Marc Tierney . Over the course of the summer James Vaughan , Grant Holt , Leon Barnett and Jacob Butterfield were all sold for undisclosed fees . Former Norwich City manager Paul Lambert returned to his former club to sign goalkeeper Jed Steer for his current club Aston Villa but the decision on a fee went to tribunal . During the summer Declan Rudd and Andrew Surman were both loaned out to lower league clubs for the season . During the lower league loan window David Fox and Daniel Ayala were loaned for half of the season . 
 Grant Holt 's exit followed a very successful period at the club including two promotions , being named Norwich City F.C. Player of the Season three times and being top scorer at the club four seasons in a row . Holt blamed the tactics of Chris Hughton as a contributory factor in his exit , along with the prospect of playing Europa League football for the first time . 
 = = = = Transfers in = = = = 
 The summer transfer window was a record breaking one for Norwich with both a record amount spent in total and a record amount spent on a single player . The task of building on the successes of the previous season for the 2013 – 14 season started while the 2012 – 13 season was still in progress when during March 2013 it was announced that Ricky van Wolfswinkel had signed for a reported club record fee of £ 8 @.@ 5 million . Javier Garrido who had been with Norwich the previous season signed a two @-@ year permanent deal during May 2013 . During the summer Gary Hooper , Leroy Fer , Carlo Nash , Martin Olsson and Nathan Redmond all also signed permanent deals . Norwich first attempted to sign Hooper during the January 2013 transfer window with a number of bids reported to have been rejected but he eventually signed during July 2013 for £ 5 million . In August 2013 Johan Elmander signed on a season long loan deal . 
 † effective July 2013 
 = = = January transfer window = = = 
 = = = = Transfers in = = = = 
 On 13 January Jonás Gutiérrez signed on loan from Newcastle United . On 30 January Joseph <unk> signed from Fenerbahçe on loan . 
 = = = = Transfers out = = = = 
 After his original three @-@ month loan deal at Middlesbrough expired Daniel Ayala made his move permanent on 24 January for an undisclosed fee . On 7 February it was announced Jacob Murphy would be joining Swindon Town for a month when the loan window opens ( 8 February ) . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season matches = = = 
 Norwich started their build up to the season with a pre @-@ season tour of the United States . It continued with away games against Brighton and Braga and concluded with two home games against Panathinaikos and Real Sociedad . 
 Note : first @-@ team friendlies only 
 = = Premier League season = = 
 = = = August = = = 
 Norwich started their league season with a home draw with Everton with record signing Ricky van Wolfswinkel scoring a 71st @-@ minute equaliser on his debut . This was followed up with a 1 – 0 away defeat by Hull City . Hull spent an hour with ten men following Yannick <unk> 's red card for an apparent head butt motion towards Russell Martin . Norwich earned their first win of the season with a 1 – 0 home win over Southampton in which Nathan Redmond scored his first goal for the club . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Norwich 's poor away form continued with a 2 – 0 away defeat by Tottenham Hotspur . The run of defeats continued when Aston Villa 's visit to Carrow Road ended in a 1 – 0 defeat . Norwich scored their first away goal of the season in their first ever win at the Britannia Stadium when they beat Stoke City 1 – 0 . 
 = = = October = = = 
 Norwich got back into the game against Chelsea with a goal from Anthony Pilkington but conceded two late goals to finish 1 – 3 to the visitors . This was followed up with a 4 – 1 away defeat by Arsenal . The home fixture against Cardiff City finished in controversy during when Leroy Fer put the ball in the back of the net when passing the ball back to goalkeeper David Marshall . This resulted in a melee in which both Norwich and Cardiff were fined £ 20 @,@ 000 by the FA for failing to control their players . The game was also notable with Norwich having 31 shots at goal despite the game finishing as a draw . 
 = = = November = = = 
 November started badly with a 7 – 0 defeat at Manchester City following a 4 – 0 defeat against Manchester United in the League Cup earlier in the week . This heavy defeat following on from a run of bad form resulted in calls from fans for Chris Hughton to be replaced as manager . Norwich responded to the defeat the following week with a 3 – 1 comeback win over West Ham United . Gary Hooper 's first Premier League goal from the penalty spot marked the start of the comeback and it was completed with goals from Robert Snodgrass and Leroy Fer . Norwich 's poor away form continued after the international break with a 2 – 1 defeat at Newcastle United which stretched their away record to five defeats out of six matches . The run of injuries continued when Anthony Pilkington was stretchered off with a suspected hamstring injury . The 1 – 0 home win over Crystal Palace was watched by a record all @-@ seater home attendance at Carrow Road in a match which was Tony Pulis ' first game in charge of the visitors . 
 = = = December = = = 
 Norwich 's poor away form continued at Anfield with Liverpool winning 5 – 1 . Luis Suarez scored four of the goals which was Suárez 's third hat @-@ trick against Norwich in three seasons and extended his run to eleven goals in five games against Norwich . Three days after their mauling at Liverpool , Norwich were again on the road travelling to West Bromwich Albion where goals from Gary Hooper and Leroy Fer saw them climb up to 14th in the table . The return to Carrow Road for the match against Swansea City saw Hooper score his fourth goal in six games to equalise following Nathan Dyer 's opener . The final game before Christmas saw Norwich travel to the Stadium of Light where the goalless draw saw reach Norwich 19 points , six points clear of the relegation zone , and ensure that Sunderland went into Christmas three points adrift of the bottom of the table . Hooper scored his fifth goal in eight games in a Boxing Day defeat by Fulham . The year finished poorly with a 0 – 1 home defeat by defending champions Manchester United seeing the Canaries pick up only two points from a possible twelve . 
 = = = January = = = 
 The new year started with a 1 – 1 draw in the return fixture against Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park . This was a poor game for Leroy Fer who gave away a penalty for the equaliser and was also sent off for a second yellow card in the 82nd minute . The run of games without a win continued when Norwich visited Liverpool to play Everton where goals from Gareth Barry and Kevin <unk> saw Norwich come away with nothing . The following game saw loan signing Jonas Gutiérrez make his debut for Norwich and the 1 – 0 win saw Norwich move up to twelfth in the table level on points with visitors Hull . The midweek match which followed a weekend off at home to Newcastle ended in a goalless draw . Both teams finished with ten men after an altercation between Loïc Rémy and Bradley Johnson . Norwich appealed against the decision to send Johnson off . An Independent Regulatory Commission upheld the appeal and the red card was rescinded . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Robert Snodgrass scored early on to give Norwich the lead at half time during the Cardiff City away fixture . The second half of the game started with two quick goals from Craig Bellamy and Kenwyne Jones to see Cardiff come back to win the game . The next game was a visit from title challenging Manchester City which Norwich were expected to lose . Norwich defended well to earn a point and could have won the game when they had a goal disallowed for offside . The following Tuesday Norwich visited West Ham where two late goals from the home side saw them slip to one point above the relegation zone . The defeat saw pressure build once more on Chris Hughton following an interview with Norwich chief executive David McNally . The next match saw champions league chasing Tottenham Hotspur visit Carrow Road where a single Robert Snodgrass goal proving to be enough to take the lead and a number of fine saves saw John Ruddy ensure Norwich kept their fourth home clean sheet in a row . 
 = = = March = = = 
 Norwich started their match against Aston Villa with a goal after 3 minutes by Wes Hoolahan who nearly joined them in the January transfer window . Hoolahan 's goal was a high point of the match after four goals were scored by the home side in sixteen minutes to consign Norwich to another away defeat . Norwich took the lead in the second half of their next match at home to Stoke City thanks to a goal from Bradley Johnson . Jonathan Walters equalised for Stoke City but shortly afterwards was sent off for a foul on Alex <unk> . Norwich failed to make use of the extra man and the game finished as a draw . The following week saw Norwich travel to Southampton where they conceded after five minutes . By eighty minutes Norwich looked out of the game when the score had increased to 3 – 0 to the home side . Two quick goals from Norwich raised hopes of an unlikely point but the result was put beyond doubt when Southampton scored in time added on to make the final score 4 – 2 . The following game , at home to Sunderland , was another game that was billed as " must win " in the media . Goals from Robert Snodgrass and Alex <unk> saw Norwich cruise past Sunderland in the end and lifted them to thirteenth in the table and seven points clear of the bottom three . The trip to Swansea saw Norwich concede three goals and meant that Norwich had lost six away games in a row . 
 = = = April = = = 
 Their next match against West Brom was a crucial one , but a poor performance saw them lose by a single goal dragging them closer to the relegation zone . The defeat saw angry scenes after the game with fans chanting for Chris Hughton to be sacked and also saw John Ruddy climb over the barrier to remonstrate with one of the home fans in the Barclay Stand . This result was the final straw for the club board who sacked Chris Hughton along with Colin Calderwood and Paul Trollope and named Neil Adams as his replacement . Adams ' first game in charge was against Fulham , a team that they had not beaten at Craven Cottage since 1986 . The game was settled by a single first half Hugo <unk> goal . Norwich entertained league leaders Liverpool for the Easter Sunday match . The game looked like turning into a rout when Liverpool scored two early goals but a strong second half saw Norwich fight back before eventually losing 2 – 3 . Norwich 's next game , at Manchester United , came at the end of a week which saw the hosts sack manager David Moyes and appoint Ryan Giggs as interim player @-@ manager . Two goals apiece from Wayne Rooney and Juan Mata saw Norwich slump to their fifth defeat in a row overall and seventh away defeat in a row . 
 = = = May = = = 
 Norwich went into the final away match against Chelsea knowing that defeat would mean relegation to the Championship after Sunderland beat Manchester United the day before . Norwich ended a run of eight successive away defeats and five defeats overall by holding Chelsea to a goalless draw . This was their first away point since New Years Day . Norwich manager Neil Adams believed that his team should have got more from the game after they were denied a penalty . The result left Norwich favourites for relegation and two points behind fourth bottom Sunderland with one game left to play . Relegation was effectively sealed by a victory for Sunderland against West Brom which left Norwich three points behind West Brom with their vastly inferior goal difference . Relegation was confirmed on the final day of the season when they lost at home to Arsenal . 
 = = = League table = = = 
 = = = Results summary = = = 
 Last updated : 11 May 2014 . 
 Source : <unk> 
 = = = Results by matchday = = = 
 Last updated : 11 May 2014 . 
 Source : <unk> : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 The third round of the FA Cup drew Norwich against Fulham , a team they had also played at home a week before in the league . Chris Hughton made eight changes to the team that played against Crystal Palace on New Year 's Day . These included naming Josh Murphy in his starting line @-@ up for the match , his first start for the club . During the game Josh Murphy was substituted for his twin brother Jacob Murphy who was making his professional début . The match finished 1 – 1 following a Robert Snodgrass equaliser on 45 minutes . Chris Hughton made six changes for the replay which finished 3 – 0 to the home side after goals from Darren Bent , <unk> <unk> and Steve Sidwell . 
 = = League Cup = = 
 Despite making eight changes to the starting eleven Norwich started their League Cup campaign brightly with an entertaining 6 – 3 win at home to Bury with Johan Elmander scoring two of the six goals . The third round of the cup saw Norwich win away at Watford 3 – 2 . Norwich were two goals down on 55 minutes but a goal from Josh Murphy , who was making his professional début , on 77 minutes inspired an extra time comeback . Chris Hughton again made eight changes for the fifth round of the cup which saw Norwich travel to Manchester United where two late goals resulted in a one @-@ sided looking 4 – 0 defeat . 
 = = Aftermath of the season = = 
