 Finishing eighteenth in the Premier League resulted in relegation to the Championship for the following season . The Norwich City board announced shortly after relegation was confirmed on 11 May 2014 that a new manager would be announced within the week . On 22 May 2014 Neil Adams was named as the permanent manager despite the relegation from this season and four defeats in five matches as caretaker manager . The upheaval at the club was not limited to change in the management team with a number of first team players being linked to moves away from Carrow Road including Robert Snodgrass , Gary Hooper and John Ruddy . Chairman Alan Bowkett responded to the reports by stating that the club would be under no pressure to sell players during the transfer window . 
 The 2014 summer transfer window started for Norwich with attacking signings of Lewis <unk> from AFC Bournemouth and Kyle Lafferty from 2013 – 14 Serie B champions Palermo on 27 June . This was followed by the sale of Scotland international Robert Snodgrass to Hull City for a fee reported to be in the region of £ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on 30 June 2014 . On 5 August Norwich announced the signing of former QPR midfielder Gary O 'Neil following his release at the end of the previous season . Anthony Pilkington was the next to leave , joining promotion rivals Cardiff City for a reported fee of £ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on 15 August . Newly promoted Queens Park Rangers completed the transfer of Leroy Fer for a reported fee of £ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on 20 August . Also on 20 August it was announced that Carlos Cuellar had signed a one @-@ year deal following his release from Sunderland at the end of the previous season and that Cameron Jerome had signed from Stoke City on a three @-@ year deal for an undisclosed fee . 
 On 2 June 2014 Norwich named under @-@ 21 coach Mark Robson and former player Gary Holt first team coaches . They also named former player and Ipswich Town manager Joe Royle as football consultant . 
 There was criticism of the summer 2013 transfer activity including specific criticism of record signing Ricky Van Wolfswinkel who was rated as one of the worst signings of the season by various critics Norwich City chief executive David McNally admitted that the club had got the summer transfer window " horribly wrong " . 
 Norwich City announced on 25 October 2014 that they made a profit of £ 6 @.@ 7 million from the 2013 – 14 season , with their revenue rising to £ 95 @.@ 5 million from £ 78 @.@ 7 million the previous season . They also made £ 64 @.@ 5 million from Premier League broadcast payments during the season , which was more than the £ 60 @.@ 8 million that Manchester United received for winning the Premier League title the previous season . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Last updated : 11 May <unk> : 
 = = = Overall competition record = = = 
 = = = Appearances , goals and cards = = = 
 Status ( Premier League eligibility ) : 
 HG 
 = Home grown player named in 25 @-@ man squad 
 PL = 
 Non home grown player named in 25 @-@ man squad 
 U21 = Under 21 players 
 Source : Premier League Squad list : 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = Other statistics = = = 
 Norwich 's total of 28 league goals in total were the fewest in the 2013 – 14 Premier League season . 
 Only two teams , Fulham and Cardiff , conceded more goals than Norwich during the League Season . 
 Norwich 's 14 away defeats was the most in the league . 
 Norwich 's 9 away points was the worst in the league . 
 Norwich 's 8 away defeats in a row was the joint worst in the league . 
 = Avro Canada CF @-@ 103 = 
 The Avro Canada CF @-@ 103 was a proposed Canadian interceptor , designed by Avro Canada in the early 1950s as a development , and possible replacement of the company 's CF @-@ 100 Canuck , that was entering service at the time with the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) . Although intended to be capable of flying at transonic speeds , the CF @-@ 103 only proffered a moderate increase in performance and capability over the CF @-@ 100 ; subsequently , the aircraft never progressed beyond the mock @-@ up stage . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Even before the prototype of the CF @-@ 100 had flown , Avro Canada was conducting studies of potential advanced variations of the aircraft , as the RCAF was seeking an interceptor with greater high @-@ speed performance . Due to the perceived limitations of the CF @-@ 100 's original " thick " , straight wing , Chief Designer John Frost proposed a series of refinements that included a thinner swept wing . In December 1950 , the Avro Aircraft Design Office decided to proceed with a redesign , primarily incorporating the early series CF @-@ 100 fuselage structure with a new swept wing and tail surfaces as part of the C @-@ <unk> design study . 
 Frost considered the new design as an interim aircraft between the CF @-@ 100 and the more advanced C @-@ 104 project . The salient changes to the basic wing planform were in decreasing its chord and thickness , and adding a 42 ° sweep to the leading edge , creating a near @-@ delta wing configuration . The tail surfaces were also swept back . One version that was considered featured two streamlined fuel tanks blended into the leading edge of the wings near the three / quarter position . Despite the use of more powerful engines , the redesign had very modest performance specifications , with a planned maximum diving speed of Mach 0 @.@ 95 , scarcely better than the placarded Mach 0 @.@ 85 speed limit of the production CF @-@ 100 Mk 2 and Mk 3 . Avro executives , recognizing that the company had already suffered due to the protracted development of the CF @-@ 100 , determined that Frost 's revised design would provide a " hedge " against the CF @-@ 100 's failure to secure long @-@ term contracts . 
 In 1951 , the Canadian Department of Trade and Commerce issued an order for two prototypes and a static test airframe , under the CF @-@ 103 project designation . Jigs , tools and detailed engineering drawings were in place by June 1951 , with wind tunnel testing , conducted at Cornell University , completed by November 1951 . Although a wooden mock @-@ up of the CF @-@ 103 was built , along with a separate cockpit area and engine section that was partially framed in , the mock @-@ up did not feature an undercarriage unit nor any interior fittings . Two different tail designs were fitted with the initial effort only having a swept leading edge of the tail , while the definitive version had a much more raked appearance . The engineering and installation requirements for the CF @-@ 103 's proposed Orenda 17 jet engines were not finalized , as the experimental " hybrid " using an Orenda 8 compressor unit and Orenda 11 two @-@ stage turbine , matched to a " reheat " unit , had not been fully developed . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 During 1951 , flight tests carried out by Chief Development Test Pilot S / L Janusz Żurakowski and other members of the Flight Test unit , revealed the development potential of the CF @-@ 100 had outstripped the intended performance envelope of the CF @-@ 103 , while Frost and the Design Office became preoccupied with more sophisticated designs as potential replacements for the CF @-@ 100 . Work on the CF @-@ 103 stalled , with the maiden flight originally scheduled for the summer of 1952 , postponed to mid @-@ 1953 . With Cold War pressures mounting , the Canadian government demanded that production of the latest CF @-@ 100 fighter , as well as developing more advanced variants of the Canuck should predominate , leading the Avro company to curtail the moribund CF @-@ 103 project in December 1951 . 
 Although the mock @-@ up languished in the experimental bay at the factory , a dramatic event served to preclude any attempt to restart the project . On 18 December 1952 , from a height of 33 @,@ 000 ft ( 10 @,@ 000 m ) , Żurakowski dived the CF @-@ 100 Mk 4 prototype ( RCAF Serial No. <unk> ) to Mach 1 @.@ 06 . His " unauthorized " test flight resulted in the final scrapping of the mock @-@ up . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Avro Arrow : The Story of the Avro Arrow from its Evolution to its Extinction 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 59 ft 9 in ( 18 @.@ 2 m ) 
 Wingspan : 43 ft ( 13 @.@ 1 m ) 
 Height : 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 87 m ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Orenda 17 turbojets 
 Dry thrust : 7 @,@ 275 lbf ( 34 @.@ 36 kN ) each 
 Thrust with afterburner : 8 @,@ 490 lbf ( 37 @.@ 8 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 0 @.@ 85 or 647 mph ( 1 @,@ 039 km / h ) ( Mach 0 @.@ 95 in dive ) 
 Armament 
 Proposed 
 Forward @-@ firing ventral gun pack containing eight .5 @-@ inch Browning M3 machine guns ( 200 rounds per machine gun ) 
 = Music of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 = 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix in 2011 as the sequel to Final Fantasy XIII . The music of the game was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Mitsuto Suzuki . It was intended to sound different from the music of previous Final Fantasy titles , featuring more musical styles and vocal pieces . Since the release of the game , Square Enix has published the 2011 four @-@ disc soundtrack album , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack , as well as an album of arrangements and alternate versions of tracks from the game , Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack PLUS , in 2012 . The theme song for the game , " Yakusoku no Basho " ( 約束の場所 , The Promised Place ) , was released by singer Mai Fukui as a single in 2011 , and the English version of the song , sung by Charice Pempengco and included in the non @-@ Japanese versions of the game , was included on her 2012 album Infinity . 
 Reviews of the soundtrack album were positive , with critics praising both the variety of styles and quality of the pieces . Several critics noted Mizuta 's work as possibly his finest to date . Reviewers of the game were more mixed , with some feeling that some of the styles of music did not match where they were played in the game . Critics were also mixed in their opinions of the arranged album , feeling that several of the pieces were simply inferior versions of the original tracks . Both of the albums and the single sold well enough to place on the Japanese Oricon charts , with the original soundtrack album reaching a peak of # 13 and remaining on the charts for eight weeks . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 The music of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Mitsuto Suzuki . The three composers were coordinated by Keiji Kawamori to ensure the composers ' three styles meshed well together . Hamauzu , who was the sole composer for the music of Final Fantasy XIII , composed roughly a quarter of the game 's tracks , as did Suzuki , while Mizuta wrote nearly half . Prior to this game , Mizuta has worked on the music of Final Fantasy XI , while Suzuki had been a sound director for several Square Enix games and served as an arranger for XIII . The game 's director , Motomu Toriyama , wanted the game 's soundtrack to have more variety than that of the music in Final Fantasy XIII , as well as feature more styles . As a result , the game had three composers rather than just Hamauzu . Toriyama also wished for the music to have " a more edgy sound " and more vocal pieces , so that it would sound " unlike the typical Final Fantasy title " . The music incorporates a wide variety of styles , from orchestral and electronic to rap , hip @-@ hop , jazz funk , and metal . 
 Prior to the game Hamauzu was known for working on orchestral pieces , Mizuta for instrumental pieces , and Suzuki for electronic pieces , and as a result all three composers attempted to write music that did not fit their general style to avoid only writing music similar to what they had produced before . They also worked with each other to blend their styles together , so that shifts between composers in the soundtrack would not be jarring . While the music is not intended to be reminiscent of Final Fantasy XIII 's music , pieces set in scenes involving places or characters from the prequel use motifs and pieces of music used in that game for those places or characters . Mizuta 's favorite song from the soundtrack that he wrote is " Caius 's Theme " , which he rewrote four times over the course of a month . Suzuki 's favorite is " Historia Crux " , which he wrote as several tunes mixing into one as a metaphor for time travel in the game , and Hamauzu 's is " Knight of the Goddess " , the battle theme for the game , which he attempted to make the equal of " Blinded by Light " , the battle theme of the prequel , which he felt was very well received . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The first album of music from the game which Square Enix released is Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack . The album contains all of the musical tracks from the game , and was composed and produced by Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Mitsuto Suzuki . Some of the tracks were arranged by Ryo Yamazaki , Yoshitaka Suzuki , Kengo Tokusashi , Shootie HG , and Sachiko Miyano , and a few songs were arrangements of previous Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu 's chocobo theme . The soundtrack spans four discs and 79 tracks , covering a duration of 5 : 01 : 22 . It was released by Square Enix on December 14 , 2011 in Japan and on February 2 , 2012 in North America as a part of the limited edition of the game , bearing the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 9 . The Japanese limited edition of the soundtrack included a bonus disc containing two versions of the 2011 Electronic Entertainment Expo trailer for the game . The album reached # 13 on the Japanese Oricon charts , and remained on the charts for eight weeks . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics . Patrick Gann of the role @-@ playing video game news website RPGFan called it " a no @-@ questions @-@ asked kind of purchase " , praising in particular the variety of the pieces and the contrasts between the different styles . Jayson Napolitano of the video game music news website Original Sound Version concurred , calling it " a fantastic soundtrack " with eclectic styles , and noting Mizuta 's contributions as his best work to date . Original Sound Version later named the album as the best soundtrack of 2011 . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online , another video game music news website , was not as enthusiastic about the album as other reviewers , as he felt that some of the more experimental tracks missed the mark , but was still positive about the album as a whole . He considered the soundtrack " a fresh sound for the series " , and agreed with Napolitano that Mizuta 's contributions were noteworthy for the composer . Reviewers of the soundtrack in the context of the game were more mixed . Simon Parkin in his review of the game for Eurogamer said that the music " suffers from a lack of coherent direction " and often did not match up with the scenes it was played in . Dale North of Destructoid , however , felt that the soundtrack was " wonderfully varied and lots of fun " , and predicted that " traditionalist " fans of Final Fantasy music would not like it as much . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Soundtrack Plus = = 
 On May 30 , 2012 Square Enix published in Japan a second album of music from the game titled Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack PLUS . Similar to the Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack PLUS album released for the previous game , the album contains early versions of songs used in Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , alternate takes contained in the downloadable content for the game , arrangements made for promotions of the game , and new remixes . The tracks on the album were arranged by Ryo Yamazaki , Kengo Tokusashi , Yoshitaka Suzuki , Goh Hotoda , Shootie HG , and Hiroyuki Togo . The single @-@ disc soundtrack contains 16 tracks , covering a duration of 1 : 07 : 02 , and bears the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The album 's music covers a variety of styles , often different ones than those of the original pieces , including electronic , instrumental , and piano covers . The album reached # 93 on the Oricon charts , and remained on the charts for one week . 
 Unlike the original soundtrack , the arranged album received mixed reviews from critics . Patrick Gann of RPGFan felt that the album was a good addition to the musical outputs of the Final Fantasy XIII world , and superior to the PLUS soundtrack for the first game in that it relied less on early , unpolished versions of songs . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online , however , felt that the album contained mainly " inferior " versions of works from the original soundtrack , and was not worth acquiring . Both reviewers , however , praised " Clash on the Big Bridge - Oriental Mix - " , an arrangement of a tune by Nobuo Uematsu from Final Fantasy V included in the game 's downloadable content , as a welcome addition to the soundtrack , with Kotowski calling it " amazing " and the main reason to get the album , and Gann terming it " the most interesting version " of the song released to date . 
 = = Theme song = = 
 " Yakusoku no Basho " ( 約束の場所 , The Promised Place ) is the theme song of the Japanese version of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . Sung by Mai Fukui , it was composed by Koichi Tabo . Non @-@ Japanese versions of the game instead included an alternate English version of the song , " New World " , from Charice Pempengco 's album Infinity ( 2012 ) . " New World " was also composed by Koichi Tabo . " Yakusoku no Basho " was released as a single on November 23 , 2011 by J @-@ more , and included three other tracks in addition to the piece . These tracks are " <unk> Hitori no <unk> " ( <unk> , Only One Side ) and instrumental version of both songs . Simon Isogai composed and wrote the lyrics for " <unk> Hitori no <unk> " . The limited edition of the single included a DVD with a music video for the song . The song was also released on Fukui 's six @-@ track mini @-@ album Beautiful Days on December 14 , 2011 , along with a Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 trailer and a code for downloadable content for the game . The single has a length of 21 : 22 , and has the catalog number of <unk> @-@ <unk> . The single reached # 24 on the Oricon charts , and stayed on the charts for 8 weeks . 
 = Education in early modern Scotland = 
 Education in early modern Scotland includes all forms of education within the modern borders of Scotland , between the end of the Middle Ages in the late fifteenth century and the beginnings of the Enlightenment in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . By the sixteenth century such formal educational institutions as grammar schools , petty schools and sewing schools for girls were established in Scotland , while children of the nobility often studied under private tutors . Scotland had three universities , but the curriculum was limited and Scottish scholars had to go abroad to gain second degrees . These contacts were one of the most important ways in which the new ideas of Humanism were brought into Scottish intellectual life . Humanist concern with education and Latin culminated in the Education Act 1496 . 
 After the Reformation the Humanist concern with education became part of a programme of godly education , with an attempt to establish a system of parish schools administered by the Church of Scotland ( the " Kirk " ) . A new university was established in Edinburgh and the existing universities underwent a series of reforms associated with Andrew Melville that revitalised them and brought them up to the standards of Humanist scholarship and methods of teaching of institutions elsewhere . In the seventeenth century there were attempts to organise and finance the system of parish schools and a successful expansion of the university system . By the early eighteenth century the network of parish schools was reasonably complete in the Lowlands , but limited in the Highlands where it was supplemented by Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge . Scotland began to reap the benefits of its university system , with major early figures of the Enlightenment including Francis Hutcheson , Colin Maclaurin and David Hume . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Schooling = = = 
 Surviving sources for education in Medieval Scotland are extremely limited . Outside of occasional references in documents concerned with other matters , they amount to a handful of burgh records and monastic and episcopal registers . In the Highlands there are indications of a system of Gaelic education associated with the professions of poetry and medicine , with <unk> , who may have taught theology and arts , and rex <unk> of lesser status , but evidence of formal schooling is largely only preserved in place names . By the end of the Middle Ages most large churches probably had song schools , open to all boys . Grammar schools , which were based on the teaching of Latin grammar for boys , could be found in all the main Scottish burghs and some small towns . Educational provision was probably better in towns ; in rural areas , petty schools provided an elementary education . They were almost exclusively aimed at boys , but by the end of the fifteenth century Edinburgh also had schools for girls . These were sometimes described as " sewing schools " , whose name probably indicates one of their major functions , although reading may also have been taught , and were generally run by lay women or nuns . There was also the development of private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers . Sometimes these developed into " household schools " that may also have catered to farming neighbours and kin , as well as the sons of the laird 's household . There is documentary evidence for about 100 schools of these different kinds before the Reformation . The growing Humanist @-@ inspired emphasis on education in the late Middle Ages culminated in the passing of the Education Act 1496 , which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools and endorsed the Humanist concern to learn " perfyct Latyne " . All this resulted in an increase in literacy , although it was largely concentrated among a male and wealthy elite , with perhaps 60 per cent of the nobility being literate by the beginning of the sixteenth century . 
 = = = Universities = = = 
 From the end of the eleventh century universities had been founded across Europe , developing as semi @-@ autonomous centres of learning , often teaching theology , mathematics , law and medicine . By the fifteenth century , beginning in northern Italy , universities had become strongly influenced by Humanist thinking . This put an emphasis on classical authors , questioned some of the accepted certainties of established thinking and manifested itself in the teaching of new subjects , particularly through the medium of the Greek language . In the fifteenth century university colleges had been founded at St John 's College , St Andrews ( 1418 ) and St Salvator 's College was added in 1450 . Glasgow was founded in 1451 and King 's College , Aberdeen in 1495 . St Leonard 's College was added at St. Andrews in 1511 . Initially , they were designed for the training of clerics , but they would increasingly be used by laymen who began to challenge the clerical monopoly of administrative posts in government and law . 
 In this period Scottish universities largely had a Latin curriculum , designed for the clergy and civil and canon lawyers . They did not teach the Greek that was fundamental to the new Humanist scholarship , focusing on metaphysics , and putting a largely unquestioning faith in the works of Aristotle , whose authority would be challenged in the Renaissance . They provided only basic degrees . Those wanting to study for the more advanced degrees that were common amongst European scholars needed to go to universities in other countries . As a result , large numbers of Scots continued their studies on the Continent and at English universities . These international contacts helped integrate Scotland into a wider European scholarly world and would be one of the most important ways in which the new ideas of Humanism were brought into Scottish intellectual life . By 1497 the Humanist and historian Hector Boece , born in Dundee and who had studied at Paris , returned to become the first principal at the new university of Aberdeen . Another major figure was Archibald Whitelaw , a teacher at St. Andrews and Cologne who later became a tutor to the young James III and served as royal secretary from 1462 to 1493 . 
 = = Sixteenth century = = 
 = = = Humanism and Protestantism = = = 
 The civic values of humanism , which stressed the importance of order and morality , began to have a major impact on education and would become dominant in universities and schools by the end of the sixteenth century . King 's College Aberdeen was refounded in 1515 . In addition to the basic arts curriculum it offered theology , civil and canon law and medicine . St Leonard 's College was founded in Aberdeen in 1511 by Archbishop Alexander Stewart . John Douglas led the refoundation of St John 's College as St Mary 's College , St Andrews in 1538 , as a Humanist academy for the training of clerics , with a stress on biblical study . Robert Reid , Abbot of Kinloss and later Bishop of Orkney , was responsible in the 1520s and 1530s for bringing the Italian humanist Giovanni Ferrario to teach at Kinloss Abbey , where he established an impressive library and wrote works of Scottish history and biography . Reid was also instrumental in organising the public lectures that were established in Edinburgh in the 1540s on law , Greek , Latin and philosophy , under the patronage of the queen consort Mary of Guise . These developed into the " Tounis College " of the city , which would eventually become the University of Edinburgh . 
 In the mid @-@ sixteenth century , Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that rejected Papal authority and many aspects of Catholic theology and practice . It created a predominately Calvinist national church , known as the kirk , which was strongly Presbyterian in outlook , severely reducing the powers of bishops , although not initially abolishing them . This gave considerable power within the new kirk to local lairds , who often had control over the appointment of the clergy and would be important in establishing and funding schools . There was also a shift from emphasis on ritual to one on the word , making the Bible , and the ability to read the Bible , fundamental to Scottish religion . 
 = = = Reformation of schools = = = 
 The Humanist concern with increasing public access to education was shared by the Protestant reformers , who saw schools as vehicles for the provision of moral and religious education for a more godly society . After the Protestant party became dominant in 1560 , the First Book of Discipline set out a plan for a school in every parish , but this proved financially impossible . In the burghs the existing schools were largely maintained , with the song schools and a number of new foundations becoming reformed grammar schools or ordinary parish schools . Schools were supported by a combination of kirk funds , contributions from local heritors or burgh councils and parents that could pay . They were inspected by kirk sessions of local elders , which checked for the quality of teaching and doctrinal purity . There were also large number of unregulated private " adventure schools " . These were often informally created by parents in agreement with unlicensed schoolmasters , using available buildings and are chiefly evident in the historical record through complaints and attempts to suppress them by kirk sessions because they took pupils away from the official parish schools . However , such private schools were often necessary given the large populations and scale of some parishes . They were often tacitly accepted by the church and local authorities and may have been particularly important to girls and the children of the poor . Outside of the established burgh schools , which were generally better funded and more able to pay schoolmasters , masters often combined their position with other employment , particularly minor posts within the kirk , such as clerk . Immediately after the Reformation they were in short supply , but there is evidence that the expansion of the university system provided large numbers of graduates by the seventeenth century . There is evidence of about 800 schools for the period between 1560 and 1633 . The parish schools were " Inglis " schools , teaching in the vernacular and taking children to the age of about 7 , while the grammar schools took boys to about 12 . At their best in the grammar schools , the curriculum included the catechism , Latin , French , Classical literature and sports . 
 The widespread belief in the limited intellectual and moral capacity of women came into conflict with a desire , intensified after the Reformation , for women to take greater personal moral responsibility , particularly as wives and mothers . In Protestantism this necessitated an ability to learn and understand the catechism and even to be able to independently read the Bible , but most commentators of the period , even those that tended to encourage the education of girls , thought they should not receive the same academic education as boys . Girls were only admitted to parish schools when there were insufficient numbers of boys to pay an adequate living for schoolmasters . In the lower ranks of society , girls benefited from the expansion of the parish schools system that took place after the Reformation , but were usually outnumbered by boys and often taught separately , for a shorter time and to a lower level . Girls were frequently taught reading , sewing and knitting , but not writing . Among the nobility there were many educated and cultured women , such as Mary , Queen of Scots . 
 = = = Reformation of universities = = = 
 After the Reformation , Scotland 's universities underwent a series of reforms associated with Andrew Melville , who returned from Geneva to become principal of the University of Glasgow in 1574 . A distinguished linguist , philosopher and poet , he had trained in Paris and studied law at Poitiers , before moving to Geneva and developing an interest in Protestant theology . Influenced by the anti @-@ Aristotelian Pierre Ramus , he placed an emphasis on simplified logic and elevated languages and sciences to the same status as philosophy , allowing accepted ideas in all areas to be challenged . He introduced new specialist teaching staff , replacing the system of " regenting " , where one tutor took the students through the entire arts curriculum . Metaphysics were abandoned and Greek became compulsory in the first year followed by Aramaic , Syriac and Hebrew , launching a new fashion for ancient and biblical languages . Enrollment rates at the University of Glasgow had been declining before his arrival , but students now began to arrive in large numbers . He assisted in the reconstruction of Marischal College , Aberdeen founded as a second university college in the city in 1593 by George Keith , 5th Earl Marischal , and , in order to do for St Andrews what he had done for Glasgow , he was appointed Principal of St Mary 's College , St Andrews in 1580 . The " Tounis College " established in the mid @-@ sixteenth century became the University of Edinburgh in 1582 . Melville 's reforms produced a revitalisation of all Scottish universities , which were now providing a quality of education equal to the most esteemed higher education institutions anywhere in Europe . 
 = = Seventeenth century = = 
 = = = Parish schools = = = 
 In 1616 an act in Privy council commanded every parish to establish a school " where convenient means may be had " . After the Parliament of Scotland ratified this law and the Education Act of 1633 , a tax on local landowners was introduced to provide the necessary endowment . From 1638 Scotland underwent a " second Reformation " , with widespread support for a National Covenant , objecting to the Charles I 's liturgical innovations and reaffirming the Calvinism and Presbyterianism of the kirk . After the Bishop 's Wars ( 1639 – 40 ) , Scotland had virtual independence from the government in Westminster . Education remained fundamental to the ideas of the Covenanters . A loophole which allowed evasion of the education tax was closed in the Education Act of 1646 , which established a solid institutional foundation for schools on Covenanter principles , emphasising the role of presbyteries in supervision . Although the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 brought a reversal to the 1633 position , in 1696 new legislation restored the provisions of 1646 together with means of enforcement " more suitable to the age " and underlined the aim of having a school in every parish . In rural communities these acts obliged local landowners ( heritors ) to provide a schoolhouse and pay a schoolmaster , known in Scotland as a <unk> , while ministers and local presbyteries oversaw the quality of the education . In many Scottish towns , burgh schools were operated by local councils . By the late seventeenth century there was a largely complete network of parish schools in the Lowlands , but in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas . 
 = = = Growth of the universities = = = 
 Under the Commonwealth ( 1652 – 60 ) , the universities saw an improvement in their funding , as they were given income from deaneries , defunct bishoprics and the excise , allowing the completion of buildings including the college in the High Street in Glasgow . They were still largely seen as training schools for clergy , and came under the control of the hard line Protesters , who were generally favoured by the regime because of their greater antipathy to royalism , with leading protester Patrick Gillespie being made Principal at Glasgow in 1652 . After the Restoration there was a purge of Presbyterians from the universities , but most of the intellectual advances of the preceding period were preserved . The five Scottish universities recovered from the disruption of the civil war years and Restoration with a lecture @-@ based curriculum that was able to embrace economics and science , offering a high @-@ quality liberal education to the sons of the nobility and gentry . All saw the establishment or re @-@ establishment of chairs of mathematics . Astronomy was facilitated by the building of observatories at St. Andrews and at King 's and Marischal colleges in Aberdeen . Robert Sibbald was appointed as the first Professor of Medicine at Edinburgh and he co @-@ founded the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1681 . These developments helped the universities to become major centres of medical education and would put Scotland at the forefront of Enlightenment thinking . 
 = = Early eighteenth century = = 
 = = = Limitations of the school system = = = 
 One of the effects of the extensive network of parish schools was the growth of the " democratic myth " , which in the nineteenth century created the widespread belief that many a " lad of <unk> " had been able to rise up through the system to take high office and that literacy was much more widespread in Scotland than in neighbouring states , particularly England . Historians now accept that very few boys were able to pursue this route to social advancement and that literacy was not noticeably higher than in comparable nations , as the education in the parish schools was basic and short and attendance was not compulsory . 
 By the eighteenth century many poorer girls were being taught in dame schools , informally set up by a widow or spinster to teach reading , sewing and cooking . Among members of the aristocracy by the early eighteenth century a girl 's education was expected to include basic literacy and numeracy , needlework , cookery and household management , while polite accomplishments and piety were also emphasised . Female illiteracy rates based on signatures among female servants were around 90 percent from the late seventeenth to the early eighteenth centuries , and perhaps 85 percent for women of all ranks by 1750 , compared with 35 per cent for men . Overall literacy rates were slightly higher than in England as a whole , but female rates were much lower than for their English counterparts . 
 In the Scottish Highlands , popular education was challenged by problems of distance and physical isolation , as well as teachers ' and ministers ' limited knowledge of Scottish Gaelic , the primary local language . Here the Kirk 's parish schools were supplemented by those established from 1709 by the Scottish Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge . Its aim in the Highlands was to teach English language and end the attachment to Roman Catholicism associated with rebellious Jacobitism . Though the SSPCK schools eventually taught in Gaelic , the overall effect contributed to the erosion of Highland culture . Literacy rates were lower in the Highlands than in comparable Lowland rural society , and despite these efforts illiteracy remained prevalent into the nineteenth century . 
 = = = Beginnings of the Enlightenment = = = 
 Access to Scottish universities was probably more open than in contemporary England , Germany or France . Attendance was less expensive and the student body more representative of society as a whole . In the eighteenth century Scotland reaped the intellectual benefits of this system in its contribution the European Enlightenment . Key figures in the Scottish Enlightenment who had made their mark before the mid @-@ eighteenth century included Francis Hutcheson ( 1694 – 1746 ) , who was professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow from 1729 to 1746 . He was an important link between the ideas of Shaftesbury and the later school of Scottish Common Sense Realism , developing Utilitarianism and <unk> thinking . Colin Maclaurin ( 1698 – 1746 ) , appointed to a chair of mathematics by the age of 19 at Marischal College , was the leading British mathematician of his era . Perhaps the most significant intellectual figure of early modern Scotland was David Hume ( 1711 – 76 ) whose Treatise on Human Nature ( 1738 ) and Essays , Moral and Political ( 1741 ) helped outline the parameters of philosophical <unk> and <unk> . He would be a major influence of later Enlightenment figures including Adam Smith , Immanuel Kant and Jeremy Bentham . 
 = Pilot ( Cold Feet ) = 
 Cold Feet is a British television pilot directed by Declan Lowney . It stars James Nesbitt and Helen Baxendale as Adam and Rachel , a couple who meet and fall in love , only for the relationship to break down when he gets cold feet . John Thomson , Fay Ripley , Hermione Norris and Robert Bathurst appear in supporting roles . The programme was written by Mike Bullen , a BBC radio producer with little screenwriting experience , who was tasked with creating a one @-@ off television production that would appeal to middle @-@ class television audiences , who the executive producer Andy Harries believed were <unk> on British television . 
 After filming was completed in 1996 the commissioning network ITV shelved it for a year . It was eventually scheduled for broadcast on the evening of 30 March 1997 , as part of the network 's Comedy Premieres strand , but overrunning sports coverage delayed it for an hour . Ratings were low and critical reviews were minimal , but positive ; critics enjoyed the comedy drama format and praised the writing and performances of the leads . Harries entered Cold Feet in the Montreux Television Festival , where it was awarded the Rose d 'Or , the festival 's top prize , resulting in ITV quickly scheduling a repeat broadcast . At the end of the year it won the award for Best Comedy Drama ( ITV ) at the British Comedy Awards and the incoming director of channels ordered a full series , which ran for five successful years from 1998 to 2003 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Adam Williams ( James Nesbitt ) breaks up with another in a long line of girlfriends and spends the evening at the pub with his friend Pete Gifford ( John Thomson ) . Pete arrives home late , which annoys his wife Jenny ( Fay Ripley ) , who calculated that night to be the best time for them to conceive a child . She becomes even more frustrated when she sees Pete has brought Adam back ; he missed his last bus home . Rachel Bradley 's ( Helen Baxendale ) boyfriend Simon Atkinson ( Stephen Mapes ) breaks up with her over dinner after taking a job in Hong Kong . Rachel angrily leaves the restaurant and telephones her friend Karen Marsden ( Hermione Norris ) , who has just asked her husband David ( Robert Bathurst ) if they can get a nanny to take care of their son Josh . 
 Rachel crashes her car into Adam 's on a supermarket car park . After a brief argument Adam suggests they exchange phone numbers , under the pretence that it is for insurance purposes . She writes hers on his rear windscreen but rain washes it off . Prompted by Pete , Adam spends a day on the supermarket car park , in the hope that he and Rachel will cross paths , but they do not meet . At a dinner party held by Karen and David , Karen suggests Rachel get out more and advises her to call Adam . They go on a date but Adam is disappointed that Rachel does not want sex . Eventually , he suggests they see a play , which happens to be on at a theatre near his house . The play is dismal but Rachel decides it is time they slept together . Jenny takes another pregnancy test , but it is negative . Adam arrives and recounts his dates with Rachel to her and Pete , telling them he loves Rachel . 
 Following a discussion with Pete about women and commitment , Adam argues with Rachel and angrily leaves her flat . Seconds later Simon returns , telling Rachel he has turned down the Hong Kong job . After getting locked out the house , Karen interrupts a seminar David is holding , demanding they get a nanny . He relents , embarrassed after being shown up in front of his colleagues . Determined to get Rachel back , Adam goes to Simon 's flat , where he serenades her wearing nothing but a rose between his buttocks . Jenny and Pete arrive to find Simon chasing a naked Adam down the street . The fight is interrupted by a passing policeman , who lists multiple felonies Adam has committed , until Rachel steps forward and takes the blame for what has happened . She declares her love to Adam and the two leave . Pete and Jenny watch and she tells him her last pregnancy test was positive . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Writer Mike Bullen 's first script , an hour @-@ long comedy entitled The Perfect Match , was produced by Granada Television in 1995 . Granada 's controller of comedy Andy Harries was pleased with the balance Bullen 's script struck between comedy and drama . Eager to develop a television series for middle @-@ class thirty @-@ somethings , Harries had Bullen pitch ideas to The Perfect Match assistant producer Christine Langan , with a view to making a pilot . Bullen 's initial idea was a typical " boy meets girl , boy loses girl , boy wins girl back " story , but told from both sides of the relationship . Langan accepted Bullen 's pitch and he began writing a first draft . Bullen and Langan were influenced by the American television series Thirtysomething and the film When Harry Met Sally ; the stories were funny and dramatic but neither aspect was " <unk> " . Believing that there was little television aimed at people like them , Bullen and Langan discussed their own lives and friends , using personal experiences to create the characters : Adam was based on Bullen before he met his wife and Rachel was based on a combination of his ex @-@ girlfriends and " the fantasy girlfriend " . When writing his first draft , Bullen realised that telling the same story from both sides of the relationship would mean repeating something that the audience had already seen . To rectify this he introduced the fantasy scenes and the idea of the characters reporting events in a slightly different way to what really happened . 
 Adam and Rachel were originally Londoners living in Chelsea . Langan proposed moving the setting to Manchester to keep production costs down by using Granada 's existing studios based in the city . Harries , who wanted a series to be commissioned by ITV , agreed , believing it would make the show more accessible to viewers . Another requirement for a series was the number of potential storylines ; Adam and Rachel 's plot was self @-@ contained . Harries told Bullen to expand the four supporting characters ' roles , so Bullen " tacked on " their storylines . The script went through up to seven drafts before being filmed . Langan interviewed several directors before hiring Father Ted director Declan Lowney . Lowney initially rejected the script , believing the characters to be very smug . After re @-@ reading it , he met Langan backstage after a Father Ted taping , where he compared the story to The Big Chill . Both producer and director " clicked " and Lowney joined the production team . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 After commissioning the pilot , ITV Network Centre did not dictate to the producers who should be cast . John Thomson , a comedian known for his work with Steve Coogan , was the first to be cast . He had played Rick , a minor character in The Perfect Match , a role Bullen describes as " proto @-@ Pete " . Bullen was impressed by Thomson 's natural comedy and Langan asked him to write a role for him to play in Cold Feet . Thomson accepted the role because he did not want to be known forever for playing " Fat Bob " , the sidekick of Coogan 's Paul Calf in a series of sketches . Lowney had been introduced to James Nesbitt through a mutual friend . He brought him in to audition for the part of Adam after seeing his " wonderfully expressive face " in a <unk> advertisement . At the audition , Nesbitt asked to do the reading with his own accent , believing that Northern Irish characters rarely appeared in contemporary British drama without " political baggage " . Langan found Nesbitt 's approach to be refreshing and he was cast as Adam . 
 Halfway through the casting process , Cardiac Arrest actress Helen Baxendale became available . BAFTA Scotland award @-@ nominated Baxendale was seen as a coup , though she was hesitant to audition as she believed that she could not do comedy . Harries persuaded her that she was more than qualified , citing her comedic performance in Cardiac Arrest . She was cast as Rachel on the basis of her chemistry at the audition with Nesbitt . Fay Ripley assumed that she would be reading for the role of Rachel , and was surprised to be auditioning for Jenny . Many of the actresses seen for the part were " finger @-@ wagging " and " predictable " , an approach Ripley did not take . Raised in Surrey , Ripley had to adopt a Manchester accent for the part . She " managed to <unk> together a sort of Manchester accent " for the audition , assuming that she would not get the part . When she was cast , she worked on improving the accent by spending time talking to local people . 
 Robert Bathurst was appearing in The Rover during casting and arrived at his audition " bearded and shaggy " . He did not expect to win the part of David , the " smooth " management consultant , assuming someone " a lot shinier and flashier " than him would be cast . Langan had seen him in Joking Apart and some other sitcom pilots and was attracted to his " disciplined comic energy " . Hermione Norris first read for Rachel but Lowney asked her to read for Karen because her social class matched that of the character , and she had a good rapport with Bathurst . Other actors appearing are Mark Andrews as Howard , Mark <unk> as the waiter , John Griffin as Andrew , David Harewood as the Police Sergeant , Kathryn Hunt as <unk> , Pauline Jefferson as the Old Lady , Jeremy Turner @-@ Welch as the Neighbour , and Lewis Hancock as the Evangelist . Mike Bullen makes a cameo appearance as the actor . Bullen insisted on having a line as when he visited the set of The Perfect Match he " felt like a spare part " . 
 = = = Filming and music = = = 
 Filming was scheduled over a 12 @-@ day period on Granada 's sets and on location around Manchester , following a week of rehearsals . It was shot entirely on film stock . For the climax involving the rose , Nesbitt was required to be nearly naked on an open set , save for a small pouch that was not visible on screen . There was a risk that production could be shut down if residents of the street they were filming on complained to the police , so the production manager ensured that Nesbitt was covered up when he was not being filmed . Filming the five @-@ minute scene took about two hours . The song " Female of the Species " by Space was used throughout the programme ; the instrumental version plays over the opening credits and the full lyrical version is heard during a first @-@ act montage . The track was chosen by Langan after she heard it on The Chart Show . The rest of the incidental music and the main end credits theme was composed by The Other Two . Adam 's song was originally scripted to be Nilsson 's " Without You " but the rights to the song were too expensive . The song was substituted with " I 've Got You Under My Skin " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Following post @-@ production , the programme was shelved by ITV Network Centre until 1997 , when it was placed on the Easter weekend schedule as part of the network 's " Comedy Premieres " programming strand . The broadcast , scheduled for a 9 pm start on 30 March , went head @-@ to @-@ head with launch night of Channel 5 , Britain 's last terrestrial television channel , and the second part of the BBC1 drama The Missing Postman . Also broadcast on 30 March was ITV 's coverage of the Brazilian Grand Prix . The race was restarted due to an accident and threw ITV 's evening schedules into disarray . Broadcast of Cold Feet eventually began 40 minutes later than originally advertised and the overnight ratings reflected this ; it recorded viewing figures of just 3 @.@ 5 million . Harries wrote it off as a failure , telling Langan that they would never get a series . Some critical success came though ; writing in The Times the day after it aired , Matthew Bond called it " an enjoyable one @-@ off comedy aimed at anybody who 's ever been single , married , or had children . With such catholic appeal further heightened by Helen Baxendale heading a talented cast , it showed just what ITV can do when it is trying to win awards , such as the Golden Rose of Montreux . " The Sun 's Tim Ewbank echoed Bond 's reaction , expressing surprise that a " fast , funny , convincing " comedy had appeared on ITV , calling it " a treat " and " sharply observed " , and Baxendale and Nesbitt " terrific " . 
 An ITV committee selected Cold Feet to represent the network in the comedy @-@ drama category at the Montreux Television Festival at the end of April . Bullen was unable to attend the Rose d 'Or ceremony as he was sick with flu , so Harries took his place . The programme won the Silver Rose in the Humour category and the Golden Rose of Montreux , the festival 's highest honour . The Montreux jury was headed by David Liddiment , who became ITV 's director of channels in the latter half of 1997 and was influential in ordering a full series from Harries . Peter Salmon , Granada 's director of programmes , called the win " a reflection of the brilliant production and acting talents of the team " . Paul Spencer , the ITV network controller of comedy , called it " exactly the kind of comedy at which ITV excels . Bullen met with ITV executives to outline a series , and storylines were established by the end of May . 
 After the success at Montreux , ITV scheduled a repeat of Cold Feet for 25 May , this time at 9 pm The repeat brought in 5 @.@ 60 million viewers , making it the 66th most @-@ watched programme on British television that week . A. A. Gill , who had not seen the original broadcast , wrote that " it was lifted from being merely whimsical by some bow @-@ tight comic acting and a great script " , though he did not see the Golden Rose win as a particularly glorious achievement , citing the saturation of the Montreux Festival by British programmes in the 1990s . Further recognition came at the end of the year at the British Comedy Awards when Cold Feet won the Best Comedy Drama ( ITV ) award and at the Royal Television Society Programme Awards , where it was nominated for Best Situation Comedy & Comedy Drama . Helen Baxendale was nominated for the British Comedy Award for Top Television Comedy Actress but lost to Dawn French . At the RTS North West Awards , Cold Feet won the award for Best Network Entertainment Programme . The programme has retained the interest of reviewers several years after its original broadcast ; writing for The Jerusalem Post , Aryeh Dean Cohen said , " The cast sparkles all around , as does the script , and the characters are endearing and believable . " 
 Granada 's sale of the series package to American cable network Bravo in 2000 included this pilot . Bravo hired agency G <unk> to design a series of print and media advertisements for the series to run in such publications as The New York Times . G <unk> based their campaign on the shot of Adam 's buttocks , which led to many publications either asking for an alternative or refusing to carry the promotion outright . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Cold Feet 's first home video publication came in 1999 when it was released on VHS by Video Collection International , with the subtitle " A comedy about life , love & everything else ! " A short behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature on the filming of the second series was included . It was also released together with the double @-@ video set and DVD of the first series . In July 2007 , it was made available as streaming media on ITV 's revamped itv.com website and in April 2008 was made available for purchase on ITV 's iTunes Store shop . 
 = Third Epistle of John = 
 The Third Epistle of John , often referred to as Third John and written 3 John , is the antepenultimate book of the New Testament and attributed to John the Evangelist , traditionally thought to be the author of the Gospel of John and the other two epistles of John . The Third Epistle of John is a private letter composed to a man named Gaius , recommending to him a group of Christians led by Demetrius , which had come to preach the gospel in the area where Gaius lived . The purpose of the letter is to encourage and strengthen Gaius , and to warn him against Diotrephes , who refuses to cooperate with the author of the letter . 
 Early church literature contains no mention of the epistle , with the first reference to it appearing in the middle of the third century . This lack of documentation , though likely due to the extreme brevity of the epistle , caused early church writers to doubt its authenticity until the early 5th century , when it was accepted into the canon along with the other two epistles of John . The language of 3 John echoes that of the Gospel of John , which is conventionally dated to around AD 90 , so the epistle was likely written near the end of the first century . Others contest this view such as the scholar John A. T. Robinson who dates 3 John to c . AD 60 – 65 . The location of writing is unknown , but tradition places it in Ephesus . The epistle is found in many of the oldest New Testament manuscripts , and its text is free of major discrepancies or textual variants . 
 = = Content = = 
 There is no doctrine laid out in 3 John , which is strictly a personal letter , but the overall theme is the importance of hospitality , especially when it comes to men who were working to spread the gospel . Third John is the shortest book of the Bible by word count , though 2 John has fewer verses . It is the only New Testament book which does not contain the names " Jesus " or " Christ " . 
 = = = Greeting and introduction = = = 
 The letter is written to a man named Gaius . Gaius seems to have been a wealthy man , since the epistle 's author , who identifies himself only as " the Elder " , did not think it would impose unduly on him to host some traveling preachers for a short time . The Elder may have converted Gaius , since he calls Gaius his " child " in the faith . The Apostolic Constitutions <unk> records that Gaius was made bishop of Pergamon , though there is no early support for this statement . 
 The name Gaius occurs three other times in the New Testament . First , a Christian Gaius is mentioned in Macedonia as a traveling companion of Paul , along with Aristarchus ( Acts 19 : 29 ) . One chapter later , a Gaius from <unk> is named as one of Paul 's seven traveling companions who waited for him at <unk> ( Acts 20 : 4 ) . Next , a Gaius is mentioned residing in Corinth as being one of only a few people there ( the others being Crispus and the household of <unk> ) who were baptised by Paul , who founded the Church in that city ( 1 Corinthians 1 : 14 ) . Lastly , a Gaius is referred to in a final greeting portion of the Epistle to the Romans ( Romans 16 : 23 ) as Paul 's " host " and also host of the whole church , in whatever city Paul is writing from at the time ( probably Corinth ) . However , there is no reason to suppose that any of these men were the Gaius of 3 John . 
 Verse 2 , where the author wishes material prosperity upon Gaius similar to the prosperity of his soul , is a commonly used proof text within prosperity gospel teachings ; opponents of the prosperity gospel consider the verse to be little more than well @-@ wishing . 
 = = = Missionaries = = = 
 The Elder continues the letter by commending Gaius for his loyalty and his hospitality towards a group of traveling " brothers " . The " brothers " are brothers in the faith or missionaries , who in accordance with Jesus ' command in Mark 6 : 8 – 9 have set out on a journey without any money . The Elder then goes on to request that Gaius provide for the brothers to continue their journey . 
 = = = Opposition of Diotrephes = = = 
 The Elder next describes his conflict with Diotrephes , who does not acknowledge the Elder 's authority and is excommunicating those , like Gaius , who welcome missionaries sent by the Elder . The Elder mentions a previous letter which he has written to the church which was suppressed by Diotrephes , and says that he intends to visit the church and to confront Diotrephes . " The church " is apparently known to Gaius , but he is likely not a member of it , since otherwise the Elder would not need to provide him with information about Diotrephes ' activities . The dispute between Diotrephes and the Elder seems to be based on church leadership and authority rather than doctrine , since the Elder does not accuse Diotrephes of teaching heresy . 
 Most scholars do not connect the letter the Elder mentions with 2 John , since 3 John does not contain any reference to the doctrinal controversy described in 2 John , and argue that the Elder is here referring to a previous letter of recommendation . John Painter , however , argues the Elder is in fact referring to 2 John , since there is overlap between 2 John 9 and the theme of hospitality in 3 John . 
 The Elder closes this section with an entreaty to Gaius : " Beloved , do not imitate evil but imitate good . Whoever does good is from God ; whoever does evil has not seen God . " This injunction is reminiscent of several passages in 1 John ( 2 : 3 – 5 , 3 : 4 – 10 , 4 : 7 ) . 
 = = = Final greetings and conclusion = = = 
 Verse 12 introduces another man named Demetrius , who according to the Apostolic Constitutions <unk> was ordained by John as bishop of Philadelphia ( now Amman , Jordan ) . Demetrius was probably a member of the group of missionaries discussed earlier in the letter , and 3 John likely serves as a recommendation letter to Gaius about Demetrius . Recommendation letters were quite common in the early church , as evidenced by 2 Corinthians 3 : 1 , Romans 16 : 1 – 2 , and Colossians 4 : 7 – 8 . 
 The Elder , before ending the letter , says that he has many other things to tell to Gaius , and plans to make a journey to see him in the near future , using almost the exact language of 2 John 12 . The closing verse , " Peace be to you . The friends greet you . Greet the friends , one by one " , is typical of contemporary correspondence , with " Peace be to you " a greeting adopted by Christians from the Jews . 
 = = Authorship = = 
 3 John was almost certainly written by the same author who wrote 2 John , and likely 1 John as well . This individual may have been John the Evangelist himself or someone else , perhaps John the Presbyter , though according to scholar C. H. Dodd , " If we attempt to ... identify the anonymous author of these epistles with some known individual , we have little but surmise to go on . " 
 There are many similarities between 2 and 3 John . Both follow the format of other personal letters of the era ; in both the author self @-@ identifies as " the Presbyter " , a term which literally means " the elder " ; and both deal with themes of hospitality and conflict within the church . They are also extremely similar in length , probably because they were both written to fit on one papyrus sheet . 
 3 John is also linguistically similar to both 2 John and other Johannine works . Of 99 different words used , 21 are unimportant words like " and " or " the " , leaving 78 significant words . 23 of these do not appear in 1 John or the Gospel of John , of which four are unique to 3 John , one is common to 2 and 3 John , and two are found in both 2 and 3 John as well as in other New Testament writings . Approximately 30 % of the significant words in 3 John do not appear in 1 John or the Gospel , compared to 20 % for 2 John . These considerations indicate a close affinity between 2 and 3 John , while 2 John is more strongly connected to 1 John that is 3 John . A minority of scholars , however , argue against common authorship of 2 and 3 John , and Rudolf Bultmann held that 2 John was a forgery based on 3 John . 
 If 3 John was written by John the Apostle , however , it is strange that Diotrephes would oppose him since the apostles were highly respected in the early church . One possible alternative view of the epistle 's authorship arises from a fragment written by Papias of Hierapolis and quoted by Eusebius which mentions a man named " the Presbyter John " . However , since nothing else is known of this individual it is not possible to positively identify him as the author of 3 John . 
 = = = Date and location of writing = = = 
 All three letters of John were likely written within a few years of each other , and internal evidence indicates that they were written after the Gospel of John , placing them in the second half of the first century . This dating makes sense given their allusions and opposition to Gnostic and <unk> teaching , which denied the full humanity of Jesus , and which was gaining ascendancy at the end of the first century . 
 Dodd argues for a date between 96 – 110 A.D. , concluding from the absence of references to persecution in the letters that they were probably written after the harsh reign of the Roman emperor Domitian , whose persecution of Christians seems to have prompted the writing of the Book of Revelation . Dodd notes , however , that they could have been written in the pre @-@ Domitian era , which is likely if the author was a personal disciple of Jesus . Marshall suggests a date of between the 60s and 90s . <unk> suggests a dating of around 100 , assuming that the Gospel of John was written in the 90s and the letters must have followed after . Brown argues for a date of between 100 and 110 , with all three letters composed in close time proximity . A date past 110 – 115 is unlikely , as parts of 1 John and 2 John are quoted by Polycarp and Papias . 
 The letters do not indicate the location of authorship , but since the earliest quotations of them ( in the writings of Polycarp , Papias , and Irenaeus ) come from the province of Asia Minor , it is likely that the epistles were also written in Asia . Church tradition typically places them in the city of Ephesus . 
 = = = Manuscripts = = = 
 3 John is preserved in many of the old manuscripts of the New Testament . Of the Greek great uncial codices , codices Sinaiticus , Alexandrinus , and Vaticanus contain all three Johannine epistles , while Codex Ephraemi contains 3 John 3 – 15 along with 1 John 1 : 1 – 4 . Codex Bezae , while missing most of the Catholic epistles , contains 3 John 11 – 15 in Latin translation . In languages other than Greek , the Vulgate and the Sahidic , Armenian , <unk> Syriac , and <unk> versions contain all three epistles . Between the different copies there are no major difficulties or differences , meaning that there is very little doubt over determining the original text . 
 = = Canonical history = = 
 There are some doubtful similarities between passages in the Johannine epistles and the writings of Polycarp and Papias , but the earliest definitive references to the epistles come from the late second century . Irenaeus in Adversus <unk> 3 @.@ 16 @.@ 8 ( written c . 180 ) , quotes 2 John 7 and 8 , and in the next sentence 1 John 4 : 1 , 2 , but does not distinguish between 1 and 2 John ; he does not quote from 3 John . The <unk> Canon seems to refer to two letters of John only , though it is possible to interpret it as referring to three . 1 John is extensively cited by Tertullian , who died in 215 , and Clement of Alexandria , in addition to quoting 1 John , wrote a commentary on 2 John in his <unk> . All three Johannine epistles were recognized by the 39th festal letter of Athanasius , the Synod of Hippo and the Council of Carthage . Additionally Didymus the blind wrote a commentary on all three epistles , showing that by the early 5th century they were being considered as a single unit . 
 The first reference to 3 John is in the middle of the third century ; Eusebius says that Origen knew of both 2 and 3 John , however Origen is reported as saying " all do not consider them genuine " . Similarly , Dionysius of Alexandria , Origen 's pupil , was aware of a " reputed Second or Third Epistle of John " . Also around this time 3 John is thought to have been known in North Africa as it was referred to in the Sententiae <unk> produced by the Seventh Council of Carthage . There was doubt about the authority of 3 John , however , with Eusebius listing it and 2 John as " disputed books " despite describing them as " well @-@ known and acknowledged by most " . Although Eusebius believed the Apostle wrote the Gospel and the epistles , it is likely that doubt about the fidelity of the author of 2 and 3 John was a factor in causing them to be disputed . By the end of the fourth century the Presbyter ( author of 2 and 3 John ) was thought to be a different person than the Apostle John . This opinion , although reported by Jerome , was not held by all , as Jerome himself attributed the epistles to John the Apostle . One factor which helps explain the late attestation of 3 John and the doubts about its authority is the very short nature of the letter ; early writers may simply not have had occasion to quote from it . 
 = Eric Cartman = 
 Eric Theodore Cartman is one of the main characters in the animated television series South Park , created by Matt Stone and Trey Parker , and voiced by Trey Parker . Cartman , generally referred to by his surname , is one of four central characters in South Park , along with his friends Stan Marsh , Kyle Broflovski , and Kenny McCormick . Cartman first appeared , originally named Kenny , in prototypical form in a 1992 animated short Jesus vs. Frosty , and a 1995 animated short Jesus vs. Santa , and first appeared on television in the pilot episode of South Park , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , on August 13 , 1997 . 
 Cartman is an elementary school student who lives with his mother in the fictional town of South Park , Colorado , where he routinely has extraordinary experiences atypical of a small town . Cartman has been portrayed as aggressive , prejudiced , arrogant , and narcissistic since his character 's inception ; Stone and Parker describe the character as " a little Archie Bunker " . These traits are significantly augmented in later seasons as his character evolves , and he begins to exhibit extremely psychopathic , sociopathic and manipulative behavior , and also be depicted as highly intelligent , able to execute morally appalling plans and business ideas with success . 
 Cartman is considered to be the most popular character on South Park . Parker and Stone state that he is their favorite character , and the one with whom they most identify . South Park has received both praise and criticism for Cartman 's politically incorrect behavior . Prominent publications and television channels have included Cartman on their lists as one of the most iconic television and cartoon characters of all time . 
 = = Role in South Park = = 
 Eric Cartman attends South Park Elementary as part of Mr. Garrison 's class . During the show 's first 58 episodes , Cartman and the other main characters are in the third grade , after which they move on to the fourth grade . He is an only child being raised by Liane Cartman , a promiscuous single mother . In " Cartman 's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut " ( 1998 ) , Liane Cartman claims to be a hermaphrodite when she also claims to be the father of Cartman and that she did not know the woman who gave birth to Cartman . However , the season 14 ( 2010 ) episode " 201 " later reveals that Liane actually is his mother , and that his true biological father is Jack Tenorman , a fictional former player for the Denver Broncos whom Cartman arranged to be killed in the season five ( 2001 ) episode " Scott Tenorman Must Die " , making Cartman and Scott Tenorman half @-@ brothers and putting Liane 's intersexual identity in question . 
 Among the show 's main child characters , Cartman is distinguished as " the fat kid " , and his obesity is a continuing subject of insults and ridicule from other characters throughout the show 's run . Cartman is frequently portrayed as an antagonist or villain whose actions set in motion the events serving as the main plot of an episode . Other children and classmates are alienated by Cartman 's insensitive , racist , xenophobic , anti @-@ semitic , lazy , self @-@ righteous behavior , but are occasionally influenced by his obtrusive , manipulative , and propagandist antics . 
 Kyle , who is Jewish , is often the target of Cartman 's slander and anti @-@ Semitic insults . The two have shared an enmity since the show 's beginnings , and their rivalry has become significantly more pronounced as the series has progressed , with Cartman even routinely exposing Kyle to physical endangerment . Kyle has intentionally endangered Cartman as well by convincing him in " Fatbeard " to go to Somalia in hopes that he will be killed . However , at other times , Kyle is an enthusiastic participant in Cartman 's schemes and Cartman is sometimes seen actually being nice to Kyle in some instances . Parker and Stone have compared the relationship to the one shared by Archie Bunker and Michael " <unk> " <unk> on the 1970s sitcom All in the Family . Kyle has a tendency to make what he thinks are safe bets with Cartman , and often loses these bets when the improbable actions promised by Cartman are accomplished . Cartman 's motivation in this regard is not merely monetary gain , but an obsession with scoring a victory over Kyle , a fixation that ultimately plays a major part in a subplot to the three @-@ part episode " Imaginationland " ( season 11 , 2007 ) . This obsession has also proven itself to actually trump other goals Cartman wishes to achieve , for instance , in " Christian Rock Hard " Cartman makes a bet with Kyle that he can make a platinum album before Kyle can . After recruiting Butters and Token , Cartman creates a Christian rock band called " Faith + 1 " and " writes " Christian songs by merely taking love songs and replacing words such as " baby " with " Jesus " ( which humorously implicates sexual relations with Jesus ) . Against all odds , the band becomes largely successful , managing to sell over a million copies ( and potentially gain millions of dollars ) . However , since Christian rock bands cannot truly get a platinum album ( which is not true in real life ) , Cartman loses the bet . Despite having amassed a large fan base as well as a large , steady income , Cartman only becomes enraged since he was unable to win a bet with Kyle . Careless in his anger accepting the " Myrrh " album in front of a large Christian crowd , Cartman goes into an Anti @-@ Christian rant which drives away all of the fans as well as profits . In " You 're Getting Old " , the final episode of the first half of South Park 's 15th season , it is suggested that Kyle and Cartman may be developing a genuine friendship , possibly due to the void left by Stan 's apparent departure . Cartman 's resentment of Stan is usually reserved for when Cartman proudly proclaims his hatred for both Stan and Kyle as a duo , and his contempt for Stan as an individual is usually limited to his annoyance with Stan 's sensitivity , affection for animals , and the relationship Stan shares with Wendy . 
 Despite being intolerant of other cultures , Cartman displays an aptitude for learning foreign languages . In the episode " My Future Self n ' Me " when he starts " Parental Revenge Corp " , he speaks Spanish to his Latino workers , though he may have learned the language merely from a practical standpoint in order to better exploit a labor pool . He also knows German , and once spoke a few phrases while dressed up as Adolf Hitler while promoting the extermination of Jews to an oblivious audience that did not speak German . Cartman can also be seen speaking broken German with an American accent in Season 15 Episode 2 " <unk> " . Conversely in one episode ( " Major <unk> " ) Cartman acts as an Oskar Schindler character for the town 's cats , a rare case of a subplot based on Cartman 's altruism . 
 Cartman frequently teases Kenny for being poor , and derides Kenny 's family for being on welfare . He will also use an awkward pause during a conversation as an opportunity to casually remind Kenny that he hates him . Cartman 's mischievous treatment of Butters Stotch , and the relationship the duo shares has received significant focus in the more recent seasons of the series . This reflects Parker 's interest ; the scenes between the two are the ones he most enjoys writing . 
 Several episodes center around Cartman 's greed and his get @-@ rich @-@ quick schemes , although his numerous attempts to attain wealth generally fail . His extreme disdain for hippies serves to satirize the counterculture of the 1960s and its influence in contemporary society , reflecting Parker 's real @-@ life antipathy towards hippies . Though the role is customarily taken by Stan or Kyle , Cartman will occasionally be the one to reflect on the lessons learned during the course of an episode with a speech that often begins with " You know , I 've learned something today ... " . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 A precursor to Cartman first appeared in the first The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Frosty , created by Parker and Stone in 1992 while they were students at the University of Colorado . In the short , Cartman was actually named " Kenny " , and the catchphrase " Oh my God , they killed Kenny ! " was exclaimed when the character representing Cartman was killed by an evil snowman . The character was composed of construction paper cutouts and animated through the use of stop motion . When commissioned three years later by friend Brian Graden to create another short as a video Christmas card that he could send to friends , Parker and Stone created another similarly @-@ animated The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Santa . In this short , his character first appears as he does in the series , and is given the name " Cartman " , while the character of Kenny appears as the character is depicted today and given Cartman 's moniker from the previous short . Cartman next appeared on August 13 , 1997 , when South Park debuted on Comedy Central with the episode " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . 
 In keeping with the show 's animation style , Cartman is composed of simple geometrical shapes and primary colors . He is not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand @-@ drawn characters ; his character is mostly shown from one direction , and his movements intentionally jerky . Ever since the show 's second episode , " Weight Gain 4000 " ( season one , 1997 ) , Cartman , like all other characters on the show , has been animated with computer software , though he is portrayed to give the impression that the show still utilizes its original technique . 
 Cartman is usually depicted wearing winter attire which consists of a red coat , brown pants , yellow gloves / mittens , and a yellow @-@ brimmed turquoise knit cap tapered with a yellow pom @-@ pom . He has parted brown hair , and he is seen without his hat more often than the other characters with distinctive headwear . As he is overweight , his body is wider , his hands noticeably larger and his head is a more elliptical shape in contrast to the circular heads of the other children . An additional curved line on his lower face represents a double chin . 
 Although he had originally voiced Cartman without any computer manipulation , Parker now does so by speaking within his normal vocal range with a childlike inflection . The recorded audio is then edited with Pro Tools , and the pitch is altered to make the voice sound like that of a fourth grader . Parker says to achieve the effect of Cartman 's voice , he simply uses the same technique when voicing Stan while " adding a lot of fat to it " . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Cartman is partially named after and based on Matt <unk> , a high school classmate of Parker who remains a friend of both Parker and Stone . Cartman is also inspired by All in the Family patriarch Archie Bunker , who is himself inspired by Alf Garnett from Till Death Us Do Part , the original British version of All in the Family . Parker and Stone are big fans of All in the Family . They state that creating Cartman as a " little eight @-@ year @-@ old fat kid " made it easier for the two to portray a Bunker @-@ like character after the introduction of political correctness to late @-@ 20th century television . While developing the character , Parker noted that everyone either remembers " an annoying fat kid in their pasts " , or " they were the annoying fat kid " . Stone has observed that " kids are not nice , innocent , flower @-@ loving little rainbow children [ ... ] they don 't have any kind of social tact or etiquette , they 're just complete little raging bastards " . 
 In the season five ( 2001 ) episode " Scott Tenorman Must Die " , Cartman is tricked into buying the pubic hair of local eighth @-@ grader named Scott Tenorman for $ 16 @.@ 12 . He then successfully executes an elaborate scheme to publicly humiliate Scott in front of his favorite band Radiohead , by getting Scott 's parents killed and then tricking Scott into eating them . The show 's writers debated during production of the episode whether or not the incident would be " a step too far , even for Cartman " . Parker felt that the act could sufficiently be the culmination of Cartman 's sociopathic behavior , and would " [ set ] a new bar " by portraying Cartman as being capable of performing anything short of murder . Fans reacted by ranking it as Cartman 's " greatest moment " in a 2005 poll on Comedy Central 's website . It is later revealed in the season fourteen episode " 201 " that Jack Tenorman , Scott 's father , was a football player for the Denver Broncos and Cartman 's father . Dr. Alphonse Mephesto also admits that he lied about Cartman 's mother being a hermaphrodite . 
 Parker and Stone , despite being the basis for Stan and Kyle , insist that Cartman is their favorite character , and the one with whom they identify the most . 
 = = = Personality and traits = = = 
 Cartman is foul @-@ mouthed ( as are his friends ) as a means for Parker and Stone to portray how they believe young boys really talk when they are alone . According to Parker , Cartman does not possess the " underlying sweetness " of the show 's other child characters . Cartman is shown at times to be completely amoral and remorseless . Cartman is amused by bodily functions and toilet humor , and his favorite television personalities are Terrance and Phillip , a Canadian duo whose comedy routines on their show @-@ within @-@ the @-@ show revolve substantially around fart jokes . 
 Cartman is sensitive and in denial about his obesity . Often reasserting Liane 's notion by exclaiming " I 'm not fat , I 'm big @-@ boned ! " and will just as often either threaten to bring harm to anyone who mocks his weight or curse them out in aggravation . He has also had people killed , such as when he drove his psychiatrist 's wife to suicide after enduring a long tirade about his weight . He views himself as more mature than his fellow friends and classmates , and often grows impatient with their company ; despite claiming to be more mature , he will often break down crying childishly and pathetically whenever he feels defeated . This often leads to loud arguments , which in earlier seasons typically end with Cartman <unk> saying " Screw you guys ... I 'm going home ! " and then leaving . In an action King 's College philosophy professor David Kyle Johnson describes as " directed either toward accomplishing his own happiness or the unhappiness of others " , Cartman often feigns actual friendship with his classmates when needing a favor . The lack of a true father figure in his life , and Liane 's promiscuity and drug use have caused repressed psychological hardship in Cartman 's life . As a parent , Liane often spoils Cartman , and is largely ineffectual as a disciplinarian . Cartman sometimes commands his mom to do tasks for him , but more often resorts to pleading with her in an ingratiating tone . When neither method works , he resorts to excessive and indecipherable whining , to which Liane usually succumbs . Parker has noted that this is the primary cause for Cartman 's behavior , stating that Cartman is " just a product of his environment " . 
 We always had this thing where Cartman 's mother was so sweet — she was always so sweet to him and giving him whatever he wanted . And I don 't know if it 's worse in L.A. than most places in the country — I hope so — but [ we 've met ] so many parents who were just so desperately trying to be friends to their kids . And it was the thing we really picked up on . And it was just like , ' These [ people ] are making these really evil kids ' . 
 – Trey Parker , discussing Liane 's role in shaping Cartman 's personality in an interview with NPR 
 Cartman thrives on achieving ascendancy over others , and exerts his will by demagogy and by demanding that others " Respect my <unk> ! " Cartman has several times declared that his dream is getting " Ten million dollars " . He has shown initiative in taking a businesslike approach to earning money , starting his own " hippie control " and " parental revenge " operations , as well as a Christian Rock and a boy band , a basketball team of crack babies ( parody of the NCAA ) and his own church . 
 Cartman 's anti @-@ Semitism , while mostly limited to mocking Kyle , culminates in the season eight ( 2004 ) episode " The Passion of the Jew " . In the episode , Cartman , after watching The Passion of the Christ numerous times , deifies the film 's director , Mel Gibson , and starts an official Gibson fan club , praising Gibson for " trying to express — through cinema — the horror and filthiness of the common Jew " . Cartman 's interpretation of the film influences him to dress up as Adolf Hitler and lead other fan club members ( who are oblivious of Cartman 's actual intentions ) in a failed effort to engage in a systematic genocide of the Jews similar to that of the Final Solution . In the season 10 ( 2006 ) episode " <unk> Alert ! " , Cartman anonymously saves Kyle 's life in an effort to get him and his family to return to South Park from San Francisco , revealing that he craves the animosity shared between the two . And in " Coon vs. Coon and Friends " ( season 14 , 2010 ) , Cartman directs the " evil god " Cthulhu to destroy " most of the synagogues " . However , in the 16th season episode " <unk> " Cartman revealed he had converted to Judaism after a hallucinogenic dream . As of season 19 , it is unsure whether he has retained this trait or whether it was simply a plot point in that one episode . 
 Upon hearing his classmates tell him that they hold him in the lowest regard possible and that they could not possibly think any worse of him , a stubborn Cartman misinterprets this act as their attempt to make him feel better , and convinces himself that everyone thinks he is the " coolest kid in school " . In the season 13 ( 2009 ) episode " Fishsticks " , Cartman subconsciously believes that he helped in creating a joke that quickly becomes a nationwide sensation , despite the fact that the character Jimmy <unk> writes the joke without any assistance . Carlos Delgado of If Magazine noted this as " Cartman being so egotistical that he manipulates the past to serve his own purposes " . 
 Little is shown concerning Cartman 's romantic interests , as for the most part , his attitude towards females is sexist . However , at least in one episode ( " Chef Goes <unk> " ) , Cartman develops an attraction to Wendy , which is apparent from the end of episode when Wendy describes her temporary infatuation towards Cartman as ' sexual tension ' and even though Cartman agrees in front of Wendy , he sighs with sorrow at being alone again . During a period when he was physically unable to control his speech and he repeatedly blurted hidden feelings , he expressed a romantic interest in classmate Patty Nelson , a side character who has not been seen before or since . 
 Though he is commonly portrayed as ignorant , Cartman is shown at least twice ( " My Future Self n ' Me " and " Pandemic " ) to be able to speak fluent Spanish ( and German ) . 
 In certain episodes , Cartman is shown to think of himself as a skilled fighter , only to be beat up by Wendy , Token , Stan , and Kyle at different times . However , when Cartman thinks he has some sort of authority , such as being the Coon or the hallway monitor , he displays various martial arts knowledge and proves to be able to beat up various other characters such as Clyde and Bradley . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Cartman is a South Park fan favorite , and is often described as the most famous character from the series . With a headline to their online written version of a radio report , NPR declared Cartman as " America 's Favorite Little $ @ # & * % " . " Respect my <unk> ! " and " Screw you guys ... I 'm going home ! " became catchphrases and , during the show 's earlier seasons , were highly popular in the lexicon of viewers . His eccentric enunciation of " Hey ! " was included in the 2002 edition of The Oxford Dictionary of Catchphrases . Stone has said that when fans recognize him or Parker , the fans will usually do their imitation of Cartman , or , in Parker 's case , request that he do Cartman 's voice . 
 In 2005 , Comedy Central ran a three @-@ night marathon of episodes showcasing what voters had deemed to be his " 25 greatest moments " . A two @-@ disc DVD collection entitled " The Cult of Cartman " , which Comedy Central described as " 12 classic episodes with Cartman at his very worst ! " , was released in 2008 . 
 In a 1999 poll conducted by NatWest Bank , eight and nine @-@ year @-@ old children in the United Kingdom voted Cartman as their favorite personality . This drew the concern of several parent councils who were expecting a character from a television show aimed at children to top the list , to which Stone responded by claiming the results of the poll were " upsetting to people who have an idyllic vision of what kids are like " . Parker and Stone have always asserted that due to Cartman 's actions and dialogue , his appearances in South Park are not meant to be viewed by younger children , and they note that the show is certified with TV ratings that indicate its intention for mature audiences . 
 While some in the Jewish community have praised the show 's depiction of Cartman holding an anti @-@ Semitic attitude towards Kyle as a means of accurately portraying what it is like for a young Jew to have to endure prejudice , other Jews have blamed South Park and Cartman for having found themselves surrounded by " acceptable racism " . On November 20 , 2008 , a Facebook group titled " National Kick a Ginger Day , are you going to do it ? " surfaced , suggesting abuse towards <unk> . Thousands of internet users signed up as a member of the group , and reports of a feared increase of bullying of red @-@ headed students across Canada soon followed . The group 's administrator , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old from Vancouver Island , said the group was only intended as a joke , and apologized for the offense it caused . The group was inspired by the season nine ( 2005 ) episode " Ginger Kids " , in which Cartman incites prejudice towards those with red hair , pale skin , and freckles , a group he calls " Gingers " and claims are inherently evil and without souls . 
 Other characters commonly express lessons learned from the antagonistic actions Cartman commonly provokes ; this has resulted in these characters giving their opinions on issues such as hate crime legislation , civil liberties , excessive religious devotion , the stem cell controversy , anabolic steroid use , the " right to die " debate , and prejudice . In the season 10 ( 2006 ) episode " Cartoon Wars Part II " , Cartman , planning to exploit the public 's fear of terrorism , seeks to get the Fox television series Family Guy , a program he despises , permanently removed from the airwaves when Fox plans to air an episode despite its inclusion of a cartoon likeness of Muhammad . This leads Kyle to give a short speech about the ethics of censorship , which reiterates Parker and Stone 's sentiments of " Either it 's all okay , or none of it is " in regards to whether or not any subject should remain off @-@ limits to satire . Both Cartman 's commentary and the commentary resulting in response to his actions have been interpreted as statements Parker and Stone are attempting to make to the viewing public , and these opinions have been subject to much critical analysis in the media and literary world . 
 The book South Park and Philosophy : You Know , I Learned Something Today includes an essay in which Johnson uses Cartman 's actions and behavior as examples when discussing the logical problem of moral evil , and another essay by College of Staten Island professor Mark D. White cited the season two ( 1998 ) episode " Chickenlover " , in which Cartman is temporarily granted law enforcement powers , in its discussion regarding the command theory of law and what obligates a citizen to obey the law . Essays in the books South Park and Philosophy : Bigger , Longer , and More Penetrating , Blame Canada ! South Park and Contemporary Culture , and Taking South Park Seriously have also analyzed Cartman 's perspectives within the framework of popular philosophical , theological , political , and social concepts . Parker and Stone downplay the show 's alignment with any particular political affiliation , and deny having a political agenda when creating an episode . In response to the focus on elements of satire in South Park , Parker has said that the main goal of the show is to portray Cartman and his friends as " kids just being kids " as a means of accurately showcasing " what it 's like to be in [ elementary school ] in America " . 
 = = = Recognitions = = = 
 TV Guide ranked Cartman at number 10 on their 2002 list of the " Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters " , 24th on TV Guide 's " 25 Greatest TV Villains " , 198th on VH1 's " 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons " , and 19th on Bravo 's " 100 Greatest TV Characters " television special in 2004 . When declaring him the second @-@ scariest character on television ( behind only Mr. Burns of The Simpsons ) in 2005 , MSNBC 's Brian <unk> described Cartman as a " bundle of pure , unadulterated evil all wrapped up in a fat — er , big @-@ boned — cartoony package " who " takes a feral delight in his <unk> " . In 2014 , IGN ranked Cartman first place on their list of " The Top 25 South Park Characters " , commenting that he was " the obvious choice " of number one and that " sometimes the obvious choice is also the right one . " The website stated that despite Cartman being " one of the worst human beings in the history of fiction [ ... ] he 's the most loathsome character we 've ever loved . " IGN concluded by calling him " the biggest contribution to the world of animated characters that South Park has made – and that 's saying something . " 
 = = In other media = = 
 Cartman has a major role in South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , the full @-@ length film based on the series , and appeared on the film 's soundtrack singing the same musical numbers performed in the movie . As a tribute to the Dead Parrot sketch , a short that features Cartman attempting to return a dead Kenny to a shop run by Kyle aired during a 1999 BBC television special commemorating the 30th anniversary of Monty Python 's Flying Circus . Cartman is also featured in the documentary film The Aristocrats , telling his version of the film 's titular joke to Stan , Kyle , and Kenny , and in " The Gauntlet " , a short spoofing both Gladiator and Battlefield Earth that aired during the 2000 MTV Movie Awards . 
 For their 2007 Snakes & Arrows tour , the rock band Rush commissioned a short , video introduction for the song " Tom Sawyer " . Cartman , dressed in a long wig to look like singer Geddy Lee , sings his own , personal , version of the song 's lyrics prompting the usual outrage from Kyle . The video can be seen on the band 's Snakes & Arrows concert video . 
 In 2002 , Cartman became the main protagonist of a series of promotional videos for the Los Angeles Kings of the NHL , which are played on the big @-@ screen TVs inside of Staples Center where the character ridicules the mascots of rival teams and reacts to various aspects of the game . 
 Short clips of Cartman introducing the starting lineup for the University of Colorado football team were featured during ABC 's coverage of the 2007 match @-@ up between the University of Colorado and the University of Nebraska . 
 In Plants vs. Zombies 2 : It 's About Time , the plant Winter Melon , has a costume of a hat resembling Eric Cartman 's . 
 In 2008 , Parker , as Cartman , gave answers to a Proust Questionnaire conducted by Julie <unk> of NPR . 
 Parker performs as Cartman on tracks for Chef Aid : The South Park Album and Mr. Hankey 's Christmas Classics . Cartman also appears in five South Park @-@ related video games : In South Park , Cartman is controlled by the player through the first person shooter mode who attempts to ward off enemies from terrorizing the town of South Park . In South Park : Chef 's Luv Shack , a user has the option of playing as Cartman when participating in the game 's several " minigames " based on other popular arcade games . In the racing game South Park Rally , a user can race as Cartman against other users playing as other characters , while choosing to place him in any of a variety of vehicles . In South Park Let 's Go Tower Defense Play ! , Cartman can be selected as a playable character used to establish a tower defense against the game 's antagonists . In South Park : The Stick of Truth , Cartman is the leader of one of two tribes in South Park , at war over the Stick of Truth . Cartman is later a selectable companion character in this JRPG @-@ style game . 
 A cover of " Poker Face " was released as DLC for the Rock Band video game series in 2010 based on the version heard in the episode , " Whale Whores " , released the same day as the original , featuring Cartman on lead vocals . 
 = Scotland in the modern era = 
 Scotland in the modern era , from the end of the Jacobite risings and beginnings of industrialisation in the 18th century to the present day , has played a major part in the economic , military and political history of the United Kingdom , British Empire and Europe , while recurring issues over the status of Scotland , its status and identity have dominated political debate . 
 Scotland made a major contribution to the intellectual life of Europe , particularly in the Enlightenment , producing major figures including the economist Adam Smith , philosophers Francis Hutcheson and David Hume , and scientists William Cullen , Joseph Black and James Hutton . In the 19th century major figures included James Watt , James Clerk Maxwell , Lord Kelvin and Sir Walter Scott . Scotland 's economic contribution to the Empire and the industrial revolution included its banking system and the development of cotton , coal mining , shipbuilding and an extensive railway network . Industrialisation and changes to agriculture and society led to depopulation and clearances of the largely rural highlands , migration to the towns and mass immigration , where Scots made a major contribution to the development of countries including the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand . 
 In the 20th century , Scotland played a major role in the British and allied effort in the two world wars and began to suffer a sharp industrial decline , going through periods of considerable political instability . The decline was particularly acute in the second half of the 20th century , but was compensated for to a degree by the development of an extensive oil industry , technological manufacturing and a growing service sector . This period also increasing debates about the place of Scotland within the United Kingdom , the rise of the Scottish National Party and after a referendum in 1999 the establishment of a devolved Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh . 
 = = Late 18th century and 19th century = = 
 With the advent of the Union with England and the demise of Jacobitism , thousands of Scots , mainly Lowlanders , took up positions of power in politics , civil service , the army and navy , trade , economics , colonial enterprises and other areas across the nascent British Empire . Historian Neil Davidson notes that " after 1746 there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life , particularly outside Scotland " . Davidson also states that " far from being ' peripheral ' to the British economy , Scotland – or more precisely , the Lowlands – lay at its core " . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Scottish politics in the late 18th century and throughout the 19th century was dominated by the Whigs and ( after 1859 ) their successors the Liberal Party . From the Scottish Reform Act 1832 ( which increased the number of Scottish MPs and significantly widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes ) , until the end of the century they managed to gain a majority of the Westminster Parliamentary seats for Scotland , although these were often outnumbered by the much larger number of English and Welsh Conservatives . English @-@ educated Scottish peer Lord Aberdeen ( 1784 – 1860 ) led a coalition government from 1852 to 1855 , but in general very few Scots held office in the government . From the mid @-@ century there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and when the Conservative Lord Salisbury became prime minister in 1885 he responded to pressure for more attention to be paid to Scottish issues by reviving the post of Secretary of State for Scotland , which had been in abeyance since 1746 . He appointed the Duke of Richmond , a wealthy landowner who was both Chancellor of Aberdeen University and Lord Lieutenant of Banff . Towards the end of the century the first Scottish Liberal to become prime minister was the Earl of Rosebery ( 1847 – 1929 ) , like Aberdeen before him a product of the English education system . In the later 19th century the issue of Irish Home Rule led to a split among the Liberals , with a minority breaking away to form the Liberal Unionists in 1886 . The growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie 's success in the Mid Lanarkshire by @-@ election , 1888 , leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party , which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895 , with Hardie as its first leader . 
 The main unit of local government was the parish , and since it was also part of the church , the elders imposed public humiliation for what the locals considered immoral behaviour , including fornication , drunkenness , wife beating , cursing and Sabbath breaking . The main focus was on the poor and the landlords ( " lairds " ) and gentry , and their servants , were not subject to the parish 's discipline . The policing system weakened after 1800 and disappeared in most places by the 1850s . 
 = = = Enlightenment = = = 
 In the 18th century , the Scottish Enlightenment brought the country to the front of intellectual achievement in Europe . Perhaps the poorest country in Western Europe in 1707 , Scotland reaped the economic benefits of free trade within the British Empire together with the intellectual benefits of a highly developed university system . Under these twin stimuli , Scottish thinkers began questioning assumptions previously taken for granted ; and with Scotland 's traditional connections to France , then in the throes of the Enlightenment , the Scots began developing a uniquely practical branch of humanism to the extent that Voltaire said " we look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilization " . 
 The first major philosopher of the Scottish Enlightenment was Francis Hutcheson , who held the Chair of Philosophy at the University of Glasgow from 1729 to 1746 . A moral philosopher who produced alternatives to the ideas of Thomas Hobbes , one of his major contributions to world thought was the utilitarian and consequentialist principle that virtue is that which provides , in his words , " the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers " . Much of what is incorporated in the scientific method ( the nature of knowledge , evidence , experience , and causation ) and some modern attitudes towards the relationship between science and religion were developed by his proteges David Hume and Adam Smith . 
 Hume became a major figure in the sceptical philosophical and empiricist traditions of philosophy . He and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers developed what he called a ' science of man ' , which was expressed historically in works by authors including James Burnett , Adam Ferguson , John Millar and William Robertson , all of whom merged a scientific study of how humans behave in ancient and primitive cultures with a strong awareness of the determining forces of modernity . Indeed , modern sociology largely originated from this movement . Adam Smith developed and published The Wealth of Nations , the first work on modern economics . It had an immediate impact on British economic policy and still frames 21st century discussions on globalisation and tariffs . The focus of the Scottish Enlightenment ranged from intellectual and economic matters to the specifically scientific as in the work of William Cullen , physician and chemist , James Anderson , an agronomist , Joseph Black , physicist and chemist , and James Hutton , the first modern geologist . While the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded toward the end of the 18th century , disproportionately large Scottish contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or more , thanks to such figures as James Hutton , James Watt , William Murdoch , James Clerk Maxwell , Lord Kelvin and Sir Walter Scott . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The late 18th and 19th centuries saw a fragmentation of the Church of Scotland that had been created in the Reformation . These fractures were prompted by issues of government and patronage , but reflected a wider division between the Evangelicals and the Moderate Party over fears of fanaticism by the former and the acceptance of Enlightenment ideas by the latter . The legal right of lay patrons to present clergymen of their choice to local ecclesiastical livings led to minor schisms from the church . The first in 1733 , known as the First Secession , led to the creation of a series of secessionist churches . The second in 1761 lead to the foundation of the independent Relief Church . Gaining strength in the Evangelical Revival of the later 18th century and after prolonged years of struggle , in 1834 the Evangelicals gained control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act , which allowed congregations to reject unwanted " intrusive " presentations to livings by patrons . The following " Ten Years ' Conflict " of legal and political wrangling ended in defeat for the non @-@ intrusionists in the civil courts . The result was a schism from the church by some of the non @-@ intrusionists led by Dr Thomas Chalmers known as the Great Disruption of 1843 . Roughly a third of the clergy , mainly from the North and Highlands , formed the separate Free Church of Scotland . In the late 19th century the major debates were between fundamentalist Calvinists and theological liberals , who rejected a literal interpretation of the Bible . This resulted in a further split in the Free Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church in 1893 . There were , however , also moves towards reunion , beginning with the unification of some secessionist churches into the United Secession Church in 1820 , which united with the Relief Church in 1847 to form the United Presbyterian Church , which in turn joined with the Free Church in 1900 . The removal of legislation on lay patronage allowed the majority of the Free Church to rejoin Church of Scotland in 1929 . The schisms left small denominations including the Free Presbyterians and a remnant as the Free Church from 1900 . 
 By the mid @-@ 18th century , Catholicism had been reduced to the fringes of the country , particularly the Gaelic @-@ speaking areas of the Highlands and Islands . Conditions grew worse for Catholics after the Jacobite risings and Catholicism was reduced to little more than a poorly run mission . However , Catholic Emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish immigrants , particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s , principally to the growing lowland centres like Glasgow , led to a transformation of its fortunes . In 1878 , despite opposition , a Roman Catholic ecclesiastical hierarchy was restored to the country , and Catholicism became a significant denomination within Scotland . Also important was Episcopalianism , which had retained supporters through the civil wars and changes of regime in the 17th century . Since most Episcopalians had given their support to the Jacobite risings in the early 18th century they suffered a decline in fortunes , but revived in the 19th as the issue of succession receded , becoming established as the Episcopal Church in Scotland in 1804 , as an autonomous organisation in communion with the Church of England . Baptist , Congregationalist and Methodist churches also appeared in Scotland in the 18th century , but did not begin significant growth until the 19th century , partly because more radical and evangelical traditions already existed within the Church of Scotland and the free churches . From 1879 they were joined by the evangelical revivalism of the Salvation Army , which attempted to make major inroads in the growing urban centres . 
 = = = Industrial Revolution = = = 
 During the Industrial Revolution , Scotland became one of the commercial and industrial centres of the British Empire . With tariffs with England now abolished , the potential for trade for Scottish merchants was considerable , especially with Colonial America . However , the economic benefits of union were very slow to appear , primarily because Scotland was too poor to exploit the opportunities of the greatly expanded free market . Scotland in 1750 was still a poor rural , agricultural society with a population of 1 @.@ 3 million . Some progress was visible , such as the sales of linen and cattle to England , the cash flows from military service , and the tobacco trade that was dominated by Glasgow after 1740 . The clippers belonging to the Glasgow Tobacco Lords were the fastest ships on the route to Virginia . Merchants who profited from the American trade began investing in leather , textiles , iron , coal , sugar , rope , sailcloth , glassworks , breweries , and <unk> , setting the foundations for the city 's emergence as a leading industrial centre after 1815 . The tobacco trade collapsed during the American Revolution ( 1776 – 83 ) , when it sources were cut off by the British blockade of American ports . However , trade with the West Indies began to make up for the loss of the tobacco business , reflecting the extensive growth of the cotton industry , the British demand for sugar and the demand in the West Indies for herring and linen goods . During 1750 – 1815 , 78 Glasgow merchants not only specialised in the importation of sugar , cotton , and rum from the West Indies , but diversified their interests by purchasing West Indian plantations , Scottish estates , or cotton mills . They were not to be self @-@ perpetuating due to the hazards of the trade , the incident of bankruptcy , and the changing complexity of Glasgow 's economy . 
 Linen was Scotland 's premier industry in the 18th century and formed the basis for the later cotton , jute , and woollen industries . Scottish industrial policy was made by the Board of Trustees for Fisheries and Manufactures in Scotland , which sought to build an economy complementary , not competitive , with England . Since England had woollens , this meant linen . Encouraged and subsidised by the Board of Trustees so it could compete with German products , merchant entrepreneurs became dominant in all stages of linen manufacturing and built up the market share of Scottish linens , especially in the American colonial market . The British Linen Company , established in 1746 , was the largest firm in the Scottish linen industry in the 18th century , exporting linen to England and America . As a joint @-@ stock company , it had the right to raise funds through the issue of promissory notes or bonds . With its bonds functioning as bank notes , the company gradually moved into the business of lending and discounting to other linen manufacturers , and in the early 1770s banking became its main activity . Renamed the British Linen Bank in 1906 , it was one of Scotland 's premier banks until it was bought out by the Bank of Scotland in 1969 . It joined the established Scottish banks such as the Bank of Scotland ( Edinburgh , 1695 ) and the Royal Bank of Scotland ( Edinburgh , 1727 ) . Glasgow would soon follow and Scotland had a flourishing financial system by the end of the century . There were over 400 branches , amounting to one office per 7000 people , double the level in England . The banks were more lightly regulated than those in England . Historians often emphasise that the flexibility and dynamism of the Scottish banking system contributed significantly to the rapid development of the economy in the 19th century . 
 From about 1790 textiles became the most important industry in the west of Scotland , especially the spinning and weaving of cotton , which flourished until in 1861 the American Civil War cut off the supplies of raw cotton . The industry never recovered , but by that time Scotland had developed heavy industries based on its coal and iron resources . The invention of the hot blast for smelting iron ( 1828 ) revolutionised the Scottish iron industry . As a result , Scotland became a centre for engineering , shipbuilding and the production of locomotives . Toward the end of the 19th century , steel production largely replaced iron production . 
 Coal mining became a major industry , and continued to grow into the 20th century , producing the fuel to heat homes , factories and drive steam engines , locomotives and steamships . By 1914 there were 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 coal miners in Scotland . The stereotype emerged early on of Scottish colliers as brutish , non @-@ religious and socially isolated serfs ; that was an exaggeration , for their life style resembled coal miners everywhere , with a strong emphasis on masculinity , egalitarianism , group solidarity , and support for radical labour movements . 
 Britain was the world leader in the construction of railways , and their use to expand trade and coal supplies . The first successful locomotive @-@ powered line in Scotland , between Monkland and Kirkintilloch , opened in 1831 . Not only was good passenger service established by the late 1840s , but an excellent network of freight lines reduce the cost of shipping coal , and made products manufactured in Scotland competitive throughout Britain . For example , railways opened the London market to Scottish beef and milk . They enabled the Aberdeen Angus to become a cattle breed of worldwide reputation . 
 = = = Urbanisation = = = 
 Scotland was already one of the most urbanised societies in Europe by 1800 . The industrial belt ran across the country from southwest to northeast ; by 1900 the four industrialised counties of Lanarkshire , Renfrewshire , Dunbartonshire , and Ayrshire contained 44 per cent of the population . Glasgow and the River Clyde became a major shipbuilding centre . Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world , and known as " the Second City of the Empire " after London . Shipbuilding on Clydeside ( the river Clyde through Glasgow and other points ) began when the first small yards were opened in 1712 at the Scott family 's shipyard at Greenock . After 1860 the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron ( after 1870 , made of steel ) , which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world . It became the world 's pre @-@ eminent shipbuilding centre . <unk> became an industry benchmark of quality , and the river 's shipyards were given contracts for warships , as well as prestigious liners . It reached its peak in the years 1900 – 18 , with an output of 370 ships completed in 1913 , and even more during the First World War . 
 The industrial developments , while they brought work and wealth , were so rapid that housing , town @-@ planning , and provision for public health did not keep pace with them , and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad , with overcrowding , high infant mortality , and growing rates of tuberculosis . The companies attracted rural workers , as well as immigrants from Catholic Ireland , by inexpensive company housing that was a dramatic move upward from the inner @-@ city slums . This paternalistic policy led many owners to support government sponsored housing programs as well as self @-@ help projects among the respectable working class . 
 = = = Highlands = = = 
 Modern historians suggest that due to economic and social change , the clan system in the highlands was already declining by the time of the failed 1745 rising . In its aftermath the British government enacted a series of laws that attempted to speed the process , including a ban on the bearing of arms , the wearing of tartan and limitations on the activities of the Episcopalian Church . Most of the legislation was repealed by the end of the 18th century as the Jacobite threat subsided . There was soon a process of the rehabilitation of highland culture . Tartan had already been adopted for highland regiments in the British army , which poor highlanders joined in large numbers until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , but by the 19th century it had largely been abandoned by the ordinary people . In the 1820s , as part of the Romantic revival , tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite , not just in Scotland , but across Europe . The international craze for tartan and for idealising a romanticised highlands was set off by the Ossian cycle published by Scottish poet James Macpherson 's in 1761 @-@ 2 . Sir Walter Scott 's Waverley novels further helped popularise Scottish life and history . His " staging " of the royal Visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 and the king 's wearing of tartan resulted in a massive upsurge in demand for kilts and tartans that could not be met by the Scottish linen industry . The designation of individual clan tartans was largely defined in this period and they became a major symbol of Scottish identity . The fashion for all things Scottish was maintained by Queen Victoria who help secure the identity of Scotland as a tourist resort and the popularity of the tartan fashion . Her Highland enthusiasm led to the design of two tartan patterns , " Victoria " and " Balmoral " , the latter named after her castle Balmoral in Aberdeenshire , which from 1852 became a major royal residence . 
 Despite these changes the highlands remained very poor and traditional , with few connections to the uplift of the Scottish Enlightenment and little role in the Industrial Revolution . A handful of powerful families , typified by the dukes of Argyll , Atholl , Buccleuch , and Sutherland , owned the best lands and controlled local political , legal and economic affairs . As late as 1878 , 68 families owned nearly half the land in Scotland . Particularly after the end of the boom created by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars ( 1790 – 1815 ) , these landlords needed cash to maintain their position in London society , and had less need of soldiers . They turned to money rents , displaced farmers to raise sheep , and downplayed the traditional patriarchal relationship that had historically sustained the clans . This was exacerbated after the repeal of the Corn Laws in mid @-@ century , when Britain adopted a free trade policy , and grain imports from America undermined the profitability of crop production . 
 One result of these changes were the Highland Clearances , by which much of the population of the Highlands suffered forced displacement as lands were enclosed , principally so that they could be used for sheep farming . The clearances followed patterns of agricultural change throughout the UK , but were particularly notorious as a result of the late timing , the lack of legal protection for year @-@ by @-@ year tenants under Scots law , the abruptness of the change from the traditional clan system , and the brutality of many evictions . The result was a continuous exodus from the land — to the cities , or further afield to England , Canada , America or Australia . Of those that remained many were now crofters : poor families living on " crofts " — very small rented farms with indefinite tenure used to raise various crops and animals , with kelping , fishing , spinning of linen and military service as important sources of revenue . The traditional landed interests held their own politically in the face of the rapidly growing urban middle classes , for the electoral reforms of mid @-@ century were less far @-@ reaching in Scotland than in England . 
 The unequal concentration of land ownership remained an emotional subject and eventually became a cornerstone of liberal radicalism . The politically powerless poor crofters embraced the popularly oriented , fervently evangelical Presbyterian revival after 1800 and the breakaway " Free Church " after 1843 . This evangelical movement was led by lay preachers who themselves came from the lower strata , and whose preaching was implicitly critical of the established order . The religious change energised the crofters and separated them from the landlords ; it helped prepare them for their successful and violent challenge to the landlords in the 1880s through the Highland Land League . Violence began on the Isle of Skye when Highland landlords cleared their lands for sheep and deer parks . It was quieted when the government stepped in passing the Crofters ' Holdings ( Scotland ) Act , 1886 to reduce rents , guarantee fixity of tenure , and break up large estates to provide crofts for the homeless . In 1885 three Independent <unk> candidates were elected to Parliament , which listened to their pleas . The results included explicit security for the Scottish smallholders ; the legal right to bequeath tenancies to descendants ; and creating a Crofting Commission . The Crofters as a political movement faded away by 1892 , and the Liberal Party gained most of their votes . 
 = = = Emigration = = = 
 The population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century , from 1 @,@ 608 @,@ 000 in the census of 1801 to 2 @,@ 889 @,@ 000 in 1851 and 4 @,@ 472 @,@ 000 in 1901 . Even with the growth of industry there were insufficient good jobs , as a result , during the period 1841 – 1931 , about 2 million Scots emigrated to North America and Australia , and another 750 @,@ 000 Scots relocated to England . By the 21st century , there were about as many people who were Scottish Canadians and Scottish Americans as the 5 million remaining in Scotland . Scots born migrants played a leading role in the foundation and principles of the United States ( John Witherspoon , John Paul Jones , Andrew Carnegie ) , Canada ( John A MacDonald , James Murray , Tommy Douglas ) , Australia ( Lachlan Macquarie , Thomas Brisbane , Andrew Fisher ) and New Zealand ( James Mckenzie , Peter Fraser ) . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 A legacy of the Reformation in Scotland was the aim of having a school in every parish , which was underlined by an act of the Scottish parliament in 1696 ( reinforced in 1801 ) . In rural communities these obliged local landowners ( heritors ) to provide a schoolhouse and pay a schoolmaster , while ministers and local presbyteries oversaw the quality of the education . In many Scottish towns , burgh schools were operated by local councils . One of the effects of this extensive network of schools was the growth of the " democratic myth " in the 19th century , which created the widespread belief that many a " lad of <unk> " had been able to rise up through the system to take high office and that literacy was much more widespread in Scotland than in neighbouring states , particularly England . Historians now accept that very few boys were able to pursue this route to social advancement and that literacy was not noticeably higher than comparable nations , as the education in the parish schools was basic , short and attendance was not compulsory . 
 Industrialisation , urbanisation and the Disruption of 1843 all undermined the tradition of parish schools . From 1830 the state began to fund buildings with grants , then from 1846 it was funding schools by direct sponsorship , and in 1872 Scotland moved to a system like that in England of state @-@ sponsored largely free schools , run by local school boards . Overall administration was in the hands of the Scotch ( later Scottish ) Education Department in London . Education was now compulsory from five to thirteen and many new board schools were built . Larger urban school boards established " higher grade " ( secondary ) schools as a cheaper alternative to the burgh schools . The Scottish Education Department introduced a Leaving Certificate Examination in 1888 to set national standards for secondary education and in 1890 school fees were abolished , creating a state @-@ funded national system of free basic education and common examinations . 
 The five Scottish universities had been oriented to clerical and legal training , after the religious and political upheavals of the 17th century they recovered with a lecture @-@ based curriculum that was able to embrace economics and science , offering a high quality liberal education to the sons of the nobility and gentry . It helped the universities to become major centres of medical education and to put Scotland at the forefront of Enlightenment thinking . In the mid 19th century , the historic University of Glasgow became a leader in British higher education by providing the educational needs of youth from the urban and commercial classes , as well as the upper class . It prepared students for non @-@ commercial careers in government , the law , medicine , education , and the ministry and a smaller group for careers in science and engineering . Scottish universities would admit women from 1892 . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Although Scotland increasingly adopted the English language and wider cultural norms , its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation . Allan Ramsay ( 1686 – 1758 ) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature , as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry , helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form . James Macpherson was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation , claiming to have found poetry written by Ossian , he published translations that acquired international popularity , being proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics . Fingal written in 1762 was speedily translated into many European languages , and its deep appreciation of natural beauty and the melancholy tenderness of its treatment of the ancient legend did more than any single work to bring about the Romantic movement in European , and especially in German , literature , influencing Herder and Goethe . Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from the Gaelic , but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience . 
 Robert Burns and Walter Scott were highly influenced by the Ossian cycle . Burns , an Ayrshire poet and lyricist , is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major figure in the Romantic movement . As well as making original compositions , Burns also collected folk songs from across Scotland , often revising or adapting them . His poem ( and song ) " Auld Lang Syne " is often sung at Hogmanay ( the last day of the year ) , and " Scots Wha Hae " served for a long time as an unofficial national anthem of the country . Scott began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads . His first prose work , Waverley in 1814 , is often called the first historical novel . It launched a highly successful career that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish cultural identity . 
 In the late 19th century , a number of Scottish @-@ born authors achieved international reputations . Robert Louis Stevenson 's work included the urban Gothic novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde ( 1886 ) , and played a major part in developing the historical adventure in books like Kidnapped and Treasure Island . Arthur Conan Doyle 's Sherlock Holmes stories helped found the tradition of detective fiction . The " <unk> tradition " at the end of the century , brought elements of fantasy and folklore back into fashion as can be seen in the work of figures like J. M. Barrie , most famous for his creation of Peter Pan and George MacDonald whose works including <unk> played a major part in the creation of the fantasy genre . 
 = = = Art and architecture = = = 
 Scotland in this era produced some of the most significant British artists and architects . The influence of Italy was particularly significant , with over fifty Scottish artists and architects known to have travelled there in the period 1730 – 80 . Many painters of the early part of the eighteenth century remained largely artisans , like the members of the Norie family , James ( 1684 – 1757 ) and his sons , who painted the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . The painters Allan Ramsay ( 1713 – 84 ) , Gavin Hamilton ( 1723 – 98 ) , the brothers John ( 1744 – 1768 / 9 ) and Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 85 ) , Jacob More ( 1740 – 93 ) and David Allan ( 1744 – 96 ) , mostly began in the tradition of the Nories , but were artists of European significance , spending considerable portions of their careers outside Scotland , and were to varying degree influenced by forms of Neoclassicism . 
 The shift in attitudes to a romantic view of the Highlands at the end of the 18th century had a major impact on Scottish art . Romantic depictions can be seen in the work of 18th @-@ century artists including Jacob More , and Alexander <unk> and the next generation of artists , including the portraits of Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) , and the landscapes of Alexander Nasmyth ( 1758 – 1840 ) and John Knox ( 1778 – 1845 ) . The Royal Scottish Academy of Art was created in 1826 , allowing professional painters to more easily exhibit and sell their works . Andrew Geddes ( 1783 – 1844 ) and David Wilkie ( 1785 – 1841 ) were among the most successful portrait painters . The tradition of highland landscape painting was continued by figures such as Horatio McCulloch ( 1806 – 67 ) , Joseph Farquharson ( 1846 – 1935 ) and William McTaggart ( 1835 – 1910 ) . Aberdeen born William Dyce ( 1806 – 64 ) , emerged as one of the most significant figures in art education in the United Kingdom . The Glasgow School , which developed in the late 19th century , and flourished in the early 20th century , produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the Arts and Crafts Movement , and Japonisme , which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style . Among the most prominent members were the loose collective of The Four : acclaimed architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh , his wife the painter and glass artist Margaret MacDonald , her sister the artist Frances , and her husband , the artist and teacher Herbert MacNair . 
 Scotland produced some of the most significant British architects of the 18th century , including : Colen Campbell ( 1676 – 1729 ) , James Gibbs ( 1682 – 1754 ) , James ( 1732 – 94 ) , John ( 1721 – 92 ) and Robert Adam ( 1728 – 92 ) and William Chambers ( 1723 – 96 ) , who all created work that to some degree looked to classical models . Edinburgh 's New Town was the focus of this classical building boom in Scotland . From the mid @-@ eighteenth century the it was laid out according to a plan of rectangular blocks with open squares , drawn up by James Craig . This classicism , together with its reputation as a major centre of the Enlightenment , resulted in the city being nicknamed " The Athens of the North " . However , the centralisation of much of the government administration , including the king 's works , in London , meant that a number of Scottish architects spent most of all of their careers in England , where they had a major impact on Georgian architecture . 
 = = Early 20th century = = 
 In the 20th century Scotland made a major contribution to the British participation in the two world wars and suffered relative economic decline , which only began to be offset with the exploitation of North Sea Oil and Gas from the 1970s and the development of new technologies and service industries . This was mirrored by a growing sense of cultural and political distinctiveness , which towards the end of the century , culminated in the establishment of a separate Scottish Parliament within the confines of the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Before the First World War 1901 – 13 = = = 
 In the Khaki Election of 1900 , nationalist concern with the Boer War meant that the Conservatives and their Liberal Unionist allies gained a majority of Scottish seats for the first time , although the Liberals regained their ascendancy in the next election . Various organisations , including the Independent Labour Party , joined to make the British Labour Party in 1906 , with Keir Hardie as its first chairman . The Unionists and Conservatives merged in 1912 , usually known as the Conservatives in England and Wales , they adopted the name Unionist Party in Scotland . 
 The years before the First World War were the golden age of the inshore fisheries . Landings reached new heights , and Scottish catches dominated Europe 's herring trade , accounting for a third of the British catch . High productivity came about thanks to the transition to more productive steam @-@ powered boats , while the rest of Europe 's fishing fleets were slower because they were still powered by sails . However , in general the Scottish economy stagnated leading to growing unemployment and political agitation among industrial workers . 
 = = = First World War 1914 – 18 = = = 
 Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War . It especially provided manpower , ships , machinery , food ( particularly fish ) and money . With a population of 4 @.@ 8 million in 1911 , Scotland sent 690 @,@ 000 men to the war , of whom 74 @,@ 000 died in combat or from disease , and 150 @,@ 000 were seriously wounded . Thus , although Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population , they made up 15 per cent of the national armed forces and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead . Concern for their families ' standard of living made men hesitate to enlist ; voluntary enlistment rates went up after the government guaranteed a weekly stipend for life to the survivors of men who were killed or disabled . Clydeside shipyards and the engineering shops of west @-@ central Scotland became the most significant centre of shipbuilding and arms production in the Empire . In the Lowlands , particularly Glasgow , poor working and living conditions led to industrial and political unrest . After the end of the war in June 1919 the German fleet interned in Scapa Flow was scuttled by its crews , to avoid its ships being taken over by the victorious allies . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period 1919 – 38 = = = 
 After World War I the Liberal Party began to disintegrate . As the Liberals splintered Labour emerged to become the party of progressive politics in Scotland , gaining a solid following among working classes of the urban lowlands , and as a result the Unionists were able to gain most of the votes of the middle classes , who now feared Bolshevik revolution , setting the social and geographical electoral pattern in Scotland that would last until the late 20th century . With all the main parties committed to the Union new nationalist and independent political groupings began to emerge , including the National Party of Scotland in 1928 and Scottish Party in 1930 . They joined together to form the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) in 1934 with the goal of creating an independent Scotland , but it enjoyed little electoral success in the Westminster system . 
 The interwar years were marked by economic stagnation in rural and urban areas , and high unemployment . Thoughtful Scots pondered their declension , as the main social indicators such as poor health , bad housing , and long @-@ term mass unemployment , pointed to terminal social and economic stagnation at best , or even a downward spiral . The heavy dependence on obsolescent heavy industry and mining was a central problem , and no one offered workable solutions . The despair reflected what Finlay ( 1994 ) describes as a widespread sense of hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during the Second World War . 
 The shipbuilding industry had expanded by a third during the war and had expected continued prosperity , but instead it shrank drastically . A serious depression hit the economy by 1922 and it did not fully recover until 1939 . The most skilled craftsmen were especially hard hit , because there were few alternative uses for their specialised skills . The yards went into a long period of decline , interrupted only by the Second World War 's temporary expansion . The war had seen the emergence of a radical movement led by militant trades unionists . John MacLean became a key political figure in what became known as Red Clydeside , and in January 1919 , the British Government , fearful of a revolutionary uprising , deployed tanks and soldiers in central Glasgow . Formerly a Liberal stronghold , the industrial districts switched to Labour by 1922 , with a base in the Irish Catholic working class districts . Women were especially active in building neighbourhood solidarity on housing and rent issues . However , the " Reds " operated within the Labour Party and had little influence in Parliament ; in the face of heavy unemployment the workers ' mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s . 
 Emigration of young people continued apace with 400 @,@ 000 Scots , ten per cent of the population , estimated to have left the country between 1921 and 1931 . The economic stagnation was only one factor ; other push factors included a zest for travel and adventure , and the pull factors of better job opportunities abroad , personal networks to link into , and the basic cultural similarity of the United States , Canada , and Australia . Government subsidies for travel and relocation facilitated the decision to emigrate . Personal networks of family and friends who had gone ahead and wrote back , or sent money , prompted emigrants to follow . 
 = = = Scottish renaissance = = = 
 In the early 20th century there was a new surge of activity in Scottish literature and art , influenced by modernism and resurgent nationalism , known as the Scottish Renaissance . The leading figure in the movement was Hugh MacDiarmid ( the pseudonym of Christopher Murray Grieve ) . MacDiarmid attempted to revive the Scots language as a medium for serious literature in poetic works including " A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle " ( 1936 ) , developing a form of Synthetic Scots that combined different regional dialects and archaic terms . Other writers that emerged in this period , and are often treated as part of the movement , include the poets Edwin Muir and William Soutar , the novelists Neil Gunn , George Blake , Nan Shepherd , A J Cronin , Naomi Mitchison , Eric Linklater and Lewis <unk> Gibbon , and the playwright James Bridie . All were born within a fifteen @-@ year period ( 1887 and 1901 ) and , although they cannot be described as members of a single school they all pursued an exploration of identity , rejecting nostalgia and parochialism and engaging with social and political issues . 
 In art , the first significant group to emerge in the 20th century were the Scottish Colourists in the 1920s : John Duncan Fergusson ( 1874 – 1961 ) , Francis Cadell ( 1883 – 1937 ) , Samuel Peploe ( 1871 – 1935 ) and Leslie Hunter ( 1877 – 1931 ) . Influenced by the Fauvists , they have been described as the first Scottish modern artists and were the major mechanism by which post @-@ impressionism reached Scotland . In the inter @-@ war period , elements of modernism and the Scottish Renaissance , were incorporated into art by figures including Stanley Cursiter ( 1887 – 1976 ) , who was influenced by Futurism , and William Johnstone ( 1897 – 1981 ) , whose work marked a move towards abstraction . Johnstone also played a part in developing the concept of a Scottish Renaissance with poet Hugh MacDiarmid , which attempted to introduce elements of modernism into Scottish cultural life and bring it into line with contemporary art elsewhere . James McIntosh Patrick ( 1907 – 98 ) and Edward Baird ( 1904 – ) were influenced by elements of surrealism . 
 = = = Second World War 1939 – 45 = = = 
 The Second World War brought renewed prosperity , despite extensive bombing of cities by the Luftwaffe . It saw the invention of radar by Robert Watson @-@ Watt , which was invaluable in the Battle of Britain , as was the leadership at RAF Fighter Command of Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding . 
 As in World War I , Scapa Flow in Orkney served as an important Royal Navy base . Attacks on Scapa Flow and Rosyth gave RAF fighters their first successes downing bombers in the Firth of Forth and East Lothian . The shipyards and heavy engineering factories in Glasgow and Clydeside played a key part in the war effort , and suffered attacks from the Luftwaffe , enduring great destruction and loss of life . As transatlantic voyages involved negotiating north @-@ west Britain , Scotland played a key part in the battle of the North Atlantic . Shetland 's relative proximity to occupied Norway resulted in the Shetland Bus by which fishing boats helped Norwegians fled the Nazis , and expeditions across the North Sea to assist resistance . Perhaps Scotland 's most unusual wartime episode occurred in 1941 when Rudolf Hess flew to Renfrewshire , possibly intending to broker a peace deal through the Duke of Hamilton . 
 Scottish industry came out of the depression slump by a dramatic expansion of its industrial activity , absorbing unemployed men and many women as well . The shipyards were the centre of more activity , but many smaller industries produced the machinery needed by the British bombers , tanks and warships . Agriculture prospered , as did all sectors except for coal mining , which was operating mines near exhaustion . Real wages , adjusted for inflation , rose 25 per cent , and unemployment temporarily vanished . Increased income , and the more equal distribution of food , obtained through a tight rationing system , dramatically improved the health and nutrition ; the average height of 13 @-@ year @-@ olds in Glasgow increased by 2 inches . 
 Prime Minister Winston Churchill appointed Labour politician Tom Johnston as Secretary of State for Scotland in February 1941 ; he controlled Scottish affairs until the war ended . As Devine ( 1999 ) concludes , " Johnson was a giant figure in Scottish politics and is revered to this day as the greatest Scottish Secretary of the century ... in essence , Johnson was promised the powers of a benign dictator " . Johnston launched numerous initiatives to promote Scotland . Opposed to the excessive concentration of industry in the English Midlands , he attracted 700 businesses and 90 @,@ 000 new jobs through his new Scottish Council of Industry . He set up 32 committees to deal with any number of social and economic problems , ranging from juvenile delinquency to sheep farming . He regulated rents , and set up a prototype national health service , using new hospitals set up in the expectation of large numbers of casualties from German bombing . His most successful venture was setting up a system of hydro electricity using water power in the Highlands . A long @-@ standing supporter of the Home Rule movement , Johnston persuaded Churchill of the need to counter the nationalist threat north of the border and created a Scottish Council of State and a Council of Industry as institutions to devolve some power away from Whitehall . 
 = = Postwar 1946 – present = = 
 = = = Postwar politics = = = 
 In this period the Labour Party usually won most Scottish parliamentary seats , losing this dominance briefly to the Unionists in the 1950s . Support in Scotland was critical to Labour 's overall electoral fortunes as without Scottish MPs it would have gained only two UK electoral victories in the 20th century ( 1944 and 1966 ) . The number of Scottish seats represented by Unionists ( known as Conservatives from 1965 onwards ) went into steady decline from 1959 onwards , until it fell to zero in 1997 . The Scottish National Party gained its first seat at Westminster in 1945 and became a party of national prominence during the 1970s , achieving 11 MPs in 1974 . However , a referendum on devolution in 1979 was unsuccessful as it did not achieve the support of 40 per cent of the electorate ( despite a small majority of those who voted supporting the proposal ) and the SNP went into electoral decline during the 1980s . The introduction in 1989 by the Thatcher @-@ led Conservative government of the Community Charge ( widely known as the Poll Tax ) , one year before the rest of the United Kingdom , contributed to a growing movement for a return to direct Scottish control over domestic affairs . On 11 September 1997 , the 700th anniversary of Battle of Stirling Bridge , the Blair @-@ led Labour government again held a referendum on the issue of devolution . A positive outcome led to the establishment of a devolved Scottish Parliament in 1999 . The new Scottish Parliament Building , adjacent to Holyrood House in Edinburgh , opened in 2004 . Although not reaching its 1970s peak in Westminster elections , the SNP had more success in the Scottish Parliamentary elections with their system of mixed member proportional representation . It became the official opposition in 1999 , a minority government in 2007 , a majority government from 2011 and a second minority government in 2016 . 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 After World War II , Scotland 's economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition , inefficient industry , and industrial disputes . This only began to change in the 1970s , partly due to the discovery and development of North Sea oil and gas and partly as Scotland moved towards a more service @-@ based economy . The discovery of the giant Forties oilfield in October 1970 signalled that Scotland was about to become a major oil producing nation , a view confirmed when Shell <unk> discovered the giant Brent oilfield in the northern North Sea east of Shetland in 1971 . Oil production started from the Argyll field ( now Ardmore ) in June 1975 , followed by Forties in November of that year . <unk> took place rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s , as most of the traditional industries drastically shrank or were completely closed down . A new service @-@ oriented economy emerged to replace traditional heavy industries . This included a resurgent financial services industry and the electronics manufacturing of Silicon Glen . 
 = = = Twentieth @-@ century religion = = = 
 In the 20th century existing Christian denominations were joined by other organisations , including the Brethren and Pentecostal churches . Although some denominations thrived , after World War II there was a steady overall decline in church attendance and resulting church closures for most denominations . In the 2011 census , 53 @.@ 8 % of the Scottish population identified as Christian ( declining from 65 @.@ 1 % in 2001 ) . The Church of Scotland is the largest religious grouping in Scotland , with 32 @.@ 4 % of the population . The Roman Catholic Church accounted for 15 @.@ 9 % of the population and is especially important in West Central Scotland and the Highlands . In recent years other religions have established a presence in Scotland , mainly through immigration and higher birth rates among ethnic minorities , with a small number of converts . Those with the most adherents in the 2011 census are Islam ( 1 @.@ 4 % , mainly among immigrants from South Asia ) , Hinduism ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) , Buddhism ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) and Sikhism ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) . Other minority faiths include the Bahá 'í Faith and small Neopagan groups . There are also various organisations which actively promote humanism and secularism , included within the 43 @.@ 6 % who either indicated no religion or did not state a religion in the 2011 census . 
 = = = Twentieth @-@ century education = = = 
 The Scottish education system underwent radical change and expansion in the 20th century . In 1918 Roman Catholic schools were brought into the system , but retained their distinct religious character , access to schools by priests and the requirement that school staff be acceptable to the Church . The school leaving age was raised to 14 in 1901 , and although plans to raise it to 15 in the 1940s were never ratified , increasing numbers stayed on beyond elementary education and it was eventually raised to 16 in 1973 . As a result , secondary education was the major area of growth in the inter @-@ war period , particularly for girls , who stayed on in full @-@ time education in increasing numbers throughout the century . New qualifications were developed to cope with changing aspirations and economics , with the Leaving Certificate being replaced by the Scottish Certificate of Education Ordinary Grade ( ' O @-@ Grade ' ) and Higher Grade ( ' Higher ' ) qualifications in 1962 , which became the basic entry qualification for university study . The centre of the education system also became more focused on Scotland , with the ministry of education partly moving north in 1918 and then finally having its headquarters relocated to Edinburgh in 1939 . After devolution , in 1999 the new Scottish Executive set up an Education Department and an Enterprise , Transport and Lifelong Learning Department , which together took over its functions . One of the major diversions from practice in England , possible because of devolution , was the abolition of student tuition fees in 1999 , instead retaining a system of means @-@ tested student grants . 
 = = = New literature = = = 
 Some writers that emerged after the Second World War followed MacDiarmid by writing in Scots , including Robert <unk> and Sydney <unk> Smith . Others demonstrated a greater interest in English language poetry , among them Norman <unk> , George Bruce and Maurice Lindsay . George Mackay Brown from Orkney , and Iain Crichton Smith from Lewis , wrote both poetry and prose fiction shaped by their distinctive island backgrounds . The Glaswegian poet Edwin Morgan became known for translations of works from a wide range of European languages . He was also the first Scots Makar ( the official national poet ) , appointed by the inaugural Scottish government in 2004 . Many major Scottish post @-@ war novelists , such as Muriel Spark , James <unk> , Alexander <unk> , Jessie Kesson and Robin Jenkins spent much or most of their lives outside Scotland , but often dealt with Scottish themes , as in Spark 's Edinburgh @-@ set The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie ( 1961 ) and <unk> 's script for the film Tunes of Glory ( 1956 ) . Successful mass @-@ market works included the action novels of Alistair MacLean , and the historical fiction of Dorothy Dunnett . A younger generation of novelists that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s included <unk> Mackay , Alan Spence , Allan Massie and the work of William McIlvanney . 
 From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival , particularly associated with a group of Glasgow writers focused around meetings in the house of critic , poet and teacher Philip <unk> . Also important in the movement was Peter Kravitz , editor of Polygon Books . Members of the group that would come to prominence as writers included James Kelman , Alasdair Gray , Liz Lochhead , Tom Leonard and Aonghas MacNeacail . In the 1990s major , prize @-@ winning , Scottish novels that emerged from this movement included Irvine Welsh 's Trainspotting ( 1993 ) , Warner 's Morvern <unk> ( 1995 ) , Gray 's Poor Things ( 1992 ) and Kelman 's How Late It Was , How Late ( 1994 ) . These works were linked by a sometimes overtly political reaction to Thatcherism that explored marginal areas of experience and used vivid vernacular language ( including expletives and Scots dialect ) . Scottish crime fiction has been a major area of growth with the success of novelists including Val McDermid , Frederic Lindsay , Christopher Brookmyre , Quintin Jardine , Denise Mina and particularly the success of Edinburgh 's Ian Rankin and his Inspector Rebus novels . This period also saw the emergence of a new generation of Scottish poets that became leading figures on the UK stage , including Don Paterson , Robert Crawford , Kathleen Jamie and Carol Ann Duffy . Glasgow @-@ born Carol Ann Duffy was named as Poet Laureate in May 2009 , the first woman , the first Scot and the first openly gay poet to take the post . 
 = = = Modern art = = = 
 Important post @-@ war artists included Anne Redpath ( 1895 – 1965 ) , most famous for her two dimensional depictions of everyday objects , Alan Davie ( 1920 – ) , influenced by jazz and Zen Buddhism , who moved further into abstract expressionism and sculptor and artist Eduardo Paolozzi ( 1924 – 2005 ) , who was a pioneer of pop art and in a varied career produced many works that examined juxtapositions between fantasy and the modern world . John Bellany ( 1942 – ) , mainly focusing on the coastal communities of his birth and Alexander Moffat ( 1943 – ) , who concentrated on portraiture , both grouped under the description of " Scottish realism " , were among the leading Scottish intellectuals from the 1960s . The artists associated with Moffat and the Glasgow School of Art are sometimes known as the " new Glasgow Boys " , or " Glasgow pups " and include Steven Campbell ( 1953 – 2007 ) , Peter Howson ( 1958 – ) , Ken Currie ( 1960 – ) and Adrian Wisniewski ( 1958 – ) . Their figurative work has a comic book like quality and puts an emphasis on social commentary . Since the 1990s , the most commercially successful artist has been Jack <unk> , whose work usually consists of figure composition , with his most famous painting The Singing Butler ( 1992 ) , often cited as the best selling print in Britain . However , he has received little acclaim from critics . Contemporary artists emerging from the Glasgow include Douglas Gordon ( 1966 – ) , working in the medium of installation art , Susan Philipsz who works in sound installations , Richard Wright , noted for his intricate wall paintings and Lucy McKenzie ( 1977 – ) , whose painting is often sexually explicit . 
 = Utah State Route 161 = 
 State Route 161 ( SR @-@ 161 ) is a 3 @.@ 084 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 963 km ) long state highway , designated as a rural major connector , completely within Millard County in central Utah . The highway connects Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) to I @-@ 15 while providing service to historic Cove Fort . The route was once part of U.S. Route 91 ( US @-@ 91 ) , but was renumbered to SR @-@ 161 in the 1970s , in parallel with the construction of I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Located entirely in southeastern Millard County , SR @-@ 161 starts at a diamond interchange with the westernmost exit on I @-@ 70 before it terminates at I @-@ 15 . The road continues northward until it reaches the historic Cove Fort and the associated visitors center . On the eastern side of the highway is a Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) maintenance center . SR @-@ 161 starts to make a gentle turn to the northeast , passing a filling station , which also serves as a rest area as part of a public – private partnership between UDOT and the owners of the station . The highway intersects I @-@ 15 and comes to an end at a cattle guard on Black Rock Road northwest of the interchange with I @-@ 15 . 
 In 2007 , a daily average of 455 cars traveled along SR @-@ 161 , representing only a slight growth from previous years ; in 2006 , the average was 450 and in 2005 , 415 ) . Thirty five percent of this traffic was composed of trucks . The average traffic measurement is collected at a point on SR @-@ 161 between Cove Fort and the interchange with I @-@ 15 . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR @-@ 161 designation has been used two other times for other state routes . The first route , which was formed in 1933 , connected US @-@ 50 / US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 ( now US @-@ 89 ) to SR @-@ 68 in Bluffdale until the route was decommissioned in 1953 . From May 8 , 1961 to February 14 , 1964 , the route number was used for a road from US @-@ 91 to I @-@ 15 in the city of Beaver . 
 The parallel T @-@ beam bridges that carry I @-@ 15 over SR @-@ 161 at its northern terminus were constructed in 1966 along with the construction of I @-@ 15 though the area . The bridges carrying I @-@ 70 over SR @-@ 161 were constructed in 1973 . 
 The current route , codified into Utah law in 1965 and designated on signage following the decommissioning of US @-@ 91 in the 1970s , was partially a former alignment of US @-@ 91 . Once I @-@ 70 was completed the 1 @.@ 07 mi ( 1 @.@ 72 km ) long segment of US @-@ 91 as well as the roadway to the north was designated SR @-@ 161 by the Utah State Department of Highways . No significant changes have been made to the roadway except for its legal definition . SR @-@ 161 serves the important function of providing access to the contracted rest area as well as the historic Cove Fort . As of 2009 no new projects are scheduled for SR @-@ 161 , either through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act or the UDOT Statewide Transportation Improvement Program . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Millard County . 
 = Vs . ( Pearl Jam album ) = 
 Vs. is the second studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam , released on October 19 , 1993 through Epic Records . After a relentless touring schedule in support of their 1991 debut album Ten , Pearl Jam headed into the studio in early 1993 facing the challenge of following up the commercial success of its debut . The resulting album , Vs . , featured a rawer and more aggressive sound compared with the band 's previous release . It was the band 's first collaboration with producer Brendan O 'Brien . 
 Pearl Jam decided to scale back its commercial efforts for Vs . , including declining to produce music videos for any of the album ’ s singles . Upon its release , Vs. set the record for most copies of an album sold in its first week , a record it held for five years . Vs. occupied the number one spot on the Billboard 200 chart for five weeks , the longest duration for a Pearl Jam album . The album has been certified seven times platinum by the RIAA in the United States . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For its second album , Pearl Jam felt the pressures of trying to match the success of its debut album , Ten . In a 2002 interview , guitarist Mike McCready said , " The band was blown up pretty big and everything was pretty crazy . " Vs. was the first Pearl Jam album to have production duties handled by producer Brendan O 'Brien . It was also the band 's first album with drummer Dave Abbruzzese , who had joined the band in August 1991 and toured for the album Ten . Rehearsals for Vs. began in February 1993 at <unk> Studio in Seattle , Washington . The band then moved to The Site in <unk> , California in March 1993 to begin recording . Abbruzzese called the tranquil recording site " paradise " while lead vocalist Eddie Vedder said , " I fucking hate it here ... I 've had a hard time ... How do you make a rock record here ? " 
 The band took the approach of recording one song at a time , and agreed with O 'Brien to mix the songs as each one was finished . O 'Brien had the band members set up much as they do live , and most of the songs were developed out of jam sessions . Guitarist Stone Gossard said , " I think we allowed things to develop in a more natural , band @-@ oriented sort of way , rather than me bringing in a bunch of stuff that was already arranged . " Gossard added that most of the songs were arranged once Vedder joined in and started singing , elaborating , " You could tell when the music wanted to change just by the way he was singing . " In a 2009 interview , Gossard stated , " [ Vs . ] was probably where it felt better recording wise . I saw how it could change and evolve which gave me a lot of inspiration to go we can do ballads , we can do fast stuff , we can do slow stuff , we can do punk stuff . That was where I realized there were gonna be a lot of places to go with Ed . " 
 The first week of recording produced " Go " , " Blood " , " Rats " , and " Leash " before the band hit a lull . In order to keep up his intensity , Vedder traveled into San Francisco and began sleeping in his truck , as well as the sauna at the recording studio . Bassist Jeff Ament said , " Recording Vs . , there was a lot more pressure on Ed . The whole follow @-@ up . I thought we were playing so well as a band that it would take care of itself ... He was having a hard time finishing up the songs ; the pressure , and not being comfortable being in such a nice place . " Ament added that " toward the end it got fairly intense " and that the band " tried to make it as uncomfortable for [ Vedder ] as we could . " Eventually the band was able to get " back on track " according to Ament as Vedder was allowed " to get in the space of his songs . " The album was finished in May 1993 . Vedder later said , " The second record , that was the one I enjoyed making the least ... I just didn 't feel comfortable in the place we were at because it was very comfortable . I didn 't like that at all . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album featured a much looser and rawer sound compared to the band 's debut album , Ten . Ament said , " When we made Vs . , our second record , I remember thinking , ' Man , I wish our first record sounded like this . ' I thought it was more direct , more powerful . " Besides the heavier songs , the album features two acoustic ballads in " Daughter " and " Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town " . A few of the songs incorporate elements of funk , including " Animal " , " Blood " , and " Rats " . McCready stated that it wasn 't that the band " sat down and decided to be funky , " but rather it came from the band " exploring different directions and combining our influences . " Paul Evans of Rolling Stone said " ' Animal ' , ' Daughter ' and ' Blood ' ... are songs of a kind of ritual passion , tapping into something truly wild . " In a 2002 interview , Gossard said , " We got our <unk> out on that record . " 
 The songs on the album tackle personal as well as social and political concerns . Vedder said that " you write what comes to you ... You try to reflect the mood of the songs . " Topics on the album include child abuse ( " Daughter " ) , gun culture ( " Glorified G " ) , police racism ( " W.M.A. " ) , and the media ( " Blood " ) . " Daughter " , " Dissident " , and " Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town " are three storytelling songs . " Daughter " tells the story of a child who is abused by her parents because they do not understand her learning disability ; " Dissident " tells the story of a woman who takes in a political fugitive ; and " Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town " tells the story of an old lady who has been stuck in a small town her whole life . 
 " Glorified G " , a song mocking gun enthusiasts , was inspired by an incident that involved Abbruzzese telling the band he had just bought two guns which sparked a conversation about guns within the band . " W.M.A. " was inspired by an incident that happened outside Pearl Jam 's rehearsal studio in which Vedder got into an altercation with a group of police officers who hassled a black friend of his but ignored him . Vedder said that " <unk> " is about being " in a car , leaving ... a bad situation . " Vedder stated that " Rats " is about the idea that " rats are probably a hell of a lot more admirable " than humans . " Leash " was written about the same girl that the Ten song " Why Go " is about . Regarding " Indifference " , Vedder said it is about " [ trying to ] do something to make some other peoples ' lives better than they are , even if it means going through hell . Three Faces of Me . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Vs. debuted at the top of the Billboard 200 album chart and stayed there for five weeks . Vs. sold 950 @,@ 378 copies in its first five days of release , which set a record for the most copies of an album sold in its first week of release and outperformed all other entries in the Billboard top ten that week combined . Vs. held this record for five years before it was broken by Garth Brooks ' 1998 album , Double Live . While Double Live officially beat Vs. in first week sales , Vs. still holds an unbreakable record in that Soundscan only counted the first five days of an album 's release in its first week sales until 1998 . Vs. has been certified seven times platinum by the RIAA , and , as of July 2013 , has sold 6 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 Rolling Stone staff writer Paul Evans gave Vs. a favorable review , saying , " Few American bands have arrived more clearly talented than this one did with Ten ; and Vs. tops even that debut . " He added , " Like Jim Morrison and Pete Townshend , Vedder makes a forte of his psychological @-@ mythic explorations ... As guitarists Stone Gossard and Mike McCready paint dense and slashing backdrops , he invites us into a drama of experiment and strife . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated that " Pearl Jam uses its new album ... to broaden its music , " and added that " most of the album ... projects individual misery as public catharsis . " AllMusic staff writer Steve Huey gave the album four out of five stars , saying " Vs. may not reach the majestic heights of Ten , but at least half the record stands with Pearl Jam 's best work . " 
 David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B – . He said , " Vs. is not a carbon copy of Ten ; for that alone , [ Pearl Jam ] get points . " However , he countered by saying that " Vs. confirms once and for all that there 's nothing underground or alternative about [ Pearl Jam ] . " Critic Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " rating . 
 Pearl Jam made a conscious decision beginning with the release of Vs. to scale back its commercial efforts . " We pulled back after the second record pretty hard , " Ament stated . " A lot of it had to do with being in the eye of the storm and not being able to think straight . " The band declined to produce music videos after the very successful " Jeremy " , and opted to give fewer interviews as well as make fewer television appearances . " Ten years from now , " Ament said , " I don 't want people to remember our songs as videos . " 
 Vs. included the hit singles " Go " , " Daughter " , " Animal " , and " Dissident " . All four singles placed on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . " Daughter " was the most successful song from Vs. on the rock charts , reaching the number one spot on both the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts , spending a total of eight weeks at number one on the former . Album tracks " Glorified G " and " Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town " also charted . At the 1995 Grammy Awards , " Daughter " received a nomination for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and " Go " received a nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance . Vs. received a nomination for Best Rock Album . 
 In 2011 , Pearl Jam released a remastered Vs . , along with Vitalogy , in three formats : an Expanded Version , a three @-@ CD Deluxe Edition and a Limited Edition Collector 's Boxed Set . The Expanded Version features three bonus tracks recorded by Brendan O 'Brien at The Site studio during the Vs. sessions : a previously unreleased acoustic version of " Hold On " , " <unk> Stomp " - a previously unreleased studio outtake , and the band 's cover of Victoria Williams ' " Crazy Mary " featuring Williams on backing vocals and guitar , which had previously been issued on the 1993 tribute album , Sweet Relief : A Benefit for Victoria Williams . The three @-@ CD Deluxe Edition features both the Legacy Versions of Vs. and Vitalogy with their bonus tracks and a copy of Live at the Orpheum Theater , Boston , April 12 , 1994 . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album 's cover art , photographed by Ament , features a black @-@ and @-@ white picture of a sheep from a farm in Hamilton , Montana . According to Ament , the cover was a representation of how the band felt at the time , with Ament stating " we were slaves . " The album booklet contains additional drawings and writings by Vedder , including one page apparently doodled at a business meeting that says " I will never trust anybody again . " The lyric page for " W.M.A. " features a portion of a news story concerning Malice Green , allegedly a victim of police brutality . 
 Originally , the album was titled Five Against One ( The song " Animal " features the lyric " One , two , three , four , five against one ... " ) . Concerning the original album title , Gossard said , " For me , that title represented a lot of struggles that you go through trying to make a record ... Your own independence — your own soul — versus everybody else 's . " The album title was changed at the last minute , first to a self @-@ titled album and then to Vs . , a nod to the general theme of conflict present in most of the songs on the album . Regarding the title Vs . , Vedder said , " They were writing all these articles ... Our band against somebody else 's band . What the hell are they talking about ? You know , don 't try to separate the powers that be . We 're all in this together . " 
 The decision to change the album 's name at the last minute resulted in a few different versions of the album . There are also different versions of the album that are unrelated to the title . Regarding the different versions of the album , some of the first pressings of the cassette still contained Five Against One printed on the cassette itself , the first couple of pressings of the cassette do not contain the title printed on the artwork at all , and the lyrics to " Indifference " are included in the cassette version . The first couple of pressings of the CD do not contain the title printed on the artwork at all , and the initial versions of the CD came in an <unk> , which was a variation on the traditional CD sized Digipak . While not rare , they went out of print quickly and are now hard to find . The song titles are not printed on the back cover of this version , but the artwork remains the same . The vinyl version has never had the title printed on it , and the cover art on the vinyl copies is different from the CD and cassette . For all versions , the picture of the " elderly woman " changed at some point after the first pressings . Allegedly , the original woman never gave permission for her picture to be used , so Pearl Jam changed the picture to another woman . The difference is easy to spot , as " the new and improved woman behind the counter " is printed below the picture . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in the United States in the fall of 1993 and the spring of 1994 . The fall 1993 tour focused on the Western United States , while the spring 1994 tour focused on the Eastern United States . Industry insiders compared Pearl Jam 's tour to the touring habits of Led Zeppelin , in that the band " ignored the press and took its music directly to the fans . " During this tour the band set a cap on ticket prices in the attempt to thwart scalpers . 
 Several songs from the band 's third album , Vitalogy , were premiered during this tour . The band 's April 3 , 1994 concert in Atlanta , Georgia at the Fox Theatre was broadcast live on the radio in the United States . A few days later , the body of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain was found in his home in Seattle due to an apparent suicide , which deeply affected Vedder . At the band 's April 8 , 1994 concert in Fairfax , Virginia at the Patriot Center , Vedder proclaimed , " I don 't think any of us would be in this room tonight if it weren 't for Kurt Cobain . " Vedder later said that " the day that we found out about Kurt ... I was just spinning . I was lost and didn 't know if we should play , or if we should just go home , or if we should attend the services . I still have some regrets about that , even though in the end it was probably better that we played the last two weeks of the tour . I decided I would play those next two weeks and then I 'd never have to play again . " 
 Pearl Jam was outraged when it discovered after a pair of shows in Chicago , Illinois in March 1994 that ticket vendor Ticketmaster had added a service charge to the tickets . Following the tour , the band brought a lawsuit against Ticketmaster that accused them of being a monopoly whose anticompetitive practices allowed markup prices of more than 30 % . The band 's intention was to get ticket prices lowered for its fans . Pearl Jam 's plans for a 1994 summer tour were cancelled as a result of a Ticketmaster boycott . 
 On April 16 , 2016 at the Bon Secours Wellness Arena in Greenville , South Carolina , during their 2016 tour , Pearl Jam played the entire album in order as part of their set . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder . All music is credited to Pearl Jam , actual music composers listed below . 
 = = = Reissue bonus material = = = 
 = = = = Vs . Tour bonus live CD = = = = 
 Performed April 12 , 1994 at the Orpheum Theater , Boston , MA . The penultimate show of the Vs. tour , this concert featured some songs from the upcoming follow @-@ up album Vitalogy . The CD omits eight songs from the original performance : " State of Love and Trust " , " Hard to Imagine " , " Go " , " Animal " , " Alone " , " Better Man " , " Yellow Ledbetter " , " I 've Got a Feeling " ( The Beatles cover ) . 
 " Oceans " 
 " Even Flow " 
 " Sonic <unk> " ( Dead Boys cover ; guest performance : Mark Arm ) 
 " Immortality " 
 " Glorified G " 
 " Daughter " 
 " Not for You " 
 " Rats " 
 " Blood " 
 " Release " 
 " Tremor Christ " 
 " Once " 
 " Fuckin ' Up " ( Neil Young cover ) 
 " Dirty Frank " 
 " <unk> " 
 " Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town " 
 = = Outtakes = = 
 Two songs were rejected from the album that later appeared on the band 's follow @-@ up Vitalogy , " Whipping " and " Better Man " . Both songs made their live debuts at the band 's May 13 , 1993 concert in San Francisco at Slim 's Café where the band premiered most of the newly recorded songs for Vs . " Better Man " was said to have been rejected because Vedder was not comfortable with the song 's accessibility . Another song that was recorded during the album 's sessions is " Hard to Imagine " . " Hard to Imagine " later made its way on to the soundtrack for the 1998 film , Chicago Cab ; however , this version was recorded during the sessions for Vitalogy . The version recorded for Vs. appears on the 2003 rarities compilation , Lost Dogs . According to Gossard , " Hard to Imagine " was cut from Vs. because the band already had enough mellow songs for the album . Pearl Jam 's cover of the Victoria Williams song " Crazy Mary " ( to which Williams herself contributed background vocals and guitar ) was also recorded during these sessions . " Crazy Mary " appeared on the 1993 tribute album , Sweet Relief : A Benefit for Victoria Williams , and later on the 2011 Vs. reissue , as a bonus track . The Pearl Jam / Cypress Hill collaboration " Real Thing " was also recorded around this time . " Real Thing " appeared on the 1993 Judgment Night soundtrack . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Marge Simpson = 
 Marjorie Jacqueline " Marge " Simpson ( née Bouvier ) is a fictional character in the American animated sitcom The Simpsons and part of the eponymous family . She is voiced by Julie Kavner and first appeared on television in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " on April 19 , 1987 . Marge was created and designed by cartoonist Matt Groening while he was waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks ' office . Groening had been called to pitch a series of shorts based on Life in Hell but instead decided to create a new set of characters . He named the character after his mother Margaret Groening . After appearing on The Tracey Ullman Show for three seasons , the Simpson family received their own series on Fox , which debuted December 17 , 1989 . 
 Marge is the matriarch of the Simpson family . With her husband Homer , she has three children : Bart , Lisa , and Maggie . Marge is the moralistic force in her family and often provides a grounding voice in the midst of her family 's antics by trying to maintain order in the Simpson household . She is often portrayed as a stereotypical television mother and is often included on lists of top " TV moms " . She has appeared in other media relating to The Simpsons — including video games , The Simpsons Movie , The Simpsons Ride , commercials , and comic books — and inspired an entire line of merchandise . 
 Marge 's distinctive blue beehive hairstyle was inspired by a combination of the Bride 's in Bride of Frankenstein and the style that Margaret Groening wore in the 1960s . Julie Kavner , who was a member of the original cast of The Tracey Ullman Show , was asked to voice Marge so that more voice actors would not be needed . Kavner has won several awards for voicing Marge , including a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 . She was also nominated for an Annie Award for Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature for her performance in The Simpsons Movie . In 2000 , Marge , along with the rest of her family , was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 The Simpsons uses a floating timeline in which the characters do not physically age , and as such the show is generally assumed to be set in the current year . In several episodes , events have been linked to specific time periods , although this timeline has been contradicted in subsequent episodes . Marge Simpson is the wife of Homer and mother of Bart , Lisa and Maggie Simpson . She was raised by her parents , Jacqueline and Clancy Bouvier . She has a pair of sisters , the joyless Patty and Selma , both of whom vocally disapprove of Homer . In " The Way We Was " ( season two , 1991 ) , it is revealed via flashback that Marge attended Springfield High School , and in her final year met Homer Simpson . She was at first wary of Homer , but agreed to go to the prom with him , although she ended up going with Artie Ziff . However , she regretted going with Artie and ended up with Homer . After the two had been dating for several years , Marge discovered she was pregnant with Bart , and she and Homer were married in a small wedding chapel across the state line . Bart was born soon after , and the couple bought their first house . The episode " That ' 90s Show " ( season 19 , 2008 ) contradicted much of the established back @-@ story ; for example , it was revealed that Marge and Homer were childless in the early 1990s although past episodes had suggested Bart and Lisa were born in the 1980s . 
 As with many Simpsons characters , Marge 's age and birthday changes to serve the story . In season one ( 1990 ) episodes " Life on the Fast Lane " and " Some Enchanted Evening " , Marge was said to be 34 . In " Homer 's Paternity Coot " ( season 17 , 2006 ) , Marge states that Emerald would have been her <unk> if she had been born three months later , placing her birthday sometime in February . In " Regarding Margie " ( season 17 , 2006 ) , Homer mentioned that Marge was his age , meaning she could have been anywhere between 36 and 40 . In the season eighteen episode " Marge Gamer " she states that she and actor Randy Quaid share the same birthdate ( October 1 ) . 
 Marge has been <unk> for most of the series , choosing to be a homemaker and take care of her family . However , she has held several one @-@ episode jobs in the course of the series . These include working as a nuclear technician alongside Homer at Springfield Nuclear Power Plant in " Marge Gets a Job " ( season four , 1992 ) ; selling houses in " Realty Bites " ( season nine , 1997 ) ; owning her own pretzel business in " The Twisted World of Marge Simpson " ( season eight , 1997 ) , and working at an erotic bakery in " Sex , Pies and Idiot Scrapes " ( season 20 , 2008 ) . While Marge has never expressed discontent with her role as a homemaker , she has become bored with it . In " The Springfield Connection " ( season six , 1995 ) , Marge decided that she needed more excitement in her life and became a police officer . However , by the end of the episode , she became upset with the corruption in the force and quit . Of course , her work as a house mother far outweighs any job she 's had over the course of the series and this earned her a spot on COX Cable 's TV Mom Hall of Fame in 2015 . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Matt Groening first conceived Marge and the rest of the Simpson family in 1986 in the lobby of producer James L. Brooks ' office . Groening had been called to pitch a series of animated shorts for The Tracey Ullman Show , and had intended to present an adaptation of his Life in Hell comic strip . When he realized that animating Life in Hell would require him to rescind publication rights , Groening decided to go in another direction and hurriedly sketched out his version of a dysfunctional family , naming the characters after members of his own family . Marge was named after Groening 's mother Margaret " Marge " Groening , who has said she bears little similarity to the character , stating , " It 's really weird to have people think you 're a cartoon . " Marge 's beehive hairstyle was inspired by the titular Bride in Bride of Frankenstein and the style that Margaret Groening wore during the 1960s , although her hair was never blue . 
 Marge debuted with the rest of the Simpson family on April 19 , 1987 , in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " . In 1989 , the shorts were adapted into The Simpsons , a half @-@ hour series airing on the Fox Network . Marge and the Simpson family remained the main characters on this new show . 
 Matt Groening believes that episodes featuring Marge are among the most difficult episodes to write . Bill Oakley believes that the " junior " writers are usually given Marge episodes because he and writing partner Josh Weinstein were given several to write during their first season . During the third season of the show , most of the writers focused on Bart and Homer , so David M. Stern decided to write a Marge episode , which became " Homer Alone " ( season three , 1992 ) . He felt that they could achieve a " deeper vein " of comedy in an episode where Marge has a nervous breakdown , and James L. Brooks quickly approved . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette . The family was crudely drawn , because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators , assuming they would clean them up ; instead , they just traced over his drawings . To draw Marge , the animators generally start off with a sphere , similar to the way Lisa and Maggie are drawn . The eyes are then drawn , with one roughly in the middle of the sphere , and the other to the front side of the head . Then , the nose and lip are drawn . Her hair is then drawn on top as a long tube coming out of the sphere . An original idea the animators had for when Marge walked through doorways was that her hair would be forced down as she walked through , then once clear of the door , it would spring back and forth . This was never used . Groening 's original plan for Marge 's hair was that it would conceal large , Life in Hell @-@ esque rabbit ears . The gag was intended to be revealed in the final episode of the series , but was scrapped early on due to inconsistencies , and also to the fact that rabbit ears would be too fictitious even for The Simpsons . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Marge 's voice is performed by Julie Kavner , who also does the voices of Marge 's mother Jacqueline and her sisters Patty and Selma . Kavner had been part of the regular cast of The Tracey Ullman Show . Voices were needed for the shorts , so the producers decided to ask Kavner and fellow cast member Dan Castellaneta to voice Marge and Homer rather than hire more actors . Part of Kavner 's contract says that she will never have to promote The Simpsons on video and she rarely performs Marge 's voice in public because she believes it " destroys the illusion . People feel these are real people . " Kavner takes recording sessions seriously and feels that voice acting is " a little more limiting than live acting . And I have nothing to do with my character 's movement . " 
 Marge 's raspy voice is only slightly different from Kavner 's , who has a " honeyed gravel voice " which she says is due to " a bump on [ her ] vocal cords . " While Marge is her most famous character , Kavner 's favorite characters to voice are Patty and Selma because " they 're really funny and sad at the same time . " In The Simpsons Movie , some scenes , such as Marge 's video message to Homer , were recorded over one hundred times , leaving Kavner exhausted . 
 Until 1998 , Kavner was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing to cast new voices . However , the dispute was soon resolved and she received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The issue was resolved a month later , and Kavner earned $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary re @-@ negotiations in 2008 , the voice actors receive approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Kavner and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Marge is generally a stereotypical sitcom mother , and she also plays the " long @-@ suffering wife " who puts up with the antics of her children and her oafish husband . While she usually takes her family 's problems with good humor , in " Homer Alone " ( season three , 1992 ) , her workload and resultant stress caused her to have a mental breakdown . After spending time at " Rancho Relaxo " , during which her family barely coped with her absence , she returned refreshed and everyone promised to help out more often . Marge often provides a grounding opinion for Homer and their marriage has often been shaky . Marge admits that she " put [ s ] up with a lot in [ their ] marriage , " and has left Homer or thrown him out of the house on several occasions . One of the first such episodes to depict this is " Secrets of a Successful Marriage " ( season five , 1994 ) , where Homer starts teaching an adult education class on how to build a successful marriage . He is at first unsuccessful , but gains the interest of the class when he starts giving away family secrets , many of which concern Marge . Upon finding this out , Marge is incensed and throws him out of the house . The next day , Homer is dirty and disheveled , and begs Marge to take him back , saying the one thing he can offer her that nobody else can is " complete and utter dependence . " At first , Marge does not see that as a benefit , but eventually admits that he " really [ does ] make a gal feel needed . " Episodes that depict marital problems have become more frequent in recent seasons of the show . Through it all , Marge has remained faithful to Homer , despite temptations to the contrary such as the one in " Life on the Fast Lane " ( season one , 1990 ) , where she resists the charming Frenchman Jacques and instead chooses to remain with Homer . 
 Marge is a caring , understanding , and nurturing parent to Bart , but she refers to him as " a handful " and is often embarrassed by his antics . In " Marge Be Not Proud " ( season seven , 1995 ) , she felt she was mothering Bart too much and started acting more distant towards him after he was caught shoplifting . In the beginning of the episode , Bart protested her " over @-@ mothering " , but as she started acting more distant towards him , he felt guilty about it and made up with her . Marge has expressed understanding for her " special little guy " and has defended him on many occasions . She once said " I know Bart can be a handful , but I also know what he 's like inside . He 's got a spark . It 's not a bad thing ... Of course , it makes him do bad things . " Marge has a good relationship with Lisa and the two are shown to get along quite well . Marge over @-@ mothers Maggie , which causes her to become too clingy and dependent on Marge . In " Midnight <unk> " ( season 19 , 2007 ) , Marge hires an expert to help make Maggie more independent . However , Maggie becomes so independent that she rarely needs Marge . Marge begins to miss Maggie , but at the end of the episode , Maggie starts to need her again . 
 Marge maintains a good relationship with her mother Jacqueline and her sisters Patty and Selma , though they disapprove of Homer and are vocal about it . Marge has tolerated their criticism , but has occasionally lost patience with them , once referring to them as " ghouls . " Marge 's late father Clancy is rarely referred to in the series and has had speaking parts in only two episodes . It was revealed in " Fear of Flying " ( season six , 1994 ) that Clancy told Marge that he was a pilot , but in reality , he was a flight attendant . Marge discovered this one day and developed <unk> . In " Jazzy and the Pussycats " ( season 18 , 2006 ) , Homer casually mentions that they once attended his funeral . 
 Marge believes she has higher morals than most other characters , once leading a family values crusade against the violent The Itchy & Scratchy Show and being a prominent member of the " Citizens ' Committee on Moral Hygiene . " She often provides a voice of reason for the town itself , but many of the townspeople are frustrated or contemptuous of her frequent failure to recognize or react correctly to breaches of social norms . Marge is the only member of the family who encourages , and occasionally forces , church attendance . In " Homer the Heretic " ( season four , 1992 ) , Homer starts skipping church and Marge tells him " don 't make me choose between my man and my God , because you just can 't win . " . Yet , in some episodes , Marge 's stereotypical attitude seems to affect her relationship with her daughter , Lisa , who is a feminist . In " Lisa the Skeptic " ( season nine , 1997 ) , an " angel skeleton " is discovered , much to the skepticism of Lisa . As Lisa rants about the people who believe it is an angel , Marge informs her that she also believes it is an angel . She tells Lisa , " There has to be more life than just what we see , everyone needs something to believe in . " In spite of her highly debatable moral stances , Marge struggles with vices , such as a gambling addiction . While Marge has learned to cope with her addiction , it has never completely disappeared and remains an underlying problem that is referenced occasionally on the show . 
 Politically , Marge generally aligns with the Democratic Party , having supported the candidacy of her state 's progressive governor Mary Bailey , and voting for Jimmy Carter in both of his presidential elections . 
 = = Reception = = 
 At the 44th Primetime Emmy Awards , Kavner received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for voicing Marge in the season three episode " I Married Marge " . In 2004 , Kavner and Dan Castellaneta ( the voice of Homer ) won a Young Artist Award for " Most Popular Mom & Dad in a TV Series " . For her performance in The Simpsons Movie , Kavner was nominated for " Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature " at the 2007 Annie Awards , but lost to Ian Holm from Ratatouille . Kavner 's emotional performance in the movie got positive reviews and one critic said she " gave what must be the most heartfelt performance ever . " Various episodes in which Marge is prominently featured have been nominated for Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program , including " The Way We Weren 't " in 2004 and " Life on the Fast Lane " , which won the award in 1990 . In 2000 , Marge and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard . 
 Marge has been ranked highly in lists of the top television mothers of all time . She was ranked first on Entertainment Weekly 's list in 1994 ; first on Fox News ' list in 2005 ; eighth on CityNews ' list in 2008 ; and was included in Time 's list of the " 10 Best Moms Ever " . In a 2004 poll in the United Kingdom , Marge was named the " most respected mother " by respondents . Still in 2004 , Marge was ranked third in a poll conducted by the Opinion Research Company . In May 2012 , Marge was one of the 12 moms chosen by users of <unk> on their list of " Mommy Dearest : The TV Moms You Love " . AOL has named Marge the 24th " Most Memorable Female TV Character " . Her relationship with Homer was included in TV Guide 's list of " The Best TV Couples of All Time " . 
 Religious writer Kenneth Briggs has written that " Marge is my candidate for sainthood [ ... ] She lives in the real world , she lives with crises , with flawed people . She forgives and she makes her own mistakes . She is a forgiving , loving person [ ... ] absolutely saintly . " 
 = = Cultural influence = = 
 The October 1 , 1990 edition of People included an interview with then @-@ First Lady of the United States Barbara Bush . The article included the following passage : " She loves America 's Funniest Home Videos but remains baffled after sampling The Simpsons . " It was the dumbest thing I had ever seen , " she says , " but it 's a family thing , and I guess it 's clean . " The writers decided to respond by privately sending a polite letter on September 28 to Bush where they posed as Marge Simpson . On October 9 , Bush sent a reply : " Dear Marge , How kind of you to write . I 'm glad you spoke your mind ... I foolishly didn 't know you had one . I am looking at a picture of you ... depicted on a plastic cup ... with your blue hair filled with pink birds peeking out all over . Evidently , you and your charming family — Lisa , Homer , Bart and Maggie — are camping out . It 's a nice family scene . Clearly you are setting a good example for the rest of the country . Please forgive a loose tongue . " 
 In 2002 , opponents of the Seattle Monorail Project planned on showing the episode " Marge vs. the Monorail " at a protest event . Following complaints , 20th Century Fox sent a letter to the event organizers ordering that the episode not be shown due to copyright laws . In 2004 , Marge appeared on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom for the Alternative Christmas message , which is annually broadcast at the same time that Queen Elizabeth II gives her Christmas message . 
 On April 9 , 2009 , the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44 cent stamps featuring Marge and the four other members of the Simpson family . They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while the show is still in production . The stamps , designed by Matt Groening , were made available for purchase on May 7 , 2009 . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Marge is depicted in much The Simpsons @-@ related merchandise , including T @-@ shirts , baseball caps , bumper stickers , cardboard stand @-@ ups , refrigerator magnets , key rings , buttons , dolls , posters and figurines . She has appeared in each of The Simpsons video games , including The Simpsons Game , released in 2007 . Besides the television series , Marge regularly appears in issues of Simpsons Comics , which were first published on November 29 , 1993 , and are issued monthly . Marge also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride , launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood . 
 Marge appeared in a 2005 advertisement for Dove Styling , where her normal beehive hair was exchanged for a more stylish look for a series of ads featuring several popular cartoon women . 
 In October 2009 , it was announced that Marge would be featured on the front cover of the November issue of Playboy becoming the first cartoon character to appear on the cover of the magazine . The edition was first published on October 16 , 2009 . The cover and a three @-@ page picture spread , as well as a story inside entitled The Devil in Marge Simpson , is a celebration of the 20th anniversary of The Simpsons , but is also part of a plan to appeal to younger readers . Chief executive of Playboy Enterprises , Scott Flanders , has said that the cover and centerfold were " somewhat tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " . <unk> Stern 's picture on the October 1971 cover served as the inspiration for Playboy 's November 2009 cover . 
 = Pool Party ( The Office ) = 
 " Pool Party " is the twelfth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 164th episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 19 , 2012 . It was written by Owen Ellickson and was directed by Charles McDougall . The episode guest starred Lindsey Broad and Eleanor Seigler . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Robert California ( James Spader ) decides to sell his mansion following his divorce and Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) suggests that he have an office pool party . There , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) tries to make Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) jealous by flirting with Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) . Meanwhile , Robert gives everyone a tour of his massive home . 
 " Pool Party " received mostly mixed reviews from critics , with many criticizing the episode 's lack of a finite plot . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Pool Party " drew 6 @.@ 02 million viewers and received a 3 rating / 7 % share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , marking a slight increase from the previous episode , " Trivia . " The episode ranked third in its timeslot , and was the highest rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Robert California ( James Spader ) is forced to sell his mansion at the behest of his ex @-@ wife following his divorce , Kevin suggests that he have an office pool party . Andy ( Ed Helms ) takes his girlfriend Jessica to the party and brings an engagement ring his Jessica @-@ approving mother gave him , hoping to propose . The ring goes missing from Andy 's pants and he is horrified that he cannot find it . Kelly and Phyllis later find the ring and decide , based on the superstition of finding a lost ring , that it must be destroyed . Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) , having been told by Meredith that Andy followed her home after the Christmas party , decides to make Andy jealous by flirting with Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) . Dwight initially refuses , but , after realizing that Erin 's choosing him as her co @-@ conspirator is flattering to his attractiveness , agrees to help . The two flirt outrageously whenever Andy is close by , but Andy doesn 't notice . To ensure Andy 's attention , Erin and Dwight challenge Andy and Jessica to a series of chicken fights in the pool . After several defeats , Erin is so determined to win a match that she pushes Dwight to the point where he passes out in the water , ending the game . In a final attempt to make Andy jealous , Dwight tells Andy he wants to pursue a romance with Erin but wants to avoid an " Angela @-@ type situation " between them . Andy assures Dwight that he and Erin are through but , at the mention of Dwight having sex with Erin that very night , suggests that Dwight take things slowly instead , leading Dwight to pointedly tell him " You 're an idiot . " Erin later swims up to Andy with the lost ring , which Kelly had earlier set in the pool atop a tiny pyre , and he admits that he has doubts about proposing to Jessica . This makes Erin very happy . 
 While most of the employees are congregated in the pool area , Robert gives some of the male employees a tour of his massive home , spending most of the time mournfully describing how it was intended to be the location for wild , uninhibited parties . He offers those present on the tour a free bottle of wine from his wine cellar and the staff proceed to get drunk . Jim ( John Krasinski ) had intended to make a token appearance at Robert 's party and quickly return home to his wife and kids ; however , Robert , sensing his reluctance to be there , insists that Jim stay for the duration of the tour in order to punish him for laughing at an inopportune moment earlier that day as Robert had complained about having to sell his house . Eventually , Robert realizes that he is hosting one of the parties he had always imagined , at which point he jumps into the pool completely naked , followed by Gabe and Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) , who had both been battling all night to impress him . Jim takes this as his cue to leave , sneaking away and driving home at top speed . At the end of the night , Gabe and Ryan , both drunk and unwilling to concede defeat in their brown @-@ nosing battle , remain at the party with Robert even as the CEO passes out . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by co @-@ producer Owen Ellickson , his first writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the eighth season . It was directed by Charles McDougall , his seventh directing credit for the series . The episode also marks the sixth appearance of Lindsey Broad , who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season and she initially appeared in " Pam 's Replacement " . Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy , Pam did not appear in the episode . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Erin and Dwight taking turns suggestively massaging and stretching each other , Erin talking to the camera about her convoluted relationship with Andy , and Robert shows his guests his " shame " room . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The songs " Big White Elephant " and " Model Homes " by the band In @-@ Flight Safety were featured during scenes at the party . The song " Can 't Complain " by Bomb the Music Industry ! appeared around 14 minutes in . Many of the references were a result of Robert California bemoaning his position in life . He mentions early on in the episode that , " The 1 % are hurting too " , a reference to the slogan of the Occupy movement . During the tour of his home theater , California explained that he had it created to watch Caligula , Last Tango in Paris , and Emmanuelle 2 , but that the last two movies he watched in there were Marley & Me and On Golden Pond . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Pool Party " originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 19 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 02 million viewers and received a 3 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode marked a slight increase in ratings compared to the previous episode , " Trivia . " The episode finished third in its time slot , being beaten by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 8 % share and the CBS drama Person of Interest which received a 3 @.@ 3 rating / 8 % share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . The episode , however , did manage to beat the Fox drama series The Finder and The CW drama series The Secret Circle . In addition , " Pool Party " was the highest rated NBC television episode of the night . It was also the last episode of The Office to be viewed by more than 6 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Many reviews criticized the episode 's lack of a cohesive plot . Myles McNutt from The A.V. Club awarded the episode a C rating , saying , " ' Pool Party ' was so loosely structured that it relied heavily on the characters to carry the narrative , and the result was some languid storytelling which gave me way too much time to think about missed opportunities , failed experiments , and the increasing burden of a show without any momentum . " Dan Forcella from TVFanatic gave the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and wrote , " There were bits and pieces of each story that worked in ' Pool Party , ' but neither Robert 's stroll through parties never had , nor Erin 's endeavor to make Andy jealous , came together to make completely funny or interesting tales . " The Huffington Post wrote that , " Once [ at the titular pool part ] , the plot bits were so loose it might have been difficult for casual fans to follow it all . " Craig McQuinn from The Faster Times wrote , " ' Pool Party ' was one of those episodes where you can tell the writers didn 't know what else to do . ... This is filler , really , which unfortunately tends to be unavoidable when you do 22 @-@ episode seasons and you 're eight years in . " Many reviews were critical of the continued Erin @-@ Andy romance taking center @-@ stage . McNutt wrote , " I still really do not care about Andy and Erin as a relationship . The show 's approach to this storyline ... is to have Andy enjoying a fairly normal evening with his girlfriend Jessica while Erin acts like a crazy person in an effort to get his attention . " <unk> noted that , while the Erin and Dwight pairing was funny , their attempts to make Andy jealous were not successful , as Andy 's sub @-@ plots were deemed not funny and " boring . " 
 Not all reviews were critical . WhatCulture reviewer Joseph Kratzer awarded the episode four out of five stars and wrote , " Now that 's what I 'm talking about – few things are better in art than having your expectations overturned and " The Pool Party " pleasantly surprised me with the efficacy of its execution . " Jeffrey Hyatt from ScreenCrave gave the episode a 9 / 10 rating and wrote , " I think ' Pool Party ' is my favorite episode so far this season . The Robert California and Erin / Dwight / Andy story lines were rock solid . Previous excursions out of the office have been blah , but the pool party setting really complimented the ensemble – and the sharp writing . " Michael Tedder from New York Magazine called the episode the season 's second best , after " Trivia . " In addition , many critics wrote positively of the characters and their actions . Jill Mader from <unk> wrote that while , " [ the pool party ] storyline itself was just OK ... Ellie Kemper was hilarious . " Many reviewers , including McNutt and Forcella , found Kevin 's lines and actions to be particularly memorable , most notably , his declaration that Val was racist after she asked if Darryl could swim . A variety of reviewers found the cold @-@ opening , featuring Jim pranking Dwight by placing meatballs in his desk in an attempt to make Stanley laugh , funny . 
 = New Kid on the Block = 
 " New Kid on the Block " is the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 12 , 1992 . After meeting his new neighbor , Laura , Bart develops a crush on her , only to later discover that she has a boyfriend , Jimbo Jones , whom he attempts to scare off so that he can have a relationship with Laura . Meanwhile , Homer sues the Sea Captain Horatio McCallister after being kicked out of his all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat restaurant while still hungry . It was written by Conan O 'Brien and directed by Wes Archer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons ' neighbors , the Winfields , decide to relocate because of Homer 's regular inappropriate behavior . Bart and Lisa explore the Winfield 's house while it is empty and up for sale , but Bart scares Lisa away from the basement with stories . Bart turns around to see his new neighbor , Laura Powers . Surprised , he falls down in shock and is helped back up by her and the pair become acquainted . Bart instantly develops a crush on her . 
 After Marge visits Ruth Powers to welcome her to the area , she tells Marge that she is divorced , and the two become friends . Meanwhile , after seeing a television advertisement about The Frying Dutchman 's all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat offer , Homer insists that Marge come dine with him , so he arranges for Laura to babysit Bart and Lisa . Homer quickly earns himself the ire of the Sea Captain , devouring nearly every morsel of food in the buffet , and is eventually forced to leave despite not being sated . Much to Marge 's embarrassment , Homer sues the restaurant for deceptive advertisement . Lionel Hutz is employed by him to represent him in court and the case is successful after Hutz convinces the mostly overweight jury that a similar buffet mishap could befall them . To avoid further legal trouble , the Sea Captain and Homer eventually agree that Homer shall be displayed in the restaurant as " Bottomless Pete : Nature 's Cruelest Mistake " to draw in more customers to the restaurant and offset the cost of his eating . 
 Meanwhile , Bart is delighted at having Laura babysitting him and attempts to impress her . She later asks him to come to his treehouse , as she has important news . She tells him she is dating Jimbo Jones , which upsets Bart. When Laura invites him over to the household , Bart , in an attempt to break the pair up , prank @-@ calls Moe 's Tavern , giving his name as Jimbo Jones , and telling Moe where he lives . Mistakenly believing Jimbo was the one who had been pranking Moe throughout the entire series , he races into the Simpson house with a kitchen knife looking for Jimbo , causing Jimbo to cry and plead for his life . Afterwards , Laura breaks up with him for not being the tough " outlaw " she thought he was . Laura tells Bart that she would date him if he were old enough to grow a mustache and the episode ends with the pair laughing after prank @-@ calling Moe again . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Conan O 'Brien and directed by Wes Archer . The episode 's original subplot was intended to include American actor and comedian Don Rickles as a guest star presenting a comedy show and Homer laughing excessively at his jokes , until Rickles ridicules him . The pair were intended to start fighting and end up having to go to court . Despite O 'Brien and other production staff being sure that Rickles would appear in the episode , he was reportedly upset by the concept of the storyline , as he did not wish to be portrayed as a " mean guy " . 
 When attending a Fox Broadcasting Company publicity event in New York with Rupert Murdoch , show producer Matt Groening was introduced by Murdoch to Rickles . Rickles began shouting at Groening , accusing him of spying on his Las Vegas act and using material from that for the episode . The cast actually had been receiving recordings from Rickles from the 1950s to use as ideas on how to get the style for his animatic portrayal . Another side story the writers produced was for Homer to become an outstanding barber and hair dresser , but this was never used . 
 " New Kid on the Block " features first time appearances from Laura Powers , Ruth Powers , and The Sea Captain . Hank Azaria based the Sea Captain 's voice on that of actor Robert Newton . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The courtroom scene in which numerous sacks of letters to Santa Claus are delivered to court is a parody of the 1947 film Miracle on 34th Street . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " New Kid on the Block " finished 23rd in ratings for the week of November 9 – 16 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 4 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 4 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Beverly Hills , 90210 . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide commented that it was " a fun episode , introducing the Powers family [ and featuring ] the last appearance of the Winfields " . In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Sara Gilbert 's role as Laura Powers as one of the sixteen best guest appearances on The Simpsons . 
 = Chris Ryan 's Strike Back = 
 Chris Ryan 's Strike Back , also known as Strike Back : Origins on Cinemax , is a six @-@ part British television series based on the novel of the same name written by best @-@ selling author and former soldier of the Special Air Service , Chris Ryan , and is the first series of Strike Back . It was produced by Left Bank Pictures for Sky1 . The cast of Strike Back is led by Richard Armitage and Andrew Lincoln , also starring Orla Brady , Shelley Conn , Colin Salmon and Jodhi May , including a variety of guest appearances including Toby Stephens , Ewen Bremner , <unk> L <unk> , Shaun Parkes and Alexander Siddig . The series follows John Porter ( Armitage ) , a former British Special Forces soldier , who is drafted back into service by Section 20 , a fictional branch of the Defence Intelligence ( DI ) of the Ministry of Defence . 
 The series ran on a multi @-@ million pound budget , and was filmed on location in South Africa , particularly in Gauteng . Ryan became a series consultant . Strike Back commenced airing on 5 May 2010 with two episodes showing a week . The first episode received unofficial overnight ratings of almost 400 @,@ 000 viewers in the United Kingdom , which increased to just over one million according to the more official Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board . It was met with generally positive reviews ; comments of the series ranged from a positive " British action series that packs a Die Hard @-@ style thrill around every corner , " to a more negative " pathetic male fantasy " . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on 7 June 2010 . 
 A 10 @-@ part second series , known as Strike Back : Project Dawn , a co @-@ production between Sky and the American network Cinemax , was first broadcast in August 2011 . A third series of Strike Back , also consisting of 10 parts , was released in August 2012 . 
 Following success of the second through fourth series , Cinemax began airing the six @-@ part series starting 25 October 2013 in the United States . It is airing as a prequel in the U.S. since Cinemax aired Strike Back : Project Dawn , Strike Back : Vengeance , and Strike Back : Shadow Warfare prior to the first season . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In this table , the number in the first column refers to the episode 's number within the entire series , " UK viewers in millions " refers to how many Britons watched the episode on Sky1 . The series plays out as three two @-@ part episodes . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Richard Armitage plays series protagonist John Porter . Porter served with the SAS until he was discharged after he spared the life of a boy who was believed to have subsequently killed two soldiers in his unit following a rescue operation the night before the Iraq invasion . He is brought back into service by Section 20 seven years later . He is married to Diane , and has a daughter , Alexandra . Armitage described Porter as a " damaged hero " , and " sort of like Lucas North , only on some kind of go @-@ faster drug . " In order to fit into the role , Armitage had to " bulk up for the role , " and performed a lot of training for about ten weeks in the UK , and then flew to Johannesburg the day after filming the eighth series of Spooks wrapped up , where he proceeded with more training . He was trained from " how to hold a gun to how you can run through a door without getting your head blown off . " Armitage had not trained as hard as in the past ; the intensity of such training almost made him pass out after the first workout , stating " filming Spooks is demanding , but nowhere near as physical as this . " Armitage performed most of his own stunts . 
 Andrew Lincoln plays Hugh Collinson , former soldier in Porter 's unit and has since become the head of Section 20 . Lincoln was signed onto the role because he thought the series was a " great story " , and that his character was " completely re @-@ written from the book . " Out of the cast , the weapons instructor told Lincoln that he was the most instinctive he ever worked with . 
 Orla Brady plays Katie Dartmouth , a British war correspondent who was kidnapped in Basra by the " Sword of Islam " , an Iraqi terrorist group . To play Dartmouth , Brady used her inspiration from real life BBC war correspondent Orla Guerin . During the filming of Dartmouth 's holding , a male stand @-@ in with a wig was used as a stunt double . The crew also added oil and dirt on Brady 's hair every morning . Brady stated that she liked playing extremes , and thought Dartmouth is " grown up " compared to Siobhan <unk> , the character Brady portrayed in Mistresses . 
 Shelley Conn plays Danni <unk> , an officer with Section 20 . Porter started an affair with her after he was redrafted into service . She signed on for the role because she " thought the concept of the scripts was very clever and once I heard who was involved it didn 't take me long to sign up . " In researching for her role , Conn had somewhat of a military background since her father and uncle both served in the British Army , and had since had a base understanding of military life . 
 Colin Salmon plays James Middleton , a civil servant who sits between the British government and the Ministry of Defence . Salmon previously worked with Sky1 on Hex . He was attracted to the role in Strike Back due to the script being " a page @-@ turner , and they 're rare . It 's really lovely to sit down to start reading something and then not be able to stop because you have to know what 's going to happen next , " as well as hearing of who was involved in the project . A member of The Prince 's Trust charity , Salmon took the opportunity to visit some of their projects in Soweto while the series was filmed . 
 Jodhi May plays Layla Thompson , a lieutenant in military intelligence and works alongside Collinson in Section 20 . At first , she came to resent Porter , but starts opening up to him after she grows some distrust towards Collinson . May described Thompson as an " incredibly challenging , assertive and ambitious woman working in a male @-@ dominated field that she 's climbed to the top of . " She was drawn into appear in the series because of the respect she has with Andy Harries and Left Bank Productions . May knew people who work in the same world her character does , and talked with them to conduct some research into her role , as well as reading on the subject . 
 The first series was also given a variety of guest appearances . Among them include Nicola Stephenson ( Diane Porter ) , Laura Greenwood ( Alexandra Porter ) , <unk> Mohammed Ali ( As 'ad ) , <unk> L <unk> ( Hakim Al <unk> ) , Shaun Parkes ( Felix <unk> ) , David Harewood ( Colonel <unk> ) , Toby Stephens ( Frank Arlington ) and Alexander Siddig ( <unk> Sharq ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The inspiration for a television adaptation came when executive producer Andy Harries saw the novel while at an airport and took it on holiday with him . He did not manage to read it before returning to Britain , but pitched the idea to Sky 's Head of Drama Elaine Pyke , who commissioned it anyway . Pyke and Harries had enthusiasm for the novel , and were excited to take up the challenge to adapt it for television . It was planned to be shot in high @-@ definition because , according to Pyke ; " Sky1 HD drama is about trying to astound audiences , up the creative bar , and commission shows which make audiences love being Sky subscribers . " After seeing the success from previous dramas such as Terry Pratchett 's Hogfather and The Take , Sky made a multimillion @-@ pound commitment to Strike Back . 
 Harries commented that he " was interested in developing a quality action series out of the UK because it 's something we don 't do very often , but there 's no reason why we shouldn 't . " Richard Armitage called the series an " ambitious project for television . But the advantage of that is that these three feature films are linked together so you get a really interesting character arc through all episodes . American television is being brave and doing that at the moment , and this is stepping into that area . " Former SAS soldier and the original novel 's author , Chris Ryan , served as the series consultant and script advisor . Chris Ryan stated ; " When you produce a novel it 's like a child and to see it put onto screen opens it up to a greater audience . I class myself as a storyteller now , and to tell that story on paper is a great privilege , then to see it on screen is even better . " 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 As Strike Back is a military drama , the production crew used a vast catalogue of firearms , including side arms , assault and sniper rifles , as well as rocket @-@ propelled grenades , hand grenades and other explosives . Cast members were first taught by carrying weights that mimicked the weight of the weapons so they could get used to carrying it during filming . Later , they were taught how to carry them professionally , including how to disassemble and re @-@ assemble them , as well as how to fire and reload . Though the majority were actually rubber , duplicates were sometimes used for some of the background characters . Three ex @-@ SAS soldiers gave the cast weapons and tactical training , and were also on hand to oversee how cast members carried the weapons during filming sessions . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming commenced on August 2009 , and concluded by the end of the same year . It was filmed on location primarily in the Johannesburg area in South Africa , as well as the same Province the city is located , Gauteng . Other filming locations in the series include Northern Cape , <unk> Falls National Park , and the Kalahari Desert . Harries wanted to film the series in South Africa because he worked there several times in the past , and knew the country can replicate anywhere in the world . 
 One of the biggest problems for filming is the environmental impact they would cause , particularly with explosions . Location manager Jaco <unk> often coordinated with a special effects team to use more environmentally friendly methods . In order to film sequences involving firearms and explosives in private property , the series crew often negotiated with property owners , as well as notifying all neighbouring properties , local police and the local hospital . In the city , leaflets were distributed to the filming location a week in advance . In airport scenes , the crew would inform the aviation authorities . The action sequences in the beginning of the first episode took five days to shoot , and was filmed in the Johannesburg suburb of <unk> . On the scenes filmed on the Kalahari , filming temporarily halted due to the spotting of venomous snakes in the area . After they retreated from some rainfall , the crew swept the area to remove them and filming continued . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Release and ratings = = = 
 The series aired two episodes a week from 5 to 19 May 2010 in the United Kingdom . BBC Worldwide acquired distribution rights to broadcast the first series internationally . Episodes 1 and 2 received unofficial overnight ratings of 398 @,@ 000 and 370 @,@ 000 viewers , with an audience share of 1 @.@ 7 % and 2 @.@ 1 % respectively . Both episodes more than tripled Sky1 's average audience share in their slots from the previous three months , and were also the third most @-@ watched non @-@ terrestrial viewing behind BBC Four 's Timothy Spall : Somewhere at Sea and a live Sky Sports football game . The overnight figures for episodes 3 and 4 were down somewhat to 337 @,@ 000 and 294 @,@ 000 with an audience share of 1 @.@ 4 % and 1 @.@ 5 % respectively . The overnight ratings for the finale episodes were both 386 @,@ 000 viewers , and received an audience share of 1 @.@ 7 % and 2 @.@ 3 % respectively . 
 Strike Back was released on both DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc in the United Kingdom on 7 June 2010 . Released by 2entertain , they contain all six episodes , as well as cast interviews and a Behind the Scenes featurette . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Overall , the reviews of the series were generally positive . Michael Conroy of GQ named Strike Back an " Editor 's Pick " for its " excellent cinematography , stellar performances and a surprisingly balanced global perspective makes this story of two former British SAS soldiers a thoroughly enjoyable action romp . " Conroy compared the series to Green Zone , The Pacific and the Call of Duty video game series . Keith Watson of Metro called the series a " British action series that packs a Die Hard @-@ style thrill around every corner . " Watson praised Armitage 's performance , calling him perfect for the role , and that " for once in a British series , the action scenes kick some proper butt . " John Preston of The Daily Telegraph stated that Strike Back was " a slick affair , crisply directed by Daniel Percival , scripted with considerable sharpness by Jed Mercurio and full of belting action sequences . " 
 Jack Foley of IndieLondon rated the first episodes four stars out of five , stating that it " made for exciting viewing even if the politics and the script sometimes proved laughably gung @-@ ho and naive . " On review on the first two episodes , Jane Simon of The Mirror has said that between the cast , " there 's enough shock and awe to make you very glad they 're showing this in a double bill . " Gerard Gilbert of The Arts Desk dubbed Strike Back as " thin and lightweight next to [ Armitage 's other gig ] Spooks " , and although " not unexciting " , Gilbert did not find the series interesting . Andrea Mullaney of The Scotsman was positive about the casting , and the changes in storyline from the original novel , though the series was aimed " squarely at the blokey viewer who 'd rather watch paint dry than a costume drama . " Whilst also reviewing Luther and Lewis , John Lloyd of The Financial Times called it " fine for tension , " " good on sub @-@ Bond dialogue " and that the story lines make Spooks look true to life . Lloyd also called Richard Armitage " one of the best action men on television . " 
 The Guardian and The Independent have each released two separate reviews ; they were more mixed . Sam Wollaston enjoyed the first two episodes , but called it a " pathetic male fantasy . " Andrew Anthony has said that " no scene lasted more than about 25 seconds in the first two episodes and no element of plot information was left unspoken . The dialogue is close to pure exposition , with an occasional clunkily macho line thrown in as a concession to dramatic atmosphere . Show , don 't tell , say the screenwriting gurus . This was show and tell . " From The Independent , Tom Sutcliffe stated the series may be enjoyed by those who like explosions and Spooks @-@ like operations . Rhiannon Harries was almost negative in her review , believing Strike Back was " in almost every respect , a terrible piece of television drama , " although part of Harries enjoyed watching it . Harries noted that Luther was more recommended . 
 = Georgia State Route 40 = 
 State Route 40 ( SR 40 ) is a 30 @.@ 46 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 49 @.@ 02 km ) state highway in the southeast part of the U.S. state of Georgia . The highway travels from US 1 / US 23 / US 301 / SR 4 / SR 15 in Folkston east to Church Street in St. Marys . SR 40 is the primary east – west highway of eastern Charlton County and southern Camden County . The highway connects Folkston and St. Marys with Kingsland , where the route meets Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) and US 17 / SR 25 . SR 40 also serves as the majority of the route from I @-@ 95 to Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay and Cumberland Island National Seashore . SR 40 has a pair of auxiliary routes : a connector route in Folkston and a spur route in St. Marys that provides access to the submarine base and Crooked River State Park . 
 SR 40 was assigned to the Folkston – St. Marys highway in the early 1920s . The highway was first improved in the mid @-@ 1920s and paved in the mid @-@ 1930s from Kingsland to St. Marys . SR 40 was paved from Folkston east to the Charlton – Camden county line in the late 1930s and from the county line to Kingsland in the early 1940s . The highway was extensively relocated between Folkston and Kingsland in the mid @-@ 1960s . SR 40 was expanded to four lanes , much of it divided highway , east of Kingsland in the 1980s . The Georgia Department of Transportation ( <unk> ) has long @-@ term plans to expand the state highway to a four @-@ lane divided highway from Folkston to Kingsland . The first portion of this project was completed east of Folkston in the mid @-@ 2000s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 40 has a pair of similarly named official designations west of Kingsland . The Georgia General Assembly designated part of the Okefenokee Parkway from Folkston to I @-@ 95 , which was then under construction , in 1968 . SR 40 from Folkston to Kingsland became one of ten stretches of highway designated part of the Okefenokee Trail by the state legislature in 2006 . The highway is a part of the National Highway System for its entire length . 
 = = = Folkston to Kingsland = = = 
 SR 40 begins at the intersection of Main Street and Second Street in the city of Folkston . Second Street carries US 1 / US 23 / US 301 / SR 4 / SR 15 . Main Street continues west as an unnumbered street through the center of town . Two blocks west of SR 40 's terminus , Main Street intersects CSX 's <unk> Subdivision , a very busy dual track rail line that attracts railfans to the Folkston Railfan Platform one block south of Main Street . One block west of the rail line , Main Street meets SR 23 / SR 121 ( Okefenokee Parkway ) . SR 40 heads east for one block to Main Street 's eastern end at Third Street , an intersection that is adjacent to the Charlton County Courthouse . The state highway turns south onto Third Street for one block , then turns east onto Kingsland Road . 
 SR 40 meets the eastern end of SR 40 Connector ( Cross Street ) and leaves Folkston as a two @-@ lane road . The road expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway for about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before reverting to two lanes shortly before crossing the Charlton – Camden county line . SR 40 intersects SR 110 , which heads northeast to Woodbine , at the hamlet of Colerain . Between Folkston and Kingsland , the highway crosses several streams that feed into the parallel St. Marys River . SR 40 enters Kingsland on King Avenue , which has a grade crossing of the First Coast Railroad and intersects US 17 / SR 25 ( Lee Street ) . Here , the state highway expands to a four @-@ lane undivided street . SR 40 expands again to a six @-@ lane divided highway and begins to closely parallel the St. Marys Railroad through a commercial area just west of its partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 95 . 
 = = = Kingsland to St. Marys = = = 
 Near the east end of the commercial area on either side of I @-@ 95 , SR 40 becomes a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane . SR 40 gains a median again at its intersection with Kings Bay Road , one of several highways that lead to Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay . Another main highway to the naval base is St. Marys Road , which the highway meets at a partial cloverleaf interchange on the boundary between the cities of Kingsland and St. Marys . SR 40 intersects a branch of the railroad that heads into the naval base and crosses Dark Entry Creek before meeting the southern end of SR 40 Spur ( Charlie Smith , Sr. , Highway ) , which heads north along the western edge of the naval base on its way to Crooked River State Park . 
 SR 40 continues through St. Marys along Osborne Road , which is a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane until after it passes to the south of St. Marys Airport . SR 40 reduces to four lanes and then two as it curves south onto Osborne Street in the center of St. Marys . The highway intersects the St. Marys Railroad near its eastern terminus before reaching its eastern terminus at the intersection of Osborne Street and Church Street . Osborne Street continues south past the historic home Orange Hall and into the St. Marys Historic District , at the southern end of which is the passenger ferry to Cumberland Island and its national seashore . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 40 was assigned to the highway from Folkston to St. Marys via Kingsland by 1920 . However , the route from Folkston to what became US 17 / SR 25 in Kingsland was not marked on maps between 1921 and January 1932 . The highway that was to become SR 40 followed most of its present alignment from Folkston to the Charlton – Camden county line in 1919 but had a significantly different route in western Camden County , following what are now Colerain Road , Forestry Road , Marr Cemetery Road , Oakhill Church Road , Willies Loop , Old Folkston Road , Arizona Avenue , and several sections of abandoned highway . East of Kingsland , the highway followed most of its present alignment but crossed the parallel railroad several times . 
 By 1926 , the Kingsland – St. Marys highway was a sand or dirt road . When the Folkston – Kingsland stretch of SR 40 reappeared on maps in February 1932 , the highway was recorded as an unimproved but maintained road . SR 40 was under construction along its present alignment from US 17 in Kingsland to the south end of Osborne Street in St. Marys by October 1934 ; the highway was completed as a paved road by January 1936 . The highway from Folkston to the Charlton – Camden county line was under construction by October 1936 . The construction was extended east from the county line to the highway 's original SR 110 junction in July 1937 . When construction concluded in October 1937 , there was a paved highway from Folkston to the county line and a graded but otherwise unimproved highway from there to SR 110 . SR 40 between Colerain and the western edge of Kingsland was under construction by July 1939 and paving was completed in January 1941 . The gap in Kingsland was placed under construction by April 1941 but was not completed until the beginning of 1943 . 
 The first major rerouting of SR 40 occurred between 1963 and 1966 when the highway was moved to its present alignment between the Charlton – Camden county line and Kingsland . By 1982 , the highway had been expanded to a divided highway around its interchange with I @-@ 95 and to a four @-@ lane undivided highway from there to St. Marys . The divided highway section was extended west toward downtown Kingsland in 1984 . SR 40 's interchange with St. Marys Road was built and the highway was expanded to a divided highway from Kings Bay Road to SR 40 Spur by 1986 . The entire length of the highway was designated a Governor 's Road Improvement Program ( <unk> ) corridor in 1989 . <unk> plans to expand the entire highway west of I @-@ 95 to a four @-@ lane divided highway . The first new section of the highway to be expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway was the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) stretch west of the Charlton – Camden county line , which was completed in 2004 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 = = = SR 40 Connector = = = 
 State Route 40 Connector ( SR 40 Connector ) is a 1 @.@ 33 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 14 km ) connector route of SR 40 in Folkston . The route follows Cross Street from US 1 / US 23 / US 301 / SR 4 / SR 15 / SR 23 / SR 121 ( Okefenokee Drive ) on the north side of town southeast to SR 40 east of Folkston . SR 40 Connector heads east from the U.S. highways as a two @-@ lane road that passes Charlton County High School . The highway continues southeast through a residential area and intersects SR 252 ( Burnt Fort Road ) , which heads southwest toward its western terminus in downtown Folkston and northeast toward White Oak in northern Camden County . SR 40 Connector enters a forested area for the remainder of its course to SR 40 ( Kingsland Road ) . SR 40 CONN was designated along Cross Street in 2005 . 
 = = = SR 40 Spur = = = 
 State Route 40 Spur ( SR 40 Spur ) is a 6 @.@ 58 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 59 km ) spur route of SR 40 in St. Marys . The route is officially named Charlie Smith , Sr. , Highway based on a 1994 Georgia Transportation Board resolution honoring a local politician from Camden County ; the highway is also known as Crooked River Road . SR 40 Spur begins at an intersection with SR 40 ( Osborne Road ) northwest of downtown St. Marys and heads north as a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane through a mixed commercial and residential area . North of its oblique intersection with Colerain Road and Douglas Drive , the spur route expands to a controlled @-@ access divided highway and serves as the western boundary of Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay . Access to the base is provided at intersections with USS Benjamin Franklin Drive opposite St. Marys Road and USS Henry L. Stimson Drive opposite Kings Bay Road . North of the latter junction , SR 40 Spur reduces to two lanes and has a grade crossing with the branch of the St. Marys Railroad that enters the naval base . Further north , the highway has a pair of intersections with USS Andrew Jackson Drive and USS Proteus Boulevard , which serve the northern part of the military reservation . SR 40 Spur leaves the edge of the base as it enters Crooked River State Park . The highway reaches its northern terminus at the park gate a short distance south of the Crooked River . SR 40 Spur was designated by the beginning of 1941 and was under construction later that year . The paved road was completed in 1942 . SR 40 Spur was expanded to four lanes from SR 40 to Kings Bay Road around 1986 . 
 = Bad Hair Day = 
 Bad Hair Day is the ninth studio album by " Weird Al " Yankovic , released on March 12 , 1996 . It was the third studio album self @-@ produced by Yankovic . The album produced an array of hit comedy singles ; lead single " Amish Paradise " , which lampoons both Coolio 's " Gangsta 's Paradise " and the Amish lifestyle , charted at number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100 , while " Gump " , which parodies " Lump " by The Presidents of the United States of America and the movie Forrest Gump , charted at 102 . 
 The musical styles on the album are built around parodies and pastiches of pop and rock music of the mid @-@ 1990s , largely targeting alternative rock and hip @-@ hop alike . The album also includes style parodies , imitations of specific artists like They Might Be Giants and Elvis Costello . " Amish Paradise " caused a minor controversy after rapper Coolio expressed distaste at having his song parodied by Yankovic , although the two later made amends . 
 Bad Hair Day was met with mixed to positive reviews , with many critics praising " Amish Paradise " in particular ; " Amish Paradise " went on to become one of Yankovic 's best @-@ known singles . The album peaked at number fourteen on the Billboard 200 . Bad Hair Day sold 1 @,@ 317 @,@ 000 copies in the US in 1996 alone , the highest sales tally for any comedy album in a single calendar year since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales in 1991 . Bad Hair Day was Yankovic 's sixth Gold record in the United States , and went on to be certified Platinum for sales of over one million copies in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The album was also certified Platinum in Canada by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 In November 1994 , Yankovic entered Santa Monica Sound Recorders in Santa Monica , California to begin the first of the Bad Hair Day sessions , which he produced himself . Recording with Yankovic were Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums , Steve Jay on bass , and Jim West on guitar . The album was recorded in five sessions . The first session started on November 30 and yielded two originals : " Callin ' In Sick " and " Everything You Know Is Wrong " . The second session started the next day and produced the original songs : " I Remember Larry " , " The Night Santa Went Crazy " , and " Since You 've Been Gone " . The third session took place on November 5 , 1995 , and resulted in the original " I 'm So Sick of You " and the parody " Cavity Search " . The fourth session yielded " The Alternative Polka " medley , and the two parodies " Gump " and " Phony Calls " . The fifth and final recording session produced " Amish Paradise " and " Syndicated Inc . " , both of which were parodies . 
 = = = Originals = = = 
 " Callin ' In Sick " is a style parody of music popular in Seattle , Washington , most notably grunge . " Everything You Know Is Wrong " is a stylistic pastiche of They Might Be Giants . Yankovic explained that he " tried to write a song sort of in their style , but perhaps even a little bit more twisted " . For fans of They Might Be Giants , he put " little references in here and there , little allusions to other songs of theirs " . Yankovic later admitted that it " is a little bit harder I think to decipher exactly where the inspiration is coming from . " 
 " I Remember Larry " is a style parody of Hilly Michaels , and it tells the tale of a neighborhood bully who , after myriad pranks , is brutally murdered by the narrator . At the 3 : 10 mark , the song contains a backmasked message , which when reversed reads , " Wow , you must have an awful lot of free time on your hands " . " The Night Santa Went Crazy " tells the story of Santa snapping and embarking on a killing spree . Originally , the song had a different third verse , differing in the fact that , at the end of the song , Santa is killed by the SWAT team . Although Yankovic 's record label made him re @-@ record the song for the album , the " Extra Gory " version was released on the single for " Amish Paradise " . Another version was written for the Touring with Scissors tour in 1999 , combining elements of the album version and the " Extra Gory " version . " Since You 've Been Gone " is a generic doo @-@ wop a cappella track that details a lover 's torment after the object of his affections breaks up with him . Yankovic performed most of the vocals himself , and to make sure that he stayed on key , a scratch guitar track was recorded ; when the song was mixed , the guitar track was removed . Bassist Steve Jay provides the low voices in the song . Finally , " I 'm So Sick of You , " a style parody of Elvis Costello in which the singer tells his girlfriend all the things he hates about her . 
 = = = Parodies and polka = = = 
 The first parody recorded for the album was " Cavity Search " , a parody of U2 's hit " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " . The song , which recounts the horror of having to go to the dentist , features the sound of an actual dental drill . To enhance the dental theme of the song , Yankovic called in his actual dentist , who brought a real drill and a human tooth , which the two took turns drilling while recording to create a genuine sound effect . The second parody was a pastiche of TLC 's hit " Waterfalls " called " Phony Calls " , about prank calls . During the bridge , a clip from The Simpsons second season episode " Blood Feud " is played on top of the music . Because the sound clip was from a preexisting episode , Yankovic noted that " it was a pretty sweet deal for the Simpsons ' voice actors – they each got a nice pile of money , and they didn 't even have to come to the studio ! " The next parody recorded for the album was " Gump " , a parody of " Lump " by The Presidents of the United States of America . The song recounts the basic plot to the 1994 film Forrest Gump about a naïve and slow @-@ witted yet athletically prodigious native of Alabama who witnesses , and in some cases influences , some of the defining events of the latter half of the 20th century in the United States . " Gump " was released as the second single from the album , and received a video . 
 On January 15 , 1996 , Yankovic began recording the lead single for the album , " Amish Paradise " . Yankovic felt that parodying Coolio would pay off , because Coolio had " such an identifiable image that a lot of things could be done [ with ] " . He noted , " I like to play around with people that have <unk> you know , a lot of style as opposed to somebody who 's kind of <unk> [ sic ] and bland and has no personality , and Coolio certainly kind of sticks out in a crowd . " Yankovic felt that juxtaposing the original song 's " gangsta " themes with the Amish lifestyle would produce a humorous end result . After Yankovic revealed to his label that he would be doing a Coolio parody , they requested that the album artwork for the release also parody Coolio . Yankovic had been toying with the name Bad Hair Day for a time and felt that he could adequately use the name and lampoon Coolio – who was known for his distinct hair style – at the same time . The final parody recorded for the album , " Syndicated Inc . " , is a parody of " Misery " by Soul Asylum , a loving ode to syndicated television . 
 Much like Yankovic 's previous album , Bad Hair Day features a polka medley of then @-@ current hit songs , " The Alternative Polka " . " The Alternative Polka " originally contained the chorus of Weezer 's song " Buddy Holly " performed by Yankovic , but Weezer front man Rivers Cuomo requested its removal just before release . Yankovic was forced to physically cut the bit out of the master tape , but Weezer was still given credit in the liner notes because the notes were already printed . On June 25 , 2010 , over fourteen years after the album 's release , Yankovic released the " Buddy Holly " clip on his official YouTube channel . 
 = = = Unused parodies = = = 
 In addition to the five parodies on the album , Yankovic had several parody ideas that were turned down . Originally , Yankovic wanted to turn The Offspring 's hit " Come Out and Play " into an ode about doing laundry called " Laundry Day " . There are conflicting stories as to why the song was never recorded ; either Yankovic never approached The Offspring about releasing the parody , or the band denied permission . Either way , Yankovic performed the song in concert from 1996 through 2000 . Despite not being able to parody " Come Out and Play " , Yankovic would later be granted permission to parody their 1998 hit " Pretty Fly ( For a White Guy ) " as " Pretty Fly for a Rabbi " on his 1999 album Running with Scissors . Yankovic also wanted to record a parody of The Beatles ' Anthology hit " Free as a Bird " entitled " Gee , I 'm a Nerd " . Yankovic asked Paul McCartney , a supporter of Yankovic 's work , if he could parody " Free as a Bird " . McCartney had no problem with the parody , but because " Free as a Bird " was written by John Lennon , McCartney turned the decision over to Yoko Ono , who denied permission because she was uncomfortable with the parody idea . 
 Yankovic had also intended to record a parody of the U2 song " Numb " and a parody of The Rembrandts 's hit song " I 'll Be There for You " . The " Numb " spoof would have been called " Green Eggs and Ham " , a song in which Yankovic recited various lines from the Dr. Seuss book of the same name . U2 approved the parody , but Yankovic was unable to get permission from the Seuss estate . Likewise , Yankovic had wanted to turn " I 'll Be There for You " into " I 'll Repair For You " , and write it about the popular 1990s sitcom Home Improvement . The Rembrandts had also given approval when Yankovic asked , but the producers of Friends did not want the theme song to get overexposed and refused permission . All of the rejected parodies were later performed in concert . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The album 's lead single , " Amish Paradise " , caused a minor controversy after rapper Coolio said that Yankovic had never asked for permission to record the parody . Yankovic traditionally secures permission from the artists he parodies , even though this is not legally required , as parodies are covered under fair use guidelines , but when he inquired about " Gangsta 's Paradise " , Yankovic was told by Scotti Brothers Records that Coolio had given permission . Coolio later claimed that he had not given such permission , making a statement at the Grammys saying that he did not appreciate Yankovic " desecrating " his song . 
 Speculation surfaced that Coolio had actually given permission but later changed his mind , or that Yankovic 's record label had lied to Yankovic in the hopes that the song would become popular . Yankovic later stated on VH1 's Behind the Music that he had written a sincere letter of apology to Coolio which was never returned , and that Coolio never complained when he received his royalty check from proceeds of the song . A series of photos taken at the XM Satellite Radio booth at the 2006 Consumer Electronics Show , and a post on the " Ask Al " feature on Yankovic 's website suggested that Yankovic and Coolio made amends . According to Yankovic , he was very surprised when Coolio came over to chat . He later joked on his site 's Q & A feature that , " I doubt I 'll be invited to Coolio 's next birthday party but at least I can stop wearing that bulletproof vest to the mall . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Scotti Brothers Records developed a promotion strategy for Bad Hair Day , which included Yankovic dressing up in exaggerated Coolio @-@ styled hair and presenting an award at the American Music Awards in January 1996 . According to Billboard , this was " a hint as to who would be the next victim of a Yankovic parody " . " Amish Paradise " was then released in the very beginning of March as a radio and commercial single , when " Gangsta 's Paradise " was still receiving radio airplay . Four days later , the video was released . The album 's success was also bolstered by the release of " Gump " as a single on April 25 , and a video four days later . In addition , WEA , who had taken over distributing Scotti Brothers ' albums from BMG , helped with the initial release of the album . 
 To promote the album , Yankovic undertook the " Bad Hair Tour " , which spanned from May 24 , 1996 to October 19 , 1997 . The tour was largely centered in the United States , although the first half saw Yankovic perform in Canada . Yankovic performed over 130 shows during the tour . Initially , there were preliminary plans to have Yankovic tour Europe , based on whether All American Music Group would secure the album 's international release , although this venture never came to fruition . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Mike Joyce of The Washington Post wrote that " Amish Paradise " was " by far the cleverest and funniest track that Bad Hair Day has to offer [ and ] it ranks right up there with such Yankovic classics as ' Another One Rides the Bus , ' ' Smells Like Nirvana ' and ' Eat It . ' " He also enjoyed " Gump " , but felt that the remainder of the parodies were weak , particularly citing " Cavity Search " as " a sophomoric attempt to extract yuks " . However , Joyce noted that " some of the biggest laugh @-@ getters " on the album were Yankovic 's originals . A record review from the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette concluded that " ' Weird Al ' Yankovic 's ninth collection of original songs and parodies reinforces his reign as pop music 's King of Comedy " , and that the record " showcases Yankovic 's unparalleled ability to capture the styles of other bands and turn boring pop songs into fun tunes . " J.D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun noted that while Yankovic 's music can be " sophomoric and silly " , Yankovic himself " can also be pretty smart " . The review highlighted , among other songs , " The Alternative Polka " and " The Night Santa Went Crazy " , as some of the album 's best songs . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic criticized the lack of humor on the album saying " the music on Bad Hair Day not only lacks the humor , it lacks the impish energy that made Weird Al 's first albums such fun . " The Rolling Stone Record Guide awarded the album two out of five stars . However , the book later referred to the album 's lead single , " Amish Paradise " , as " gut @-@ busting . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Bad Hair Day was released on March 12 , 1996 , and eventually became Yankovic 's best selling album . Domestically , the album debuted at number 28 on the Billboard 200 on March 30 , 1996 . It eventually peaked at number 14 . The album remained on the chart for a total of 56 weeks , making it Yankovic 's longest @-@ charting album . In 1996 alone , the album sold 1 @,@ 317 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , setting a record for the most copies a comedy album sold in a year during the Nielsen SoundScan era . On May 15 , 1996 , Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified Bad Hair Day gold , and then on June 11 of the same year , it certified the record platinum . As of May 2014 , the album had sold 2 @.@ 025 million copies in the US . The fourth best selling comedy album of the Nielsen Soundscan era . The album was also successful in Canada , where it peaked at number 9 on the Canadian Albums Chart , and was later certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , for sales over 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following is adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = = Outtakes = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = Loser like Me = 
 " Loser Like Me " is a song performed by the cast of American television series Glee , taken from their sixth soundtrack album , Glee : The Music , Volume 5 . The song was written by the series ' music producer Adam Anders , Swedish pop music producer Max Martin , and Peer Åström , Savan Kotecha , and Johan Schuster ( Shellback ) . Anders , Martin , Åström and Shellback produced the track . The song , with another track " Get It Right " , were the first two original songs to be featured on the show . The song is their first official single , being sent to US radio on March 1 , 2011 . In order for the song to have radio appeal , Anders recruited Martin to produce " Loser Like Me " while he was in the United States working on Britney Spears ' Femme Fatale . 
 Lea Michele and Cory Monteith front the song , with Michele providing lead vocals in the chorus and a verse , and Monteith having a verse . Other cast members provide vocals in the chorus and in a rap breakdown . Naya Rivera and Heather Morris have some spoken words and some solo work during the chorus . Musically , the song is a dance @-@ pop song , and it features a " pop funk " guitar . The production drew comparisons to similar Max Martin productions released at the time , notably Pink 's " Raise Your Glass " ( 2010 ) . Lyrically , it follows in the footsteps of previous self @-@ empowerment anthems released around the same time , with the incorporation of lines about revenge fantasies . 
 Critics generally praised the song in Glee 's first step at original music , including its production , lyrics , and the vocals of Lea Michele . However , common criticisms were that the song sounded like a cover of another song , and that it would have been better suited for other artists Martin usually works with , such as Pink or Avril Lavigne . The song debuted at number six on the US Billboard Hot 100 and became the cast 's third top @-@ ten hit to date . It reached number thirty @-@ six on the US Adult Pop Songs chart , becoming their first song other than a Christmas song to appear on an airplay chart . Internationally , it reached the top thirty in at least five other markets . The song 's performance was featured in the Glee episode " Original Song " which first aired on March 15 , 2011 , and included choreography and the group throwing confetti from slushie cups at the audience . The song was redone by Jenna Ushkowitz , Kevin McHale , Darren Criss and Chord Overstreet in the second part of Glee 's two @-@ part 100th episode , " New Directions " , which aired on March 25 , 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On February 23 , 2011 , it was announced that Glee , for the first time , would feature two original songs , entitled " Loser Like Me " and " Get It Right " on their March 15 , 2011 episode . The series ' music producer , Adam Anders , called the song a " Gleek anthem , " and it was " a very uptempo , kind @-@ of @-@ summery hit " . It was also revealed that pop music producer , Max Martin , known for his work with Britney Spears , among other singers , would produce " Loser Like Me " . Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly called this a " major pop music coup " by Glee . Anders also went on to comment , " The thing about Max is that he ’ s a huge fan of pop culture and he just loved the idea of being part of something that ’ s such a cultural phenomenon . So it was actually not hard to convince him at all . He was all about it . " 
 According to Anders , the Swedish @-@ based Martin was in the United States at the time working on Spears ' then @-@ new record , and then was " exposed to exactly how enormous [ Glee ] is " . According to the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers database , co @-@ writers on the song include Anders , Peer Åström , Savan Kotecha , and Johan Schuster . " Loser Like Me " and " Get It Right " both premiered on On Air with Ryan Seacrest on February 25 , 2011 , and were performed in the episode " Original Song " , on March 15 , 2011 . The song was also released on iTunes in the United States on March 15 , 2011 . 
 = = = Radio impact = = = 
 " Loser Like Me " became the first radio single for Glee , and was sent to radio on March 1 , 2011 for mainstream and Hot AC stations . Pete Cosenza , senior vice president of promotion and adult formats for Columbia Records told Billboard , 
 We 've promoted Glee music to radio for the past couple of years and week @-@ by @-@ week , programmers have embraced the show and its music more and more . ( Adult radio ) has created weekly , and , in some cases , daily , features , and played snippets of songs . Now , more have put " Loser Like Me " into regular rotation . Glee is one of the biggest shows on television and it 's a music show . What a win for us and radio . 
 Barb Richards , director of music for <unk> said that the cast 's introduction of new music prompted the station to finally add music from the cast . Richards referenced the 21 @.@ 9 million downloads and 5 @.@ 2 million albums sold since the series since its May 2009 premiere , but commented , " Still , I believe that people want to hear originals over remakes , so up until the ' Glee ' cast 's original music it didn 't make sense for us to play each latest cover , other than to spotlight it the day of the show . " However , Richards complimented the original " Loser Like Me " saying its lyrics would " resonate with kids and parents " and said that she liked it when she first heard it and when she saw it on the show . She also commented that it " is good on its own , and having the Glee name on it gives it a leg up " . Dave McKay , program director at <unk> also echoed Richards ' sentiments that the Glee sales were reason to add them to airplay , adding " Not many artists or songs enjoy the type of exposure that ' Glee ' provides . Plus , the audience that watches the show is the audience we target , so the fit seems perfect [ ... ] since ' Glee ' music sells , there is definitely an appetite for it . " 
 Responding to the song being an original as opposed to their traditional covers , McKay said , " If ' Loser Like Me ' were a bad song , then it wouldn 't matter whether it was original or a cover : we wouldn 't be playing it . That the song is good , and that it has the ' Glee ' reach , makes it an easy song to play . " Keith Kennedy , program director at <unk> said the single made him ponder why they haven 't played Glee songs prior to " Loser Like Me " . Kennedy said , " How many times have you heard radio programmers claim that they use sales numbers to shape their stations ' playlists ? Look at iTunes every Wednesday : Glee often dominates the top 10 . " Kennedy 's station , <unk> , holds a " Glee O 'clock " segment daily and he said " While some of the remakes have leaned toward show tunes , several probably should have received more airplay . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Loser Like Me " is a song that features " pop @-@ funk chicken @-@ scratch guitars , " and according to Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone , a hopped @-@ up beat . The song is fronted by Lea Michele singing lead on the chorus and a verse , with Cory Monteith providing an additional verse . Other Glee cast members back the two up the chorus and a rap breakdown . It bears resemblance to then @-@ recent Max Martin @-@ produced singles , particularly " Raise Your Glass " , which contains a similar guitar @-@ intro . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy even called " Loser Like Me " a sequel to " Raise Your Glass " . 
 After the guitar riffs , Michele sings about becoming a future superstar , " Yeah , you may think that I 'm a zero / But hey , everyone you wanna be / Probably started off like me " . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard said " Loser Like Me " is " a sunny pop track that finds Lea Michele and Cory Monteith railing against conformity and celebrating their individuality in their verses " . Other cast member lyrics include the lyric " You may think I 'm a freak show " , responded to by Naya Rivera with the spoken " I don 't care " . The song features self @-@ empowerment lyrics which revolve around revenge fantasies , such as in Monteith 's lines - " I could be a superstar / I 'll see you when you wash my car " . According to Melinda Newman of HitFix the song is about " being a loser now , but turning in to a winner now who never , ever looks back " . Aly Semigran of MTV News said the lyrics of the " peppy pop ditty " keep " in tune with the themes of the show " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone gave the song four out of five stars , and called it " predictably fizzy " and " fiendishly catchy " . Rosen also said that the " lyric , belted out with bright @-@ sided earnestness by Lea Michele and Cory Monteith , distills the show 's theme : the mystical power of a good tune and a well @-@ choreographed jazz hands routine to turn geeks into gods " . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote , " Max Martin and Shellback chuck the Pinks , <unk> and Katy <unk> into the kitchen sink and add a generous coat of gloss and shimmer ( and Auto @-@ Tune ) to create what is ultimately an audacious , unabashed and , crucially , authentic pop stomper that remains true to what Glee is all about " . Melinda Newman of HitFix liked the song , but said that it could have had " more of an edge " . Newman also said , " For any kid who ’ s ever been bullied or adult who remembers being bullied , it 's a bulls @-@ eye . " Newman wrote that that Michele , who opens the song , had a " classic voice " but it had no " grit " to it , and recommended that Pink cover it . Becky Bain of Idolator said that the song could have been a track for Pink or Avril Lavigne , two common artists who work with Martin . Bain said the song fit in with " Raise Your Glass " , and better yet , Kesha 's " We R Who We R " . Christopher Rosen of Movieline said the song had " total home run potential " , and that it " sounds like a blend of Pink , Katy Perry , Avril Lavigne , early Mandy Moore , and Kidz Bop . And that ’ s a good thing ! " On the point that the song sounds like a cover itself , Rosen asked , " who wants to listen to an original song on a television show that relies on covers unless it sounds like a cover itself ? " 
 Upon first listen , Kirsten Coachman of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer said that she was " semi @-@ horrified " at the song , but since it was a Max Martin @-@ produced track she " gave it another chance " , and commented : " It ’ s definitely a Max Martin song . It has a good beat and cheesy , yet catchy lyrics . " However , Coachman said that the song should have been sung by Mark Salling ( Puck ) and Jenna Ushkowitz ( Tina ) rather than Monteith and Michele . Coachman liked the fact that this song and " Get It Right " fit in with the episode , and wrote , " I think both songs are pretty good anthems , and hopefully they do speak to the audience . She stated , however , that she " probably won ’ t be singing along to them in my car anytime soon " . In an album review giving Glee : The Music , Vol . 5 a total of two out of five stars , Andrew Leahey of Allmusic said that the new Glee songs " aren ’ t good enough to make much of a difference " . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair gave the song four stars for its lyrics , but said that the tune " sucked " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending March 26 , 2011 , " Loser Like Me " debuted at number six on the US Billboard Hot 100 selling 210 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . The debut was the cast 's largest sales frame since their cover of Katy Perry 's " Teenage Dream " , which sold 214 @,@ 000 downloads . The song became their third top @-@ ten US hit , following " Teenage Dream " , which debuted at number eight , and their first cover , " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , which debuted at number four . For the week ending April 9 , 2011 , the song debuted on the US Adult Pop Songs chart at number thirty @-@ seven . " Loser Like Me " became the first entry on the Adult Pop chart , and became their first song to appear on an airplay chart since a string of Christmas songs from Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album charted on the Adult Contemporary Songs chart in 2009 and 2010 . " Loser Like Me " remains the fourth best @-@ selling recording in the history of the show , having sold 617 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Outside the United States , the song appeared on several other charts worldwide , debuting at number nine on the Canadian Hot 100 , as well as appearing at number fifteen on the Australian Singles Chart , number twenty @-@ five on the Irish Singles Chart , and number twenty @-@ seven on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Glee performance = = 
 " Original Song " first aired on March 15 , 2011 , and is the sixteenth episode of the second season of the television series . The episode 's plot revolves around McKinley High 's glee club , New Directions , decides to prepare original songs for the Regionals competition . In order to do better in the competition , due to Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) ' s assistance the group decided to sing original songs . " Loser Like Me " falls in line after Rachel performs her solo ballad " Get It Right " . In the performance the Glee club girls donned light @-@ blue dresses tied with black ribbons , and black boots . The guys wore black dress shirts and slacks with black ties . During the performance , the group performs sectional and group choreography . Midway , it is received by a standing ovation led by Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) . The performance ends with the club throwing slushie cups filled with confetti at the audience , alluding to the numerous slushie cups taken in the face by them earlier in the show . 
 Bobby Hankinson of Houston Chronicle said " It 's fun and summery and it 's all capped off with a confetti <unk> attack to the crowd . Loved it . " Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote , " It 's a true anthem , and it ends triumphantly , with the New Directions tossing confetti @-@ filled <unk> cups into the crowd — and then going on to win regionals . " Brett Berk of Vanity Fair noted that " the lovable dorks sing about being the lovable dorks we fell in love with ( even if we often no longer recognize them as such ) " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Enthiran = 
 Enthiran ( English : Robot ) is a 2010 Indian Tamil @-@ language science fiction film directed by S. Shankar and co @-@ written by him and Sujatha Rangarajan . The film stars Rajinikanth and Aishwarya Rai in lead roles ; Danny Denzongpa , Santhanam and Karunas play supporting roles . The soundtrack album and background score were composed by A. R. Rahman while the dialogues , cinematography , editing and art direction were handled by Madhan Karky , R. Rathnavelu , Anthony and Sabu Cyril respectively . 
 The story revolves around a scientist 's struggle to control his creation , an android ( both played by Rajinikanth ) , whose software is upgraded to give it the ability to comprehend and exhibit human emotions . The project backfires when the robot falls in love with the scientist 's girlfriend ( Rai ) , and is manipulated by a rival scientist ( Denzongpa ) into becoming homicidal . 
 After being stalled in the development phase for nearly a decade , the film 's principal photography began in 2008 and lasted two years . Enthiran marked the debut of Legacy Effects studio , which was responsible for the film 's prosthetic make @-@ up and animatronics , in Indian cinema . Enthiran was released worldwide on 1 October 2010 , along with its dubbed versions : Robot in Hindi and Robo in Telugu . Produced by Kalanithi Maran , it was India 's most expensive film up to that point . 
 The film received generally positive reviews upon release . Critics were particularly appreciative of Rajinikanth 's performance , Rathnavelu 's cinematography , Cyril 's art direction and the visual effects by V. Srinivas Mohan . Enthiran emerged as the top @-@ earning Indian film of 2010 and is the second highest @-@ grossing South Indian film of all time after Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) . It won two Indian National Film Awards , three Filmfare Awards , seven Vijay Awards and two Screen Awards . A spiritual successor , titled 2 @.@ 0 , is scheduled for release in 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a decade of research , the scientist Dr. Vaseegaran creates a sophisticated android robot with the help of his assistants , Siva and Ravi , to commission it into the Indian Army . He introduces the robot , named Chitti , at a robotics conference in Chennai . Chitti helps Sana , Vaseegaran 's medical student girlfriend , cheat in her examination , then saves her from being assaulted by a group of thugs . Vaseegaran 's mentor , Professor Bohra , is secretly engaged in a project to create similar android robots for a terrorist organisation , but has so far been unsuccessful . 
 Vaseegaran prepares Chitti for an evaluation by the Artificial Intelligence Research and Development ( AIRD ) Institute , which is headed by Bohra . During the evaluation , Chitti attempts to stab Vaseegaran at Bohra 's command , which convinces the evaluation committee that the robot is a liability and cannot be used for military purposes . Vaseegaran 's effort to prove Bohra wrong fails when he deploys Chitti to rescue people from a burning building . The robot saves most of them , including a girl named <unk> who was bathing at the time , but she is ashamed at being seen naked on camera and flees , only to be hit and killed by a truck . Vaseegaran asks for one month to modify Chitti 's neural schema to enable it to understand human behaviour and emotions , to which Bohra agrees . While nearing the deadline , Chitti becomes angry with Vaseegaran , demonstrating to him that it can manifest emotions . 
 Chitti uses Sana 's textbooks to successfully help Sana 's sister Latha give birth to a child . Bohra congratulates Vaseegaran on the achievement and allows Chitti to pass the AIRD evaluation . Chitti develops romantic feelings for Sana after she congratulates Chitti by kissing it . When Vaseegaran and Sana realise this , Sana explains to Chitti that they are only friends . Saddened by her rejection , yet still in love with her , Chitti deliberately fails an evaluation conducted by the Indian Army . Enraged , Vaseegaran chops Chitti into pieces , which are dumped into a landfill site . 
 Bohra visits the site to retrieve Chitti , which has now reassembled itself , albeit in a damaged state . Bohra embeds a red chip inside Chitti while reconstructing it , converting it into a ruthless killer . It then gatecrashes Vaseegaran and Sana 's wedding , kidnaps Sana , creates replicas of itself and kills Bohra . Using its robot army , Chitti occupies AIRD and causes mayhem in the city . After informing Sana that it has acquired the human ability to reproduce , Chitti wishes to marry her so that a machine and a human being can give birth to a preprogrammed child , but Sana refuses . It eventually finds Vaseegaran , who entered AIRD to stop it , and nearly kills him before the police appear . The ensuing battle between Chitti 's robot army and the police personnel leads to many casualties and much property destruction . Vaseegaran eventually captures Chitti using a magnetic wall and accesses its internal control panel , whereby he instructs all the other robots to self @-@ destruct . He removes Chitti 's red chip , calming it . 
 In a court hearing , Vaseegaran is sentenced to death for the casualties and damages caused by the robot army , but Chitti explains that it was Bohra who caused its deviant behaviour and shows the court video footage of Bohra installing the red chip . The court releases Vaseegaran , while ordering that Chitti be dismantled . Left with no choice , Vaseegaran asks Chitti to dismantle itself . While saying goodbye , Chitti apologises to Vaseegaran and Sana before dismantling itself . 
 The film 's setting then shifts to 2030 . Chitti is now a museum exhibit . A curious school student on excursion asks her guide why it was dismantled , to which Chitti responds , " Naan <unk> <unk> " ( English : I started thinking ) . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Rajinikanth as Dr. Vaseegaran and Chitti 
 Aishwarya Rai as Sana 
 Danny Denzongpa as Professor Bohra 
 Santhanam as Siva 
 Karunas as Ravi 
 Cochin <unk> as the traffic police officer 
 Kalabhavan Mani as <unk> 
 Delhi Kumar as Vaseegaran 's father 
 <unk> as the neighbourhood bully 
 <unk> as Latha , Sana 's sister 
 Revathi Sankaran as Vaseegaran 's mother 
 Sabu Cyril as Shah 
 <unk> as Police Inspector 
 Shriya Sharma as the curious student 
 <unk> as one of the barbers working at The Park Hotel 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Following the completion of his first directorial venture in Hindi , Nayak ( 2001 ) , S. Shankar announced his next project , Robot , which was to feature Kamal Haasan and Preity Zinta . The film was to be produced by the now @-@ defunct company Media Dreams , a division of <unk> Graphics . The film was reported to be a futuristic techno @-@ thriller set in Chennai in around 2200 or 3000 AD . Despite the completion of a photoshoot featuring Haasan and Zinta , the project was shelved as a result of scheduling conflicts with Haasan . Shankar consequently started work on Boys ( 2003 ) . 
 After Boys , Shankar began work on his next feature starring Vikram , which was initially reported by Rediff to be Robot revived , but was later revealed as Anniyan ( 2005 ) . One month post the release of his action film Sivaji in June 2007 , he approached Shah Rukh Khan for the lead in Robot . Khan was about to produce it under his own banner , Red Chillies Entertainment , but in October the same year the project was officially aborted due to creative differences between the two . 
 The project was revived in January 2008 with Eros International and the London @-@ based production company Ayngaran International willing to produce the film . The state government of Tamil Nadu granted tax exemptions for films titled in Tamil , resulting in the new production being renamed Enthiran . While Sujatha Rangarajan was originally assigned to write the dialogue for the film , Madhan Karky took over after Rangarajan 's death in February 2008 . In December 2008 , Eros International withdrew after financial difficulties caused by the box @-@ office failure of Drona ( 2008 ) and Yuvvraaj ( 2008 ) , with the subsequent departure of Ayngaran International , who struggled with the global financial crisis of 2008 . The film 's production and release rights were sold to Sun Pictures . 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 In January 2008 , Rajinikanth accepted the lead role in the film for a salary of ₹ 450 million ( Indian rupees ) . Shankar rewrote the original script to suit Rajinikanth 's acting style . Although Aishwarya Rai was Shankar 's original choice for the female lead in 2001 , she declined it owing to a busy schedule and was replaced by Zinta . When Shankar revived the project with Rajinikanth , contenders for the part included Deepika Padukone , Shriya Saran and Rai , who was ultimately selected and paid ₹ 60 million . Rai 's voice was dubbed by Savitha Reddy . 
 Several actors were considered for the role of Professor Bohra , including Amitabh Bachchan , J. D. Chakravarthy , Sathyaraj and British actor Ben Kingsley , but it was Danny Denzongpa who eventually received it , making Enthiran his first film in Tamil . Dubbing for Denzongpa was provided by <unk> . Comedians Santhanam and Karunas were cast to portray Vaseegaran 's assistants Siva and Ravi respectively in their first collaboration with Shankar . 
 The soundtrack album and background score were composed by A. R. Rahman . Vairamuthu , P. Vijay and Madhan Karky authored the lyrics for the songs . Manoj Bharathiraja , son of filmmaker P. Bharathiraja , was signed on to be an assistant director after he approached Shankar . Also working as assistant directors were Atlee , Shree and Karthik G. Krish . Sabu Cyril , in a guest appearance as Shah , an interpreter between Bohra and the terrorist organisation , was signed as the art director . 
 R. Rathnavelu was hired as the cinematographer after Ravi K. Chandran , <unk> Shah and Thiru were considered . Anthony was the film 's editor . Yuen Woo Ping , known for his work in The Matrix trilogy and the Kill Bill films , was selected to be the stunt co @-@ ordinator , while Legacy Effects , a visual effects studio based in the United States , were in charge of the prosthetic make @-@ up and animatronics in the film . Munich @-@ based film technical company , Panther , were responsible for the crane shots . The film 's subtitle captioning was done by Rekha Haricharan . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 Manish Malhotra and Mary E. Vogt were chosen to design the film 's costumes . Fifty @-@ seven costumes were used for Rai , including a " Mexican tribal " look that she sported during the filming of the " Kilimanjaro " segment . According to make @-@ up artist Banu , no prosthetics were used for Rajinikanth to avoid bothering him by withholding his time on set . Additional make @-@ up was by Vance Hartwell , an employee of Legacy Effects . 
 The visual appearance of Chitti was based on the G.I. Joe action figures . For Chitti 's " villain robot " look , its hair was spiked and brown coloured lenses were used for its eyes , whereas for its " good robot " look , green coloured lenses were used . The wig used for Chitti 's " villain robot " look had a silver streak in the middle , made out of Yak hair , while its leather jacket was designed by Vogt . To make Vaseegaran look mature , the team made Rajinikanth sport an Oakley beard . Suits made of copper were used for Chitti 's costumes . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 For Sabu Cyril 's sets , Shankar required approximately twice as much studio floor space as for his previous film . After rejecting Ramoji Film City for technical reasons , Enthiran 's producer , Kalanithi Maran , took six months to set up three air @-@ conditioned studio floors on land in <unk> owned by Sun TV Network . Filming began on 15 February 2008 at AVM Studios in Chennai . After the initial stages of filming , Shankar and Rathnavelu toured the world for three weeks , scouting for exotic filming locations . They visited Austria , Germany , Peru , Brazil and Argentina , looking for a backdrop to shoot the " Kilimanjaro " and " Kadhal <unk> " segments , eventually deciding on Peru and Brazil . " Kilimanjaro " was filmed at the ruins of the Incan city of Machu Picchu in Peru , with some 100 Brazilian extras . It was choreographed by Raju Sundaram and supervised by Fernando <unk> , director of the Machu Picchu archaeological park . " Kadhal <unk> " was filmed in <unk> <unk> National Park in northeastern Brazil . 
 The set for " Arima Arima " , a sequence choreographed by Prabhu Deva , was designed and constructed by Sabu Cyril at Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad . Filming of the number took place over 22 days in April 2009 . Junior artists were employed by Rathnavelu to wear masks of Rajinikanth . For the sequence entitled " <unk> Oru <unk> " , choreographed by Remo D 'Souza and featuring Rai and Rajinikanth as Chitti , three different sets were used : one of copper , one of gold and one in silver . The musical number , which was filmed in AVM Studios for eight days , was the last portion of the film 's principal photography . D 'Souza incorporated the popping style of street dances , but encountered difficulties in performing the dance movements in tandem with the robot , and with the restrictions created by the rigid costumes . 
 The filming for Chitti 's introduction to the international robotics conference was completed in December 2008 at Sri <unk> Nadar College of Engineering and Vellore Institute of Technology , where more than 400 students were used as extras . Further footage was shot over five days at the Ennore Port on the Mitsui <unk> Lines car carrier , Neptune Ace . An action sequence where Chitti saves Sana from thugs was filmed in Lonavla , under the supervision of the action choreographer Peter Hein . Scenes featuring Rajinikanth as Chitti were captured over five days at the <unk> Dump Yard in Chennai . Sabu Cyril told Uma Kannan of The New Indian Express that the sets for the climax sequence , which was filmed at <unk> , consisted of a tar road and glass buildings which rose to 65 feet ( 20 m ) , and that aluminium composite panels , reported to have cost ₹ 50 million , were also used to design the sets . Principal photography ended on 7 July 2010 . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Impressed with the film 's script , V. Srinivas Mohan became the visual effects supervisor in December 2007 . He asked Shankar to increase the filming schedules by six months to include pre @-@ production requirements . Both Mohan and Shankar visited several visual effects companies , including the New Zealand @-@ based Weta Digital and the United States @-@ based Industrial Light & Magic , Cafe FX and Tippett Studio before partnering with Legacy Effects . The original Eros @-@ Ayngaran visual effects budget was ₹ 700 million , but after Sun Pictures took over production , it was significantly reduced to ₹ 200 million . As a result , the visual effects team had to omit and alter some sequences , making Chitti wear sunglasses for most of the film to reduce the cost and difficultly of animating his eyes . 
 After a series of previsualisation tests , including a scene in which Chitti jumps on a train to save Sana , Mohan eventually decided to use the technique in 40 out of the 60 visual effects scenes featured in the film , consisting of 2 @,@ 000 takes . Further previsualisation supervision was conducted by P. C. <unk> of Firefly Creative Studios , a visual effects company based in Hyderabad . 3D storyboards were constructed using 3D animation programs for every scene in the film and were shot from different angles . In an interview with Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu , Mohan said that all the pre @-@ production work took one and a half years to complete . 
 Rathnavelu used the 435 Xtreme camera and also wrote a 1 @,@ 600 @-@ page manual , in which he listed all of the possible angles from which the characters played by Rajinikanth could be filmed . Legacy Effects and the Hong Kong @-@ based visual effects companies <unk> Studios and <unk> Electronics took responsibility for the film 's CGI work . To create the robots with Rajinikanth 's appearance , a complete scan of his face in 3D digital format in all possible lighting conditions was conducted using the Doom Light Stage , so that his face could be replicated on the mannequins . The technique , according to Shankar , was previously used in The Curious Case of Benjamin Button ( 2008 ) . The robot Chitti featured in the film was a mannequin made by a Legacy Effects team of 100 technicians in Los Angeles . For every robotic mannequin used , six puppeteers were employed to control the mannequin 's movements . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Enthiran focuses on the battle between man and machine . Despite Shankar 's claim that Enthiran was a purely original idea , it has been compared to Mary Shelley 's 1818 novel Frankenstein , owing to the similar personae of Chitti and Frankenstein 's monster , both of which turn against their respective creators . K. Moti Gokulsing and Wimal Dissanayake , in their book Routledge Handbook of Indian Cinemas , noted the similarity between the two works , arguing that Chitti was " manipulated by Bohra to become a Frankenstein @-@ like figure " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Genevieve Koski observed , " The plot of Enthiran is essentially Frankenstein via [ Isaac ] Asimov 's Three Laws of Robotics . " 
 Director and film critic Sudhish Kamath called Enthiran " a superhero film , a sci @-@ fi adventure , a triangular love story with a hint of the Ramayana " , while remarking that Enthiran 's similarities to The Terminator ( 1984 ) were " more than obvious . Not just visually – where we see the Superstar with one human eye and one scarred metallic eye but also intentionally spelt out when the bad robot announces that he has created Terminators . " Kamath compared two of the film 's robots to C @-@ 3PO and R2 @-@ D2 , droids from the Star Wars film series , which was referenced in Enthiran when Vaseegaran refers to one of his creations as " R2 " . 
 Although Shankar initially claimed that Enthiran would be made for all audiences , including those lacking computer literacy , the film is influenced by and makes references to many scientific principles relating to the fields of engineering , computer science and robotics , including terabytes and Asimov 's laws of robotics . Visual references are made to the science books A <unk> History of Time ( 2005 ) and Freakonomics ( 2005 ) . In his book Visual Perception and Cultural Memory : <unk> and <unk> ( e ) ing in Malayalam Cinema , Dr. <unk> Kumar <unk> notes the similarities between Kalabhavan Mani 's role in the film to the one Mani played in the Malayalam film <unk> ( 1996 ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 For Enthiran 's soundtrack and score , A. R. Rahman made use of the Continuum Fingerboard , an instrument he had experimented with previously in the song " <unk> Tu " from Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra 's drama film Delhi @-@ 6 ( 2009 ) . The film also marked the debut of Rahman 's daughter <unk> as a playback singer . 
 The soundtrack album to Enthiran was released on 31 July 2010 at the Putrajaya International Convention Centre in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia . The Tamil and Telugu versions were released by Think Music , while the Hindi version was released by Venus Music . Think Music purchased the release rights of the Tamil and Telugu versions of the album for ₹ 70 million . The album of the film 's Telugu version , Robo , was released on 6 August 2010 , while its Hindi version , Robot , was released on 14 August 2010 . After the second day of release , the album 's Tamil version reached the number one position in the Top 10 World Albums chart on iTunes , making it the first Tamil album to do so . 
 Reviewing the album 's Tamil version , Divya Kumar of The Hindu commented that " with its blend of melody , trance and rhythm , Enthiran – The Robot sounds like a winner " . Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff.com rated the Tamil version of the album three out of five and commented that , " <unk> [ sic ] is , in fact , a perfect superstar album . Where the collection does manage to veer from the usual , Rahman has managed to add his own quirky , creative notes to the songs . " However , IANS gave the Hindi version two out of five stars , concluding that " On the whole , the music of Robot does not appeal . They may suit the script of the sci @-@ film , but the audio is not impressive . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Enthiran was released on 1 October 2010 in three languages – in Tamil as Enthiran , in Hindi as Robot and in Telugu as Robo . The original version was in Tamil , while the Hindi and Telugu versions were dubbed . The film was released in 2 @,@ 250 theatres worldwide , including 500 theatres in Tamil Nadu , 350 theatres in Andhra Pradesh , 128 theatres in Kerala , 23 theatres in Karnataka , and 750 theatres in North India . With an estimated budget of ₹ 1 @.@ 32 billion , Enthiran was India 's most expensive film up to that point , surpassing the Hindi film Blue ( 2009 ) , which was filmed on a budget of ₹ 750 million . 
 Enthiran became the first Tamil film to be released at the Colosseum Kino , a Norwegian theatre complex in Oslo , and it was screened at the 21st Bath Film Festival , held in the United Kingdom in 2011 . Additionally , a version of the film , edited to a running length of two hours , was released in Japan in May 2012 , and later screened at the 24th Tokyo International Film Festival , where it won a special award under the section " Winds of Asia – Middle East " . By public demand , the original , unedited version was later released in that country . 
 = = = Marketing and distribution = = = 
 The first poster for Enthiran was released on 8 September 2008 . The film 's trailer was released on 11 September 2010 , at the Sathyam Cinemas theatre complex in Chennai . To promote it , AGS Entertainment organised a festival from 25 September 2010 until the film 's release date , in which they screened the popular films of Rajinikanth at the company 's theatre in <unk> . In Coimbatore , the Department of Posts printed 100 @,@ 000 post cards advertising the film . Sun Pictures invested a total of ₹ 500 million on promotional activities . Advance bookings for the film began two weeks before the release date in the United States . In the Jackson Heights neighbourhood in New York , tickets were sold out within ten minutes of going on sale . 
 In Kerala the distribution rights were sold for ₹ 50 million , while in Karnataka they were sold for ₹ 100 million . The distribution rights in Mumbai were sold to <unk> Films . In the United Kingdom , Enthiran was released by Ayngaran International , while Robot was released by <unk> Network . The satellite rights were purchased by Sun TV . DVD marketing in India was handled by Moser Baer ; Ayngaran International released the two @-@ DVD set of the film in early 2011 . 
 = = = Plagiarism allegations = = = 
 The novelist <unk> <unk> made a complaint with the Chennai Metropolitan Police against the filmmakers in November 2010 , stating that the producers plagiarised his 1996 novel <unk> . <unk> demanded ₹ 10 million from the director and producers for damages and filed a case against Kalanithi Maran . In June 2011 , the Madras High Court dismissed the case after a petition filed by Maran denying the allegation was approved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Business Line reported that Enthiran grossed ₹ 580 million from all versions in the opening weekend , and The Economic Times stated it earned ₹ 1 @.@ 17 billion by the end of its opening week . The Sun TV Network 's quarterly earnings press release report revealed that the box office collections accounted for approximately 30 per cent of the total revenue for the company 's fourth @-@ quarter in 2010 , while also stating that Enthiran yielded a global revenue of ₹ 1 @.@ 79 billion . Enthiran became the top @-@ earning Indian film of 2010 ahead of My Name Is Khan and Dabangg and became the highest grossing Tamil film of all time at that point . In 2015 , S. S. Rajamouli 's Baahubali : The Beginning surpassed it to become the highest grossing South Indian film of all time . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 Enthiran received positive reviews from critics in India , with praise particularly directed at Rathnavelu 's cinematography , Cyril 's art direction , Srinivas Mohan 's visual effects and Rajinikanth 's performance as Chitti . Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis gave the film a rating of four out of five stars and believed it had the " best special effects ever seen in a Tamil film " and that it was " one of the most entertaining Tamil films – across all languages – ever made . " Both Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India and Kaveree Bamzai of India Today rated the film four out of five stars . Kazmi called it " the perfect getaway film " . Bamzai praised Rajinikanth 's acting in the film and said , " Rajni tells us why robot sapiens are superior to homo sapiens " . 
 Both Anupama Chopra of NDTV and Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff.com gave Enthiran a rating of three and a half out of five stars . Chopra criticised the film 's portions in the second half , describing them as " needlessly stretched and cacophonous " , but concluded her review by saying , " Robot rides on Rajinikanth ’ s shoulders and he never stoops under the burden . Aided by snazzy clothes , make @-@ up and special effects , he makes Chitti endearing . " Srinivasan , however , said that Shankar " strikes the balance between science fiction and masala quotient . " She concluded that , " Whichever way you look at it , <unk> [ sic ] is one of those rare films that give you just enough material to pull you in , and enjoy yourself . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ News18 gave a rating of three out of five stars and said , " In the end , it 's the fantastic special effects and an inspired performance from <unk> [ sic ] that keeps the film fresh . " Mayank Shekhar , writing for Hindustan Times , rated it three stars and said , " Leave aside jokes running on the Internet . This film , just a few feet too long , is fine entertainment by itself . " 
 Malini Mannath of The New Indian Express noted Enthiran for having " An engaging script , brilliant special effects , and a debonair hero who still carries his charisma effortlessly . " Karthik Subramanian of The Hindu observed that actors " tend to get lost in special effects movies . " Subramanian believed it was not the case in Enthiran : " Rajinikanth and [ Aishwarya Rai ] carry the movie on their shoulders , and considering the fact that much of the acting must have been in front of green screens , one has to say that nothing looks artificial right through . " In contrast , Gautaman Bhaskaran of Hindustan Times rated it two out of five stars , writing that " Shankar 's work slips into a loud , <unk> and exaggerated mess " . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Enthiran has received a rating of 56 % on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on nine reviews , with an average rating of 4 @.@ 8 / 10 . Lisa Tsering from The Hollywood Reporter said , " Rajinikanth is such a badass that Chuck Norris is afraid of him . " She praised the filming locations , especially the " Kilimanjaro " song sequence , but criticised the length of the film 's climax portions . Genevieve Koski from The A. V. Club believed that Enthiran was " pretty good " and concluded that " if you prefer elaborate costumes and dance music mixed in with your killer @-@ robot action , expect to enjoy up to an hour of Enthiran . " Marc Savlov of The Austin Chronicle called Enthiran " the best apocalyptic sci @-@ fi @-@ romcom @-@ melodrama @-@ dance @-@ off date movie of the year . " Roger Moore , writing for the Orlando Sentinel , gave a mixed review , evaluating it as a " melodramatic kitschy Indian musical about a robot built for national defense but who discovers his human side . " 
 Following the film 's screening at the Mumbai International Film Festival , the American film director Oliver Stone praised Enthiran 's originality . Conversely , Joe Leydon of Variety believed that Shankar " riffs on everything " from Frankenstein to The Terminator , but suggested that the film was an " overwhelming mash @-@ up of American @-@ style , f / x @-@ driven sci @-@ fi spectacle and a Bollywood musical . " Akifumi <unk> , director of the Film Business division of Nikkatsu , stated that the film was " rather unique , interesting , funny and marketable . " <unk> Fujioka , a member of the Japan @-@ based <unk> Corporation , called Enthiran " a Bollywood Transformers type of film with a lot of Indian flavours in it . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 At the 58th National Film Awards , Enthiran won for Best Special Effects and Best Production Design . It won in three categories at the 58th Filmfare Awards South for Best Cinematographer , Best Art Director and Best Costume Design . At the 5th Vijay Awards , it was nominated in fourteen categories and won in seven , including Best Villain and Favourite Hero for Rajinikanth , Favourite Film and Favourite Director . At the 17th Screen Awards , the film won awards under the Best Special Effects and Spectacular Cutting Edge Technology categories . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In a personal appreciation letter to Shankar following the film 's release , the director K. Balachander described Shankar as India 's James Cameron , Enthiran as India 's Avatar ( 2009 ) and Sun Pictures as India 's Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu said that Rajinikanth 's style and mannerisms are similar to his performances in the films Moondru Mudichu ( 1976 ) , Avargal ( 1977 ) and Moondru Mugam ( 1982 ) . Enthiran was the only Tamil film featured on the Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) list of the 50 best films of 2010 . The film was also included as a case study in a postgraduate elective course of the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad , " Contemporary Film Industry : A Business Perspective " . 
 Scenes from Enthiran , particularly one known as the " Black Sheep " scene , have been parodied in subsequent films , including Mankatha ( 2011 ) , Osthe ( 2011 ) , <unk> II ( 2013 ) , as well as in the Telugu films Dookudu ( 2011 ) and <unk> Nena ( 2011 ) . In the film , Chitti often introduces himself by stating the clock rate of his central processing unit , which is 1 terahertz ( 1012 hertz ) , and his random @-@ access memory limit , which is 1 <unk> ( 1021 bytes ) . This introduction dialogue , which is spoken by Chitti as " Hi , I 'm Chitti , speed 1 terahertz , memory 1 <unk> " became popular . Rajinikanth featured in a cameo role as Chitti in the science @-@ fiction film Ra.One ( 2011 ) . 
 On Rajinikanth 's 64th birthday , an agency named Minimal Kollywood Posters designed posters of Rajinikanth 's films , in which the Minion characters from the Despicable Me franchise are dressed as Rajinikanth . The digital art was hand drawn on a digital pad by Gautham Raj . One of the posters depicted a mutated Minion , reminiscent of Chitti 's " villain robot " look in Enthiran . In March 2015 , Kamath , in his review of the science fiction film Chappie , compared its eponymous lead character to Chitti in terms of learning human emotions . 
 = = Spiritual successor = = 
 In September 2015 , writer <unk> announced that the pre @-@ production stage of a sequel to Enthiran was " going on in full swing " and that principal photography would commence once Rajinikanth finished filming for Kabali , by the end of the year . <unk> Shah will be the cinematographer and A. R. Rahman will return as music director , while <unk> will handle the art direction . The sequel will be shot in 3D , unlike its predecessor which was shot in 2D and converted to 3D in post @-@ production . Titled 2 @.@ 0 , the film entered production in December 2015 , for a scheduled 2017 release . The film stars Rajinikanth , reprising his role as Dr. Vaseegaran and Chitti with the additional cast played by Akshay Kumar and Amy Jackson . <unk> <unk> , the sound designer for 2 @.@ 0 revealed in June 2016 that the film will not serve as a sequel , but a spiritual successor . 
 = Trinity ( nuclear test ) = 
 Trinity was the code name of the first detonation of a nuclear weapon , conducted by the United States Army on July 16 , 1945 , as part of the Manhattan Project . The test was conducted in the Jornada del Muerto desert about 35 miles ( 56 km ) southeast of Socorro , New Mexico , on what was then the USAAF Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range ( now part of White Sands Missile Range ) . The only structures originally in the vicinity were the McDonald Ranch House and its ancillary buildings , which scientists used as a laboratory for testing bomb components . A base camp was constructed , and there were 425 people present on the weekend of the test . 
 The code name " Trinity " was assigned by J. Robert Oppenheimer , the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , inspired by the poetry of John Donne . The test was of an implosion @-@ design plutonium device , informally nicknamed " The Gadget " , of the same design as the Fat Man bomb later detonated over Nagasaki , Japan , on August 9 , 1945 . The complexity of the design required a major effort from the Los Alamos Laboratory , and concerns about whether it would work led to a decision to conduct the first nuclear test . The test was planned and directed by Kenneth Bainbridge . 
 Fears of a fizzle led to the construction of a steel containment vessel called Jumbo that could contain the plutonium , allowing it to be recovered , but Jumbo was not used . A rehearsal was held on May 7 , 1945 , in which 108 long tons ( 110 t ) of high explosive spiked with radioactive isotopes were detonated . The Gadget 's detonation released the explosive energy of about 22 kilotons of TNT ( 92 TJ ) . Observers included Vannevar Bush , James Chadwick , James Conant , Thomas Farrell , Enrico Fermi , Richard Feynman , Leslie Groves , Robert Oppenheimer , Geoffrey Taylor , and Richard Tolman . 
 The test site was declared a National Historic Landmark district in 1965 , and listed on the National Register of Historic Places the following year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The creation of nuclear weapons arose from scientific and political developments of the 1930s . The decade saw many new discoveries about the nature of atoms , including the existence of nuclear fission . The concurrent rise of fascist governments in Europe led to a fear of a German nuclear weapon project , especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries . When their calculations showed that nuclear weapons were theoretically feasible , the British and United States governments supported an all @-@ out effort to build them . 
 These efforts were transferred to the authority of the U.S. Army in June 1942 , and became the Manhattan Project . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , was appointed its director in September 1942 . The weapons development portion of this project was located at the Los Alamos Laboratory in northern New Mexico , under the directorship of physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer . The University of Chicago , Columbia University and the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California , Berkeley conducted other development work . 
 Production of the fissile isotopes uranium @-@ 235 and plutonium @-@ 239 were enormous undertakings given the technology of the 1940s , and accounted for 80 % of the total costs of the project . Uranium enrichment was carried out at the Clinton Engineer Works near Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Theoretically , enriching uranium was feasible through pre @-@ existing techniques , but it proved difficult to scale to industrial levels and was extremely costly . Only 0 @.@ 71 percent of natural uranium was uranium @-@ 235 , and it was estimated that it would take 27 @,@ 000 years to produce a gram of uranium with mass spectrometers , but kilogram amounts were required . 
 Plutonium is a synthetic element with complicated physical , chemical and metallurgical properties . It is not found in nature in appreciable quantities . Until mid @-@ 1944 , the only plutonium that had been isolated had been produced in cyclotrons in microgram amounts , whereas weapons required kilograms . In April 1944 , physicist Emilio Segrè , the head of the Los Alamos Laboratory 's P @-@ 5 ( Radioactivity ) Group , received the first sample of reactor @-@ bred plutonium from the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge . He discovered that , in addition to the plutonium @-@ 239 isotope , it also contained significant amounts of plutonium @-@ 240 . The Manhattan Project produced plutonium in nuclear reactors at the Hanford Engineer Works near Hanford , Washington . 
