 The longer the plutonium remained irradiated inside a reactor — necessary for high yields of the metal — the greater the content of the plutonium @-@ 240 isotope , which undergoes spontaneous fission at thousands of times the rate of plutonium @-@ 239 . The extra neutrons it released meant that there was an unacceptably high probability that plutonium in a gun @-@ type fission weapon would detonate too soon after a critical mass was formed , producing a " fizzle " — a nuclear explosion many times smaller than a full explosion . This meant that the Thin Man bomb design that the laboratory had developed would not work properly . 
 The Laboratory turned to an alternative , albeit more technically difficult , design , an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . In September 1943 , mathematician John von Neumann had proposed a design in which a fissile core would be surrounded by two different high explosives that produced shock waves of different speeds . Alternating the <unk> and slower @-@ burning explosives in a carefully calculated configuration would produce a compressive wave upon their simultaneous detonation . This so @-@ called " explosive lens " focused the shock waves inward with enough force to rapidly compress the plutonium core to several times its original density . This reduced the size of a critical mass , making it supercritical . It also activated a small neutron source at the center of the core , which assured that the chain reaction began in earnest at the right moment . Such a complicated process required research and experimentation in engineering and hydrodynamics before a practical design could be developed . The entire Los Alamos Laboratory was reorganized in August 1944 to focus on design of a workable implosion bomb . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 The idea of testing the implosion device was brought up in discussions at Los Alamos in January 1944 , and attracted enough support for Oppenheimer to approach Groves . Groves gave approval , but he had concerns . The Manhattan Project had spent a great deal of money and effort to produce the plutonium and he wanted to know if there would be a way to recover it . The Laboratory 's Governing Board then directed Norman Ramsey to investigate how this could be done . Ramsey reported back in February 1944 , proposing a small @-@ scale test in which the explosion was limited in size by reducing the number of generations of chain reactions , and that it take place inside a sealed containment vessel from which the plutonium could be recovered . 
 The means of generating such a controlled reaction were uncertain , and the data obtained would not be as useful as that from a full @-@ scale explosion . Oppenheimer argued that the " implosion gadget must be tested in a range where the energy release is comparable with that contemplated for final use . " In March 1944 , he obtained Groves 's tentative approval for testing a full @-@ scale explosion inside a containment vessel , although Groves was still worried about how he would explain the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium to a Senate Committee in the event of a failure . 
 = = = Code name = = = 
 The exact origin of the code name " Trinity " for the test is unknown , but it is often attributed to Oppenheimer as a reference to the poetry of John Donne , which in turn references the Christian notion of the Trinity ( three @-@ fold nature of God ) . In 1962 , Groves wrote to Oppenheimer about the origin of the name , asking if he had chosen it because it was a name common to rivers and peaks in the West and would not attract attention , and elicited this reply : 
 I did suggest it , but not on that ground ... Why I chose the name is not clear , but I know what thoughts were in my mind . There is a poem of John Donne , written just before his death , which I know and love . From it a quotation : 
 As West and East 
 In all <unk> Maps — and I am one — are one , 
 So death doth touch the Resurrection . 
 That still does not make a Trinity , but in another , better known devotional poem Donne opens , 
 Batter my heart , three person 'd God . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 In March 1944 , planning for the test was assigned to Kenneth Bainbridge , a professor of physics at Harvard University , working under explosives expert George Kistiakowsky . Bainbridge 's group was known as the E @-@ 9 ( Explosives Development ) Group . Stanley Kershaw , formerly from the National Safety Council , was made responsible for safety . Captain Samuel P. Davalos , the assistant post engineer at Los Alamos , was placed in charge of construction . First Lieutenant Harold C. Bush became commander of the Base Camp at Trinity . Scientists William Penney , Victor Weisskopf and Philip Moon were consultants . Eventually seven subgroups were formed : 
 TR @-@ 1 ( Services ) under John H. Williams 
 TR @-@ 2 ( Shock and Blast ) under John H. Manley 
 TR @-@ 3 ( Measurements ) under Robert R. Wilson 
 TR @-@ 4 ( Meteorology ) under J. M. Hubbard 
 TR @-@ 5 ( Spectrographic and Photographic ) under Julian E. Mack 
 TR @-@ 6 ( Airborne Measurements ) under Bernard Waldman 
 TR @-@ 7 ( Medical ) under Louis H. Hempelmann 
 The E @-@ 9 group was renamed the X @-@ 2 ( Development , Engineering and Tests ) Group in the August 1944 reorganization . 
 = = = Test site = = = 
 Safety and security required a remote , isolated and unpopulated area . The scientists also wanted a flat area to minimize secondary effects of the blast , and with little wind to spread radioactive fallout . Eight candidate sites were considered : the Tularosa Valley ; the Jornada del Muerto Valley ; the area southwest of Cuba , New Mexico , and north of Thoreau ; and the lava flats of the El <unk> National Monument , all in New Mexico ; the San Luis Valley near the Great Sand Dunes National Monument in Colorado ; the Desert Training Area and San Nicolas Island in Southern California ; and the sand bars of Padre Island , Texas . 
 The sites were surveyed by car and by air by Bainbridge , R. W. Henderson , Major W. A. Stevens and Major Peer de Silva . The site finally chosen , after consulting with Major General Uzal Ent , the commander of the Second Air Force on September 7 , 1944 , lay at the northern end of the Alamogordo Bombing Range , in Socorro County between the towns of Carrizozo and San Antonio , in the Jornada del Muerto ( 33 @.@ 6773 ° N 106 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 33 @.@ 6773 ; <unk> ) . 
 The only structures in the vicinity were the McDonald Ranch House and its ancillary buildings , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the southeast . Like the rest of the Alamogordo Bombing Range , it had been acquired by the government in 1942 . The patented land had been condemned and grazing rights suspended . Scientists used this as a laboratory for testing bomb components . Bainbridge and Davalos drew up plans for a base camp with accommodation and facilities for 160 personnel , along with the technical infrastructure to support the test . A construction firm from Lubbock , Texas built the barracks , officers ' quarters , mess hall and other basic facilities . The requirements expanded and , by July 1945 , 250 people worked at the Trinity test site . On the weekend of the test , there were 425 present . 
 Lieutenant Bush 's twelve @-@ man military police unit arrived at the site from Los Alamos on December 30 , 1944 . This unit established initial security checkpoints and horse patrols . The distances around the site proved too great for the horses , so they resorted to using jeeps and trucks for transportation . The horses were used for playing polo . Maintenance of morale among men working long hours under harsh conditions along with dangerous reptiles and insects was a challenge . Bush strove to improve the food and accommodation , and to provide organized games and nightly movies . 
 Throughout 1945 , other personnel arrived at the Trinity Site to help prepare for the bomb test . They tried to use water out of the ranch wells , but found the water so alkaline they could not drink it . They were forced to use U.S. Navy saltwater soap and hauled drinking water in from the firehouse in Socorro . Gasoline and diesel were purchased from the Standard Oil plant there . Military and civilian construction personnel built warehouses , workshops , a magazine and commissary . The railroad siding at Pope , New Mexico , was upgraded by adding an unloading platform . Roads were built , and 200 miles ( 320 km ) of telephone wire was strung . Electricity was supplied by portable generators . 
 Due to its proximity to the bombing range , the base camp was accidentally bombed twice in May . When the lead plane on a practice night raid accidentally knocked out the generator or otherwise doused the lights illuminating their target , they went in search of the lights , and since they had not been informed of the presence of the Trinity base camp , and it was lit , bombed it instead . The accidental bombing damaged the stables and the carpentry shop , and a small fire resulted . 
 = = = Jumbo = = = 
 Responsibility for the design of a containment vessel for an unsuccessful explosion , known as " Jumbo " , was assigned to Robert W. Henderson and Roy W. Carlson of the Los Alamos Laboratory 's X @-@ 2A Section . The bomb would be placed into the heart of Jumbo , and if the bomb 's detonation was unsuccessful , the outer walls of Jumbo would not be breached , making it possible to recover the bomb 's plutonium . Hans Bethe , Victor Weisskopf , and Joseph O. Hirschfelder , made the initial calculations , followed by a more detailed analysis by Henderson and Carlson . They drew up specifications for a steel sphere 13 to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) in diameter , weighing 150 long tons ( 150 t ) and capable of handling a pressure of 50 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch ( 340 @,@ 000 kPa ) . After consulting with the steel companies and the railroads , Carlson produced a scaled @-@ back cylindrical design that would be much easier to manufacture , but still difficult to transport . Carlson identified a company that normally made boilers for the Navy , Babcock & Wilcox , had made something similar and were willing to attempt its manufacture . 
 As delivered in May 1945 , Jumbo was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter and 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) long with walls 14 inches ( 360 mm ) thick , and weighed 214 long tons ( 217 t ) . A special train brought it from Barberton , Ohio , to the siding at Pope , where it was loaded on a large trailer and towed 25 miles ( 40 km ) across the desert by tractors . At the time , it was the heaviest item ever shipped by rail . 
 For many of the Los Alamos scientists , Jumbo was " the physical manifestation of the lowest point in the Laboratory 's hopes for the success of an implosion bomb . " By the time it arrived , the reactors at Hanford produced plutonium in quantity , and Oppenheimer was confident that there would be enough for a second test . The use of Jumbo would interfere with the gathering of data on the explosion , the primary objective of the test . An explosion of more than 500 tons of TNT ( 2 @,@ 100 GJ ) would vaporize the steel and make it hard to measure the thermal effects . Even 100 tons of TNT ( 420 GJ ) would send fragments flying , presenting a hazard to personnel and measuring equipment . It was therefore decided not to use it . Instead , it was hoisted up a steel tower 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the explosion , where it could be used for a subsequent test . In the end , Jumbo survived the explosion , although its tower did not . 
 The development team also considered other methods of recovering active material in the event of a dud explosion . One idea was to cover it with a cone of sand . Another was to suspend the bomb in a tank of water . As with Jumbo , it was decided not to proceed with these means of containment either . The CM @-@ 10 ( Chemistry and Metallurgy ) group at Los Alamos also studied how the active material could be chemically recovered after a contained or failed explosion . 
 = = = 100 @-@ ton test = = = 
 Because there would be only one chance to carry out the test correctly , Bainbridge decided that a rehearsal be carried out to allow the plans and procedures to be verified , and the instrumentation to be tested and calibrated . Oppenheimer was initially skeptical , but gave permission , and later agreed that it contributed to the success of the Trinity test . 
 A 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high wooden platform was constructed 800 yards ( 730 m ) to the south @-@ east of Trinity ground zero ( 33 @.@ 67123 ° N 106 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 33 @.@ 67123 ; <unk> ) and 108 long tons ( 110 t ) of TNT were stacked on top of it . Kistiakowsky assured Bainbridge that the explosives used were not susceptible to shock . This was proven correct when some boxes fell off the elevator lifting them up to the platform . Flexible tubing was threaded through the pile of boxes of explosives . A radioactive slug from Hanford with 1 @,@ 000 curies ( 37 TBq ) of beta ray activity and 400 curies ( 15 TBq ) of gamma ray activity was dissolved , and Hempelmann poured it into the tubing . 
 The test was scheduled for May 5 , but was postponed for two days to allow for more equipment to be installed . Requests for further postponements had to be refused because they would have impacted the schedule for the main test . The detonation time was set for 04 : 00 Mountain Daylight Time , also known as Mountain War time , on May 7 , but there was a 37 @-@ minute delay to allow the observation plane , a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress from the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit flown by Major Clyde " Stan " Shields , to get into position . 
 The fireball of the conventional explosion was visible from Alamogordo Army Air Field 60 miles ( 97 km ) away , but there was little shock at the base camp 10 miles ( 16 km ) away . Shields thought that the explosion looked " beautiful " , but it was hardly felt at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . Herbert L. Anderson practiced using a converted M4 Sherman tank lined with lead to approach the 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep and 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide blast crater and take a sample of dirt , although the radioactivity was low enough to allow several hours of unprotected exposure . An electrical signal of unknown origin caused the explosion to go off 0 @.@ 25 seconds early , ruining experiments that required split @-@ second timing . The piezoelectric gauges developed by Anderson 's team correctly indicated an explosion of 108 tons of TNT ( 450 GJ ) , but Luis Alvarez and Waldman 's airborne condenser gauges were far less accurate . 
 In addition to uncovering scientific and technological issues , the rehearsal test revealed practical concerns as well . Over 100 vehicles were used for the rehearsal test but it was realized more would be required for the main test , and they would need better roads and repair facilities . More radios were required , and more telephone lines , as the telephone system had become overloaded . Lines needed to be buried to prevent damage by vehicles . A teletype was installed to allow better communication with Los Alamos . A town hall was built to allow for large conferences and briefings , and the mess hall had to be upgraded . Because dust thrown up by vehicles interfered with some of the instrumentation , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) of road was sealed at a cost of $ 5 @,@ 000 a mile . 
 = = = The Gadget = = = 
 The term " Gadget " was a laboratory euphemism for a bomb , from which the laboratory 's weapon physics division , " G Division " , took its name in August 1944 . At that time it did not refer specifically to the Trinity Test device as it had yet to be developed , but once it was , it became the laboratory code name . The Trinity Gadget was officially a Y @-@ 1561 device , as was the Fat Man used a few weeks later in the bombing of Nagasaki . The two were very similar , with only minor differences , the most obvious being the absence of fuzing and the external ballistic casing . The bombs were still under development , and small changes continued to be made to the Fat Man design . 
 To keep the design as simple as possible , a near solid spherical core was chosen rather than a hollow one , although calculations showed that a hollow core would be more efficient in its use of plutonium . The hollow core design was initially pursued , but it was found difficult to produce the more stringent hollow pit implosion requirements that would be necessary . The core 's sub @-@ critical mass was instead manufactured into a geometry that closely resembled a near perfect solid sphere , which could then be compressed to prompt super @-@ criticality by a less technically demanding implosion , generated by the high explosive lens . This design became known as a " Christy Core " or " Christy pit " after physicist Robert F. Christy , who made the solid pit design a reality after it was initially proposed by Edward Teller . Along with the pit , the whole physics package was also informally nicknamed " Christy [ ' s ] Gadget " . 
 Of the several allotropes of plutonium , the metallurgists preferred the malleable δ phase . This was stabilized at room temperature by alloying it with gallium . Two equal hemispheres of plutonium @-@ gallium alloy were plated with silver , and designated by serial numbers HS @-@ 1 and HS @-@ 2 . The 6 @.@ 19 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) radioactive core generated 15 W of heat , which warmed it up to about 100 to 110 ° F ( 38 to 43 ° C ) , and the silver plating developed blisters that had to be filed down and covered with gold foil ; later cores were plated with nickel instead . The Trinity core consisted of just these two hemispheres . Later cores also included a ring with a triangular cross @-@ section to prevent jets forming in the gap between them . 
 A trial assembly of the Gadget without the active components or explosive lenses was carried out by the bomb assembly team headed by Norris Bradbury at Los Alamos on July 3 . It was driven to Trinity and back . A set of explosive lenses arrived on July 7 , followed by a second set on July 10 . Each was examined by Bradbury and Kistiakowsky , and the best ones were selected for use . The remainder were handed over to Edward Creutz , who conducted a test detonation at Pajarito Canyon near Los Alamos without nuclear material . This test brought bad news : magnetic measurements of the simultaneity of the implosion seemed to indicate that the Trinity test would fail . Bethe worked through the night to assess the results , and reported that they were consistent with a perfect explosion . 
 Assembly of the nuclear capsule began on July 13 at the McDonald Ranch House , where the master bedroom had been turned into a clean room . The polonium @-@ beryllium " Urchin " initiator was assembled , and Louis Slotin placed it inside the two hemispheres of the plutonium core . Cyril Smith then placed the core in the uranium tamper plug , or " slug . " Air gaps were filled with 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mil ( 0 @.@ 013 mm ) gold foil , and the two halves of the plug were held together with uranium washers and screws which fit smoothly into the domed ends of the plug . The completed capsule was then driven to the base of the tower . 
 At the tower a temporary eyebolt was screwed into the 105 @-@ pound ( 48 kg ) capsule , and a chain hoist was used to lower the capsule into the gadget . As the capsule entered the hole in the uranium tamper , it stuck . Robert Bacher realized that the heat from the plutonium core had caused the capsule to expand , while the explosives assembly with the tamper had cooled during the night in the desert . By leaving the capsule in contact with the tamper , the temperatures equalized and in a few minutes the capsule had slipped completely into the tamper . The eyebolt was then removed from the capsule and replaced with a threaded uranium plug , a boron disk was placed on top of the capsule , an aluminum plug was screwed into the hole in the pusher , and the two remaining high explosive lenses were installed . Finally , the upper Dural polar cap was bolted into place . Assembly was completed at about 16 : 45 on July 13 . 
 The Gadget was hoisted to the top of a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) steel tower . The height would give a better indication of how the weapon would behave when dropped from a bomber , as detonation in the air would maximize the amount of energy applied directly to the target ( as the explosion expanded in a spherical shape ) and would generate less nuclear fallout . The tower stood on four legs that went 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) into the ground , with concrete footings . Atop it was an oak platform , and a shack made of corrugated iron that was open on the western side . The Gadget was hauled up with an electric winch . A truckload of mattresses was placed underneath in case the cable broke and the Gadget fell . The seven man arming party , consisting of Bainbridge , Kistiakowsky , Joseph McKibben and four soldiers including Lieutenant Bush , drove out to the tower to perform the final arming shortly after 22 : 00 on July 15 . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 In the final two weeks before the test , some 250 personnel from Los Alamos were at work at the Trinity site , and Lieutenant Bush 's command had ballooned to 125 men guarding and maintaining the base camp . Another 160 men under Major T.O. Palmer were stationed outside the area with vehicles to evacuate the civilian population in the surrounding region should that prove necessary . They had enough vehicles to move 450 people to safety , and had food and supplies to last them for two days . Arrangements were made for Alamogordo Army Air Field to provide accommodation . Groves had warned the Governor of New Mexico , John J. Dempsey , that martial law might have to be declared in the southwestern part of the state . 
 Shelters were established 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) due north , west and south of the tower , known as N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 , W @-@ 10 @,@ 000 and S @-@ 10 @,@ 000 . Each had its own shelter chief : Robert Wilson at N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 , John Manley at W @-@ 10 @,@ 000 and Frank Oppenheimer at S @-@ 10 @,@ 000 . Many other observers were around 20 miles ( 32 km ) away , and some others were scattered at different distances , some in more informal situations . Richard Feynman claimed to be the only person to see the explosion without the goggles provided , relying on a truck windshield to screen out harmful ultraviolet wavelengths . 
 Bainbridge asked Groves to keep his VIP list down to just ten . He chose himself , Oppenheimer , Richard Tolman , Vannevar Bush , James Conant , Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , Charles Lauritsen , Isidor Isaac Rabi , Sir Geoffrey Taylor and Sir James Chadwick . The VIPs viewed the test from Compania Hill , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) northwest of the tower . The observers set up a betting pool on the results of the test . Edward Teller was the most optimistic , predicting 45 kilotons of TNT ( 190 TJ ) . He wore gloves to protect his hands , and sunglasses underneath the welding goggles that the government had supplied everyone with . Teller was also one of the few scientists to actually watch the test ( with eye protection ) , instead of following orders to lie on the ground with his back turned . He also brought suntan lotion , which he shared with the others . 
 Others were less optimistic . Ramsey chose zero ( a complete dud ) , Robert Oppenheimer chose 300 tons of TNT ( 1 @,@ 300 GJ ) ) , Kistiakowsky 1 @,@ 400 tons of TNT ( 5 @,@ 900 GJ ) , and Bethe chose 8 @,@ 000 tons of TNT ( 33 @,@ 000 GJ ) . Rabi , the last to arrive , won the pool with a prediction of 18 @,@ 000 tons of TNT ( 75 @,@ 000 GJ ) . Bethe 's choice of 8 kt was exactly the value calculated by Segrè , with Bethe stating that he was swayed by Segrè 's authority over that of a more junior member of Segrè 's group who had calculated 20 kt . Enrico Fermi offered to take wagers among the top physicists and military present on whether the atmosphere would ignite , and if so whether it would destroy just the state , or incinerate the entire planet . This last result had been previously calculated by Bethe to be almost impossible , although for a while it had caused some of the scientists some anxiety . Bainbridge was furious with Fermi for scaring the guards who , unlike the physicists , did not have the advantage of their knowledge about the scientific possibilities . His own biggest fear was that nothing would happen , in which case he would have to head back to the tower to investigate . 
 Julian Mack and Berlyn <unk> were responsible for photography . The photography group employed some fifty different cameras , taking motion and still photographs . Special Fastax cameras taking 10 @,@ 000 frames per second would record the minute details of the explosion . Spectrograph cameras would record the wavelengths of light emitted by the explosion , and pinhole cameras would record gamma rays . A rotating drum spectrograph at the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) station would obtain the spectrum over the first hundredth of a second . Another , slow recording one would track the fireball . Cameras were placed in bunkers only 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the tower , protected by steel and lead glass , and mounted on sleds so they could be towed out by the lead @-@ lined tank . Some observers brought their own cameras despite the security . <unk> brought in Jack <unk> 's 35 mm <unk> 44 . It would take the only known well @-@ exposed color photograph of the detonation explosion . 
 = = Explosion = = 
 = = = Detonation = = = 
 The scientists wanted good visibility , low humidity , light winds at low altitude and westerly winds at high altitude for the test . The best weather was predicted between July 18 and 21 , but the Potsdam Conference was due to start on July 16 and President Harry S. Truman wanted the test to be conducted before the conference began . It was therefore scheduled for July 16 , the earliest date at which the bomb components would be available . 
 The detonation was initially planned for 04 : 00 MWT but was postponed because of rain and lightning from early that morning . It was feared that the danger from radiation and fallout would be increased by rain , and lightning had the scientists concerned about a premature detonation . A crucial favorable weather report came in at 04 : 45 , and the final twenty @-@ minute countdown began at 05 : 10 , read by Samuel Allison . By 05 : 30 the rain had gone . There were some communication problems . The shortwave radio frequency for communicating with the B @-@ 29s was shared with the Voice of America , and the FM radios shared a frequency with a railroad freight yard in San Antonio , Texas . 
 Two circling B @-@ 29s observed the test , with Shields again flying the lead plane . They carried members of Project Alberta , who would carry out airborne measurements during the atomic missions . These included Captain Deak Parsons , the Associate Director of the Los Alamos Laboratory and the head of Project Alberta ; Luis Alvarez , Harold Agnew , Bernard Waldman , Wolfgang Panofsky and William Penney . The overcast obscured their view of the test site . 
 At 05 : 29 : 21 MWT ( ± 2 seconds ) , the device exploded with an energy equivalent to around 20 kilotons of TNT ( 84 TJ ) . The desert sand , largely made of silica , melted and became a mildly radioactive light green glass , which was named trinitite . It left a crater in the desert 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide . At the time of detonation , the surrounding mountains were illuminated " brighter than daytime " for one to two seconds , and the heat was reported as " being as hot as an oven " at the base camp . The observed colors of the illumination changed from purple to green and eventually to white . The roar of the shock wave took 40 seconds to reach the observers . It was felt over 100 miles ( 160 km ) away , and the mushroom cloud reached 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) in height . 
 Ralph Carlisle Smith , watching from Compania Hill , wrote : 
 I was staring straight ahead with my open left eye covered by a welder 's glass and my right eye remaining open and uncovered . Suddenly , my right eye was blinded by a light which appeared instantaneously all about without any build up of intensity . My left eye could see the ball of fire start up like a tremendous bubble or nob @-@ like mushroom . I dropped the glass from my left eye almost immediately and watched the light climb upward . The light intensity fell rapidly hence did not blind my left eye but it was still amazingly bright . It turned yellow , then red , and then beautiful purple . At first it had a translucent character but shortly turned to a tinted or colored white smoke appearance . The ball of fire seemed to rise in something of toadstool effect . Later the column proceeded as a cylinder of white smoke ; it seemed to move ponderously . A hole was punched through the clouds but two fog rings appeared well above the white smoke column . There was a spontaneous cheer from the observers . Dr. von Neumann said " that was at least 5 @,@ 000 tons and probably a lot more . " 
 In his official report on the test , Farrell wrote : 
 The lighting effects <unk> description . The whole country was lighted by a searing light with the intensity many times that of the midday sun . It was golden , purple , violet , gray , and blue . It lighted every peak , crevasse and ridge of the nearby mountain range with a clarity and beauty that cannot be described but must be seen to be imagined ... 
 William L. Laurence of The New York Times had been transferred temporarily to the Manhattan Project at Groves 's request in early 1945 . Groves had arranged for Laurence to view significant events , including Trinity and the atomic bombing of Japan . Laurence wrote press releases with the help of the Manhattan Project 's public relations staff . He later recalled that 
 A loud cry filled the air . The little groups that hitherto had stood rooted to the earth like desert plants broke into dance , the rhythm of primitive man dancing at one of his fire festivals at the coming of Spring . 
 After the initial euphoria of witnessing the explosion had passed , Bainbridge told Oppenheimer , " Now we are all sons of bitches . " Rabi noticed Oppenheimer 's reaction : " I 'll never forget his walk ; " Rabi recalled , " I 'll never forget the way he stepped out of the car ... his walk was like High Noon ... this kind of strut . He had done it . " 
 Oppenheimer later recalled that , while witnessing the explosion , he thought of a verse from the Hindu holy book , the Bhagavad Gita ( XI , 12 ) : 
 <unk> ् मि <unk> ् <unk> ् प ् <unk> ् <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> प ् <unk> ् <unk> । <unk> त ् <unk> न <unk> ् <unk> ् ति सर ् <unk> <unk> ् <unk> प ् <unk> ् <unk> <unk> ॥ <unk> <unk> ॥ 
 If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky , that would be like the splendor of the mighty one ... 
 Years later he would explain that another verse had also entered his head at that time : 
 We knew the world would not be the same . A few people laughed , a few people cried . Most people were silent . I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture , the Bhagavad Gita ; Vishnu is trying to persuade the Prince that he should do his duty and , to impress him , takes on his multi @-@ armed form and says , ' Now I am become Death , the destroyer of worlds . ' I suppose we all thought that , one way or another . 
 John R. Lugo was flying a U.S. Navy transport at 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , 30 miles ( 48 km ) east of Albuquerque , en route to the west coast . " My first impression was , like , the sun was coming up in the south . What a ball of fire ! It was so bright it lit up the cockpit of the plane . " Lugo radioed Albuquerque . He got no explanation for the blast but was told , " Don 't fly south . " 
 = = = Energy measurements = = = 
 The T ( Theoretical ) Division at Los Alamos had predicted a yield of between 5 and 10 kilotons of TNT ( 21 and 42 TJ ) . Immediately after the blast , the two lead @-@ lined Sherman tanks made their way to the crater . <unk> analysis of soil samples that they collected indicated that the total yield ( or energy release ) had been around 18 @.@ 6 kilotons of TNT ( 78 TJ ) . 
 Fifty beryllium @-@ copper diaphragm microphones were also used to record the pressure of the blast wave . These were supplemented by mechanical pressure gauges . These indicated a blast energy of 9 @.@ 9 kilotons of TNT ( 41 TJ ) ± 0 @.@ 1 kilotons of TNT ( 0 @.@ 42 TJ ) , with only one of the mechanical pressure gauges working correctly that indicated 10 kilotons of TNT ( 42 TJ ) . 
 Fermi prepared his own experiment to measure the energy that was released as blast . He later recalled that : 
 About 40 seconds after the explosion the air blast reached me . I tried to estimate its strength by dropping from about six feet small pieces of paper before , during , and after the passage of the blast wave . Since , at the time , there was no wind I could observe very distinctly and actually measure the displacement of the pieces of paper that were in the process of falling while the blast was passing . The shift was about 2 1 / 2 meters , which , at the time , I estimated to correspond to the blast that would be produced by ten thousand tons of T.N.T. 
 There were also several gamma ray and neutron detectors , although few survived the blast , with all the gauges within 200 feet ( 61 m ) of ground zero being destroyed , however sufficient data were recovered to measure the gamma ray component of the ionizing radiation released . 
 The official estimate for the total yield of the Trinity gadget , which includes the energy of the blast component together with the contributions from the explosion 's light output and both forms of ionizing radiation , is 21 kilotons of TNT ( 88 TJ ) , of which about 15 kilotons of TNT ( 63 TJ ) was contributed by fission of the plutonium core , and about 6 kilotons of TNT ( 25 TJ ) was from fission of the natural uranium tamper . However , a re @-@ analysis of data published in 2016 put the yield at 22 @.@ 1 kilotons of TNT ( 92 TJ ) , with a margin of error estimated at 2 @.@ 7 kilotons of TNT ( 11 TJ ) . 
 As a result of the data gathered on the size of the blast , the detonation height for the bombing of Hiroshima was set at 1 @,@ 885 feet ( 575 m ) to take advantage of the mach stem blast reinforcing effect . The final Nagasaki burst height was 1 @,@ 650 feet ( 500 m ) so the Mach stem started sooner . The knowledge that implosion worked led Oppenheimer to recommend to Groves that the uranium @-@ 235 used in a Little Boy gun @-@ type weapon could be used more economically in a composite core with plutonium . It was too late to do this with the first Little Boy , but the composite cores would soon enter production . 
 = = = Civilian detection = = = 
 Civilians noticed the bright lights and huge explosion . Groves therefore had the Second Air Force issue a press release with a cover story that he had prepared weeks before : 
 Alamogordo , N.M. , July 16 
 The commanding officer of the Alamogordo Army Air Base made the following statement today : " Several inquiries have been received concerning a heavy explosion which occurred on the Alamogordo Air base reservation this morning . A remotely located ammunition magazine containing a considerable amount of high explosives and pyrotechnics exploded . There was no loss of life or injury to anyone , and the property damage outside of the explosives magazine was negligible . Weather conditions affecting the content of gas shells exploded by the blast may make it desirable for the Army to evacuate temporarily a few civilians from their homes . " 
 The press release was written by Laurence . He had prepared four releases , covering outcomes ranging from an account of a successful test ( the one which was used ) to catastrophic scenarios involving serious damage to surrounding communities , evacuation of nearby residents , and a placeholder for the names of those killed . As Laurence was a witness to the test he knew that the last release , if used , might be his own obituary . A newspaper article published the same day stated that " the blast was seen and felt throughout an area extending from El Paso to Silver City , Gallup , Socorro , and Albuquerque . " An Associated Press article quoted a blind woman 150 miles ( 240 km ) away who asked " What 's that brilliant light ? " These articles appeared in New Mexico , but East Coast newspapers ignored them . 
 Information about the Trinity test was made public shortly after the bombing of Hiroshima . The Smyth Report , released on August 12 , 1945 , gave some information on the blast , and the edition released by Princeton University Press a few weeks later incorporated the War Department 's press release on the test as Appendix 6 , and contained the famous pictures of a " bulbous " Trinity fireball . Groves , Oppenheimer and other dignitaries visited the test site in September 1945 , wearing white canvas overshoes to prevent fallout from sticking to the soles of their shoes . 
 = = = Official notifications = = = 
 The results of the test were conveyed to the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson at the Potsdam Conference in Germany in a coded message from his assistant George L. Harrison : 
 Operated on this morning . Diagnosis not yet complete but results seem satisfactory and already exceed expectations . Local press release necessary as interest extends great distance . Dr. Groves pleased . He returns tomorrow . I will keep you posted . 
 The message arrived at the " Little White House " in the Potsdam suburb of Babelsberg and was at once taken to Truman and Secretary of State James F. Byrnes . Harrison sent a follow @-@ up message which arrived on the morning of July 18 : 
 Doctor has just returned most enthusiastic and confident that the little boy is as husky as his big brother . The light in his eyes discernible from here to High Hold and I could have heard his screams from here to my farm . 
 Because Stimson 's summer home at High Hold was on Long Island and Harrison 's farm near Upperville , Virginia , this indicated that the explosion could be seen 200 miles ( 320 km ) away and heard 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . 
 = = = Fallout = = = 
 Film badges used to measure exposure to radioactivity indicated that no observers at N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 had been exposed to more than 0 @.@ 1 roentgens , but the shelter was evacuated before the radioactive cloud could reach it . The explosion was more efficient than expected and the thermal updraft drew most of the cloud high enough that little fallout fell on the test site . The crater was far more radioactive than expected due to the formation of trinitite , and the crews of the two lead @-@ lined Sherman tanks were subjected to considerable exposure . Anderson 's dosimeter and film badge recorded 7 to 10 roentgens , and one of the tank drivers , who made three trips , recorded 13 to 15 roentgens . 
 The heaviest fallout contamination outside the restricted test area was 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the detonation point , on <unk> Mesa . The fallout there was reported to have settled in a white mist onto some of the livestock in the area , resulting in local beta burns and a temporary loss of dorsal or back hair . Patches of hair grew back discolored white . The Army bought 75 cattle in all from ranchers ; the 17 most significantly marked were kept at Los Alamos , while the rest were shipped to Oak Ridge for long @-@ term observation . 
 Unlike the 100 or so atmospheric nuclear explosions later conducted at the Nevada Test Site , fallout doses to the local inhabitants have not been reconstructed for the Trinity event , due primarily to scarcity of data . In 2014 , a National Cancer Institute study commenced that will attempt to close this gap in the literature and complete a Trinity radiation dose reconstruction for the population of the state of New Mexico . 
 In August 1945 , shortly after the bombing of Hiroshima , the Kodak Company observed spotting and fogging on their film , which was at that time usually packaged in cardboard containers . Dr. J. H. Webb , a Kodak employee , studied the matter and concluded that the contamination must have come from a nuclear explosion somewhere in the United States . He discounted the possibility that the Hiroshima bomb was responsible due to the timing of the events . A hot spot of fallout contaminated the river water that the paper mill in Indiana used to manufacture the cardboard pulp from corn husks . Aware of the gravity of his discovery , Dr. Webb kept this secret until 1949 . 
 This incident along with the next continental US tests in 1951 set a precedent . In subsequent atmospheric nuclear tests at the Nevada test site , United States Atomic Energy Commission officials gave the photographic industry maps and forecasts of potential contamination , as well as expected fallout distributions , which enabled them to purchase uncontaminated materials and take other protective measures . 
 = = Site today = = 
 In September 1953 , about 650 people attended the first Trinity Site open house . Visitors to a Trinity Site open house are allowed to see the ground zero and McDonald Ranch House areas . More than seventy years after the test , residual radiation at the site is about ten times higher than normal background radiation in the area . The amount of radioactive exposure received during a one @-@ hour visit to the site is about half of the total radiation exposure which a U.S. adult receives on an average day from natural and medical sources . 
 On December 21 , 1965 , the 51 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 20 @,@ 800 ha ) Trinity Site was declared a National Historic Landmark district , and on October 15 , 1966 , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The landmark includes the base camp , where the scientists and support group lived ; ground zero , where the bomb was placed for the explosion ; and the McDonald ranch house , where the plutonium core to the bomb was assembled . One of the old instrumentation bunkers is visible beside the road just west of ground zero . An inner oblong fence was added in 1967 , and the corridor barbed wire fence that connects the outer fence to the inner one was completed in 1972 . Jumbo was moved to the parking lot in 1979 ; it is missing its ends from an attempt to destroy it in 1946 using eight 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs . The Trinity monument , a rough @-@ sided , lava @-@ rock obelisk about 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high , marks the explosion 's hypocenter . It was erected in 1965 by Army personnel from the White Sands Missile Range using local rocks taken from the western boundary of the range . A simple metal plaque read : " Trinity Site Where the World 's First Nuclear Device Was Exploded on July 16 , 1945 . " A second memorial plaque on the obelisk was prepared by the Army and the National Park Service , and was unveiled on the 30th anniversary of the test in 1975 . 
 A special tour of the site was conducted on July 16 , 1995 , to mark the 50th anniversary of the Trinity test . About 5 @,@ 000 visitors arrived to commemorate the occasion , the largest crowd for any open house . Since then , the open houses have usually averaged two to three thousand visitors . The site is still a popular destination for those interested in atomic tourism , though it is only open to the public twice a year during the Trinity Site Open House on the first Saturdays of April and October . In 2014 , the White Sands Missile Range announced that due to budgetary constraints , the site would only be open once a year , on the first Saturday in April . In 2015 , this decision was reversed , and two events were scheduled , in April and October . The base commander , Brigadier General Timothy R. Coffin , explained that : 
 Trinity Site is a national historic testing landmark where the theories and engineering of some of the nation 's brightest minds were tested with the detonation of the first nuclear bomb , technologies which then helped end World War II . It is important for us to share Trinity with the public even though the site is located inside a very active military test range . We have travelers from as far away as Australia who travel to visit this historic landmark . Facilitating access twice per year allows more people the chance to visit this historic site . 
 = Jason Voorhees = 
 Jason Voorhees is a fictional character from the Friday the 13th series . He first appeared in Friday the 13th ( 1980 ) as the young son of camp cook @-@ turned @-@ murderer , Mrs. Voorhees , in which he was portrayed by Ari Lehman . Created by Victor Miller , with contributions by Ron Kurz , Sean S. Cunningham , and Tom Savini , Jason was not originally intended to carry the series as the main antagonist . The character has subsequently been represented in various other media , including novels , video games , comic books , and a cross @-@ over film with another iconic horror film character , Freddy Krueger . 
 The character has primarily been an antagonist in the films , whether by stalking and killing the other characters , or acting as a psychological threat to the protagonist , as is the case in Friday the 13th : A New Beginning . Since Lehman 's portrayal , the character has been represented by numerous actors and stuntmen , sometimes by more than one at a time ; this has caused some controversy as to who should receive credit for the portrayal . Kane Hodder is the best known of the stuntmen to portray Jason Voorhees , having played the character in four consecutive films . 
 The character 's physical appearance has gone through many transformations , with various special makeup effects artists making their mark on the character 's design , including makeup artist Stan Winston . Tom Savini 's initial design has been the basis for many of the later incarnations . The trademark hockey goalie mask did not appear until Friday the 13th Part III . Since Friday the 13th Part VI : Jason Lives , filmmakers have given Jason superhuman strength , regenerative powers , and near invulnerability . He has been seen as a sympathetic character , whose motivation for killing has been cited as being driven by the immoral actions of his victims and his own rage over having drowned as a child . Jason Voorhees has been featured in various humor magazines , referenced in feature films , parodied in television shows , and was the inspiration for a horror punk band . Several toy lines have been released based on various versions of the character from the Friday the 13th films . Jason Voorhees 's hockey mask is a widely recognized image in popular culture . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Jason Voorhees first appears during a nightmare of the main character Alice ( Adrienne King ) in the original Friday the 13th film ; he becomes the main antagonist of the series in its sequels . As well as the films , there have been books and comics that have either expanded the universe of Jason , or been based on a minor aspect of him . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Jason made his first cinematic appearance in the original Friday the 13th on May 9 , 1980 . In this film , 10 @-@ year @-@ old Jason is portrayed in the memories of his mother , Mrs. Voorhees ( Betsy Palmer ) , and as a hallucination of the film 's protagonist , Alice . Though the character makes no contemporary appearance onscreen , he propels the film 's plot — Mrs. Voorhees , the cook at Camp Crystal Lake , seeks revenge for his death , which she blames on the camp counselors . Jason 's second appearance was in the sequel , Friday the 13th Part 2 ( 1981 ) . Revealed to be alive , an adult Jason exacts revenge on Alice for decapitating his mother in the original film . Jason ( Warrington Gillette ) , returns to Crystal Lake , living there as a hermit and guarding it from all intruders . Five years later a group of teenagers arrive to set up a new camp , only to be murdered one by one by Jason , who wears a pillow case over his head to hide his face . Ginny ( Amy Steel ) , the lone survivor , finds a cabin in the woods with a shrine built around the severed head of Mrs. Voorhees , and surrounded by mutilated corpses . Ginny fights back and slams a machete through Jason 's shoulder . Jason is left for dead as Ginny is taken away in an ambulance . In Friday the 13th Part III ( 1982 ) , Jason ( Richard Brooker ) escapes to a nearby lake resort , Higgins Haven , to rest from his wounds . At the same time , Chris Higgins ( Dana Kimmell ) returns to the property with some friends . An unmasked and reclusive Jason kills anyone who wanders into the barn where he is hiding . Taking a hockey mask from a victim to hide his face , he leaves the barn to kill the rest of the group . Chris fends off Jason by slamming an axe into his head , but the night 's events drive her into hysteria as the police take her away . 
 Friday the 13th : The Final Chapter ( 1984 ) continues the story , with a presumed @-@ dead Jason ( Ted White ) found by the police and taken to the morgue . Jason awakens at the morgue and kills an attendant and a nurse , and makes his way back to Crystal Lake . A group of teens renting a house there fall victim to Jason 's rampage . Jason then seeks out Trish ( Kimberly Beck ) and Tommy Jarvis ( Corey Feldman ) next door . While Trish distracts Jason , Tommy evidently kills him with his own machete . Friday the 13th : A New Beginning follows Tommy Jarvis ( John Shepherd ) , who was committed to a mental hospital after the events of The Final Chapter , and has grown up constantly afraid that Jason ( Tom Morga ) will return . Jason 's body was supposedly cremated after Tommy killed him . Roy Burns ( Dick Wieand ) uses Jason 's persona to become a copycat killer at the halfway home to which Tommy was moved . Jason appears in the film only through Tommy 's dreams and hallucinations . In Friday the 13th Part VI : Jason Lives ( 1986 ) , Tommy ( Thom Mathews ) , who has run away from a mental institution , visits Jason 's grave and learns that Jason 's body was never actually cremated , but buried in a cemetery near Crystal Lake . While attempting to destroy his body , Tommy inadvertently resurrects Jason ( C. J. Graham ) via a piece of cemetery fence that acts as a lightning rod . Now possessing superhuman abilities , Jason returns to Crystal Lake , now renamed Forest Green , and begins his killing spree anew . Tommy eventually lures Jason back to the lake where he drowned as a child and chains him to a boulder on the lake floor , leaving him for dead . 
 Friday the 13th Part VII : The New Blood ( 1988 ) begins an undisclosed amount of time after Jason Lives . Jason ( Kane Hodder ) is freed from his chains by the telekinetic Tina Shepard ( Lar Park Lincoln ) , who was attempting to resurrect her father . Jason begins killing those who occupy Crystal Lake , and after a battle with Tina , is dragged back to the bottom of the lake by an apparition of Tina 's father . Friday the 13th Part VIII : Jason Takes Manhattan ( 1989 ) sees Jason return from the grave , brought back to life via an underwater electrical cable . He follows a group of students on their senior class trip to Manhattan , boarding the Lazarus to wreak havoc . Upon reaching Manhattan , Jason kills all the survivors but Rennie ( Jensen Daggett ) and Sean ( Scott Reeves ) ; he chases them into the sewers , where he is transformed into a child by toxic waste . Jason Goes to Hell : The Final Friday ( 1993 ) marked the second time Jason was officially killed according to studio canon . Through an unexplained resurrection , he returns to Crystal Lake , where he is hunted by the FBI . The FBI sets up a sting to kill Jason , which proves successful . Through mystical possession , however , Jason survives by passing his demon @-@ infested heart from one being to the next . Though Jason does not physically appear throughout most of the film , it is learned he has a half @-@ sister and a niece , and that he needs them to retrieve and <unk> his body . After resurrecting it , Jason is stabbed by his niece Jessica Kimble ( Kari Keegan ) and dragged into Hell . 
 Jason X ( 2002 ) marked Kane Hodder 's last performance as Jason . The film starts off in 2010 ; Jason has returned after an unexplained resurrection . Captured by the U.S. government in 2008 , Jason is being experimented upon in a research facility , where it has been determined that he has regenerative capabilities and that cryonic suspension is the only possible solution to stop him , since numerous attempts to execute him have proved unsuccessful . Jason escapes , killing all but one of his captors , and slices through the cryo @-@ chamber , spilling cryonics fluid into the room , freezing himself and the only other survivor , Rowan ( Lexa Doig ) . A team of students 445 years later discover Jason 's body . On the team 's spacecraft , Jason thaws from his cryonic suspension and begins killing the crew . Along the way , he is enhanced by a regenerative nanotechnology process , which gives him an impenetrable metal body . Finally , he is ejected into space and falls to the planet Earth 2 , burning in the atmosphere . 
 Set before the events of Jason X , Freddy vs. Jason ( 2003 ) is a crossover film in which Jason battles A Nightmare on Elm Street 's villain Freddy Krueger ( Robert Englund ) , a supernatural killer who murders people in their dreams . Krueger has grown weak , as people in his home town of Springwood have suppressed their fear of him . Freddy , who is impersonating Jason 's mother ( Paula Shaw ) , resurrects Jason ( Ken Kirzinger ) from Hell and sends him to Springwood to cause panic and fear . Jason accomplishes this , but refuses to stop killing . A battle ensues in both the dream world and Crystal Lake . The identity of the winner is left ambiguous , as Jason surfaces from the lake holding Freddy 's severed head , which winks and laughs . 
 In the 2009 Friday the 13th reboot , young Jason ( Caleb Guss ) witnesses his mother 's ( Nana Visitor ) beheading as a child and follows in her footsteps , killing anyone who comes to Crystal Lake . The adult Jason ( Derek Mears ) kidnaps Whitney Miller ( Amanda Righetti ) , a girl who looks like his mother , and holds her prisoner in his underground tunnels . Months later , Whitney 's brother Clay ( Jared Padalecki ) comes to Crystal Lake and rescues her . Eventually , Whitney uses Jason 's devotion to his mother against him , stabbing him with his own machete while he is distracted when she appears . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Jason first appeared outside of film in the 1982 novelization of Friday the 13th Part 3 by Michael Avallone . Avallone chose to use an alternate ending , which was filmed for Part 3 but never used , as the ending for his 1982 adaptation . In the alternate film ending , Chris , who is in the canoe , hears Rick 's voice and immediately rushes back to the house . When she opens the door , Jason is standing there with a machete , and he decapitates her . Jason next appears in print in the 1986 novelization of Jason Lives by Simon Hawke , who also adapted the first three films in 1987 and 1988 . Jason Lives specifically introduced Elias Voorhees , Jason 's father , a character that was slated to appear in the film but was cut by the studio . In the novel , instead of being cremated , Elias has Jason buried after his death . 
 Jason made his comic book debut in the 1993 adaptation of Jason Goes to Hell , written by Andy Mangels . The three @-@ issue series was a condensed version of the film , with a few added scenes that were never shot . Jason made his first appearance outside of the direct adaptations in Satan 's Six No. 4 , published in 1993 , which is a continuation of the events of Jason Goes to Hell . In 1995 , Nancy A. Collins wrote a three @-@ issue , non @-@ canonical miniseries involving a crossover between Jason and Leatherface . The story involves Jason stowing away aboard a train , after being released from Crystal Lake when the area is drained due to heavy toxic waste dumping . Jason meets Leatherface , who adopts him into his family after the two become friends . Eventually they turn on each other . In 1994 four young adult novels were released under the title of Friday the 13th . They did not feature Jason explicitly , but revolve around people becoming possessed by Jason when they put on his mask . 
 In 2003 and 2005 , Black Flame published novelizations of Freddy vs. Jason and Jason X respectively . In 2005 they began publishing a new series of novels ; one set was published under the Jason X title , while the second set utilized the Friday the 13th title . The Jason X series consisted of four sequels to the novelization of the film . Jason X : The Experiment was the first published . In this novel , Jason is being used by the government , who are trying to use his indestructibility to create their own army of " super soldiers " . Planet of the Beast follows the efforts of Dr. <unk> and his crew as they try to clone the body of a comatose Jason , and shows their efforts to stay alive when Jason wakes from his coma . Death Moon revolves around Jason crash @-@ landing at Moon Camp Americana . Jason is discovered below a prison site and unknowingly awakened in To The Third Power . Jason has a son in this book , conceived through a form of artificial insemination . 
 On May 13 , 2005 , Avatar Press began releasing new Friday the 13th comics . The first , titled Friday the 13th , was written by Brian Pulido and illustrated by Mike Wolfer and Greg Waller . The story takes place after the events of Freddy vs. Jason , where siblings Miles and Laura Upland have inherited Camp Crystal Lake . Knowing that Jason caused the recent destruction , Laura , unknown to her brother , sets out to kill Jason using a paramilitary group , so that she and her brother can sell the property . A three @-@ issue miniseries titled Friday the 13th : Bloodbath was released in September 2005 . Written by Brian Pulido and illustrated by Mike Wolfer and Andrew <unk> , the story involves a group of teenagers who come from Camp Tomorrow , a camp that sits on Crystal Lake , for work and a " party @-@ filled weekend " . The teenagers discover they share common family backgrounds , and soon awaken Jason , who hunts them . Brian Pulido returned for a third time in October 2005 to write Jason X. Picking up after the events of the Jason X film , Über @-@ Jason is now on Earth II where a biological engineer , Kristen , attempts to subdue Jason , in hopes that she can use his regenerative tissue to save her own life and the lives of those she loves . In February 2006 Avatar published Friday the 13th : Jason vs. Jason X. Written and illustrated by Mike Wolfer , the story takes place after the events of the film Jason X. A salvage team discovers the spaceship Grendel and awakens a regenerated Jason Voorhees . The " original " Jason and Über @-@ Jason are drawn to each other , resulting in a battle to the death . In June 2006 a one @-@ shot comic entitled Friday the 13th : Fearbook was released , written by Mike Wolfer with art by Sebastian <unk> . The comic has Jason being captured and experimented upon by the Trent Organization ; Jason escapes and seeks out Violet , the survivor of Friday the 13th : Bloodbath , who is being contained by the Trent Organization in their Crystal Lake headquarters . 
 The Friday the 13th novella storyline was not connected to the Jason X series , and did not continue the stories set forth by the films , but furthered the character of Jason in its own way . Friday the 13th : Church of the Divine Psychopath has Jason resurrected by a religious cult . Jason is stuck in Hell , when recently executed serial killer Wayne Sanchez persuades Jason to help him return to Earth in Friday the 13th : Hell Lake . In Hate @-@ Kill @-@ Repeat , two religious serial killers attempt to find Jason at Crystal Lake , believing that the three of them share the same contempt for those that break the moral code . In The Jason Strain , Jason is on an island with a group of convicts placed there by television executives running a reality game show . The character of Pamela Voorhees returns from the grave in Carnival of Maniacs . Pamela is in search of Jason , who is now part of a traveling sideshow and about to be auctioned off to the highest bidder . 
 In December 2006 DC Comics imprint Wildstorm began publishing new comic books about Jason Voorhees under the Friday the 13th moniker . The first set was a six @-@ issue miniseries involving Jason 's return to Camp Crystal Lake , which is being renovated by a group of teenagers in preparation for its reopening as a tourist attraction . The series depicts various paranormal phenomena occurring at Crystal Lake . Jason 's actions in this storyline are driven by the vengeful spirits of a Native American tribe wiped out on the lake by fur traders sometime in the 19th century . On July 11 and August 15 , 2007 , Wildstorm published a two @-@ part special entitled Friday the 13th : Pamela 's Tale . The two @-@ issue comic book covers Pamela Voorhees ' journey to Camp Crystal Lake and the story of her pregnancy with Jason as she recounts it to hitchhiker Annie , a camp counselor who was killed in the original film . Wildstorm released another two @-@ part special , entitled Friday the 13th : How I Spent My Summer Vacation , that was released on September 12 and October 10 , 2007 . The comic book provides new insight into the psychology of Jason Voorhees as he befriends a boy born with a skull deformity . Wildstorm released a six @-@ issue series called Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash , starring the two killers and Ash from the Evil Dead series . In this story , Freddy uses the Necronomicon , which is in the Voorhees ' basement , to escape from Jason 's subconscious and " gain powers unlike anything he 's had before " . Freddy attempts to use Jason to retrieve the book , stating it will make him a real boy . Ash , who is working at the local S @-@ Mart in Crystal Lake , learns of the book 's existence and sets out to destroy it . Wildstorm released another two @-@ issue miniseries on January 9 and February 13 , 2008 , titled Friday the 13th : Bad Land , written and illustrated by Ron Marz and Mike Huddleston respectively . The miniseries features Jason stalking a trio of teenaged hikers taking shelter from a blizzard in Camp Crystal Lake . 
 A sequel to Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash , subtitled The Nightmare Warriors , was released by Wildstorm in 2009 . Jason escapes from the bottom of Crystal Lake to resume his hunt for Ash , but is captured by the U.S. government . Freddy helps him escape and appoints him the general of his <unk> army , using the Necronomicon to heal his accumulated injuries and decomposition ; it removes his natural deformities in the process . At the climax of the story , Jason battles his nemesis Tommy Jarvis and his great @-@ niece Stephanie Kimble ; Stephanie impales him before Tommy decapitates him with a shard of glass . Jason 's soul is then absorbed by Freddy , who uses it to increase his own power . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 = = = Creating a monster = = = 
 Initially created by Victor Miller , Jason 's final design was a combined effort by Miller , Ron Kurz , and Tom Savini . The name " Jason " is a combination of " Josh " and " Ian " , Miller 's two sons , and " Voorhees " was inspired by a girl that Miller knew at high school whose last name was Van Voorhees . Miller felt it was a " creepy @-@ sounding name " , which was perfect for his character . Miller initially wrote Jason as a normal @-@ looking child , but the crew behind the film decided he needed to be deformed . Victor Miller explained Jason was not meant to be a creature from the " Black Lagoon " in his script , and scripted Jason as a mentally disabled young boy ; it was Savini who made Jason deformed . Ron Kurz confirmed that Miller 's version of Jason was that of a normal child , but claims that it was his idea to turn Jason into a " <unk> creature " , and have him " jump out of the lake at the end of the film " . Miller later agreed the ending would not have been as good if he looked like " Betsy Palmer at eight years old " . Miller wrote a scene where Alice dreams she is attacked in a canoe by Jason , and then she wakes up in a hospital bed . Miller 's intention was to get as close to Carrie 's ending as possible . Savini believed having Jason pop out of the lake would be psychologically disturbing to the audience , and since Alice is supposed to be dreaming , the crew could get away with adding anything they wanted . 
 When it came time to cast the role of Jason , Ari Lehman , who had received a part in Sean Cunningham 's Manny 's Orphans , arrived to read for the character of Jack . Before he could get started , Cunningham walked in and offered him a different part : Jason . Without having read a single word , Cunningham just looked at Ari and said , " You 're the right size , you 've got it . " In the original Friday the 13th , Ari Lehman is seen only in a brief flashback as the surprise ending . Subsequent actors who portrayed a young Jason include Timothy Burr <unk> in Jason Takes Manhattan and Spencer Stump in Freddy vs. Jason . The adult role of Jason Voorhees has been played by various actors , some not credited , others taking great pride in their parts . Due to the physical demands the adult character requires , and the lack of emotional depth depicted , many of the actors since have been stuntmen . The most well @-@ known among them is Kane Hodder , who is cited as the best to play the role . 
 Many ideas were suggested for the sequel to Friday the 13th , including making the title part of a serialized franchise , where each succeeding film would be its own story and not related to any previous film under the Friday the 13th moniker . It was Phil Scuderi , one of the producers for the original film , which suggested bringing Jason back for the sequel . The director Steve Miner felt it was the obvious direction to take the series , as he felt the audience wanted to know more about the child who attacked Alice in the lake . Miner decided to pretend as if Alice did not see the " real Jason " in her dream , and Jason had survived his drowning as a boy and had grown up . After killing Jason in The Final Chapter , it was the director Joseph Zito 's intention to leave the door open for the studio to make more films with Tommy Jarvis as the main antagonist . Screenwriter Barney Cohen felt Jarvis would become a substitute for Jason , but the idea was never fully developed in A New Beginning . Director and co @-@ screenwriter Danny <unk> disliked the idea of Jason not being the killer , but decided to use Tommy 's fear of Jason as the primary story . This idea was immediately abandoned in Jason Lives , when A New Beginning did not spark the " creative success " the studio was looking for . Executive producer Frank Mancuso , Jr. wanted to bring Jason back , and he did not care how it was achieved . In yet another alteration of the series ' continuity , Tom McLoughlin chose to ignore the idea that Jason had survived his drowning , instead presenting him as always having been some sort of supernatural force . Since A New Beginning , no sequel has attempted to replace Jason as the main antagonist . Miller , who has not seen any of the sequels , took issue with all of them because they made Jason the villain . Miller believes the best part of his screenplay was that it was about a mother avenging the senseless death of her son . Miller stated , " Jason was dead from the very beginning ; he was a victim , not a villain . " 
 = = = Men behind the mask = = = 
 Jason Voorhees went from deceased child to full @-@ grown man for Friday the 13th Part 2 , and Warrington Gillette was hired to play the role . Gillette auditioned for the role of Paul ; that role eventually went to John Furey . Under the belief that he had attended the Hollywood Stuntman 's School , Gillette was offered the role of Jason Voorhees . Initially Gillette was unsure about the character , but the idea of starring in his first film grew on Gillette , and he also thought the role was amusing . It became apparent Gillette could not perform the necessary stunts , so the stunt coordinator Cliff <unk> brought in Steve Daskawisz . Daskawisz filmed all of the scenes except the opening sequence and the unmasking shot at the end ; Gillette returned for the unmasking scenes . Gillette received credit for playing Jason , while Daskawisz was given credit as the stunt double . When Part 3 was released the following year , Daskawisz was credited as Jason for the reused footage from the climax of the film . Initially , Daskawisz was asked to return to the role for Part 3 , but it would have required him to pay for his own transportation and housing during filming . Having secured a part on Guiding Light , Daskawisz declined . 
 Now wanting a " bigger and stronger @-@ looking " Jason , one that was also " more athletic and powerful " , Steve Miner hired former British trapeze artist Richard Brooker . After a simple conversation , Miner decided he was the right person for the job . Being new to the country , Brooker believed that " playing a psychopathic killer " was the best way into the movie business . Brooker became the first actor to wear Jason 's now @-@ signature hockey mask . According to Brooker , " It felt great with the mask on . It just felt like I really was Jason because I didn 't have anything to wear before that . " For The Final Chapter , Joseph Zito brought his own spin to the character , one that required a " real hardcore stuntman " ; Ted White was hired to perform the role . White , who only took the job for the money , did " get into the Jason psychology " when he arrived on the set . White went so far as to not speak to any of the other actors for long stretches . As filming continued , White 's experience was not pleasant , and in one instance , he went to battle for co @-@ star <unk> Aronson , who played Samantha , when the director kept her naked in the lake for extended periods of time . Displeased with his experience from filming , White had his name removed from the credits . As with Friday the 13th Part 2 , there was confusion over who performed the role in A New Beginning , partly because Jason is not the literal antagonist in the film . When Ted White turned down the opportunity to return , Dick Wieand was cast . Wieand is credited as Roy Burns , the film 's actual murderer , but it was stuntman Tom Morga who performed in the few flashes of Jason , as well as portraying Roy in almost all of the masked scenes . Wieand has been outspoken about his lack of enthusiasm over his role in the film . Feeling alienated during the shoot , Wieand spent most of his time in his trailer . By comparison , Morga enjoyed his time as Jason and made sure he " really got into the character " . 
 A nightclub manager in Glendale , C. J. Graham , was interviewed for the role of Jason in Jason Lives , but was initially passed over because he had no experience as a stuntman . Dan Bradley was hired , but Paramount executives felt Bradley did not have the right physique to play the role , and Graham was hired to replace him . Although Bradley was replaced early during filming , he can be seen in the paintball sequence of the film . Graham opted to perform most of his own stunts , including the scene where Jason catches on fire while battling Tommy in the lake . The rest of the cast spoke highly of Graham , remarking that he never complained during all the uncomfortable situations he was placed in . Graham had no intention of being an actor or a stuntman , but the idea of playing the " bad guy " , and the opportunity to wear the prosthetics , intrigued him . Graham was not brought back to reprise the role , but has often been cited as speaking highly of his time in the part . 
 Kane Hodder took over the role in The New Blood , and played Jason in the next four films . He previously worked alongside director John Carl Buechler on a film called Prison . Based on his experience working with Hodder , Buechler petitioned Frank Mancuso Jr. to hire him , but Mancuso was apprehensive about Hodder 's limited size . Knowing he planned to use full body prosthetics , Buechler scheduled a test screening , the first in Friday the 13th history for the character , and Mancuso immediately gave Hodder approval upon seeing him . It is Buechler 's contention that Hodder gave Jason his first true personality , based on the emotions , specifically the rage , that Hodder would emit while acting the part . According to Hodder , he wanted to " get in touch with Jason 's thirst for revenge " and try to better understand his motivation to kill . After viewing the previous films , Hodder decided that he would approach Jason as a more " quick and agile " individual than he had been portrayed in the previous sequels . John Carl Buechler felt that Kane had " natural affinity for the role " — so much that Kane 's appearance , when wearing the mask , would often terrify the cast , the crew , and in one incident a lone stranger that he came across on his walk back to his trailer . Initially Frank Mancuso Jr. and Barbara Sachs planned to use a Canadian stuntperson for Jason Takes Manhattan . Hodder acted as his own voice , calling and requesting that he be allowed to reprise the role ; the ultimate decision was left to director Rob Hedden , who intended to use Hodder , because he felt Hodder knew the lore of the series . With Sean Cunningham 's return as producer for Jason Goes to Hell , Hodder felt his chances of reprising the role were even better : Hodder had worked as Cunningham 's stunt coordinator for years . Regardless , Adam Marcus , the director for Jason Goes to Hell , always intended to hire Hodder for the role . Jason X would mark Hodder 's last performance as Jason , to date . Todd Farmer , who wrote the screenplay for Jason X , knew Hodder would play Jason from the beginning . Jim Isaac was a fan of Hodder 's work on the previous films , so hiring him was an easy decision . 
 New Line believed Freddy vs. Jason needed a fresh start , and choose a new actor for Jason . Cunningham disagreed with their decision , believing Hodder was the best choice for the role . Hodder did receive the script for Freddy vs. Jason , and had a meeting with director Ronny Yu and New Line executives , but Matthew Barry and Yu felt the role should be recast to fit Yu 's image of Jason . According to Hodder , New Line failed to provide him with a reason for the recasting , but Yu has explained he wanted a slower , more deliberate Jason , and less of the aggressive movements that Hodder had used in the previous films . Yu and development executive Jeff Katz recognized the outcry among fans over the replacement of Hodder as Jason , but stood by their choice in recasting . 
 The role eventually went to Ken Kirzinger , a Canadian stuntperson who worked on Jason Takes Manhattan . There are conflicting reports over the reason Kirzinger was cast . According to Yu , Kirzinger was hired because he was taller than Robert Englund , the actor who portrays Freddy Krueger . Kirzinger stands 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) , compared to the 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) of Kane Hodder , and Yu wanted a much larger actor to tower over the 5 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) Englund . Kirzinger believes his experience on Part VIII helped him land the part , as Kirzinger doubled for Hodder on two scenes for the film , but also believes he was simply sized up and handed the job . Although he was hired by the creative crew , New Line did not officially cast Kirzinger until first seeing him on film . Kirzinger 's first scene was Jason walking down Elm Street . New Line wanted a specific movement in Jason 's walk ; Kirzinger met their expectations and signed a contract with the studio . However , concerns that test audiences were confused by the film 's original ending caused the studio to reshoot the final scene . Actor Douglas Tait was brought in to film the new ending , as he was available for the reshoot and had been the production 's second choice to portray the role of Jason during the original casting . 
 For the 2009 remake , stuntman Derek Mears was hired to portray Jason Voorhees at the recommendation of makeup special effects supervisor Scott Stoddard . Mears 's pleasant demeanor had the studio worried about his ability to portray such a menacing character on screen , but Mears assured them he would be able to perform the role . When Mears auditioned for the role he was asked why they should hire an actor over just another guy in a mask . As Mears explained , portraying Jason is similar to Greek mask work , where the mask and the actor are two separate entities , and , based on the scene , there will be various combinations of mask and actor in the performance . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The physical design of Jason Voorhees has gone through changes , some subtle and some radical . For Friday the 13th , the task of coming up with Jason 's appearance was the responsibility of Tom Savini , whose design for Jason was inspired by someone Savini knew as a child whose eyes and ears did not line up straight . The original design called for Jason to have hair , but Savini and his crew opted to make him bald , so he would look like a " <unk> , <unk> pinhead " , with a dome @-@ shaped head . Savini created a plaster mold of Ari Lehman 's head and used that to create prosthetics for his face . Lehman personally placed mud — from the bottom of the lake — all over his body to make himself appear " really slimy . " 
 For Part 2 , Steve Miner asked Carl Fullerton , the make @-@ up effects supervisor , to stick to Savini 's original design , but Fullerton only had one day to design and sculpt a new head . Fullerton drew a rough sketch of what he believed Jason should look like , and had it approved by Miner . Fullerton added long hair to the character . Gillette had to spend hours in a chair as they applied rubber forms all over his face , and had to keep one eye closed while the " droopy eye " application was in place . Gillette 's eye was closed for twelve hours at a time while he was filming the final scenes of the film . False teeth created by a local dentist were used to distort Gillette 's face . Much of the basic concept of Fullerton 's design was eliminated for Part 3 . Miner wanted to use a combination of the designs from Tom Savini and Carl Fullerton , but as work progressed the design began to lean more and more toward Savini 's concept . Stan Winston was hired to create a design for Jason 's head , but the eyes were level and Doug White , the make @-@ up artist for Part 3 , needed a droopy right eye . White did keep Winston 's design for the back of the head , because the crew did not have the time to design an entirely new head for Jason . The process of creating Jason 's look was hard work for White , who had to constantly make alterations to Richard Brooker 's face , even up to the last day of filming . 
 The script for Part 3 called for Jason to wear a mask to cover his face , having worn a bag over his head in Part 2 ; what no one knew at the time was that the mask chosen would become a trademark for the character , and one instantly recognizable in popular culture in the years to come . During production , Steve Miner called for a lighting check . None of the effects crew wanted to apply any make @-@ up for the light check , so they decided to just throw a mask on Brooker . The film 's 3D effects supervisor , Martin Jay Sadoff , was a hockey fan , and had a bag of hockey gear with him on the set . He pulled out a Detroit Red Wings goaltender mask for the test . Miner loved the mask , but it was too small . Using a substance called <unk> , Doug White enlarged the mask and created a new mold to work with . After White finished the molds , Terry Ballard placed red triangles on the mask to give it a unique appearance . Holes were punched into the mask and the markings were altered , making it different from Sadoff 's mask . There were two prosthetic face masks created for Richard Brooker to wear underneath the hockey mask . One mask was composed of approximately 11 different appliances and took about six hours to apply to Brooker 's face ; this mask was used for scenes where the hockey mask was removed . In the scenes where the hockey mask is over the face , a simple head mask was created . This one @-@ piece mask would slip on over Brooker 's head , exposing his face but not the rest of his head . 
 Tom Savini agreed to return to make @-@ up duties for The Final Chapter because he felt he should be the one to bring Jason full circle in terms of his look from child to man . Savini used his design from the original Friday the 13th , with the same practice of application as before , but molded from Ted White 's face . Since Jason is not the actual killer in A New Beginning , it was not necessary to do any major designing for Jason 's look . Only a head mask to cover the top and back of the head , like the one Brooker wore while wearing the hockey mask , was needed for the film . Make @-@ up artist Louis Lazzara , who cites A New Beginning as almost a direct sequel to The Final Chapter , did base his head @-@ mask on Tom Savini 's design for The Final Chapter . 
 Friday the 13th Part VII : The New Blood sought to make Jason more of a " classic monster along the lines of Frankenstein . " From the beginning , Buechler tried to tie the previous films together by having Jason 's appearance reflect that of the damage he received in the previous installments . Buechler wanted the motor boat damage from Jason Lives , and the axe and machete cuts Jason received in Part 3 and Part 4 to part of the design for The New Blood . Since Jason had been submerged under water in the previous entry , the effects team wanted Jason to appear " rotted " , with bones and ribs showing , and for Jason 's features to have a more defined feel to them . Howard Berger was inspired by Carl Fullerton 's design in The New Blood , and wanted to incorporate the exposed flesh concept into his model for Jason Goes to Hell . Berger designed Jason 's skin to overlap with the mask , to make it appear as if the skin and mask had fused and the mask could no longer be removed . Gregory Nicotero and Berger sculpted a full @-@ body , foam latex suit for Kane Hodder to wear under the costume . The idea was to reveal as much of Jason 's skin as possible , because Nicotero and Berger knew the physical character would not be seen for most of the film . 
 Stephen Dupuis was given the task of redesigning Jason for the tenth Friday the 13th film . One concept brought into the film was Jason 's regenerative abilities . Dupuis gave the character more hair and more of a natural flesh appearance to illustrate the constant regeneration the character goes through ; Dupuis wanted a more " gothic " design for Jason , so he added chains and shackles , and made the hockey mask more angular . Jim Isaac and the rest of his crew wanted to create an entirely new Jason at some point in the film . The idea was for the teens to completely destroy Jason 's body , allowing the futuristic technology to bring him back to life . What was referred to as Über @-@ Jason was designed to have chunks of metal growing from his body , bonded by tendrils that grew into the metal , all pushing through a leather suit . The metal was created from <unk> , the same material used to increase the size of the original hockey mask , and was attached by Velcro . The tendrils were made from silicone . All of the pieces were crafted onto one suit , including an entire head piece , which Hodder wore . The make @-@ up effects team added zippers along the side of the suit , which allowed Hodder to enter and exit the suit within 15 minutes . 
 By the time Freddy vs. Jason entered production there had been ten previous Friday the 13th films . Make @-@ up effects artist Terezakis wanted to put his own mark on Jason 's look — he wanted Jason to be less rotted and decomposed and more defined , so that the audience would see a new Jason , but still recognized the face . Terezakis tried to keep continuity with the previous films , but recognized that had he followed them too literally , then " Jason would have been reduced to a pile of goo . " Ronny Yu wanted everything surrounding the hockey mask to act as a frame , making the mask the focal point of each shot . To achieve this , Terezakis created a " pooled @-@ blood look " for the character by painting the skin black , based on the idea the blood had pooled in the back of his head because he had been lying on his back for a long time . As with other make @-@ up artists before him , Terezakis followed Savini 's original skull design , and aged it appropriately . 
 For the 2009 version of Friday the 13th , effects artist Scott Stoddard took inspiration from Carl Fullerton 's design in Friday the 13th Part 2 and Tom Savini 's work in Friday the 13th : The Final Chapter . Stoddard wanted to make sure that Jason appeared human and not like a monster . Stoddard 's vision of Jason includes hair loss , skin rashes , and the traditional deformities in his face , but he attempted to craft Jason 's look in a way that would allow for a more human side to be seen . Stoddard took inspiration from the third and fourth films when designing Jason 's hockey mask . The make @-@ up artist managed to acquire an original set piece , which he studied and later sculpted . Although he had a model of one of the original masks , Stoddard did not want to replicate it in its entirety . As Stoddard explains , " Because I didn 't want to take something that already existed , there were things I thought were great , but there were things I wanted to change a bit . Make it custom , but keep all the fundamental designs . Especially the markings on the forehead and cheeks . Age them down a bit , break them up . " In the end , Stoddard crafted six versions of the mask , each with varying degrees of wear . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 In his original appearance , Jason was scripted as a mentally disabled young boy . Since Friday the 13th , Jason Voorhees has been depicted as a non @-@ verbal , indestructible , machete @-@ wielding mass murderer . Jason is primarily portrayed as being completely silent throughout the film series . Exceptions to this include flashbacks of Jason as a child , and a brief scene in Jason Takes Manhattan where the character cries out " Mommy , please don 't let me drown ! " in a child 's voice before being submerged in toxic waste , and in Jason Goes To Hell where his spirit possesses other individuals . Online magazine Salon 's Andrew O 'Hehir describes Jason as a " silent , expressionless ... blank slate . " When discussing Jason psychologically , Sean S. Cunningham said , " ... he doesn 't have any personality . He 's like a great white shark . You can 't really defeat him . All you can hope for is to survive . " Since Friday the 13th Part VI : Jason Lives , Jason has been a " virtually indestructible " being . Tom McLoughlin , the film 's director , felt it was silly that Jason had previously been just another guy in a mask , who would kill people left and right , but get " beaten up and knocked down by the heroine at the end " . McLoughlin wanted Jason to be more of a " formidable , unstoppable monster " . In resurrecting Jason from the dead , McLoughlin also gave him the weakness of being rendered helpless if trapped beneath the waters of Crystal Lake ; inspired by vampire lore , McLoughlin decided that Jason had in fact drowned as a child , and that returning him to his original resting place would immobilize him . This weakness would be presented again in The New Blood , and the idea that Jason had drowned as a child was taken up by director Rob Hedden as a plot element in Jason Takes Manhattan . 
 Many have given suggestions as Jason 's motivation for killing . Ken Kirzinger refers to Jason as a " psychotic mama 's boy gone horribly awry ... very resilient . You can 't kill him , but he feels pain , just not like everyone else . " Kirzinger goes on to say that Jason is a " psycho @-@ savant " , and believes his actions are based on pleasing his mother , and not anything personal . Andrew O 'Hehir has stated , " Coursing hormones act , of course , as smelling salts to prudish Jason , that ever @-@ vigilant enforcer of William Bennett @-@ style values . " Todd Farmer , writer for Jason X , wrote the scene where Jason wakes from cryonic hibernation just as two of the teenagers are having sex . Farmer liked the idea that sex acts triggered Jason back to life . Whatever his motivations , Kane Hodder believes there is a limit to what he will do . According to Hodder , Jason might violently murder any person he comes across , but when Jason Takes Manhattan called for Hodder to kick the lead character 's dog , Hodder refused , stating that , while Jason has no qualms against killing humans , he is not bad enough to hurt animals . Another example from Jason Takes Manhattan , involves Jason being confronted by a street gang of young teenage boys one of whom threatens him with a knife , however Jason chooses not to kill them and instead scares them off by lifting up his mask and showing them his face . Likewise , director Tom McLoughlin chose not to have Jason harm any of the children he encounters in Jason Lives , stating that Jason would not kill a child , out of a sympathy for the plight of children generated by his own death as a child . 
 In an early draft of Freddy vs. Jason , it was decided that one of the villains needed a redeemable factor . Ronald D. Moore , co @-@ writer of the first draft , explained that Jason was the easiest to make redeemable , because no one had previously ventured into the psychology surrounding the character . Moore saw the character as a " blank slate " , and felt he was a character the audience could really root for . Another draft , penned by Mark Protosevich , followed Moore 's idea of Jason having a redeemable quality . In the draft , Jason protects a pregnant teenager named Rachel Daniels . Protosevich explained , " It gets into this whole idea of there being two kinds of monsters . Freddy is a figure of actual pure evil and Jason is more like a figure of vengeance who punishes people he feels do not deserve to live . Ultimately , the two of them clash and Jason becomes an honorable monster . " Writers Damian Shannon and Mark Swift , who wrote the final draft of the film , disagreed about making Jason a hero , although they drew comparisons between the fact that Freddy was a victimizer and Jason was a victim . They stated , " We did not want to make Jason any less scary . He 's still a brutal killer ... We never wanted to put them in a situation where Jason is a hero ... They 're both villains to be equally feared . " Brenna O 'Brien , co @-@ founder of <unk> , saw the character as having sympathetic qualities . She stated , " [ Jason ] was a deformed child who almost drowned and then spent the rest of his childhood growing up alone in the woods . He saw his mother get murdered by a camp counselor in the first Friday the 13th , and so now he exacts his revenge on anyone who returns to Camp Crystal Lake . Teenage fans can identify with that sense of rejection and isolation , which you can 't really get from other killers like Freddy Krueger and Michael Myers . " 
 As Jason went through some characterization changes in the 2009 film , Derek Mears likens him more to a combination of John Rambo , Tarzan , and the Abominable Snowman from Looney Tunes . To him , this Jason is similar to Rambo because he sets up the other characters to fall into his traps . Like Rambo , he is more calculated because he feels that he has been wronged and he is fighting back ; he is meant to be more sympathetic in this film . Fuller and Form contend that they did not want to make Jason too sympathetic to the audience . As Brad Fuller explains , " We do not want him to be sympathetic . Jason is not a comedic character , he is not sympathetic . He 's a killing machine . Plain and simple . " 
 In 2005 , California State University 's Media Psychology Lab surveyed 1 @,@ 166 people Americans aged from 16 to 91 on the psychological appeal of movie monsters . Many of the characteristics associated with Jason Voorhees were appealing to the participants . In the survey , Jason was considered to be an " unstoppable killing machine . " Participants were impressed by the " <unk> feats of slicing and dicing a seemingly endless number of adolescents and the occasional adult . " Out of the ten monsters used in the survey — which included vampires , Freddy Krueger , Frankenstein 's monster , Michael Myers , Godzilla , Chucky , Hannibal Lecter , King Kong , and the Alien — Jason scored the highest in all the categories involving killing variables . Further characteristics that appealed to the participants included Jason 's " immortality , his apparent enjoyment of killing [ and ] his superhuman strength . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Jason Voorhees is one of the leading cultural icons of American popular culture . In 1992 Jason was awarded the MTV Lifetime Achievement Award . He was the first of only three completely fictional characters to be presented the award ; Godzilla ( 1996 ) and Chewbacca ( 1997 ) are the others . Jason was named No. 26 in Wizard magazine 's " 100 greatest villains of all time " . Universal Studios theme parks , in collaboration with New Line Cinema , used the character for their Halloween Horror Nights event . 
 The character has been produced and marketed as merchandise over the years . In 1988 Screamin ' Toys produced a model kit where owners could build their own Jason statuette . The kit required the owner to cut and paint various parts in order to assemble the figure . Six years later , Screamin ' Toys issued a new model kit for Jason Goes to Hell . Both kits are now out of production . McFarlane Toys released two toy lines , one in 1998 and the other in 2002 . The first was a figure of Jason from Jason Goes to Hell , and the other was of Über @-@ Jason from Jason X. Since McFarlane 's last toy line in 2002 , there has been a steady production of action figures , dolls , and statuettes . These include tie @-@ ins with the film Freddy vs. Jason ( 2003 ) . In April 2010 Sideshow Toys released a polystone statue of Jason , based on the version appearing in the 2009 remake . 
 Jason has made an appearance in four video games . He first appeared in a 1985 Commodore 64 game . His next appearance was in 1989 , when LJN , an American game company known for its games based on popular movies in the 1980s and early 1990s , released Friday the 13th on the Nintendo Entertainment System . The premise involved the gamer , who picks one of six camp counselors as their player , trying to save the campers from Jason , while battling various enemies throughout the game . On October 13 , 2006 , a Friday the 13th game was released for mobile phones . The game puts the user in the persona of Jason as he battles the undead . Jason also appears as a playable character in the fighting game Mortal Kombat X as a downloadable content bonus character . 
 The character has been referenced , or made cameo appearances , in various entertainment mediums . Outside of literature sources based on the character , Jason has been featured in a variety of magazines and comic strips . Cracked magazine has released several issues featuring parodies of Jason , and he has been featured on two of their covers . Mad magazine has featured the character in almost a dozen stories . He has appeared twice in the comic strip Mother Goose and Grimm . 
 Many musical artists have made references to Jason Voorhees . Inspired by his own experience , Ari Lehman founded a band called <unk> . Lehman 's band is classified as horror punk , and is influenced by the sounds of the Dead Kennedys and The Misfits . The band 's name pays homage to Lehman 's portrayal of Jason Voorhees in the original Friday the 13th . One of the band 's songs is entitled " Jason is Watching " . In 1986 , coinciding with the release of Jason Lives , Alice Cooper released " He 's Back ( The Man Behind the Mask ) " from his album Constrictor . The song was written to " signal Jason 's big return " to the cinema , as he had been almost entirely absent in the previous film . Rapper Eminem has referenced Jason in several of his songs . The song " Criminal " , from the album The Marshall Mathers LP , mentions Jason specifically , while songs " Amityville " and " Off the Wall " — the latter featured fellow rapper Redman — contain Harry Manfredini 's music " ki , ki , ki ... ma , ma , ma " from the film series . Eminem sometimes wears a hockey mask during concerts . Other rap artists that have referenced Jason include Tupac Shakur , Dr. Dre , LL Cool J , and Insane Clown Posse . In 1989 , Puerto Rican rapper Vico C had a song titled " Viernes 13 " which featured Jason in Puerto Rico . The song was so popular in the island that Vico C wrote a second part titled " Viernes 13 , Parte II " . VH1 issued an advertisement for their Vogue Fashion Awards which was labeled " Friday the 20th " , and featured Jason 's mask created out of rhinestone . 
 Jason has been referenced or parodied in other films . In the film Scream , directed by Freddy Krueger creator Wes Craven , actress Drew Barrymore 's character is being stalked by a killer who calls her on her home phone . In order to survive , she must answer the man 's trivia questions . One question is " name the killer in Friday the 13th . " She incorrectly guesses Jason , who did not become the killer for the franchise until Part 2 . Writer Kevin Williamson claimed his inspiration for this scene came when he asked this question in a bar while a group was playing a movie trivia quiz game . He received a free drink , because nobody got the answer right . In another Wes Craven film , Cursed , a wax sculpture of Jason , from Jason Goes to Hell , can be seen in a wax museum . 
 Jason has also been referenced by several television shows . The stop motion animated television show Robot Chicken features Jason in three of its comedy sketches . In episode seventeen , " Operation : Rich in Spirit " , the mystery @-@ solving teenagers from Scooby @-@ Doo arrive at Camp Crystal Lake to investigate the Jason Voorhees murders , and are killed off one by one . Velma is the only survivor , and in typical Scooby @-@ Doo fashion , she rips off Jason 's mask to reveal his true identity : Old Man Phillips . In episode nineteen , " That Hurts Me " , Jason reappears , this time as a housemate of " Horror Movie Big Brother " , alongside other famous slasher movie killers such as Michael Myers , Freddy Krueger , Leatherface , Pinhead , and Ghostface . Three years later , in episode sixty @-@ two , Jason is shown on the days before and after a typical Friday the 13th . Jason is spoofed in the season five episode of Family Guy entitled " It Takes a Village Idiot , and I Married One " . The so @-@ called " Mr. Voorhees " explains to Asian reporter Trisha Takanawa how happy he is to see local wildlife return following the cleanup and rejuvenation of Lake Quahog . He reappears later in the episode as the manager of the " Britches and Hose " clothing store . As opposed to his monstrous personality in the films , Jason is depicted here as polite and articulate , albeit still a psychopath ; he murders random swimmers and threatens to kill his employee if she screws up . In an episode of The Simpsons , Jason appears in a Halloween episode sitting on the couch with Freddy Krueger waiting for the family to arrive . When Freddy asks where the family is , Jason responds , " <unk> , <unk> gonna do ? " and turns the TV on . He also appears in The Simpsons episode " Stop , or My Dog Will Shoot ! " , alongside Pinhead , menacing Bart in a fantasy sequence . The South Park episodes " Imaginationland Episode II " and " III " feature Jason among an assortment of other villains and monsters as an inhabitant of the " bad side " of Imaginationland , a world populated by fictional characters . This version of Jason has an effeminate voice and describes the removal of Strawberry Shortcake 's eyeball as " super hardcore " . Experimental pop artist Eric Millikin created a large mosaic portrait of Jason Voorhees out of Halloween candy and spiders as part of his " Totally Sweet " series in 2013 . 
 = Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! = 
 Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! is the debut studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . It was released on June 12 , 1985 , through Combat Records . At the beginning of 1985 , the band was given $ 8 @,@ 000 by Combat to record and produce its debut album . After spending half of the album 's budget on drugs , alcohol and food , the band was forced to fire their original producer and produce the album themselves . Despite the resulting poor production , the album was a well @-@ received effort that obtained strong reviews in various music publications . Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! played an essential role in establishing thrash metal as an authentic subgenre of heavy metal music . It explores themes of death , violence , and occultism . 
 The album features a controversial cover of " These Boots Are Made for Walkin ' " and the track " Mechanix " , a song frontman Dave Mustaine originally wrote for Metallica . A deluxe edition , completely remixed and remastered with several bonus tracks , was released through Loud Records in 2002 . It features vastly different artwork , with its cover based on the version originally designed by Mustaine in 1985 . All songs from the album were performed frequently during Megadeth 's initial tour but have been steadily dropped from the setlist since . 
 = = Background = = 
 Dave Mustaine served as the lead guitarist for Metallica during their early days . However , due to drinking , substance abuse , violent behavior , and personality conflicts with band mates James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich , Mustaine was soon fired from Metallica . Two months after being dismissed , he and bassist David Ellefson formed Megadeth in Los Angeles . Mustaine later recalled : " After getting fired from Metallica , all I remember is that I wanted blood . Theirs . I wanted to be faster and heavier than them . " Fueled by the desire for revenge , Mustaine elevated the intensity of Megadeth 's music in order to challenge his former band . He sped up existing songs such as " Mechanix " , which Metallica 's new line @-@ up adapted into the slower paced " The Four Horsemen " . Mustaine included his original version of the song on the album to " straighten Metallica up " , as Metallica referred to Mustaine as a drunk and said he could not play guitar . 
 After unsuccessfully searching for a vocalist for nearly six months , Mustaine decided to handle the vocal duties himself , while also serving as the band 's primary lyricist , main songwriter and co @-@ lead and rhythm guitarist . Early in 1984 , Megadeth recorded a three song demo engineered by Karat Faye , and on the strength of that demo , the band was asked to sign with the New York @-@ based independent label Combat Records . Early in 1985 , Megadeth was given $ 8 @,@ 000 by Combat to record and produce its debut album . However , this proved not to be enough and the band was given a further $ 4 @,@ 000 . Instead , a majority of the budget was spent on drugs , alcohol , and food , forcing the group to fire the original producer and produce the record themselves . The album was successfully recorded at the Indigo Ranch Studios , in Malibu , California . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album 's artwork , featuring a plastic skull with tinfoil , was not intended to be the original artwork . Both Mustaine and Ellefson had many phone conversations with Combat Records to get the cover artwork properly reproduced from a sketch given to them by Mustaine of a picture of Megadeth mascot Vic Rattlehead on the cover . However the studio lost the artwork , and instead made their own improvised and low @-@ budget replacement , with which Mustaine and the whole band were mortified . 
 Megadeth began with live performances before the record was released . Although not a member of the band , Kerry King of Slayer played lead guitar for a short period because Mustaine had not recruited a full @-@ time guitarist yet . In mid @-@ 1985 , the group toured the United States and Canada for the first time , supporting Killing Is My Business ... with Exciter . During the tour , guitarist Chris Poland abruptly left the band , and was replaced by touring guitarist Mike Albert . However , Poland rejoined Megadeth in October 1985 , and stayed with the band up to the recording of the next album . 
 The album was released on June 12 , 1985 . To date it remains the only Megadeth album that did not chart on the Billboard 200 , primarily because it was released through an independent label with little promotion . Nevertheless , the album still went on to become one of Combat Records ' highest selling releases . Later that year , Capitol Records signed Megadeth as they began working on their second album , Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? , released the following year . A limited edition of Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! was released in 2009 . The CD itself is pressed on black plastic with grooves on the top to imitate an LP . This version 's cover is redesigned to match Mustaine 's original sketch , and the song " These Boots " was removed . Over 254 @,@ 000 copies of the album were sold in the United States since the beginning of the Nielsen SoundScan era . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to writer Peter Buckley , the record presented a faster , " thrashier kind of heavy metal " . Steve Huey of AllMusic opined that the music on Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! is predominantly " chaotic " , accompanied by " lightning @-@ fast " solo sections . Sputnikmusic 's Mike Stagno said that the original pressing greatly suffered from the poor production , which made the record difficult to listen to . However , he noted that the music is performed at rapid speed , with precise riffing by both Poland and Mustaine . In his book Mean Deviation : Four Decades of Progressive Heavy Metal , editor Jeff Wagner wrote the album displayed unusual rhythms and unorthodox guitar riffs , which carried " like a runaway train " . Speaking about the intensity of the record , Ellefson said that " extreme speed was deemed the cool factor in thrash metal back in those days " . Although Ellefson considers the album as a solid debut release , he wanted some of the songs to be recorded in slower tempo . 
 The album explores gloomy lyrical subjects such as death , violence , and occultism . Speaking about the themes on the album , author Bob Larson asserted that Megadeth " cranks out songs about spilling blood and stomping guts with venomous anger " . The album 's title , as well as its lyrics , led to accusations whether the band was promoting Satanism . These allegations were rigidly denied by Mustaine , who said that the band consciously kept away from the Satanic image . " I mean , it 's great to thrash and pound , cut yourself up , scream and have fun , but you don 't have to take out a Pagan attitude . Why support the Devil ? He 's already there . I 'd rather just fucking thrash and be a <unk> and listen to whatever I want to than be forced to listen to one style of music . " 
 = = Songs = = 
 The album 's opening track , " Last Rites / Loved to Deth " , consists of two parts . The first part , " Last Rites " , is an instrumental segue featuring a piano intro , a reinterpretation of J.S. Bach 's Toccata and Fugue in D Minor . Mustaine explained that " Loved to Deth " was his " version of a love song " to his girlfriend at the time . The title track was inspired by The Punisher comic book , and tells of a paid serial assassin . The song caused minor media controversy when a man posted an online request to a radio station to play the tune , saying it was " good music to go postal and kill a bunch of people to " . The man was later arrested under suspicion of commencing a potential shooting spree . " The Skull Beneath the Skin " was developed under the working title " Self Destruct " . The song graphically describes a horrendous human torture , while also probing into the occult and black magic . Mustaine pointed that the creation of Vic Rattlehead was explained throughout that track . " Rattlehead " , according to Dave Mustaine , was dedicated to the band 's mascot and their fans . 
 " Looking Down the Cross " was penned by Mustaine in 1983 under the working title " Speak No Evil " . The song tells about the temptation of Jesus Christ , using religious metaphors and imagery . " Chosen Ones " was partially inspired by Tim the Enchanter from the movie Monty Python and the Holy Grail . " Mechanix " was originally written by Mustaine during his tenure in Metallica ; lyrically , it talks about having sex at a gas station . The album features the first of many covers performed by Megadeth : a speed metal version of Nancy Sinatra 's classic " These Boots Are Made for Walkin ' " , with lyrics altered by Mustaine . The song sparked controversy in later years when the song 's original author , Lee Hazlewood , deemed Mustaine 's changes to be " vile and offensive " and demanded that the song be removed from the album . Under threat of legal action , the song was removed from all pressings released after 1995 . In 2002 , the album was re @-@ released with a modified version of the song ; the altered lyrics were censored because Hazlewood has not given permission to the band to release the cover in its original version . In the liner notes of the album 's reissue , Mustaine was strongly critical of Hazlewood , noting that he received royalties for almost 10 years before objecting to the altered version . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Killing Is My Business ... and Business Is Good ! received mostly positive reviews , not just from metal @-@ oriented magazines , but from the mainstream press too . Colin Larkin , writing in the Encyclopedia of Popular Music , called the album a " ferocious blast of high @-@ energy thrash metal " , weakened by a thin production . Similarly , Steve Huey from AllMusic observed that the album is " as raw as Megadeth gets " . However , Huey noted that the riffs and compositions weren 't completely developed , and called Mustaine 's vocals " amateurish at best " . Chad Bowar from About.com said that Megadeth were still " finding their way " on their debut album , but remarked that the band showed great potential through angry and passionate musicianship . 
 Adrien Begrand of PopMatters dismissed the original recording , but praised the re @-@ release , writing that the album " blazes on at a furious pace " . According to him , the record greatly influenced the heavy metal genre in the upcoming two decades . Sputnikmusic staff member Mike Stagno agreed with the praise for the remaster , saying that the " fuzzy " sound of the original release was replaced with a clearer production . Even so , he opined that the album still retained the " thrashy " sound characteristic for the band during this period . Mike Marsh of Drowned in Sound recommended the music " for people who want it loud , fast and brutal " . In a retrospective review for KNAC , Frank Meyer said that the album put Megadeth at the forefront of heavy metal scene in the early 1980s and credited it for paving the way for thrash metal 's arrival . CMJ New Music Report praised Mustaine 's " masterful " wordplay and called the record a representative of " the golden age of speed metal " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine , except " These Boots " by Lee Hazlewood . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 363 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 363 ( PA 363 ) is a state highway located in Montgomery County , Pennsylvania that is a spur of PA 63 . The route runs 11 @.@ 86 mi ( 19 @.@ 09 km ) from an interchange with U.S. Route 422 ( US 422 ) near Valley Forge northeast to PA 63 in Lansdale . The route runs through suburban areas of central Montgomery County , passing some farmland in Worcester Township . PA 363 is designated along Trooper Road , Ridge Pike , Park Avenue , and Valley Forge Road . In the community of Worcester , the route crosses PA 73 . 
 PA 363 was first designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in 1928 to run from PA 23 in Port Kennedy to PA 63 in Lansdale . Between the 1940s and the 1960s , PA 363 extended west on present @-@ day PA 23 to end near Valley Forge . In the 1960s , the route was redirected to follow Gulph Road to US 202 in King of Prussia . By 1989 , the south end of PA 363 was relocated to the US 422 interchange . The Betzwood Bridge , which had carried PA 363 over the Schuylkill River , was removed in the 1990s . The partial interchange with US 422 became a full interchange in 2015 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 363 begins at an interchange with US 422 ( Pottstown Expressway ) near Valley Forge National Historic Park in Montgomery County . From this point , the route heads northeast on four @-@ lane divided Trooper Road , forming the border between Lower Providence Township to the northwest and West <unk> Township to the southeast . The road passes a business park to the northwest and residential neighborhoods to the southeast as it narrows into an undivided road and enters areas of shopping centers . Here , the route becomes a divided highway again and intersects Egypt Road . 
 PA 363 continues as a two @-@ lane undivided road past more homes as it continues to the Ridge Pike intersection . At this point , the route turns northwest onto Ridge Pike and fully enters Lower Providence Township , passing businesses as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . PA 363 turns northeast onto two @-@ lane Park Avenue and runs through more residential areas . A short distance after crossing into Worcester Township , the route comes to the community of Fairview Village and crosses Germantown Pike in commercial areas . 
 Upon crossing Germantown Pike , PA 363 becomes known as Valley Forge Road and continues into agricultural areas with scattered residential neighborhoods . The amount of development increases until the road comes to the junction with PA 73 ( Skippack Pike ) in the community of Worcester . After the PA 73 intersection , PA 363 continues past areas of housing developments to the west and farmland to the east before it reaches Morris Road . At this point , the route becomes the border between Towamencin Township to the northwest and Upper Gwynedd Township to the southeast , crossing under I @-@ 476 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike Northeast Extension ) along this stretch . 
 The road passes through residential neighborhoods before entering commercial areas and crossing Sumneytown Pike . PA 363 heads to the southeast of North Penn High School and runs past a mix of homes and businesses as it gains a center left @-@ turn lane on the approach to the Allentown Road junction . A short distance later , the route enters Lansdale and passes homes as a two @-@ lane road . PA 363 reaches its northern terminus at an intersection with PA 63 in Lansdale . 
 = = History = = 
 When Pennsylvania first legislated routes in 1911 , present @-@ day PA 363 was not given a number with the exception of the Ridge Pike portion , which was designated as part of Legislative Route 146 . In 1928 , PA 363 was designated to run between PA 23 in the Port Kennedy section of Upper Merion Township and PA 63 in Lansdale . The route headed north across the Schuylkill River near the present US 422 bridge , before heading north on Trooper Road and east on Egypt Road to an intersection with US 422 ( Ridge Pike ) . PA 363 headed west concurrent with US 422 before heading north on Park Avenue and following its current alignment north to Lansdale . At this time , the route was paved between PA 23 and the north end of the US 422 concurrency . By 1930 , PA 363 was rerouted to follow Trooper Road between Egypt Road and US 422 . At this time , the entire length of the route was paved . 
 By 1945 , PA 363 was extended west to end at PA 23 a short distance to the east of the community of Valley Forge . This portion of route was cosigned with PA 23 Truck by 1950 . PA 363 was rerouted to follow Gulph Road from Port Kennedy to US 202 in King of Prussia , with PA 23 being rerouted to follow the former PA 363 between Valley Forge and Port Kennedy , by 1967 . Also by this time , the US 422 concurrency on Ridge Pike had been removed and a freeway had been built that connected PA 363 a short distance north of the Schuylkill River to the US 202 freeway on the border of Chester and Montgomery counties . 
 By 1989 , the southern terminus of PA 363 was cut back to its current location at the US 422 interchange . In 1991 , the Betzwood Bridge , which had carried PA 363 over the Schuylkill River , was closed because of structural issues . The bridge was removed in 1995 and limited bicycle and pedestrian access to Valley Forge National Historical Park from the north , with a temporary bike path being erected on the parallel US 422 bridge . There were plans to replace the Betzwood Bridge with a structure carrying two vehicle traffic lanes and a multi @-@ use trail . These plans never advanced . Ultimately the National Park Service secured federal funding for a mixed @-@ use trail bridge to connect the trails in the north and south sides of Valley Forge Park at the site of the old bridge . Construction of the new bridge at this site began in 2014 . This new bridge , which will be named Sullivan 's Bridge after Revolutionary War General John Sullivan , is planned to be for bicycles and pedestrians only and will provide better access to Valley Forge National Historical Park . In addition , improvements to the interchange between PA 363 and US 422 , which will add a ramp from PA 363 to westbound US 422 and from eastbound US 422 to PA 363 , started in 2013 . The new ramps opened to traffic on December 1 , 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Montgomery County . 
 = Scott Niedermayer = 
 Scott Niedermayer ( born August 31 , 1973 ) is a Canadian former ice hockey defenceman and current Special Assignment Coach of the Anaheim Ducks . He played 18 seasons and over 1 @,@ 000 games in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the New Jersey Devils and Anaheim Ducks . Niedermayer is a four @-@ time Stanley Cup champion and played in five NHL All @-@ Star Games . He won the James Norris Memorial Trophy in 2003 – 04 as the NHL 's top defenceman and the Conn Smythe Trophy in 2007 as the most valuable player of the playoffs . 
 As a junior , Niedermayer was a member of a Kamloops Blazers team that won two Western Hockey League championships and was voted the most valuable player of the 1992 Memorial Cup , leading the Blazers to the Canadian Hockey League championship . A third overall selection at the 1991 NHL Entry Draft by New Jersey , Niedermayer played the majority of his professional career with the Devils before moving to Anaheim in 2005 . 
 Internationally , Niedermayer played with Team Canada on several occasions . He is a member of the Triple Gold Club , signifying he has won the Stanley Cup , the World Championship ( 2004 ) and an Olympic gold medal ( 2002 , 2010 ) . Niedermayer also played on gold medal @-@ winning squads at the 1991 World Junior Championship and the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , making him and Joe Sakic the only players in history to win every major North American and international championship available to a Canadian player . 
 Regarded as one of the greatest defencemen in NHL history , Niedermayer has earned numerous accolades throughout his career . He was inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame in 2012 and was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in November 2013 . The New Jersey Devils and Kamloops Blazers have both retired his uniform number . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Niedermayer was born in Edmonton , Alberta , but spent the first three years of his life in <unk> , British Columbia before his family settled in Cranbrook , British Columbia . His father , Bob , was a doctor in <unk> and then Cranbrook , and his mother Carol was a teacher . He has a younger brother , Rob . 
 Scott and his brother were inseparable when they were younger and often played hockey together . While their father was often their team doctor , their mother taught them to skate . She enrolled them in figure skating to aid their skills development and taught power skating classes in Cranbrook in exchange for ice time for her sons . An offensive defenceman , Scott led his Cranbrook midget team in scoring with 55 goals and 92 points in 1988 – 89 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Niedermayer played three seasons of junior hockey with the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) between 1989 and 1992 . He recorded 69 points in 64 games in his first season , 1989 – 90 , and helped the Blazers win the President 's Cup as WHL champions . The Blazers advanced to the 1990 Memorial Cup as the top ranked team in Canada , but disappointed in the tournament by losing all three games . Niedermayer earned several accolades in 1990 – 91 . He scored 26 goals and 82 points in 57 games to earn a place on the Western Conference All @-@ Star Team . Additionally , he was named the recipient of the Daryl K. ( Doc ) Seaman Trophy as the WHL 's scholastic player of the year and won the Canadian Hockey League Scholastic Player of the Year award . 
 A top prospect for the 1991 NHL Entry Draft , Niedermayer was selected in the first round , third overall , by the New Jersey Devils . He began the 1991 – 92 season with New Jersey as the team wanted him to experience the NHL before being returned to Kamloops . After sitting out the Devils first five games , Niedermayer made his NHL debut on October 16 , 1991 , against the New York Rangers . He appeared in four games with the Devils , recording one assist , before he was sent back to junior . Though he appeared in only 35 games in the 1991 – 92 WHL season , Niedermayer 's 39 points were enough to earn him a second berth on the West All @-@ Star Team . After losing in the Western Conference Final the previous season , the Blazers rebounded to win their second WHL championship in three years in 1992 . Niedermayer tied for third place in playoff scoring with 23 points . At the 1992 Memorial Cup , he scored seven points in five games to lead the Blazers to the national championship . He was voted the recipient of the Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy as the most valuable player of the Memorial Cup . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils = = = 
 Niedermayer joined the Devils full @-@ time in 1992 – 93 . He scored his first NHL goal on November 8 , 1992 , against goaltender Brian Hayward in a 6 – 1 victory over the San Jose Sharks . Overall , Niedermayer appeared in 80 games , scoring 11 goals and 40 points and was named to the NHL All @-@ Rookie Team on defence . Niedermayer improved to 48 points in 1993 – 94 , and added 4 points in 20 playoff games as the Devils reached the Eastern Conference Final against the New York Rangers , a series they lost in seven games . The Devils made another long playoff run in the lockout @-@ shortened 1994 – 95 season , reaching the Stanley Cup Final for the first time in franchise history . Niedermayer scored 11 points in 20 playoff games , including a key goal in game two of the Final as the Devils won the Stanley Cup with a four @-@ game sweep of the Detroit Red Wings . 
 A 33 @-@ point season followed for Niedermayer in 1995 – 96 , but the Devils became the first defending champion in 26 years to miss the playoffs . After a 35 @-@ point season in 1996 – 97 , Niedermayer 's best statistical season in New Jersey came in 1997 – 98 with a 14 @-@ goal , 57 @-@ point campaign . He played in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , scoring a goal , and was named to the NHL 's Second All @-@ Star Team at the season 's end . After finishing second in league scoring amongst defencemen , despite playing in New Jersey 's stifling defensive system that suppresses offence , Niedermayer demanded a significant raise . He rejected an offer that would have paid him a base salary of $ 3 @.@ 25 million and , unable to come to terms before the start of the 1998 – 99 season , began the year as a holdout . As the dispute dragged into the season , he joined the Utah Grizzlies of the International Hockey League ( IHL ) . After missing the first month of the NHL season , Niedermayer and the Devils finally agreed to a multi @-@ year contract , the terms of which were not released . He appeared in 71 games with the Devils that season , recording 46 points . 
 Late in the 1999 – 2000 season , Niedermayer was involved in a violent incident with Peter Worell of the Florida Panthers . After being elbowed by Worell , Niedermayer responded by swinging his stick at his opponents head . Worell suffered a concussion and missed six games , while Niedermayer was suspended for ten games – nine in the regular season , and New Jersey 's first playoff game . After returning from his ban , Niedermayer 's steady defensive contributions in the playoffs helped the Devils win their second Stanley Cup by defeating the Dallas Stars in six games in the 2000 Stanley Cup Final . While celebrating his day with the Cup , Niedermayer took the trophy to Fisher Peak , overlooking his hometown of Cranbrook and was famously pictured hoisting it over his head . 
 The expiration of his contract following the season resulted in another lengthy dispute with the Devils . While he wanted a contract similar to the $ 5 @.@ 3 million per season average the top ten paid defencemen in the league made , the Devils offered a deal with a base salary of $ 3 @.@ 5 million . He was again a holdout at the start of the 2000 – 01 season , and missed nearly two months of play before finally agreeing to a four @-@ year , $ 16 million contract . Niedermayer recorded 35 points in 57 games and played in his second All @-@ Star Game . Late in game four of New Jersey 's first round playoff series against the Toronto Maple Leafs , Niedermayer was knocked unconscious by a vicious elbow from Toronto 's Tie Domi . Niedermayer later claimed that Domi had threatened to retaliate against him over a previous hit earlier in the series . Domi apologized for the incident , calling it a " stupid reaction " , but was suspended for the remainder of the 2001 Stanley Cup Playoffs . New Jersey reached the 2001 Stanley Cup Final , but lost the series to the Colorado Avalanche in seven games . 
 Niedermayer missed several games early in the 2001 – 02 season due to back pain , and his 33 points on the season was his lowest in six seasons . Niedermayer and the Devils reached their fourth Stanley Cup Final in 2002 – 03 . The series was a family affair , as Scott 's brother Rob was a member of the opposing Mighty Ducks of Anaheim . When asked , their mother admitted she was hoping Rob 's Mighty Ducks would win as Scott already had two championships to his name . Scott dashed his brother and mother 's hopes , recording two assists in the deciding seventh game to lead the Devils to a 3 – 0 victory , and win his third Stanley Cup . 
 Niedermayer cemented his reputation as an elite NHL defenceman in 2003 – 04 , earning praise from both teammates and opponents for his play throughout the season . Injuries to fellow defencemen Scott Stevens and Brian Rafalski resulted in Niedermayer averaging over 25 minutes of ice time per game , sometimes topping 30 , and he temporarily inherited the Devils ' captaincy from Stevens . Offensively , Niedermayer posted his second career 50 @-@ point season , finishing with 14 goals and 40 assists . He played in his third All @-@ Star Game and was named a First Team All @-@ Star for the first time . After finishing second in league scoring amongst defencemen , recording a plus @-@ minus rating of + 20 and leading the Devils to a modern NHL record low 164 goals against , Niedermayer was voted the winner of the James Norris Memorial Trophy as the league 's top defenceman . 
 Upon the expiration of his previous contract , Niedermayer was again a restricted free agent , and he again endured a difficult negotiation with the Devils , even after he changed agents . Initially demanding a five @-@ year , $ 45 million contract , Niedermayer chose to go to arbitration . He was awarded a one @-@ year contract for the 2004 – 05 season , and the $ 7 million salary he was given tied John LeClair 's award in 2000 as the highest ever given in arbitration . However , the contract was wiped out when the entire season was cancelled as a result of the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout . 
 = = = Anaheim Ducks = = = 
 As an unrestricted free agent in the summer of 2005 , Niedermayer was in considerable demand ; 14 teams contacted his agent on the first day they were allowed to talk to him . The Devils offered him a five @-@ year contract that would have paid him $ 7 @.@ 8 million per season , the maximum allowed under the new salary cap , but Niedermayer chose instead to sign a four @-@ year contract worth $ 6 @.@ 75 million per season with the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim . He chose to take the shorter term and lower salary to play and try to win a Stanley Cup with his brother . The Ducks immediately named Scott the team 's captain . In his first season in Anaheim , 2005 – 06 , Niedermayer scored 63 points and was named a First Team All @-@ Star for the second time . In the playoffs , the Ducks reached the Western Conference Final , but were eliminated by the Edmonton Oilers . 
 Joined on Anaheim 's blueline by Chris Pronger , Niedermayer helped the Ducks set franchise records in 2006 – 07 for most wins ( 48 ) and points ( 110 ) . Both were named finalists for the Norris Trophy , but lost to Detroit 's Nicklas Lidström . Individually , Niedermayer played his 1,000th career game , against the Edmonton Oilers on November 28 , 2006 . He set career highs of 15 goals , 54 assists and 69 points during the regular season and was named a First Team All @-@ Star . He added 11 points in the 2007 Stanley Cup Playoffs , and was named recipient of the Conn Smythe Memorial Trophy as the most valuable player of the post @-@ season after leading Anaheim to the franchise 's first championship in a five @-@ game series victory over the Ottawa Senators in the final . As team captain , Niedermayer was the first player given the chance to hoist the Stanley Cup . He passed the trophy to his brother ; it was Rob 's first championship victory . Of the moment , Scott stated : " You don 't really dream of passing it to your brother . I never have . To be able to do that is definitely a highlight of my career . " 
 Coming off his fourth championship , the 34 @-@ year @-@ old Niedermayer contemplated retirement . Remaining undecided on his future as the 2007 – 08 season began , he failed to report to the team and was suspended by the Ducks as a formality . Pronger replaced him as captain , and Niedermayer remained undecided until early December when he finally chose to return . He appeared in only 48 games that season , scoring 25 points , but played in his fourth All @-@ Star Game . 
 After the Ducks were eliminated in the first round of the 2008 playoffs , he again contemplated retirement , but quickly made the decision to return for the 2008 – 09 season . He regained captaincy of the Ducks , and played in his fifth All @-@ Star Game during the season in which he scored 59 points in 82 games . In what proved to be his final season , 2009 – 10 , Niedermayer scored 48 points in 80 games . He announced his retirement as a player on June 22 , 2010 , but remained with the Ducks organization as a consultant to general manager Bob Murray . He turned to coaching in 2012 – 13 season , serving as a Special Assignment Coach with the Ducks . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Niedermayer enjoyed a long and successful international career , winning championships at all levels . He made his international debut as a 17 @-@ year @-@ old with the Canadian junior team at the 1991 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . He appeared in three games as Team Canada used a late goal by John Slaney in the final game of the tournament , against the Soviet Union , to win the gold medal . He returned for the 1992 tournament , one which The Sports Network described as one of the most disappointing in Canadian history , as the team finished sixth in the eight team event . 
 Four years later , in 1996 , Niedermayer first joined the senior team at the inaugural World Cup of Hockey . He had a goal and three assists in eight games , but Canada lost the championship final to the United States . Niedermayer next made his Olympic debut in 2002 . He appeared in six games , and helped Canada defeat the United States , 5 – 2 in the final as the country won its first Olympic gold medal in hockey in 50 years . 
 Gold medal victories followed in 2004 as Niedermayer scored five points in nine games at the World Championship then added two points in six games at the World Cup of Hockey . In the latter event , Niedermayer scored a goal in the championship game , a 3 – 2 victory over Finland . He was set to make his second Olympic appearance in 2006 , however a knee injury suffered during NHL play that required surgery forced him to withdraw from the tournament . 
 Niedermayer 's final international competition came at the 2010 Olympics , four months before his retirement as a player . He was named captain of the team for the tournament that was held in his home province , in Vancouver . He led Canada to the gold medal , culminating in a 3 – 2 overtime win over the United States . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 An offensively @-@ minded defenceman , Niedermayer was best known for his skating ability and drew comparison 's to the game 's offensive greats from the time he broke into the NHL . He was compared to Paul Coffey for his ability to take the puck from his own goal line and convert a defensive situation into an offensive rush . He often chafed at playing within the Devils ' defence @-@ oriented system , feeling it restricted his offensive creativity , but also admitted that he learned to place greater emphasis on his defence and develop his overall game . Niedermayer earned a reputation for inconsistency early in his career . He often played his best games against top opposition , but his failure to consistently apply his skills against all opposition occasionally frustrated his teammates and left his coaches lamenting that he was a player capable of being dominant but often was not . By the end of his career however , and following his Norris Trophy win in 2004 , Niedermayer was regarded as one of the top offensive defencemen of his generation and as one of the game 's greatest winners . Niedermayer is the only player in hockey history to win every major contemporary North American and International Competitive titles : the Memorial Cup , World Junior championship , Stanley Cup , World Championship , World Cup and Olympic Games . 
 Niedermayer has been honoured on several occasions . The New Jersey Devils retired his jersey number 27 in 2011 , and the Kamloops Blazers retired the number 28 he wore in junior in 2013 . He has been inducted into the BC Hockey Hall of Fame and Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame . Niedermayer was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame as part of its 2013 class , and was inducted on November 11 , 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Niedermayer and his wife Lisa have four sons : Logan , Jackson , Joshua and Luke . The family resides in Newport Beach , California , but often returns to Cranbrook , where they spent the off @-@ seasons while he was playing . Scott and Lisa are active in the community . They serve as honorary co @-@ chairs of the Walk for Kids , a charity event that supports the Ronald McDonald House of Orange County , while Scott and his brother Rob operate a hockey school in Cranbrook and established a fund that offers grants to community associations . An active environmentalist , Scott has also joined with WWF @-@ Canada to speak out in favour of efforts to maintain British Columbia 's natural wilderness . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Sauvignon blanc = 
 Sauvignon blanc is a green @-@ skinned grape variety that originates from the Bordeaux region of France . The grape most likely gets its name from the French words sauvage ( " wild " ) and blanc ( " white " ) due to its early origins as an indigenous grape in South West France . It is possibly a descendant of Savagnin . Sauvignon blanc is planted in many of the world 's wine regions , producing a crisp , dry , and refreshing white varietal wine . The grape is also a component of the famous dessert wines from Sauternes and <unk> . Sauvignon blanc is widely cultivated in France , Chile , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Washington and California . Some New World Sauvignon blancs , particularly from California , may also be called " Fume Blanc " . 
 Depending on the climate , the flavor can range from aggressively grassy to sweetly tropical . In cooler climates , the grape has a tendency to produce wines with noticeable acidity and " green flavors " of grass , green bell peppers and nettles with some tropical fruit ( such as passion fruit ) and floral ( such as elderflower ) notes . In warmer climates , it can develop more tropical fruit notes but risk losing a lot of aromatics from over @-@ ripeness , leaving only slight grapefruit and tree fruit ( such as peach ) notes . 
 Wine experts have used the phrase " crisp , elegant , and fresh " as a favorable description of Sauvignon blanc from the Loire Valley and New Zealand . Sauvignon blanc , when slightly chilled , pairs well with fish or cheese , particularly <unk> . It is also known as one of the few wines that can pair well with sushi . 
 Along with Riesling , Sauvignon blanc was one of the first fine wines to be bottled with a <unk> in commercial quantities , especially by New Zealand producers . The wine is usually consumed young , as it does not particularly benefit from aging , as varietal Sauvignon blancs tend to develop vegetal aromas reminiscent of peas and asparagus with extended aging . Dry and sweet white Bordeaux , including oak @-@ aged examples from Pessac @-@ <unk> and Graves , as well as some Loire wines from Pouilly @-@ Fumé and Sancerre are some of the few examples of Sauvignon blancs with aging potential . 
 Since 2010 , 24 April has been International Sauvignon Blanc Day . 
 = = History = = 
 The Sauvignon blanc grape traces its origins to western France in the Loire Valley and Bordeaux Regions . As noted above , it is not clear that the vine originated in western France . Ongoing research suggests it may have descended from Savagnin . It has also been associated with the <unk> family . At some point in the 18th century , the vine paired with Cabernet Franc to parent the Cabernet Sauvignon vine in Bordeaux . In the 19th century , plantings in Bordeaux were often interspersed with Sauvignon vert ( In Chile , known as <unk> ) as well as the Sauvignon blanc pink mutation Sauvignon gris . Prior to the phylloxera epidemic , the insect plague which devastated French vineyards in the 19th century , these interspersed cuttings were transported to Chile where the field blends are still common today . Despite the similarity in names , Sauvignon blanc has no known relation to the Sauvignon rosé mutation found in the Loire Valley of France . 
 The first cuttings of Sauvignon blanc were brought to California by Charles Wetmore , founder of Cresta Blanca Winery , in the 1880s . These cuttings came from the Sauternes vineyards of Château d <unk> . The plantings produced well in Livermore Valley . Eventually , the wine acquired the alias of " Fumé Blanc " in California by promotion of Robert Mondavi in 1968 . The grape was first introduced to New Zealand in the 1970s as an experimental planting to be blended with Müller @-@ Thurgau . 
 = = Climate and geography = = 
 The Sauvignon blanc vine often buds late but ripens early , which allows it to perform well in sunny climates when not exposed to overwhelming heat . In warm regions such as South Africa , Australia and California , the grape flourishes in cooler climate appellations such as the Alexander Valley area . In areas where the vine is subjected to high heat , the grape will quickly become over @-@ ripe and produce wines with dull flavors and flat acidity . Rising global temperatures have caused farmers to harvest the grapes earlier than they have in the past . 
 The grape originated in France , in the regions of Bordeaux and the Loire Valley . Plantings in California , Australia , Chile and South Africa are also extensive , and Sauvignon blanc is steadily increasing in popularity as white wine drinkers seek alternatives to Chardonnay . The grape can also be found in Italy and Central Europe . 
 = = Wine regions = = 
 = = = France = = = 
 In France , Sauvignon blanc is grown in the maritime climate of Bordeaux ( especially in Entre @-@ Deux @-@ Mers , Graves and Pessac @-@ <unk> as a dry wine , and in Sauternes as a sweet wine ) as well as the continental climate of the Loire Valley ( as Pouilly Fumé , Sancerre , and Sauvignon de Touraine ) . The climates of these areas are particularly favorable in slowing the ripening on the vine , allowing the grape more time to develop a balance between its acidity and sugar levels . This balance is important in the development of the intensity of the wine 's aromas . Winemakers in France pay careful attention to the terroir characteristics of the soil and the different elements that it can impart to the wine . The chalk and <unk> marl of Sancerre and Pouilly produces wines of richness and complexity while areas with more compact chalk soils produces wines with more finesse and perfume . The gravel soil found near the Loire River and its tributaries impart spicy , floral and mineral flavors while in Bordeaux , the wines have a fruitier personality . Vines planted in flint tend to produce the most vigorous and longest lasting wines . 
 Pouilly Fumé originate from the town of Pouilly @-@ sur @-@ Loire , located directly across the Loire River from the commune of Sancerre . The soil here is very flinty with deposits of limestone which the locals believed imparted a smoky , gun flint flavor to the wine and hence Fumé , the French word for " smoke " was attached to the wine . Along with Sémillon , <unk> and <unk> blanc , Sauvignon blanc is one of only four white grapes allowed in the production of white Bordeaux wine . Mostly used as a blending grape , Sauvignon blanc is the principal grape in Château Margaux 's Pavillon Blanc , In the northern Rhône Valley , Sauvignon Blanc is often blended with <unk> to form a tart white wine . 
 In the Sauternes region , the grape is blended with Sémillon to make the late harvest wine , Sauternes . The composition of Sauvignon blanc varies from producer and can range from 5 @-@ 50 % with the Premier Cru Supérieur Château d <unk> using 20 % . A traditional practice often employed in Sauternes is to plant one Sauvignon Blanc vine at regular intervals among rows of <unk> . However , Sauvignon blanc 's propensity to ripen 1 – 2 weeks earlier can lead the grapes to lose some of their intensity and aroma as they hang longer on the vine . This has prompted more producers to isolate their parcels of Sauvignon blanc . 
 Near the edge of the <unk> commune is an AOC called Saint @-@ <unk> that is gaining attention for its Sauvignon blanc production . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 In Australia , particularly the Margaret River region , the grape is often blended with Sémillon . <unk> styles , made from only the Sauvignon blanc grape , from Adelaide Hills and <unk> have a style distinctive from their New Zealand neighbors that tend to be more ripe in flavor with white peach and lime notes and slightly higher acidity . 
 = = = Chile and Brazil = = = 
 In the early 1990s , ampelographers began to distinguish Sauvignon blanc from <unk> plantings in Chile . The character of non @-@ blended Chilean Sauvignon blanc are noticeably less acidic than the wines of New Zealand and more similar to the French style that is typical of Chilean wines . The region of Valparaíso is the most notable area for Sauvignon blanc in Chile due to its cooler climate which allows the grapes to be picked up to six weeks later than in other parts of Chile . In Brazil , ampelographers have discovered that the vines called Sauvignon blanc planted in the region are really <unk> blanc . 
 = = = New Zealand = = = 
 In the 1990s , Sauvignon blanc wines from the maritime climatic regions of New Zealand , particularly the South Island , became popular on the wine market . In the Marlborough region , sandy soils over slate shingles have become the most desirable locations for plantings due to the good drainage of the soil and poor fertility that encourages the vine to concentrate its flavors in lower yields . In the flood plain of the Wairau River Valley , the soil runs in east @-@ west bands across the area . This can create a wide diversity of flavors for vineyards that are planted north @-@ south with the heavier soils producing more herbaceous wines from grapes that ripen late and vines planted in <unk> soils ripening earlier and imparting more lush and tropical flavors . It is this difference in soils , and the types of harvest time decisions that wine producers must make , that add a unique element to New Zealand Sauvignon blanc . 
 The long narrow geography of the South Island ensures that no vineyard is more than 80 miles ( 130 km ) from the coast . The cool , maritime climate of the area allows for a long and steady growing season in which the grapes can ripen and develop a natural balance of acids and sugars . This brings out the flavors and intensity that distinguish New Zealand Sauvignon blancs . More recently , <unk> in the South Island and <unk> , Gisborne and Hawkes Bay in the North Island have been attracting attention for their Sauvignon blanc releases , which often exhibit subtle differences to those from Marlborough . The asparagus , gooseberry and green flavor commonly associated with New Zealand Sauvignon blanc is derived from flavor compounds known as <unk> that becomes more pronounced and concentrated in wines from cooler climate regions . Riper flavors such as passion fruit , along with other notes such as boxwood , may be driven by thiol concentrations . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 In North America , California is the leading producer of Sauvignon blanc with plantings also found in Washington state and on the Niagara Peninsula and Okanagan Valley in Canada . In California wine produced from the Sauvignon blanc grape is also known as Fumé Blanc . This California wine was first made by Napa Valley 's Robert Mondavi Winery in 1968 . Mondavi had been offered a crop of particularly good Sauvignon blanc grapes by a grower . At that time the variety had a poor reputation in California due to its grassy flavor and aggressive aromas . Mondavi decided to try to tame that aggressiveness with barrel <unk> and released the wine under the name Fumé Blanc as an allusion to the French Pouilly @-@ Fumé . The usage of the term is primarily a marketing base one with California wine makers choosing whichever name they prefer . Both <unk> and <unk> Sauvignon blanc wines have been marketed under the name Fumé Blanc . California Sauvignon blancs tend to fall into two styles . The New Zealand @-@ influenced Sauvignon blanc have more tropical fruit undertones with citrus and passion fruit notes . The Mondavi @-@ influenced Fumé Blanc are more round with melon notes . 
 = = = Other areas = = = 
 Sauvignon blanc is also beginning to gain prominence in areas like South Africa 's Stellenbosch and <unk> and Italy 's Collio <unk> areas . It is also one of the main ingredients in <unk> della Sala , one of Italy 's most celebrated sweet wines . 
 = = Viticulture = = 
 Winemakers in New Zealand and Chile harvest the grapes at various intervals for the different blending characteristics that the grape can impart depending on its ripeness levels . At its most unripe stage , the grape is high in malic acid . As it progresses further towards ripeness the grape develops red & green pepper flavors and eventually achieves a balance of sugars . The flavors characteristic of Sauvignon blanc come from the chemicals <unk> . Grapes grown in Marlborough 's Wairau Valley may exhibit different levels of ripeness over the vineyard , caused by slight unevenness in the land and giving a similar flavor profile to the resulting wine . 
 Sauvignon blanc can be greatly influenced by decisions in the winemaking process . One decision is the amount of contact that the must has with the skins of the grape . In the early years of the New Zealand wine industry , there were no wineries on the South Island which meant that freshly harvested grapes had to be trucked and then ferried to the North Island , often all the way up to Auckland . This allowed for prolonged exposure of the skins and juice which sharpened the intensity and pungency of the wine . Some winemakers , like the Loire , intentionally leave a small amount of must to spend some time in contact with the skin for later blending purposes . Other winemakers , like in California , generally avoid any contact with the skin due to the reduced aging ability of the resulting wine . 
 Another important decision is the temperature of fermentation . French winemakers prefer warmer <unk> ( around 16 @-@ 18 ° C ) that bring out the mineral flavors in the wine while New World winemakers prefer slightly colder temperatures to bring out more fruit and tropical flavors . A small minority of Loire winemakers will put the wine through malolactic fermentation , a practice more often associated with New Zealand wines . Oak aging can have a pronounced effect on the wine , with the oak rounding out the flavors and softening the naturally high acidity of the grape . Some winemakers , like those in New Zealand and Sancerre , prefer stainless steel fermentation tanks over barrels with the intention of maintaining the sharp focus and flavor intensity . 
 = = Synonyms = = 
 Sauvignon blanc is also known under the synonyms Beyaz Sauvignon , Blanc Doux , Blanc Fume , Bordeaux bianco , Douce blanche , Feher Sauvignon , <unk> , Fie , Fie dans le <unk> , Fume , Fume Blanc , Fume Surin , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> a <unk> , Gros Sauvignon , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Muskat Silvaner , Muskat Sylvaner , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Petit Sauvignon , <unk> , <unk> , Pinot <unk> Bely , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Sauternes , Sauvignon , Sauvignon bianco , Sauvignon <unk> , Sauvignon blanco , Sauvignon Fume , Sauvignon Gros , Sauvignon jaune , Sauvignon jeune , Sauvignon Petit , Sauvignon vert , Sauvignon White , Savagnin , Savagnin blanc , Savagnin Musque , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Beli , <unk> , <unk> , Surin , Sylvaner Musque , Uva <unk> , Weisser Sauvignon , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = Duane Barry = 
 " Duane Barry " is the fifth episode of the second season and 29th episode overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired in the United States and Canada on October 14 , 1994 , on Fox . The episode was written and directed by executive producer Chris Carter . " Duane Barry " received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 9 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 5 million households . The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder becomes involved in a hostage situation with an escaped psychiatric patient , named Duane Barry ( Steve Railsback ) , who claims to be terrified of frequent alien abductions . " Duane Barry " was a storyline milestone for the series , marking the events which would lead up to Scully being abducted by aliens , which in turn would lead to her developing cancer in the fourth and fifth seasons . It would also lead to the birth of her son , William , at the end of the eighth season . 
 The episode marked Chris Carter 's debut as a director . While never directing before , he would direct such episodes as " The List " , " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " , " Triangle " , and " Improbable " , as well as the second feature film , The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe and three episodes of the tenth season . The storyline was inspired by the true story of Phineas Gage , a 19th @-@ century medical case . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1985 , at his home in Pulaski , Virginia , Duane Barry ( Steve Railsback ) is abducted by aliens . Eight years later , Barry has become a violent patient in a mental institution , refusing to take his medication and insisting that the aliens are coming back for him . He attacks a security guard and steals his gun , taking head psychiatrist Dr. Hakkie hostage before escaping . Barry seeks to return to his original abduction site with Dr. Hakkie , in the hopes that the aliens will take the doctor instead when they return . But since he can 't remember where the abduction site is located , Barry heads to a travel agency in Richmond and holds the three clerks hostage along with Dr. Hakkie . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) are summoned to the ensuing hostage situation by Agent Lucy Kazdin ( CCH Pounder ) , since Barry insists that he is an alien abductee . Mulder contacts Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) for assistance , asking her to look into Barry 's history . Mulder acts as a hostage negotiator , calling Barry in order to earn his trust so that the standoff may be peacefully resolved . Barry quickly figures this out , causing Mulder to learn that he is a former FBI agent . A power outage occurs , frightening Barry and causing him to fire his gun , hitting one of the hostages . Mulder heads inside the travel agency with a paramedic . Barry releases the wounded hostage in exchange for Mulder , who is instructed to get Barry near the agency 's front door so that snipers can fire on him . 
 Scully arrives and reveals that Barry 's frontal cortex was damaged when he was shot in the head in 1982 ; she thinks this injury has made Barry a psychopathic pathological liar . Mulder talks to Barry , who claims that the aliens performed painful tests on him and put tracking devices in his body . Mulder — against Agent Kazdin 's orders — tells Barry that he believes his story , convincing him to let two more hostages go . However , when Mulder questions whether Barry is lying , he becomes enraged . Mulder tricks Barry into approaching the front door where Barry is shot by a sniper . 
 The next day , Mulder visits Barry in the hospital . Agent Kazdin appears , revealing that metal implants were found in Barry 's body and that tiny holes were found in his teeth , in the same manner he had described . Mulder gives one of the implants to Scully , who has it reviewed by a ballistics expert ; they find a microscopic barcode imprinted on it . Later , at a supermarket , Scully swipes the implant across a checkout scanner , causing the machine to malfunction while displaying a strange serial number . At her house , Scully leaves a message on Mulder 's voicemail , suggesting that Barry had been " catalogued " by the implant . But just then , Barry — having just escaped from the hospital — breaks in through Scully 's window and kidnaps her . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Originally planned to be a standalone mythology episode , but the news of Gillian Anderson 's pregnancy led to the creation of a two @-@ part episode , since the production crew knew they needed Anderson to disappear until she had given birth . The follow @-@ up episode , " Ascension " , was written by Paul Brown . 
 Much of Carter 's inspiration for the episode came from reports of Phineas Gage , who underwent a personality change after a blasting accident drove an iron rod completely through his head ( though the idea that Gage became violent , immoral , or a pathological liar , as Scully describes him , is without foundation ) . The aliens ' use of a dental drill on Barry was inspired by a neighbour of Carter who said that he was abducted and that the aliens drilled holes into his teeth – which a dentist analyzed and said could not be done with any equipment he knew . 
 The aliens seen at the start of the episode were portrayed by children . Carter wrote specifically the part of Duane Barry with Steve Railsback in mind , saying " I 've resisted casting the marquee names only because it takes you out of the show ; makes the show less believable . But there are certain actors who just call out for the part . " Originally , Railsback character was named Duane Garry , but it was changed to Duane Barry after learning that a person within the Federal Bureau of Investigation had the same name . Carter has mentioned that he disliked the new name at first , but got used to it over time . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 This episode marked Chris Carter 's directing debut . Being the first he had ever directed , David Nutter from the directing staff helped , tipped , and showed him what to do . With Nutter 's help , Carter learned how to block entire scenes . When commenting on his experience , Carter told that he sometimes followed Nutter 's advice down to " the letter " . When directing the episode , Carter wanted to create a different feel for the episode , by focusing more on the performances given by the actors , than the mechanical set designs . Carter declared that directing he learned about " things you take for granted as a writer and producer " , that lead to " compromises " for things Carter could not do on @-@ screen , and compared the episode to a stage play as most is set in a single place , the travel agency . 
 During the filming of Duane Barry 's abduction , they had a " film run out " which , according to Carter , gave the scene a " very eerie effect " . Shooting that scene was a " real test " according to Carter . Carter was pleased with the outcome , saying he was able to show viewers what he wanted out of The X @-@ Files , which he felt he was " very successful " at . The visual effects ' crew had to hang a " giant light " over the house where Barry was being abducted . It took the course of 45 minutes to shoot the scene . According to Carter , much teamwork was required to film that particular scene . As Carter puts it , he was actually forced to stay " behind the camera " to see the end results . For the experiments , Railsback was put in a plaster model of his back as he was lifted by a hydraulic device , and had water squirted on his mouth for the dental drill . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Duane Barry " premiered on the Fox network on October 14 , 1994 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 9 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 8 @.@ 5 million households . CCH Pounder and Chris Carter both earned Primetime Emmy nominations for " excellence in primetime television " for their work in this episode . Pounder was nominated in the category " Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series " , while Carter was nominated in the category " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing for a Drama Series " . The episode was also nominated in the categories " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Editing for a Series " and " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Editing for a Series - Single Camera Production " . Director of Photography John Bartley also received a nomination for Outstanding Achievement Award for Episodic Television by the American Society of Cinematographers . 
 The episode was well received by the cast and crew of The X @-@ Files . Producer J.P. Finn praised the episode and Carter 's directing , saying " We were all pretty nervous doing that one , because Chris Carter was a new director . It turned out that he directed very ... It was a great script , a great cast , and he ended up directing a home run . One of the charming things about it was the end , where we had these alien heads placed on young children . It was so endearing to see them on the set between takes , playing with Chris and everyone " . Actor David Duchovny said of Carter 's directing " Chris came in meticulously prepared , which is his nature . I think his first episode was great " . Carter himself described it as one of his favorite episodes because " it was a chance for me to sort of do it all , and it came out in ways better than I imagined it would " . 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . Matt Roush from USA Today said Steve Railsback 's performance as Duane Barry rivaled that of his portrayal of Charles Manson in the 1976 television miniseries Helter Skelter . An unnamed reviewer from the Contra Costa Times called the episode " seminal " . San Jose Mercury News said Railsback gave what was to be the " ultimate X @-@ Files performance " in 2002 after the show had been cancelled . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a glowing review and rated it five stars out of five . The two called it " a career best for Chris Carter " and praised his writing and directing , noting that both were " powerfully " and " passionately " done . Shearman and Pearson also applauded the episode 's simplicity , citing it as the factor that made the entry stand out from others . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club named it an " essential " episode of The X @-@ Files . Furthermore , he praised Railsback 's performance , writing that " there 's a sweaty intensity to his best performances that makes him impossible to look away from ; but you still can 't accept anything he says at face value . " 
 = Roderic Dallas = 
 Roderic Stanley ( Stan ) Dallas , DSO , DSC & Bar ( 30 July 1891 – 1 June 1918 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War I. His score of aerial victories is generally regarded as the second @-@ highest by an Australian , after Robert Little , but there is considerable dispute over Dallas 's exact total . While his official score is commonly given as 39 , claim @-@ by @-@ claim analyses list as few as 32 , and other research credits him with over 50 , compared to Little 's official tally of 47 . Like Little , Dallas flew with British units , rather than the Australian Flying Corps . Beyond his personal combat record , Dallas achieved success as a squadron leader , both in the air and on the ground . He was also an influential tactician and test pilot . His service spanned almost the entirety of World War I fighter aviation . 
 Born on a remote property in rural Queensland , Dallas showed an early interest in aviation . He travelled to England at his own expense following the outbreak of World War I and became a pilot in the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) in August 1915 . Initially seeing action with No. 1 Naval Wing on the Western Front in Caudrons and Nieuport 11s , he was chosen to test one of the earliest Sopwith Triplanes . This became his favourite type , and he achieved many victories with it through 1916 – 17 , earning the Distinguished Service Order , and the Distinguished Service Cross and Bar . He was appointed commanding officer of No. 1 Squadron RNAS in June 1917 . On the establishment of the Royal Air Force on 1 April 1918 , he took command of No. 40 Squadron . Flying Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s , he achieved further victories before being killed in action on 1 June 1918 while on patrol near Liévin in northern France . He was buried in Pernes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stan Dallas was born on 30 July 1891 at Mount Stanley station outside Esk , Queensland , to labourer Peter MacArthur Dallas and his wife Honora . Mount Stanley was an isolated property , and journeys to and from Esk were long and infrequent ; Stan was the first Caucasian child born at the station . His family moved to Tenterfield , New South Wales , soon after the birth of his younger brother in 1893 . They returned to Queensland in 1898 , settling in Mount Morgan , where Peter Dallas became a shift boss at the local mines . Stan attended Mount Morgan Boy 's School from February 1899 and eventually joined its cadet corps , rising to sergeant . At school he was noted for his intelligence , ability to get along well with others , and quiet sense of humour . He enjoyed the outdoors , and spent many hours in the mountains behind his family 's home , observing birds of prey . 
 In July 1907 , Dallas joined the assay office of the Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company , and also enrolled in the local technical college , where he took night classes in chemistry and technical drawing . He showed an early interest in aviation , fuelled by the establishment in 1911 of the Mount Morgan chapter of the Queensland Aero Club . Dallas and his younger brother <unk> built a glider , which was wrecked by an untimely gust of wind the first time they tried to launch it . The two brothers continued to build model gliders in spite of this initial disaster , and Stan corresponded with pioneer aviators in France , England , and the United States . He later transferred to a higher @-@ paying job driving trucks for Iron Island ironstone quarries . Stan and <unk> once again built their own flying machine while Stan was working on Iron Island . They experimented with this seaplane on nearby Marble Island , notorious for its treacherous waters ; Stan lost this aeroplane in the sea . 
 At 1 @.@ 88 metres ( 6 ft 2 in ) tall , and weighing 101 kg ( 223 lb ) , Dallas would later surprise observers with his ability to fit into the cramped cockpits of fighter planes . Despite his size , he was considered a fine athlete with quick reflexes . Although he could project a loud speaking voice , he was generally soft @-@ spoken and was not known to curse or drink alcohol , nor often to smoke . Dallas stayed fit through regular exercise at the gym , and played rugby union football . He had exceptionally keen eyesight , which he had trained by reading small print in newspapers at the six @-@ foot length of his family 's table . To balance out athletics , he participated in amateur theatrics , where his strong voice served him well . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Rise to flying ace = = = 
 Dallas joined the Port Curtis Militia in 1913 , and was commissioned as a lieutenant prior to the outbreak of World War I. Believing he had little chance of gaining a place in the recently established Australian Flying Corps , he applied to join the British Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) , but was rejected . Undaunted , he travelled from Queensland to Melbourne , where he impressed Minister Without Portfolio J.A. Jensen . Jensen gave the young aspirant a letter of introduction to the Australian High Commissioner in London , Sir George Reid . Dallas paid his own passage to England and , once there , applied once more to the RFC . Rejected again , he turned to the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) and was accepted , topping the entrance examination over 83 other students . He was commissioned a flight sub @-@ lieutenant and began training at Hendon in June 1915 , gaining Pilot 's License # 1512 on 5 August . 
 On 3 December 1915 , Dallas joined No. 1 Naval Wing and began flying combat missions in single @-@ seat Nieuport 11 fighters and two @-@ seat Caudrons out of Dunkirk , France . Early in his career there , a practical joker imitating the commanding officer telephoned Dallas , who was the duty officer , and peremptorily ordered him to take off in a <unk> Breguet . Upon learning that he had been tricked , Dallas joined in the laughter . He not only accepted the resulting nickname of " Breguet " , but also used it as a signature on his letters home later in the war . Having made two unconfirmed claims in February 1916 , Dallas scored his first confirmed victory on 23 April . He <unk> a German <unk> C and shot it out of control , following his victim down to 2 @,@ 000 feet , though heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire holed his plane in several places . He went on to score three more confirmed victories with his Nieuport . 
 On 23 June 1916 , Dallas took delivery of the newest RNAS fighter , Sopwith Triplane # <unk> . This was the original prototype , having undergone Admiralty trials before being shipped to France . Though still only a test plane , it was flown into combat 15 minutes after its arrival . Dallas named it Brown Bread , and it was the first of a series of ' <unk> ' that he would fly and fight in over the next year . He achieved his first victory with Brown Bread on 1 July , the same day he was promoted to flight lieutenant . Three days later , he was recommended for further promotion . He scored his last Nieuport @-@ mounted ' kill ' on 9 July , earning the Croix de guerre and a mention in despatches for coming to the aid of a French Maurice Farman biplane . On 7 September 1916 , Dallas was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , " for the specially gallant manner in which he has carried out his duties " since first seeing action in December 1915 . By the end of the year he was among the earliest RNAS aces , with eight confirmed and four unconfirmed victories , and had been raised to the rank of flight commander . 
 Dallas became one of the best @-@ known pilots of Sopwith Triplanes in the RNAS . He opened 1917 by setting an altitude record of 26 @,@ 000 feet in the Triplane while testing a prototype oxygen set ; he endured frostbite and oxygen intoxication in the process . By now No. 1 Wing 's fighter squadron had been renumbered as No. 1 Squadron RNAS , and had totally re @-@ equipped with production Triplanes . It also shifted airfields from <unk> in Belgium to Chipilly in France , leaving behind RNAS control by transferring to No. 14 Wing , 4th Brigade of the RFC . Formation flying became the order of the day , as the practice of fighter pilots soloing into combat dwindled . The last three weeks of March were also filled with Dallas 's responsibilities for flight and gunnery testing . As British losses in the air began to mount during Bloody April , Dallas and his squadron moved airfields once again , to La Bellevue . They were thus positioned to take a prominent part in the subsequent Battle of Arras , where the intense aerial fighting saw Dallas add to his burgeoning score . The combat of 23 April became known as one of the classic air battles of the war . Dallas and his wingman Thomas Culling took on a squadron @-@ sized formation of 14 German aircraft , having gained an altitude edge over their foes . The naval aces exploited this edge by making quick diving attacks from opposite sides , culminating in short bursts of machine @-@ gun fire . Using the Triplane 's superior climbing ability , they would then bob back up to position themselves for the next assault . In contrast to the usual hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics of most dogfights , the RNAS duo launched at least 20 gunnery runs over 45 minutes . The Germans were forced progressively lower , into disarray , and then chased back over their own lines . While they shot down three of the Germans , Dallas and Culling also achieved a more important outcome by blocking and then breaking up a determined enemy effort against the British ground offensive . The action led to the award of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for Dallas , and a Distinguished Service Cross for Culling , which were gazetted on 29 June . 
 = = = Squadron command = = = 
 By June 1917 , Dallas had achieved over 20 victories in aerial combat . This experience , and his leadership ability , led to his appointment as commanding officer of No. 1 Naval Squadron on 23 June 1917 . The unit had been forced to cut back its operational strength from 18 aircraft to 15 due to lack of pilot replacements and a shortage of spare parts for the aging Triplanes . It had also moved airfields , to an unprepared site at Bailleul . As a leader , Dallas made a point of shepherding new pilots through their first flights , and even setting them up with their first victories by manoeuvring enemy aircraft into a good position for the rookie to take a shot . On the ground , he proved to be an efficient organiser , designing and directing construction of the new air base . It was also during this time that he wrote a treatise on air combat tactics , extracts of which have survived . Both the air base layout and the treatise displayed his talent as a sketch artist . On 2 November , No. 1 Squadron moved airfields once more , to Middle Aerodrome , which put it back under overall RNAS control . The unit received its first eight new Sopwith Camels on 9 November as replacements for the Triplanes . On 11 November , Dallas was again mentioned in despatches , this time by Field Marshal Haig . After gaining its full complement of Camels , No. 1 Squadron was transferred to England , and took up home defence duties at Dover . On 16 February 1918 , Dallas led his squadron back to France , where it was based at <unk> , supporting units on operations along the Belgian coast . He commanded it for another six weeks , until 31 March . 
 As part of the amalgamation of the RFC and RNAS to form the Royal Air Force , on 1 April 1918 Dallas was promoted to major and given command of No. 40 Squadron RAF , flying Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s. The squadron boasted several aces in its ranks , and its former RFC members were suspicious of Dallas 's naval background . He was nevertheless able to overcome their misgivings and established himself as the new CO with his personal demeanour and courage ; the nickname of " Admiral " that they bestowed upon him was an affectionate one . Ten days after taking over , he had adapted well enough to his new mount with its inline engine to score his first victory with his new unit . His men also saw that he would not only look out for his rookie pilots , but would not shirk the dangers of ground attack sorties . His offhand attitude toward two leg wounds he received during a strafing mission on 14 April , after which he made " a perfect landing " , especially impressed his subordinates , as did his appreciation of all ranks for their hard work . His studious bent continued to serve him ; he kept notes on his methods of attacking enemy aircraft , which often exploited their structural weaknesses , and used them to tutor pilots under his command . 
 Dallas was briefly hospitalised with the wounds to his thigh and heel on 14 April , but sneaked out four days later to rejoin his squadron . His departure may have been spurred by news of the capture of his friend Richard Minifie . As soon as he was able , Dallas was flying again . By 26 April , he had increased his official score to 37 , and been awarded the Distinguished Service Order for operations at Dunkirk . He had also several times been recommended for the Victoria Cross , but it was never approved . His casual attitude towards claiming victories was noted by a member of No. 40 Squadron , Cecil Usher , who related that Dallas once remarked of an opponent , " ... he went down belching a lot of black smoke and after he had gone down <unk> one of his planes came off , but I didn 't see him crash so I shan 't claim him . " On 2 May , during a lull in the fighting at Flanders , Dallas took off in his S.E.5 to taunt his foes . He strafed the German base at La <unk> to " attract attention " before dropping a package on the aerodrome with a note reading , " If you won 't come up here and fight , herewith a pair of boots for work on the ground , pilots for the use of " . He then circled in mist until troops came to examine the bundle , whereupon he dropped two bombs and again shot up the base , causing " general panic " . News of this singular exploit reportedly provoked laughter from Field Marshal Haig and RAF founder General Sir Hugh Trenchard , two men not known for their sense of humour . While adding to his score and leading his squadron into combat , Dallas had begun thinking beyond the war . He was pleading with his father to quit the dangerous job of mining , with hints that he would support his parents by pioneering aviation in Australia . He also harboured a long @-@ standing ambition of flying from England back to Australia , which would be a record @-@ setting journey . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Dallas was raised to lieutenant colonel and appointed to the command of a wing , but would never see the message from headquarters that arrived on 1 June 1918 advising him of the promotion and ordering him to cease flying . He disappeared on a solo mission the same day . It was later learned that he had been killed over Liévin during combat with three Fokker Triplanes from Jagdstaffel 14 , probably by its commander , Leutnant Johannes Werner . There are several theories as to how he died . The common elements are that he was on patrol near the front line when he pounced on a German plane flying at a lower level , that there might have been another unknown British pilot in trouble , and that the Germans who shot Dallas down had dived from a still higher altitude . Medics near his crash site at Absalom Trench ventured into no man 's land and retrieved his body , while a patrol of eight volunteers salvaged his personal effects from the fallen aircraft . News of Dallas 's death was greeted with shock and disbelief by his squadron , one pilot recording : 
 The world is upside down ... Dallas has been killed ... Too good for this world I suppose . 
 The British magazine Aeroplane later paid tribute to him in an editorial : 
 Roderic Dallas had become almost a legendary character in the RNAS . He was a pilot of quite extraordinary skill , a fighting man of astonishing gallantry , a humorist of a high order , and a black @-@ and @-@ white artist of unusual ability . But , above all this , he was a great leader of men . To be in Dallas ' squadron was quite one of the highest honours open to a young fighting pilot of the RNAS and the high reputation held by certain of the RNAS squadrons operating with the RFC during the past year or two has been largely due to the training , example and leadership of Roderic Dallas . 
 For his record in aerial combat and his leadership skills , Dallas has been compared to the " Red Baron " , Manfred von Richthofen . The former flew combat for 29 months , and the latter for 31 months , if his three months in hospital are deducted . Dallas successfully led two different squadrons during his career , and was killed just before assuming command of a wing . Richthofen led first a squadron , then a wing during his 12 months in command , again excluding hospital time ; he achieved more victories , but had the tactical advantage of fighting over his own lines with the wind in his favour . Dallas flew a score of different types of Allied aircraft , as well as captured German planes ; he was also instrumental in developing the Sopwith Triplane . Richthofen flew the Fokker <unk> , and helped develop the Fokker D.VII , but did not live to fly it into battle . 
 Stan Dallas was buried at the Pernes British Cemetery , France , in Lot 38 , Row E of Plot II . Along with his military decorations , he was honoured with a Gold Medal by the Aéro @-@ Club de France , and a Bronze Medal and Diploma by the Aero Club of America . The town of Toogoolawah , Queensland , commemorated him in the name of its airport , and the national capital of Canberra remembered him with Dallas Place . His home town of Mount Morgan has dedicated a water reservoir in his honour ; its Historical Society Museum holds his medals , uniform , and sword , as well the propeller from one of his planes . 
 = = List of victories = = 
 Historians have struggled to develop a definitive list of Dallas 's victories ; Adrian Hellwig , in the bibliography to his 2006 biography , lists over a dozen previous historians that have investigated the subject . He also refers to his difficulties in reconciling previous accounts . While various claim @-@ by @-@ claim analyses ascribe Dallas a score of 32 aircraft shot down , he was officially credited with 39 , and with being second only to Robert Little — who was credited with 47 — among Australian aces . However , Dallas 's unofficial tally has been estimated at over 50 . This list is a compilation of claim @-@ by @-@ claim analyses that follow , as much as possible , the British system of confirming victory : pilot log entries and / or combat reports did not count , unless verified by squadron or higher levels of command . Thus , inclusion of a confirmed victory in this list has depended on verification by the Squadron Record Book , and / or by RNAS / RAF Communique or other reliable secondary source verification . Victories not confirmed by these methods are marked " u / c " . 
 = <unk> Kato = 
 <unk> Kato ( <unk> <unk> , Katō <unk> , 22 July 1899 – c . November 1978 ) was thought to have been Tokyo 's oldest man until July 2010 , when his mummified corpse was found in his bedroom . It was concluded he had likely died in November 1978 , aged 79 , and his family had never announced his death in an attempt to preserve his record . Relatives had rebuffed attempts by ward officials to see Kato in preparations for Respect for the Aged Day later that year , citing various reasons from him being a " human vegetable " to becoming a <unk> . The cause of death was not determined due to the state of Kato 's body . 
 The discovery of Kato 's remains sparked a search for other missing centenarians lost due to poor record keeping by officials . A study following the discovery of Kato 's remains found that police did not know if 234 @,@ 354 people over the age of one hundred were still alive . Poor record keeping was to blame for many of the cases , officials admitted . One of Kato 's relatives was found guilty of fraud ; his relatives claimed ¥ 9 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 117 @,@ 939 ; £ 72 @,@ 030 ) of pension meant for Kato . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery of the body = = = 
 After tracking down the residence in Adachi , Tokyo , where Kato was reportedly living , attempts by officials to meet him were rebuffed numerous times by the family . Many reasons were given by his relatives , including that he was a " human vegetable " and that he was becoming a <unk> . 
 Eventually , Kato 's body was found by police and ward officials in July 2010 , when ward officials intending to honour his achievement of longevity on Respect for the Aged Day later that year were again rebuffed and police broke into the house . Found in a first floor room , Kato 's mummified remains were lying on a bed wearing underwear and pajamas and were covered with a blanket . Newspapers that were found in the room dated back three decades to the Shōwa period , suggesting that Kato 's death may have occurred around November 1978 . An official named Yutaka <unk> said , " His family must have known he has ( d ) been dead all these years and acted as if nothing happened . It 's so eerie . " 
 The day after the visit , Kato 's granddaughter told an acquaintance that " my grandfather shut himself in a room on the first floor of our home 32 years ago , and we couldn 't open the door from the outside . My mother said , ' Leave him in there , ' and he was left as he was . I think he 's dead . " One official had reported concerns about Kato 's safety earlier in the year to his ward office . An autopsy failed to determine the cause of Kato 's death . 
 = = = Fraud trial = = = 
 Following the discovery of Kato 's body , two of his relatives were arrested in August 2010 , and subsequently charged with fraud . Prosecutors alleged that Michiko Kato , 81 , Kato 's daughter , and <unk> Kato , 53 , his granddaughter , fraudulently received about ¥ 9 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 117 @,@ 939 ; £ 72 @,@ 030 ) of pension money . In addition , after Kato 's wife died in 2004 at the age of 101 , ¥ 9 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 ( $ 117 @,@ 318 ; £ 71 @,@ 651 ) from a survivor 's mutual pension was deposited into Kato 's bank account between October 2004 and June 2010 . Approximately ¥ 6 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 ( $ 75 @,@ 108 ; £ 45 @,@ 872 ) was withdrawn before his body was discovered . Kato was likely paid a senior welfare benefit from the time he turned 70 , which the family may also have used to their advantage . Investigators said that the pair defrauded the Japan Mutual Aid Association of Public School Teachers , who transferred the money into Kato 's account . 
 In November 2010 , the Tokyo District Court sentenced <unk> Kato to a 2 ½ year sentence for fraud , suspended for four years . Judge Hajime Shimada said , " The defendant committed a malicious crime with the selfish motive of securing revenue for her family . However , she has paid back the pension benefits and expressed remorse for the crime . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the discovery of Kato 's mummified corpse , other checks into elderly centenarians across Japan produced reports of missing centenarians and faulty record keeping . When Tokyo officials attempted to find the oldest woman in the city — 113 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Furuya — they found her last known address was vacant . Furuya 's granddaughter said she had not seen her grandmother for several years . The revelations about the disappearance of Furuya and the death of Kato prompted a nationwide investigation , which concluded that police did not know if 234 @,@ 354 people older than 100 were still alive . More than 77 @,@ 000 of these people , officials said , would have been older than 120 years old if they were still alive . Poor record keeping was blamed for many of the cases , and officials said that many may have died during World War II . One register suggested a man was still alive at age 186 . 
 Following the revelations about Kato and Furuya , analysts investigated why record keeping by Japanese authorities was poor . Many seniors have , it has been reported , moved away from their family homes . Statistics show that divorce is becoming increasingly common among the elderly . Dementia , which afflicts more than two million Japanese , is also a contributing factor . " Many of those gone missing are men who left their hometowns to look for work in Japan ’ s big cities during the country ’ s pre @-@ 1990s boom years . Many of them worked obsessively long hours and never built a social network in their new homes . Others found less economic success than they ’ d hoped . Ashamed of that failure , they didn ’ t feel they could return home , " a Canadian newspaper reported several months after the discovery of Kato 's body . 
 Japan is the most elderly nation in the world ; as of October 2010 , 23 @.@ 1 percent of the population were found to be aged 65 and over , and 11 @.@ 1 percent were 75 and over . This has largely been caused by a very low birthrate ; as of 2005 , the rate was 1 @.@ 25 babies for every woman — to keep the population steady the number needed to be 2 @.@ 1 . However , the issue of aging in the country has been increased by the government 's unwillingness to let immigrants into the country — foreign nationals accounted for only 1 @.@ 2 percent of the total population as of 2005 . A 2006 report by the government indicates that by 2050 , 1 ⁄ 3 of the population may be elderly . 
 The inquiry also noted that many elderly Japanese citizens were dying in solitude . " Die alone and in two months all that is left is the stench , a rotting corpse and maggots , " The Japan Times said in an editorial , one of many comments from the country 's press on the news . An editorial in Asahi Shimbun said that the findings suggested " deeper problems " in the Japanese register system . " The families who are supposed to be closest to these elderly people don 't know where they are and , in many cases , have not even taken the trouble to ask the police to search for them , " read the editorial . " The situation shows the existence of lonely people who have no family to turn to and whose ties with those around them have been severed . " 
 One Japanese doctor , however , said he was not surprised at the news . Dr. Aiba <unk> , of the Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical Centre , said many Japanese seniors were dying alone , ignored by their families . “ Some patients come in with their families , but many are alone or come in just with their social workers , ” he said . “ It happens especially in Tokyo . There are more and more single @-@ person families . ” Dr. Aiba added that a key reason for the statistics was because people in Japan are living longer than ever before . " That achievement is placing new burdens on a society where a declining number of working @-@ age Japanese have to fund rising health @-@ care and pension costs , " The Globe and Mail reported . Dr. Aiba said that because Tokyo was so crowded , families cannot possibly live together any more . “ There ’ s not enough space for families to live together any more , ” he said . 
 A national census in 2005 found that 3 @.@ 86 million elderly Japanese citizens were living alone , compared with 2 @.@ 2 million a decade before . 24 @.@ 4 per cent of men and 9 @.@ 3 per cent of women over the age of 60 in Japan have no neighbours , friends or relatives on whom they could rely , a more recent study discovered . In 2008 , the Associated Press reported that the number of elderly people committing suicide had reached a record high because of health and economic worries . " In what appears to be a collective cry for help , more than 30 @,@ 000 Japanese seniors are arrested every year for shoplifting . Many of those arrested told police they stole out of feelings of boredom and isolation , rather than any economic necessity , " The Globe and Mail reported after the discovery of Kato 's corpse . Jeff Kingston , the Director of Asian Studies at the Japan Campus of Temple University , said , " It is a <unk> phenomenon — the Japanese are traditionally seen as sober , law @-@ abiding people — when they are in fact <unk> like the rest of us . [ The story of the missing centenarians ] holds up a mirror to society and reflects realities that many in Japan do not want to accept . " 
 = California State Route 160 = 
 State Route 160 ( SR 160 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California consisting of two sections . The longer , southern , section is a scenic highway through the alluvial plain of the Sacramento River , linking SR 4 in Antioch with Sacramento via the Antioch Bridge . The northern section , separated by the southern by Sacramento city streets , is the North Sacramento Freeway , running from the 16th Street Bridge over the American River to Interstate 80 Business towards Roseville . 
 This northern section was deleted from the definition in the Streets and Highways Code in 2003 , when the relinquished portion through downtown Sacramento was also removed , but it is still maintained and signed by the California Department of Transportation ( Caltrans ) as SR 160 . This portion is also part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , as is the piece south of SR 12 near Rio Vista , though , of the latter , only the southernmost piece in Antioch is built to freeway standards . The entire southern portion , from SR 4 to Sacramento , is part of the State Scenic Highway System . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 160 begins in eastern Antioch at SR 4 . After two interchanges , the highway rises onto the two lane Antioch Bridge over the San Joaquin River . It cuts north across the center of Sherman Island , reaching the Sacramento River on the opposite shore . From here to Sacramento , SR 160 never strays far from the river , first following the east levee over the 1949 Three Mile Slough Bridge ( a lift bridge ) , past Brannan Island State Recreation Area , and across SR 12 opposite the river from Rio Vista . After passing Isleton , the highway crosses the river on the Isleton Bridge , a bascule bridge built in 1923 , and runs along the west shore on Grand Island , where it meets the east end of SR 220 . The Walnut Grove Bridge carries County Route <unk> east across the river to Walnut Grove , and , at the north end of the island , SR 160 crosses the 1924 Steamboat Slough Bridge onto Sutter Island and then the 1923 Paintersville Bridge across the Sacramento River to the mainland , both bascule bridges . 
 On the mainland , SR 160 once again runs atop the east levee , now 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 km ) west of Interstate 5 . The final bridge over the river is the Freeport Bridge , which carries County Route E9 to the west levee , where it turns south to return to SR 160 at the west end of the Paintersville Bridge . About a mile ( 1 @.@ 5 km ) beyond the Freeport Bridge , SR 160 leaves the levee , enters the city of Sacramento ( where state maintenance and control ends ) , passes under I @-@ 5 , and farms give way to suburbs . Here the former SR 160 is known as Freeport Boulevard , a major surface road that passes the Sacramento Executive Airport and Sacramento City College . Freeport Boulevard turns to the northwest at about 4th Avenue . It was formerly a one @-@ way pair with 21st Street with Freeport heading one @-@ way southbound and 21st heading one @-@ way northbound . The city converted these streets back to two @-@ way streets for traffic calming purposes in 2008 . After a short jog west on Broadway , former SR 160 turns north on the one @-@ way pair of 15th ( southbound ) and 16th ( northbound ) Streets , almost immediately crossing Business 80 and entering downtown Sacramento . 
 15th and 16th Streets lead traffic north past the east side of the State Capitol grounds , which lie between L and N Streets . At F Street , the path of southbound SR 160 jogged west for three blocks to 12th Street ; both 12th and 16th Streets pass under the Union Pacific Railroad 's Martinez Subdivision ( where B Street would be ) in four @-@ lane subways , but 15th Street dead @-@ ends . 12th Street remains a one @-@ way southbound roadway , but the two @-@ way RT Light Rail now occupies its east side . 12th Street turns northeast at North B Street , and the two directions of former SR 160 come together at Richards Boulevard , just south of the 16th Street Bridge over the American River and the south end of the state @-@ maintained North Sacramento Freeway . The light rail , which crosses the river between the two directions of SR 160 , soon leaves at the Del Paso Boulevard interchange as the freeway turns east . Two folded diamonds at local streets and a northbound @-@ only entrance ramp from Tribute Road are all that remains before SR 160 merges with Business 80 at the Arden Way interchange . Business 80 is also known as the Capital City Freeway here . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1910s , Sacramento County improved the county road along the levee of the Sacramento River between Sacramento and Rio Vista , which crossed the river twice on free ferries near Paintersville and Isleton . A toll ferry across the San Joaquin River connected Sherman Island , south of Rio Vista , with Antioch , where drivers could head west through the Broadway Tunnel to reach the San Francisco Bay , but the road between Rio Vista and the ferry was poor . In 1922 , the Victory Highway Association selected this " Netherlands Route " ( through what was locally promoted as the " Netherlands of America " ) for the Victory Highway west of Sacramento , as it was both shorter than the Lincoln Highway route via Stockton and more scenic . In particular , the river district would " impress [ the motorist ] with the enormous productive resources of this state as well as supply him with an unmatched scenic drive " , and the Broadway Tunnel approach to the bay would bring him " over the Victory Highway to the end of his journey in such a fashion that he will never forget the view spread before him as he first comes into sight of the San Francisco Bay region " . 
 Two bascule bridges — the Paintersville Bridge and Isleton Bridge — replaced the free ferries in 1923 , and are of a type patented by Joseph B. Strauss , who went on to design the Golden Gate Bridge . Local businessmen Aven Hanford and Oscar Klatt replaced the toll ferry with the tolled Antioch Bridge in mid @-@ 1926 , almost a year before they opened the larger Carquinez Bridge to the west . The counties of Contra Costa and Sacramento organized a joint highway district in November 1925 to fund an improvement of the northern approach from Rio Vista ; the concrete highway was completed in July 1927 , creating a fully paved continuous route between Sacramento and the bay . 
 The legislature added this road to the state highway system in 1933 , and it became part of Legislative Route 11 , which had stretched east from Sacramento along US 50 . This part of Route 11 was not assigned a sign route number in 1934 , but , by 1937 , when the new Broadway Low Level Tunnel opened , it was part of Sign Route 24 . That route had initially begun at Woodland and traveled northeast and east through the Feather River Canyon , and was extended southeast from Woodland along Sign Route 16 to Sacramento and then south and west via Antioch to the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge approach in Berkeley . The California Freeway and Expressway System was formed in 1959 , and included in the planned upgrades was the road between Antioch and Rio Vista . ( North of Rio Vista the present SR 84 was part of the system . ) The entire length was included in the State Scenic Highway System in 1963 . In the 1964 renumbering , the Antioch @-@ Sacramento roadway was split between two routes : Route 84 from Antioch to SR 12 near Rio Vista , and Route 160 from SR 12 to Sacramento . However , the entire route was marked as SR 160 , and in 1981 the legislative definition was changed to reflect this . 
 The part of SR 160 through and north of downtown Sacramento began as part of Legislative Route 3 , which was added to the state highway system under the first bond issue , passed in 1910 , and left the city on the 16th Street Bridge over the American River , following Del Paso Boulevard , El Camino Avenue , and Auburn Boulevard to Roseville . ( The short piece from the end of Route 3 near the State Capitol south to Broadway and Freeport Boulevard was Route 4 , which followed SR 99 towards Los Angeles . ) Route 3 between Sacramento and Roseville was also part of the Victory Highway , and was marked as part of US 40 in 1928 and US 99E in 1929 . The North Sacramento Freeway opened on October 6 , 1947 , bypassing this route from the bridge to Auburn Boulevard near Ben Ali . In 1955 , the Elvas Freeway opened from the midpoint of the North Sacramento Freeway to the east side of downtown , and US 99E was moved off the south half of the older North Sacramento Freeway and onto the Elvas Freeway . The North Sacramento Freeway was included in the California Freeway and Expressway System when it was created in 1959 , and the part of Route 3 southwest of the Elvas Freeway , which carried I @-@ 80 , became part of SR 160 in the 1964 renumbering . 
 By 2000 , the city of Sacramento maintained the non @-@ freeway portion of SR 160 within the city limits under a contract with Caltrans . However , since Caltrans 's main goal is to move traffic efficiently , the city was not able to carry out pedestrian @-@ friendly projects that they and local residents wanted . Under a law passed in July 1999 , Caltrans was authorized to relinquish any part of Route 160 within the city limits to Sacramento . The two agencies agreed , and on October 19 , 2000 the portion from the south city limits to the American River became the full responsibility of the city . A 2003 amendment to the Streets and Highways Code erroneously deleted not only this part , but the North Sacramento Freeway as well . 
 A project to convert the former southbound @-@ only Richards Boulevard access just south of the American River to a standard signalized intersection was completed in August 2007 ; this improves access to existing and future development in the area , including redevelopment of a former rail yard , while slowing northbound traffic heading for the bridge and freeway . Another project converting Freeport Boulevard and 21st Street south of Broadway into two @-@ way streets was also completed . 21st Street has carried northbound traffic since 1974 , when Caltrans took it over . This will calm traffic while improving the intersection at the south end of the former one @-@ way pair , which the RT Light Rail now crosses 21st Street just to the north of . In addition , the three blocks of F Street that carried southbound SR 160 from 12th Street to 15th Street have been calmed by the addition of a roundabout at 13th Street . 
 In 2012 , SR 4 was re @-@ routed to go further south to bypass Oakley and Brentwood . The southern end of SR 160 was then extended south to cover the part of the freeway that is no longer designated as SR 4 , from Main Street ( where State Route 4 originally exited the freeway ) to the fork of the new SR 4 ( formerly known as the State Route 4 Bypass , or Bypass Road ) . 
 In 2014 , construction began at the interchange with SR 4 to complete the two remaining ramps that would link southbound SR 160 to eastbound SR 4 and westbound SR 4 to northbound SR 160 . Construction was completed in March 2016 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured in 1964 , based on the alignment as it ( and Route 84 south of Route 12 ) existed at that time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = U.S. Route 50 in California = 
 In the U.S. state of California , U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) runs east from I @-@ 80 in West Sacramento to the Nevada state line in South Lake Tahoe . Portions within Sacramento are known as the Capital City Freeway and El Dorado Freeway . The western half of the highway in California , from I @-@ 80 through Sacramento and Placerville to Exit 60 in Pollock Pines is a four @-@ or @-@ more @-@ lane divided highway , mostly built to freeway standards . US 50 continues as an undivided highway with one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes until it reaches the canyon of the South Fork American River at Riverton . The remainder of the highway , which climbs along and out of the canyon , then over the Sierra Nevada at Echo Summit and into the Lake Tahoe Basin , is a mainly two @-@ lane road . 
 The US 50 corridor is a historic one , used by many 49ers who came to California during the Gold Rush as well as the Pony Express . In 1895 , part of the present @-@ day route was designated as California 's first state highway , and it was later considered as a scenic alternate of the Lincoln Highway . Much of US 50 was constructed during the initial construction of the California state highway system . During the second half of the twentieth century , US 50 was gradually designated and converted into a modern highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 50 has been added to the California Freeway and Expressway System by the state legislature . The highway east of SR 49 is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System , and has been recognized as such except within the South Lake Tahoe city limits . 
 US 50 begins in West Sacramento , where I @-@ 80 leaves the West Sacramento Freeway onto a bypass of Sacramento . The old route of I @-@ 80 through Sacramento is signed as Business 80 ( Capital City Freeway ) , which overlaps US 50 on the West Sacramento Freeway to the split with SR 275 , then over the Sacramento River on the Pioneer Memorial Bridge and across I @-@ 5 to SR 99 . US 50 is part Interstate Highway as well , carrying the unsigned designation of Interstate 305 through its interchange with SR 99 . 
 There Business 80 splits to the north , SR 99 heads south , and US 50 continues east as the El Dorado Freeway . This freeway parallels Folsom Boulevard and the American River east @-@ northeasterly through the suburb of Rancho Cordova to Folsom . Entering El Dorado , US 50 continues eastward through the foothills of the Sierra Nevada via El Dorado Hills , Cameron Park , and Shingle Springs to downtown Placerville . The freeway temporarily ends , and US 50 has several at @-@ grade intersections in Placerville , including SR 49 . 
 Leaving Placerville , the freeway restarts , only to end several miles later . The final section of freeway begins as a bypass of Camino , and ends at Exit 60 at the east end of Pollock Pines . Just east of Exit 60 , US 50 continues as an undivided conventional highway with one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes , entering the river canyon of the South Fork American River near Riverton and crossing to the north side of the river near Ice House Road . From Ice House Road to the crest of the Sierras , US 50 is a steadily rising mostly two @-@ lane road , staying just north of the river except for a 1995 cutoff that crosses the river twice in quick succession west of Kyburz , the boyhood home of ski racer Spider Sabich . 
 Several hairpin turns take the highway up a grade east of Strawberry , after which US 50 continues east alongside the river to its source at Echo Summit . Echo Summit is the highest elevation U.S. Route 50 reaches in California at 7 @,@ 382 feet ( 2 @,@ 250 m ) . In 1968 , it was the site of the U.S. Olympic trials for men 's track and field , held at a temporary facility in the parking lot of the <unk> ski area . 
 From Echo Summit down to the Lake Tahoe Basin , the roadway slowly descends the side of a steep hill ; it then curves northeast to its south junction with SR 89 ( which heads south to Luther Pass ) beginning co @-@ signing of SR 89 , and then turns northward near the city of South Lake Tahoe . Where US 50 and SR 89 split , at an intersection known as " The Y " , the former turns east on the four @-@ lane Lake Tahoe Boulevard , which it follows to and along the south shore of Lake Tahoe , then it enters the state of Nevada . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Emigrant trails and wagon roads = = = 
 The earliest roads used by Europeans to cross the Sierra Nevada into California were branches of the California Trail . The first route near the present US 50 was the Carson Route , laid out in 1848 by an eastward Mormon party that wanted to avoid the Truckee Route and its deep crossings of the Truckee River . The group left Pleasant Valley , southeast of Placerville , on July 3 , following Iron Mountain Ridge up to the crest of the Sierra at Carson Pass and then descending through Carson Canyon into the Carson Valley . Along the Humboldt River in Nevada , the Mormons met Joseph B. Chiles , who was leading a westward wagon train to California , and told him of their new trail . Although this new Carson Route crossed two summits — Carson Pass over the crest of the Sierra and West Pass over the Carson Spur just to the west , these crossings were easier than Donner Pass on the Truckee Route , and only three fords of the Carson River were required . The route became the primary westward route into California at the start of the Gold Rush . Through California , the general alignment of the Carson Route , in terms of today 's highways , was State Route 88 over Carson Pass and Mormon Emigrant Trail and Sly Park Road to Pleasant Valley . 
 John Calhoun Johnson of Placerville surveyed and cleared a shorter , lower ( and thus less snow @-@ covered ) trail east from that town in 1852 , completing the work by the summer . Rather than following the ridge to the Sierra 's crest as the Mormons had , Johnson headed eastward to the South Fork American River , crossing to its north side near the present Pacific Ranger Station in order to follow Peavine Ridge around a rocky stretch of the river . Returning to the river between Kyburz and Strawberry , he then continued alongside it to the crest at Johnson Pass , where a steep slope descended to Lake Tahoe . Within Nevada , his route generally followed the lake to Glenbrook , where it turned inland and crossed the Carson Range over Spooner Summit into the Carson Valley near Carson City . This trail , known as Johnson 's Cut @-@ off , generally followed the present US 50 , with notable deviations only just east of Placerville ( via Carson Road ) , over Peavine Ridge ( roughly following Peavine Ridge Road , some trails , and Wrights Lake Road ) , just east of Strawberry ( via Slippery Ford Road ) , over the crest of the Sierra ( via Johnson Pass Road and Meyers Road ) , south of Lake Tahoe ( via Pioneer Trail ) , east of Lake Tahoe ( via Genoa Peak Road ) , and from Spooner Summit into the Carson Valley ( via Kings Canyon Road ) . By 1854 , Bartlett 's Bridge had been built at the trail 's westernmost crossing of the American River , allowing wagons to follow the cutoff ; it was soon washed away by a freshet on March 7 , 1855 , and replaced by <unk> Bridge , several miles to the east . Due to an improvement of the road through Carson Canyon on the old Carson Route , most travelers ended up turning southeast from Johnson Pass over Luther Pass ( present SR 89 ) to join the older route northeast of Carson Pass rather than following the cutoff along Lake Tahoe . 
 Johnson 's Cut @-@ off was the only trail that could be used year @-@ round , but it still had problems , as it had been built without use of earth @-@ moving equipment , and thus did not always take the optimal route . The state adopted a survey by Sherman Day in September 1855 , but failed to make use of it . Two years later , the counties of Yolo , Sacramento , and El Dorado , all of which would be benefited by further improvements , began planning and carrying out work . The state legislature created a " Board of Wagon Commissioners " on March 8 , 1858 , and it completed the improvements by the end of that year . This new route had better grades than the old cutoff , deviating from it in several places : it followed the present Smith Flat Road rather than Carson Road east of Placerville , traversed Peavine Ridge much further down the slope , returning to the river west of Kyburz ( roughly via the present White Meadows Road , Ice House Road , and Weber Mill Road to US 50 at Granite Springs Road ) , and crossed into Carson Valley via Luther Pass . By 1860 , the immense traffic over the road and lack of maintenance had worsened it to the point that it could no longer be used by stagecoaches . 
 To provide for better maintenance , improvements funded by tolls were authorized . The first of these was built and operated by Kingsbury and McDonald , who improved the old Johnson 's Cut @-@ off between Johnson Pass and <unk> , where they turned east over Daggett Pass ( now SR 207 ) in Nevada , connecting Lake Tahoe to the Carson Valley via a shorter route than that over Luther Pass . Two other competing toll roads soon opened across the Carson Range : one built by Rufus Walton from Spooner Summit down Clear Creek to the valley ( now part of US 50 ) , and an 1863 improvement of the original Johnson 's Cut @-@ Off along the lake , across Spooner Summit , and through Kings Canyon to Carson City . West of Johnson Pass , the Slippery Ford Grade down to Strawberry was rebuilt by George W. Swan . The first toll @-@ supported bypass of Peavine Ridge was built by Oglesby and opened in 1861 , leaving the old road from Placerville at Pollock Pines , following the <unk> and slopes south of the South Fork American River , crossing the river east of White Hall , and then following US 50 along the north bank to the 1858 county road west of Kyburz . Johnson began work on a lower @-@ grade replacement on the north side of the river in 1864 , but stopped when Pearson and McDonald opened a road over the present alignment of US 50 , leaving the pre @-@ 1861 main road southwest of <unk> Bridge and following US 50 , across the river at Riverton , to Oglesby 's road east of White Hall . Toll collection ended in California in 1886 , when El Dorado County bought the privately improved sections and made them public roads . 
 West of Placerville , the wagon road headed south to Diamond Springs , where it turned west along the original Carson Route over relatively gentle terrain to Sacramento , generally following the present US 50 on parallel surface roads , such as Pleasant Valley Road and White Rock Road . The Pony Express used this route from its beginning in April 1860 until July 1 , when its western terminus became Folsom on the Sacramento Valley Railroad . ( The route was further cut back to Placerville , where messages were passed to the telegraph , from July 1861 to its discontinuance in October . ) The Placerville and Sacramento Valley Railroad reached Latrobe in 1864 , Shingle Springs ( on the old Carson Route west of Placerville ) in 1865 , and was finally completed to Placerville in 1888 . As the railroad extended east , the western terminus of the stage lines followed ; the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad in 1869 took most of the traffic off the Placerville wagon road . 
 = = = State maintenance and reconstruction = = = 
 At the dawn of the automobile era , the state legislature authorized California 's first state road on March 26 , 1895 , by creating the post of " Lake Tahoe Wagon Road Commissioner " to maintain the road from Newtown Road near Smith Flat ( just east of Placerville ) to Nevada . The county deeded the 58 @-@ mile ( 93 km ) road to the state on February 28 , 1896 . Funding was only enough for minimal improvements , including a new stone bridge over the South Fork American River at Riverton in 1901 . The Department of Engineering took over its maintenance in 1907 , immediately completed a survey and posted granite milestones that marked the distance from Placerville , and in 1910 started sprinkling the dirt road with water in summer to keep down dust ( as had been done in the 1860s ) . A 1915 law added the short distance from Smith Flat west to the east limits of Placerville to the state road . 
 With the passage of the first state highway bond issue in 1910 , the Department of Engineering was directed to lay out and construct a system connecting all county seats . Placerville , seat of El Dorado County , was connected to Sacramento by the 46 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 74 @.@ 8 km ) Route 11 , which followed Folsom Boulevard from Sacramento to Folsom , Bidwell Street and Placerville Road to White Rock , the old Carson Route to El Dorado , and Forni Road and Placerville Drive to Placerville . Between El Dorado and Placerville , the state had two routes to choose from , including one via Diamond Springs ( present SR 49 ) , where it decided improving a cut would be too expensive . Instead , it chose the " O 'Keefe grade " ( Forni Road ) , following the old road for about 4 miles ( 6 km ) and then building a cutoff ( now part of Placerville Drive ) to the Green Valley road . In 1917 the mileage that had been added by special laws , rather than as part of bond issues , was consolidated with the rest of the system , and Route 11 was extended east to the state line . ( The route was extended farther , from Sacramento southwest to Antioch via present SR 160 , in 1933 . ) The third bond issue , passed in 1919 , included funds for the improvement of 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Placerville east to Sportsman 's Hall , by which time paving was complete west of Placerville . 
 The Lincoln Highway , one of the earliest marked highways across the country , split in two over the Sierra Nevada . The main route followed the present I @-@ 80 alignment over Donner Pass , but an alternate " Pioneer Branch " , designated as part of the initial routing in 1913 , turned south at Reno , Nevada to Carson City and then crossed the Sierras via Johnson Pass and the Placerville route . Contrary to the Lincoln Highway Association 's policy of marking the most direct route , this deviation was explained simply as " for those tourists desiring to see Lake Tahoe " . However , it actually became shorter in 1921 , when the Fallon Cut @-@ off opened from Carson City directly east to the main route near Fallon , bypassing Reno . The U.S. Highway system was created in 1926 , and this route ( along with the main Lincoln Highway east of the cutoff ) became part of U.S. Route 50 . ( The Donner Pass route was U.S. Route 40 , crossing Nevada on the Victory Highway . ) US 50 initially ended in Sacramento , where motorists could follow US 40 ( Victory Highway ) southwest to the San Francisco Bay Area or turn south over US 99 to Stockton and take US 48 ( Lincoln Highway ) west over Altamont Pass . Originally , US 48 was a road connecting the San Francisco Bay area with the San Joaquin Valley , traveling from San Jose to near Modesto , largely following the future routing of US 50 , which replaced US 48 . Its western terminus was located near the present location of the Interstate 238 / Interstate 880 interchange . It generally followed the route of current Interstate 580 to the Interstate 205 junction . From here , US 48 continued east on Interstate 205 , then followed Old Highway 50 ( present I @-@ 205 Bus . ) through Tracy , thence to Interstate 5 . It then followed Interstate 5 to SR 120 , where US 48 followed SR 120 to the old location of the SR 99 / SR 120 interchange ( present day intersection of Main and Yosemite in <unk> ) , the location of its eastern terminus . At this time , US 50 was improved but unpaved east of Placerville . As part of the state project to pave this portion , the old road was bypassed in several areas , completing the final two @-@ lane alignment . These realignments included Broadway , bypassing Smith Flat Road , at Smith Flat ( 1932 ) , a new route around Slippery Ford Grade east of Strawberry ( 1931 ) , and a new route through South Lake Tahoe , leaving behind Pioneer Trail ( 1931 ) . The crossing of the Sierra crest at Johnson Pass was bypassed in 1940 by a better @-@ quality route over Echo Summit ; the lower part of the current road east of the summit opened in 1947 , bypassing Meyers Road . West of Placerville , several major two @-@ lane relocations were built . A bypass ( now Mother Lode Drive ) around El Dorado and the winding Forni Road was completed in 1938 , and the improvement was extended west to Shingle Springs in 1947 . A short relocation north of White Rock , between Bidwell Street and Bass Lake Road , opened in 1940 , and was extended west beyond Hazel Avenue , bypassing Folsom , in 1949 . 
 = = = = Extension to San Francisco = = = = 
 By the early 1930s , US 50 had been extended to San Francisco via the former US 48 by overlapping US 99 from Sacramento to Stockton and replacing US 48 over Altamont Pass to US 101E ( Foothill Boulevard at Castro Valley Boulevard ) near Hayward . It was extended over the new Bay Bridge at the time of its opening in 1936 , replacing US 101E on Foothill Boulevard and the present MacArthur Boulevard to the Bay Bridge Distribution Structure in Oakland . As the new MacArthur Freeway ( now I @-@ 580 ) was constructed , US 50 was moved to it . This extension was officially eliminated in the 1964 renumbering , but it remained on maps and signs for several more years before being replaced by I @-@ 80 over the Bay Bridge , I @-@ 580 over Altamont Pass , I @-@ 205 business route through Tracy , I @-@ 5 to Stockton , SR 4 ( Charter Way ) and SR 26 through Stockton , and SR 99 to Sacramento . 
 = = = Freeway and expressway upgrades = = = 
 When the California Freeway and Expressway System was created in 1959 , it included US 50 from Sacramento to Nevada . ( The Oakland @-@ Sacramento portion was also included , mostly as part of the Interstate Highway System . ) Two segments had already been upgraded to freeway or expressway standards — an expressway through Placerville , completed in 1955 , and a freeway bypass of Camino with an expressway continuing west to Five Mile Terrace , completed in 1957 . From Pollock Pines east to the bridge at Riverton , the road was widened to four lanes in about 1960 . The next decade saw the improvement of every remaining two @-@ lane section between Rancho Cordova ( near Sunrise Boulevard ) and Riverton , with the final section , connecting Bass Lake Road and Shingle Springs , opening in July 1970 . The freeway was completed west to I @-@ 80 ( now Business 80 ) and SR 99 in early 1973 , bypassing the mostly four @-@ lane Folsom Boulevard . US 50 was extended west along former I @-@ 80 to the new I @-@ 80 bypass in 1981 , when the old I @-@ 80 became Business 80 . ( Since Business 80 was not a valid legislative designation , the remainder became State Route 51 . ) 
 For many years , the four lanes from Sacramento stopped at Riverton , where the original two @-@ lane road continued through the canyon and over Echo Summit . The state rejected a proposed $ 133 million total realignment between Riverton and Kyburz in 1985 , instead opting for a less expensive program of spot improvements including new bridges and passing lanes . Portions of the work were completed by 1987 , including a four @-@ lane bridge at Riverton ( though two lanes are used by traffic turning at Ice House Road at the east end of the bridge ) . Between White Hall and Kyburz , a pair of four @-@ lane bridges over the South Fork American River , carrying a realignment across a bend in the river , were dedicated on May 31 , 1995 , as the El Dorado County Veterans Bridges . 
 The route through the South Fork American River Canyon remains vulnerable to mudslides and other storm damage . One particularly bad slide closed the highway east of Riverton for 28 days from January 24 to February 21 , 1997 , only a week after a similar 17 @-@ day closure caused by flooding on January 1 . A project to make more permanent repairs and prevent future closures began on July 31 , and from September 2 to October 24 the highway was closed during the week to allow for more efficient reconstruction . The state signed the detour , which followed Sly Park Road , Mormon Emigrant Trail ( the old ridgetop Carson Route ) , SR 88 , and SR 89 ( over Luther Pass ) , as Alternate U.S. Route 50 , a designation not approved by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials , which generally assigns new bannered U.S. Highways . After the work was complete , signs were left along the route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Paparazzi ( Girls ' Generation song ) = 
 " Paparazzi " is a song recorded in the Japanese language by South Korean girl group Girls ' Generation for their second Japanese @-@ language studio album , Girls & Peace ( 2012 ) . It was released as the album 's lead single on June 27 , 2012 . Written by Fredrik <unk> , Johan Becker , and Junji Ishiwatari , and produced by Miles Walker , the track was described as an electropop and R & B song . To promote the single , Girls ' Generation appeared on Japanese music programs Music Station and Hey ! Hey ! Hey ! Music Champ , while a music video for the song directed by Toshiyuki Suzuki premiered on June 10 , 2012 in order to accompany the release of the song . 
 Upon its release , " Paparazzi " received mixed reviews from music critics , who compared the song to the group 's previous Japanese @-@ language single " Mr. Taxi " in 2011 . The track was ranked number 19 on Spin 's list of top 20 K @-@ pop songs of 2012 . The single was a commercial success in Japan , peaking atop the Japan Hot 100 and at number two on both the Oricon Singles Chart and RIAJ Digital Track Chart . " Paparazzi " was certified Gold in Japan for the sales of the single 's digital and physical release , respectively . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 " Paparazzi " is a song recorded in the Japanese language , which was described as a hybrid of electropop and R & B. It was written by Swedish songwriters Fredrik <unk> and Johan Becker , while production was handled by American producer Miles Walker . Japanese songwriter Junji Ishiwatari provided additional writing credits . The track was released as the lead single from the group 's second Japanese @-@ language studio album , Girls & Peace ( 2012 ) , as part of the group 's foray into the Japanese music industry . It was released for CD and DVD sales in Japan by Nayutawave Records , which is affiliated with Universal Music Group , on June 27 , 2012 . The song was made available for digital purchase globally on the same day . " Paparazzi " was also released in Hong Kong , Taiwan , and South Korea in mid @-@ 2012 under license by Universal Music Hong Kong , Universal Music Taiwan , and S.M. Entertainment , respectively . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the single , Girls ' Generation performed " Paparazzi " on the Japanese music program Music Station on June 22 , 2012 , where the group wore tuxedos and pink gloves . On July 9 , 2012 , the group staged their second performance of the song on Fuji Television 's Hey ! Hey ! Hey ! Music Champ , where the members wore tuxedos with black gloves . The accompanying music video for " Paparazzi " was directed by Toshiyuki Suzuki and is almost seven minutes long . In the video , Girls ' Generation performs on stage in a theatre , with the set inspired by classic musicals . The video begins with the members wearing trench coats and " whimsically prancing " to Gene Kelly 's " Singin ' in the Rain " . During the main performance of " Paparazzi " , the video is intercut with scenes of the members being followed by photographers . They perform in two different outfits – showgirl @-@ inspired costumes and tuxedos with pink gloves . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard praised the dance routines for their " perfect nine @-@ piece synchronization " and opined that the pink gloves of the girls resembled those worn by Marilyn Monroe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Paparazzi " received mixed reviews from music critics . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard named it a " high @-@ energy " track . James Hadfield , writing for the Tokyo edition of Time Out , compared the song 's R & B styles to those of the group 's previous 2011 Japanese @-@ language single " Mr. Taxi " and called it a " redux " of the latter single , writing that " you 'd struggle to spot many real improvements . " 
 " Paparazzi " was a commercial success in Japan , debuting at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart on the chart issue dated July 9 , 2012 ; the number one position belonged to <unk> @-@ <unk> 's single " To the Limit " . The following week , it dropped to number ten . " Paparazzi " became the 58th best @-@ selling physical single of 2012 on the Oricon chart , selling 136 @,@ 181 copies . 
 The single debuted at number 31 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 on July 2 , 2012 . The following week , it rose up to the top position on the chart . On the chart issue dated July 16 , 2012 , the single dropped to number seven . " Paparazzi " ranked at number 50 on the year @-@ end chart of 2012 . The track as well charted at number two on the Billboard Japan Hot Singles Sales , number five on the Billboard Japan Adult Contemporary Airplay , and number two on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Paparazzi " has sold 103 @,@ 000 digital copies in Japan as of July 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the CD issue 's liner notes 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Sales and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Max Weinberg = 
 Max Weinberg or Minister of the Big Beat ( born April 13 , 1951 ) is an American drummer and television personality , most widely known as the longtime drummer for Bruce Springsteen 's E Street Band and as the bandleader for Conan O 'Brien on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien and The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien . 
 Weinberg grew up in suburban New Jersey and began drumming at an early age . He attended college planning to be a lawyer but got his big break in music in 1974 when he won an audition to become the drummer for Springsteen . His powerful but controlled playing on albums such as Born to Run and Born in the U.S.A. stabilized the E Street Band sound and Weinberg became a mainstay of Springsteen 's long concert performances . Springsteen dissolved the band in 1989 , and Weinberg spent several years considering a law career and trying the business end of the music industry before deciding he wanted to continue with drumming . 
 In 1993 , Weinberg got the role as bandleader of The Max Weinberg 7 for Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Weinberg 's drums @-@ driven jump blues sound and his role as a comic foil prospered along with the show , giving him a second career . In 1999 , Springsteen re @-@ formed the E Street Band for a series of tours and albums ; Weinberg worked out an arrangement that allowed him to play with both O 'Brien and Springsteen . In 2009 , Weinberg moved to the short @-@ lived Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien as leader of Max Weinberg and The Tonight Show Band . After that ended , he began touring with his own ensembles , and in 2010 chose not to follow O 'Brien to the new Conan show . Weinberg continued playing with Springsteen , and in 2014 was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the E Street Band . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Weinberg was born to a Jewish family in Newark , New Jersey to parents Bertram Weinberg , an attorney , and Ruth Weinberg , a high school physical education teacher . He has three sisters , Patty , Nancy and Abby . He grew up in Newark as well as in the neighboring suburban towns of South Orange and Maplewood . 
 The young Max was exposed to music early on , attending Broadway shows weekly from the age of two and liking the big sound put forth by the pit orchestras . He then liked the rhythms of country and western music . He knew he wanted to be a drummer from the age of five , when he saw Elvis Presley and his drummer , D. J. Fontana , appear on The Milton Berle Show in April 1956 . Decades later , Weinberg said , " I think anybody who wanted to develop a life in rock ' n ' roll music had a moment . That was my moment , " and Fontana became a major influence on him . 
 Weinberg started actually playing at the age of six . His first public appearance came at the age of seven when he sat in on a bar mitzvah band playing " When the Saints Go Marching In " . The bandleader , Herbie Zane , was the leading act for bar mitzvahs and weddings in the area ; he was impressed with young Weinberg and brought him along on other engagements as a kind of novelty act . Weinberg thus became a local child star , drumming in a three @-@ piece mohair suit . He gained an appreciation for showmanship and was a fan of Liberace and Sammy Davis , Jr . He grew to idolize drummer Buddy Rich and become a fan of Gene Krupa and saw drummer Ed Shaughnessy of Doc Severinsen 's band on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson as having an ideal job as well as admiring the level of playing and serious sartorial style of the Tonight Show musicians . Weinberg stayed with Zane until junior high school and learned rhythms such as cha @-@ <unk> , <unk> , polkas , and the hora and playing everything from Dixieland jazz to Acker Bilk 's " Stranger on the Shore " . 
 Weinberg attended Temple <unk> <unk> @-@ Israel , a Reform Judaism congregation in South Orange , where he was inspired by a local rabbi and had what he later described as " a wonderful Jewish background . " He would later say that the Jewish concept of seder , meaning order , became key to his vision of how a good drummer serves his band 's music . Witnessing his father lose two summer camps in The Poconos impressed upon him the fragility of economic success and led to a strong work ethic . 
 When the British Invasion hit in 1964 , the Beatles and their drummer , Ringo Starr , became a huge influence on Weinberg . He began playing in local New Jersey rock bands , playing the music of The Rolling Stones , Mitch Ryder and the Detroit Wheels , and The Young Rascals . While a member of The <unk> , he played at the 1964 New York World 's Fair . He attended Columbia High School in Maplewood ; there he knew Leigh Howard Stevens , who would become a famous percussionist in his own right . Weinberg graduated from Columbia High in 1969 . Another band he was in , Blackstone , recorded an eponymous album for Epic Records in 1970 . 
 Weinberg first attended Adelphi University , and later Seton Hall University , majoring in film studies . His general goal was to become a lawyer , but he was still most viscerally interested in a music career and kept his drum set in his car in case any chances to play arose . He performed at weddings , bar mitzvahs , and bars , then landed a job in the pit band for the Broadway musical Godspell . 
 = = Success with the E Street Band = = 
 Weinberg was still living at home when he met Bruce Springsteen on April 7 , 1974 when his band , The Jim Marino Band , were Springsteen 's support at Seton Hall . Springsteen had parted ways with his drummer , Vini " Mad Dog " Lopez , earlier that year , and the replacement , Ernest " Boom " Carter , lasted only six months before leaving with pianist David <unk> to form Tone . Weinberg answered a Springsteen Village Voice newspaper ad that famously requested , " no junior Ginger Bakers , " in reference to Ginger Baker 's reputation for long drum solos . Weinberg auditioned with Springsteen and the core E Street Band in mid @-@ late August of that year at the SIR studios in Midtown Manhattan , bringing a minimalist drum kit with him . He knew one Springsteen song from the Marino band , " Sandy " , and played it . His drumming on the Fats Domino song " Let the Four Winds Blow " sealed the position as his . A week later he was offered the $ 110 per week job and he quit college immediately , about six academic credits short of a degree . Weinberg 's first public performance came on September 19 , 1974 , at The Main Point in Bryn Mawr , Pennsylvania . 
 Weinberg rose to success as the drummer for Springsteen 's E Street Band , as his powerful yet controlled beat solved the E Street Band 's drumming instabilities . On Born to Run ( 1975 ) , Weinberg 's drumming evoked two of his idols , Ringo Starr and Levon Helm , and he covered his snare drum with heavy paper towels to capture some of the Memphis soul sound . While travelling on tour , Weinberg became known for his exact requests , such as specifying the particular brand of paper towels to use for his drums or the standards for his hotel rooms . Weinberg never adopted the " rock and roll lifestyle " ; he treated his music seriously and kept to the mantra , " Show up , do a good job , and give them more than their money 's worth . " One compromise Weinberg did have to make was sometimes playing on the High Holy Days . During shows , Springsteen built up the personas of his bandmates , and Weinberg was frequently referred to as " the Mighty Max " . Weinberg started a long practice of keeping his eyes on Springsteen every moment during the show , as he never knew when Springsteen would change a tempo or suddenly deviate from the set list . Decades later , E Street guitarist Steve Van Zandt would say of Weinberg , " What nobody understands is that not only is Max a great drummer , Max reads Bruce 's mind . You can 't learn that . " Weinberg bought a house overlooking the water in Atlantic Highlands , New Jersey , triggering a lifelong interest in real estate and home design . 
 Tempos slowed to an oft dirge @-@ like pace on Darkness on the Edge of Town ( 1978 ) ; Rehearsals and recording of the album stretched out over a long period , with Springsteen and bandmate and co @-@ producer Steven Van Zandt experiencing a prolonged frustration over their inability to capture a more resonant drum sound . Weinberg soon regretted not playing faster on " Badlands " , and tempos did speed up on that number and some others during the accompanying Darkness Tour . The River Tour Springsteen and E Street Band shows that opened New Jersey 's Meadowlands Arena in 1981 became one of the top highlights of Weinberg 's career . 
 Weinberg suffered an acknowledged " drumming slump " around 1980 , and his time @-@ keeping skills were criticized by Springsteen . What could pass unnoticed in concert became apparent on record , and Weinberg practiced drumming components for months in order to regain a fine sense of timing . Weinberg also suffered from repetitive stress injury and tendinitis , eventually requiring seven operations on his hands and wrists . He studied for a while with noted jazz drummer Joe Morello ; Weinberg credited Morello for helping him to learn how to play with the tendinitis . 
 In 1981 , Weinberg married Rebecca Schick , a Methodist who had grown up in Tinton Falls , New Jersey and whom he had met through a mutual friend . Springsteen and the band played at their wedding , which was officiated by the same rabbi he had growing up . Becky Weinberg worked as a high school history teacher . In 1984 , they bought a 5 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) farm in Monmouth County ; after feeling taken advantage of in the deal , Weinberg became a scrupulous researcher in real estate matters , often spending days at town halls looking over obscure zoning regulations . While on tour he studied books about architecture , and dreamt of building houses in the style of Frank Lloyd Wright or Richard Meier . They had two children , daughter Ali ( born c . 1987 ) and son Jay ( born 1990 ) . 
 He made a full recovery from his injuries in time for Born in the U.S.A. ( 1984 ) , which featured an aerobics @-@ timed beat on some tracks that also owed something to the popular Phil Collins drum sound . Weinberg 's own experimentation since the Darkness days had also led to a more reverberant sound . Overall , Weinberg 's more fluid drumming combined with Roy Bittan 's use of synthesizers and better overall production to give Springsteen a more modern sound , resulting in the album becoming Springsteen 's best @-@ selling one ever and spawning a record @-@ tying seven Top 10 hit singles . Springsteen later said of the album , " Max was the best thing on the record . " Weinberg 's most well @-@ known drum part came on " Born in the U.S.A. " , where his snare drum paired against Bittan 's signature synthesizer riff on the opening and throughout the main part of the song . The recording then descends into improvised chaos ; Springsteen had told Weinberg , " When I stop , keep the drums going . " Upon the restart , intentional drum breakdowns matched bass swoops and guitar feedback ; Springsteen subsequently said of the performance overall , " You can hear Max – to me , he was right up there with the best of them on that song . " Weinberg said it was one of his most intense musical experiences . 
 On the subsequent Born in the U.S.A. Tour , Springsteen generally interspersed hard @-@ rocking song sequences after every three or four numbers in order to give Weinberg 's hands a chance to recover . Weinberg 's wife Becky unintentionally triggered one of the tour 's most celebrated episodes . She was a fan of the This Week with David Brinkley television program and invited panelist George Will to the Washington @-@ area Capital Centre show . After seeing the band perform , Will became convinced that they were exemplars of hard @-@ working patriotism and traditional American values ; he wrote , " ... consider Max Weinberg 's bandaged fingers . The rigors of drumming have led to five tendonitis operations . He soaks his hands in hot water before a concert , in ice afterward , and sleeps with tight gloves on . " Will further decided that Springsteen might endorse Ronald Reagan in the 1984 presidential campaign and talked to the campaign , which later led to Reagan 's famous extolling of Springsteen at a stop in Hammonton , New Jersey and Springsteen 's subsequent negative response . 
 For his efforts , Weinberg was named Best Drummer in the Playboy 1985 Pop and Jazz Music Poll and Best Drummer again in Rolling Stone 's 1986 Critics Poll . The adulation got to him a bit as he aligned with the Mighty Max persona and went to fashionable parties . 
 Weinberg had a reduced role on Springsteen 's 1987 Tunnel of Love album , replacing Springsteen 's drum machine parts on a few tracks , but the full band was in place for the 1988 Tunnel of Love Express and Human Rights Now ! tours . Weinberg called the latter tour 's visiting of many third @-@ world spots around the globe one of the most rewarding things the band had done . 
 In 1984 , Weinberg published The Big Beat : Conversations with Rock 's Greatest Drummers , a series of interviews conducted over two years with drummers from various eras , including Starr , Helm , D. J. Fontana , Charlie Watts , Dino <unk> , Hal Blaine and others . The book captured drummers revealing more about their musical approaches than they normally did to the press and was thus considered an important addition to the rock literature . In 1986 , Weinberg began taking a one @-@ man show " Growing Up on E Street " to college campuses around the country . It contained some short films that Weinberg produced as well as a question @-@ and @-@ answer session . 
 Weinberg also played as a session musician , enjoying particular success in connection with songwriter and producer Jim Steinman . He drummed on the very popular 1977 Meat Loaf album , Bat Out of Hell , playing on the Steinman @-@ penned tracks " Bat Out of Hell " , " You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth " and " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " . At a point in 1983 , Weinberg was featured on the number one and number two songs on the Billboard Hot 100 , Bonnie Tyler 's " Total Eclipse of the Heart " and Air Supply 's " Making Love Out of Nothing at All " , both Steinman creations . Weinberg also recorded with Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes , Gary U.S. Bonds , Ian Hunter and Carole King . 
 On October 18 , 1989 , Springsteen unexpectedly called Weinberg to say he was dissolving the E Street Band . As Weinberg later said , " That 's why they call him the Boss . " 
 = = Breakup and career choices = = 
 The news left him " a zombie for about six months . " Even before the breakup , he had returned to school at Seton Hall University in early 1989 . The band breakup occurred during his second semester at Seton Hall , on his way to completing the remaining 21 credits needed to obtain his bachelor 's degree in communications . He graduated from there later in 1989 . He then briefly attended Yeshiva University 's Cardozo School of Law , but withdrew after six weeks . Weinberg asked Ringo Starr for advice on how to go on when the band that had made your life had broken up . Weinberg and Springsteen remained on friendly terms during this period . 
 In 1990 , Weinberg began offering motivational seminars oriented towards corporations to augment his one @-@ person college show business . He received the HERO Award from Big Brothers Big Sisters of America in October 1990 for his work for that organization . The Big Beat was republished in 1991 . 
 Weinberg thought his career as a musician was over and considered himself retired as a drummer . He went into the music business instead , joining a distribution company as a business partner . He worked as an executive for the Music Master label . He formed his own record company , Hard Ticket Entertainment , in 1990 . In 1991 , they issued an album that he produced by a group he formed , Killer Joe , called Scene of the Crime . He had sought out this career path because " I didn 't want to continually be competing with ' Mighty Max ' , " but he found business life unfulfilling . Because of that , and for personal reasons as well , he needed to return to performing . Weinberg later reflected , " I felt at times , after the E Street Band broke up , so anonymous it was painful . " 
 He looked through the Yellow Pages for jobs and played at bar mitzvahs for $ 125 ; he later said " [ I ] was glad to do it . " Weinberg became the live drummer for 10 @,@ 000 Maniacs in 1992 after their drummer Jerry <unk> was injured five days before a five @-@ week tour . He went after that assignment once he heard it was open and later said , " I lived on a bus and had a roommate . Not exactly like the E Street Band , but I loved it . It reminded me that I am a drummer and I 'm good . I was put here to play the drums . To turn my back on that ability was wrong . " He played at the January 1993 inauguration of Bill Clinton . Weinberg auditioned in 1993 to be the principal drummer on the Broadway show The Who 's Tommy , but was selected instead as the second substitute . Despite the very low pay , Weinberg was nevertheless happy : " I 'd buried drumming so far into my psyche . I felt I 'd resurrected it . " Of Springsteen 's work , Weinberg felt " that I would never get to play these songs again . " 
 = = Late Night with Conan O 'Brien = = 
 In July 1993 , Weinberg had a chance sidewalk meeting outside Carnegie Deli with newly selected Late Night host Conan O 'Brien , where Weinberg spoke about his ideas for music on the show . O 'Brien promised Weinberg an audition . Within a few short days Weinberg put together The Max Weinberg 7 , recruiting musicians he had worked with during his career including on the Killer Joe project , starting with guitarist and arranger Jimmy Vivino . Weinberg decided a muscular , drums @-@ driven jump blues vibe , partly derived from the Killer Joe sound , is what he would use as a starting point for the group 's sound . At the early August audition , the outfit impressed O 'Brien with their ability to play not just rock but also rhythm and blues , soul , jazz , pop , and big band swing ; Weinberg was so anxious to land the job that he threw up afterward . After a final meeting with executive producer Lorne Michaels they were hired as the house band . The band performed on the show every night since its premiere on September 13 , 1993 . O 'Brien later said of the Weinberg choice , " The energy and enthusiasm of his music coincided with the show I wanted to do . Plus , his tan offset my ghostly complexion . " Weinberg held the title of music director on the show , while Vivino did most of the arranging . Of his career rebound , Weinberg said simply : " I grabbed the brass ring twice . " 
 In the early phases of the show , Weinberg was involved in occasional comedy bits , but mostly focused on his musical responsibilities , including the selection of walk @-@ on music for guests . The band got a 30 @-@ second featured spot each night after O 'Brien 's opening monologue . O 'Brien often received poor notices during the early years of Late Night , and Jon Pareles of The New York Times pronounced the Max Weinberg 7 as the " saving grace " of the show . Weinberg established an image by dressing in high @-@ quality suits and a tie ; he said , " I like us to look sharp and play sharp , " and " I don 't want to look like the audience , I want to look different . " Weinberg became a television celebrity , and his visibility and stature grew from Late Night and established an image for him beyond Springsteen . Indeed , much of the show 's young fan base , and some of the staff on the show itself , were unaware of Weinberg 's past role in the E Street Band . 
 In 1994 , Rhino Records released Max Weinberg Presents : Let There Be Drums , a three @-@ volume set of CDs that highlighted drumming that Weinberg admired on songs from the 1950s through the 1970s . <unk> in 1998 of the first five years of Late Night concluded that the band had been an important element in the show surviving , with Weinberg 's personality providing a foil to O 'Brien 's and with " the Max Weinberg 7 [ leaving ] television viewers wishing they were in the studio to hear more . " Their sound also fit into the swing revival going on during the late 1990s . 
 In 2000 , Conan sidekick Andy Richter left the show , and Weinberg became the " second banana " . Weinberg continued to present an obvious visual foil : as O 'Brien said , " If you looked at this guy you would never know he was the drummer in a huge rock ' n ' roll band . You would say he was the guy who did the band 's accounting . But Max is the authoritative , buttoned @-@ down adult in the midst of all this madness . " The drummer reveled in O 'Brien 's youthful audience : " To be 49 and appreciated by 14 @-@ year @-@ olds again ? What a thrill ! " Weinberg engaged in stare @-@ downs with O 'Brien and gave scripted <unk> about newsmakers . Additionally , Weinberg was comically presented as a twisted character with sexual fetishes and homicidal tendencies in comedy bits . When Conan O 'Brien was host of Saturday Night Live on March 10 , 2001 , his monologue featured a visit from the SNL studio to the Late Night studio ( only a few floors apart in the same building , 30 Rockefeller Plaza ) , where Conan discovers Weinberg engaged in sexual intercourse with a woman on his desk ( played by Max 's real @-@ life wife , Becky ) . Weinberg says of his comic persona : " [ I ] t 's playing against type . I 've been happily married for nearly 30 years , with two wonderful children . It 's not what I portray on the show , and that 's funny . " Weinberg continued his one @-@ man college shows , now titled " E Street to Late Night : Dreams Found , Lost , and Found Again " . 
 Weinberg returned to the E Street Band briefly when Springsteen re @-@ grouped the band in early 1995 to record a few new songs for the Greatest Hits release . The regrouping was only temporary and the band returned to inactivity . Also in 1995 , Weinberg drummed on two of Johnnie Johnson 's songs : " I 'm Mad " and " She Called Me Out of My Name , " on Johnnie 's 1995 album Johnnie Be Back . Weinberg spent two years building an 8 @,@ 900 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 830 m2 ) house in Middletown Township , New Jersey that they moved into in 1999 ; he picked up many of the furnishings for it from locations around the world during subsequent tours . 
 The Max Weinberg 7 released a self @-@ titled album in 2000 on Hip @-@ O Records ; Weinberg said he waited until then because " I wanted to change my style of playing and hone my style before I committed to a record . " He was especially proud that the band had successfully backed Tony Bennett during a late 1990s appearance on Late Night : " Two years ago if you 'd asked me if I could play with Tony Bennett , I would have said absolutely not . I 'm not in his league . But we played with him the other night , and it was wonderful . We swung . " 
 = = Reformation of the E Street Band = = 
 Springsteen reunited the E Street Band in 1999 on a more lasting basis , for the Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band Reunion Tour . This posed a dilemma for Weinberg , whose greater loyalty was to O 'Brien and NBC . Indeed , up until then Weinberg had never missed a Late Night show , appearing in over 1 @,@ 000 in a row . However , allowing Weinberg to tour for one of the highest @-@ profile reunions in rock history was thought to be of long @-@ term benefit to the television show 's appeal , and an arrangement was worked out wherein Weinberg took a leave of absence from Late Night in order to go out on this and subsequent tours . When he was tied up with Springsteen , drummer James <unk> took his place , and the band was led by Jimmy Vivino ( " Jimmy Vivino and the Max Weinberg 7 " ) . When the Reunion Tour was extended in length , shows were generally restricted to weekends , so as to permit Weinberg to fulfill his Late Night responsibilities . At NBC , the coexistence between the drummer 's two bosses was known as the Weinberg @-@ Springsteen Rule , and was not typically extended to other talent at the network . 
 While Weinberg did not forget the breakup and long separation , he viewed it as " at the same time the most horrifying experience I 've ever been through and the most liberating . " In any case , he immediately felt comfortable playing with Springsteen once more : " Right from the first downbeat of the first rehearsal , it was there again . " His drumming for the E Street Band was more relaxed and mature than before , showing more confidence and finesse , and his hands and fingers were in better shape for having done the daily Late Night work . When the tour concluded with ten shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden , on several days Weinberg taped the Conan show at Rockefeller Center in the late afternoon , put his hands in ice and changed from his suit into jeans and a vest , and played with Springsteen at night . The experience of doing both left him " professionally speaking , as alive as I 've ever felt . " Of his position on the drum platform behind Springsteen , he says , " I have the best seat in the house . " His energy level was no less , as he could be seen jumping a foot off his seat during some songs . His daughter Ali joined the band on keyboards several times during the tour . 
 Weinberg 's steady drumming helped power Springsteen 's 2002 comeback album , and the first E Street Band studio recording in 18 years , The Rising . Weinberg took more time off from the Conan show to participate in the long and successful 2002 – 2003 Rising Tour . In the early 2000s , Weinberg was at the center of annual holiday benefit shows at Asbury Park Convention Hall , billed as Bruce Springsteen , the Max Weinberg 7 and Friends . 
 Weinberg was a member of the board of trustees of the Monmouth Conservation Foundation and won a conservation award in 2002 . Nevertheless , during 2002 and 2003 he got into a prolonged local controversy over his plans to subdivide a portion of his 65 @-@ acre ( 26 ha ) Middletown Township , New Jersey property into lots for new homes . Some of his neighbors strongly protested the move , and they and some in the press accused him of hypocrisy ; Weinberg defended himself by saying the conservation foundation was not against all development , just thoughtless development . A scaled @-@ down version of the plan was approved by the town 's zoning board , and in 2008 Weinberg went ahead with plans to sell the lots . Weinberg generally avoids political comments , but did campaign for John Kerry in the United States presidential election , 2004 . 
 Springsteen himself also made appearances on Late Night in 1999 , 2002 , and 2006 . Weinberg participated in the 2004 Vote for Change tour then drummed on Springsteen 's 2007 album Magic . There he was part of a core rhythm section comprising himself , Springsteen , bassist Garry Tallent , and pianist Roy Bittan , who did the tracks first ; other members ' contributions were added later . Weinberg then took more time off from the Conan show to do the 2007 – 2008 Magic Tour . Weinberg repeated his role in the core section in recording Springsteen 's Working on a Dream album . Weinberg also fulfilled a long @-@ time dream by going to Super Bowl XLIII in February 2009 with Springsteen and the E Street Band 's half @-@ time performance , where he was joined by some of the other members of the Max Weinberg 7 . 
 = = Move to The Tonight Show = = 
 The ending of the Conan Late Night and beginning of The Tonight Show coincided with the start of Springsteen and the E Street Band 's 2009 Working on a Dream Tour . O 'Brien told a Variety reporter at the time of the announcement that he hoped that Weinberg would follow him to Los Angeles and that he also hoped an arrangement could be worked out to let Weinberg go on the road with Springsteen as had been done for past tours . 
 Whether Weinberg would stay with O 'Brien and move or not became a subject of conflicting news reports . Weinberg did and does have strong New Jersey and East Coast ties . He lives on the New Jersey shore with his wife and children . He and his family are fans of the New Jersey Devils , and played ice hockey on the 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) pond in front of their house . They were season ticket holders for the Devils until the children became too old and busy to attend games . Their son Jay had , without much instruction from his father but using Max 's old gear , become a drummer for local punk rock and metal bands . Their daughter Ali became an assistant to NBC News reporter Chuck Todd and began appearing on their MSNBC.com blog " First Read " . Weinberg played drums on the first album recorded by his sister Nancy Winston , a professional pianist and singer in New York City , known for her regular appearances at Cafe Pierre . 
 Nevertheless , O 'Brien confirmed on February 18 , 2009 , that Weinberg and the band were indeed coming with him . Weinberg had not missed an E Street Band show since joining the outfit in 1974 , and E Streeter Van Zandt said that no amount of rehearsal by another drummer could replace Weinberg 's intuitive understanding of Springsteen 's performance gambits . 
 The conflict was resolved when son Jay became a substitute drummer for his father during parts of the Working on a Dream Tour that Max could not make due to commitments to the O 'Brien show . Springsteen said , " Once again , I want to express my appreciation to Conan O 'Brien , and everyone on his team , for making it possible for Max to continue to do double duty for both us and for him . We promise to return him in one piece . " The younger Weinberg began playing during segments of the tour 's shows , and got a very positive response from audiences and reviewers as a spark plug for the band . Max Weinberg said Jay 's segments allowed him a " total out @-@ of @-@ body experience . For the first time in – I 've been with Bruce for 35 years – I 've been able to go out in the audience and enjoy a Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band concert . " In one case , Jay did one show of a two @-@ night stand on the East Coast and Max then took a red @-@ eye flight back from Los Angeles to do the second . 
 The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien premiered on June 1 , 2009 , with The Max Weinberg 7 now expanded to eight and referred to as Max Weinberg and the Tonight Show Band . Andy Richter was back as an announcer , making Weinberg 's role as a foil a little uncertain . Gradually Weinberg and the band 's roles in the comic aspects of the show began to assert themselves . On June 25 , Weinberg departed The Tonight Show temporarily for four weeks to join Springsteen and band part @-@ way through their European leg ; this was conveyed on the show via a comedy bit that had his drum riser turn into a float that took him outside the studio and purportedly to the airport . Weinberg returned to the show on August 3 , after flying back from a Springsteen show that had ended early into the same morning in Spain . Of being Tonight Show bandleader , he said , " I think one of the biggest thrills in my life was seeing my name in the same sentence as Doc Severinsen , who , in my view , is the gold standard for ' Tonight Show ' bandleaders . There 's never been anyone who did it quite near the class and the brilliance of Doc Severinsen in the original Tonight Show Band . I used to think when I was a kid what a great job that must be – you know , same place , every time , everyday . Lo and behold , here I am 40 years later , doing it . That sounds deep , deep , deep , deep , deeply satisfying to me . " On September 25 , Weinberg left The Tonight Show again for two months , to join Springsteen and band for the final , American portion of the Working on a Dream Tour . The same drum @-@ riser @-@ to @-@ float comedy bit was used , except this time the float was " hit " and demolished by a truck just outside the studio ( and airing of the segment was delayed a few days due to O 'Brien legitimately injuring himself during the same show ) . The tour wrapped on November 22 , 2009 , in Buffalo , New York ; Weinberg was back on The Tonight Show the next day . With no E Street Band projects in sight for at least the next year or two , Weinberg was left to concentrate on his bandleader role . 
 Even though Weinberg was living in Los Angeles for The Tonight Show , he retained his home in New Jersey and considered that his permanent residence : " I 'm not really moving . I 'm living out here , but it 's more like an extended road trip . " Regarding his decision to stay in music rather than pursue the legal profession , he has had no regrets : " The world needs more drummers and fewer lawyers . " 
 However , Weinberg 's stint as Tonight Show bandleader was not to last long . The 2010 Tonight Show host and timeslot conflict erupted , and after an intense period of public turmoil , the last Conan show took place on January 22 , 2010 , finishing with Weinberg propelling a guest @-@ filled seriocomic rendition of " Free Bird " . While O 'Brien negotiated a settlement deal with NBC for himself and his staff , Weinberg as well as sidekick Richter had to reach their own agreements with the network . 
 = = Departure from O 'Brien and start of Big Band = = 
 In February 2010 , Weinberg underwent a twelve @-@ hour open heart valve repair surgery to correct a condition he had known about and had been monitoring since the mid @-@ 1980s . His recovery took place over three to five months , and Weinberg kept news about the operation private until an interview eight months later . 
 In April 2010 , O 'Brien began his The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour . While the rest of the group was part of the tour under the moniker The Legally Prohibited Band , Weinberg was not ( except for a brief appearance at one show ) . 
 Instead , he assembled and staged appearances by the Max Weinberg Big Band , a fifteen @-@ piece ensemble with twelve horns that mostly plays the music of Frank Sinatra , Buddy Rich , Count Basie , and Maynard Ferguson . Weinberg 's interest in the genre dated back to his childhood and the artists he had seen on televised variety shows . 
 It was initially unknown whether Weinberg would be part of O 'Brien 's new late night show on TBS cable that began in November 2010 , as no specifics had been worked out for that show while O 'Brien focused on his tour . In June 2010 , the Max Weinberg Big Band Tour began with a show in Red Bank , New Jersey 's Count Basie Theater . Weinberg said that he was booking appearances by his big band through 2011 and that with regard to O 'Brien , " I literally have not thought about it . There have been no discussions . It 's kind of an open question . " 
 In September 2010 , it was announced Weinberg would not be part of the show , now named Conan ; Jimmy Vivino took over leadership of that band , with <unk> replacing Weinberg full @-@ time on drums . The split was stated as being mutual , with O 'Brien saying , " Max has been a huge part of my life for the past 17 years and he is an incredible bandleader and musician , " and Weinberg thanking his band and saying , " 17 years – a lifetime on TV ... my association with Conan , his staff , and crew has been a deeply rewarding experience for me . " Weinberg subsequently acknowledged that " we both wanted to go in different directions , " but both looked forward to Weinberg occasionally stopping by to sit in on the new show . Weinberg said his health was better than ever but that the " life @-@ changing experience emotionally and spiritually " of the surgery , a desire to remain in New Jersey with his family , and an interest in exploring new musical directions had all played a role in his departure from O 'Brien . 
 In 2013 , Weinberg again found himself in a real estate dispute , threatening legal action against Monmouth County in connection with its attempt to repair damage to the Henry Hudson Trail in Atlantic Highlands following damage caused by <unk> Sandy . Weinberg claimed that the work done in creating that portion of the trail , augmented by Sandy , had caused significant damage to two properties he and his wife owned there . The issue was still ongoing in 2014 . 
 Weinberg played on only a couple of tracks on Springsteen 's March 2012 album Wrecking Ball , but resumed his normal role with the E Street Band on the subsequent 2012 – 2013 Wrecking Ball Tour , this time augmented by percussionist Everett Bradley , as well as on its 2014 continuation , the High Hopes Tour . In 2014 , Weinberg was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the E Street Band . He said of the honor , " when you have that trophy in your hands , I 've never experienced anything like that . ... You 're walking around with this big heavy symbolic recognition of the work you 've done . " Meanwhile , he continued to play in a jazz idiom on his own , now with the Max Weinberg Quintet . In late October 2014 , Weinberg sat in for a surprise guest appearance on Conan . In early 2015 , Weinberg received the Humanitarian of the Year Award from Temple Rodeph Torah in Marlboro , New Jersey , in recognition of his volunteering in association with multiple local groups ; he said he was humbled to be accepting an award that focused on tikkun olam . Weinberg once again hit the road with Springsteen and the E Street Band for The River Tour 2016 in January 2016 . 
 = = Drum equipment = = 
 For many years , Weinberg 's gear included Ludwig and Pearl Drums and Zildjian cymbals ; he subsequently switched to DW Drums , but continues to use Zildjian cymbals . He also uses Remo heads and previously using Regal Tip drumsticks and brushes , he now uses Vater drumsticks , notably the 5A Nude wood tip model and Wire Tap brushes . His setup has always been simple , mostly consisting of a snare drum , mounted tom , bass drum and floor tom while his usual cymbal setup consists of two crash cymbals , a ride cymbal and a pair of hi @-@ hats , with an occasional third crash : " I 've got four drums . Anything more is redundant . Besides , I tend to trip over things . " 
 = Battle of Cooch 's Bridge = 
 The Battle of Cooch 's Bridge , also known as the Battle of Iron Hill , was a battle fought on September 3 , 1777 , between the Continental Army and American militia and primarily German soldiers serving alongside the British Army during the American Revolutionary War . It was the only significant military action during the war on the soil of Delaware ( though there were also naval engagements off the state 's coast ) , and it took place about a week before the major Battle of Brandywine . Reportedly , the battle saw the first flying of the American flag . 
 After landing in Maryland on August 25 as part of a campaign to capture Philadelphia , the seat of the Continental Congress , British and German forces under the overall command of General William Howe began to move north . Their advance was monitored by a light infantry corps of Continental Army and militia forces that had based itself at Cooch 's Bridge , near Newark , Delaware . On September 3 , German troops leading the British advance were met by musket fire from the American light infantry in the woods on either side of the road leading toward Cooch 's Bridge . Calling up reinforcements , they flushed the Americans out and drove them across the bridge . 
 = = Background = = 
 After having successfully captured New York City in 1776 , British military planners organized two expeditions to divide the Thirteen Colonies and , they hoped , decisively end the rebellion . One expedition was to take control of the Hudson River by a descent from Quebec , while the other was targeted at the colonial capital , Philadelphia . In pursuit of the latter objective , Lieutenant General William Howe embarked an army numbering about 18 @,@ 000 ( plus about 5 @,@ 000 camp followers ) onto transports in late July 1777 , and sailed from New York City to the Chesapeake Bay . The Continental Army of Major General George Washington remained near New York until Howe 's objective became clear . Howe 's plan was gauged to the south , intending to move against Philadelphia via the Chesapeake . Washington marched his army , numbering about 16 @,@ 000 , through Philadelphia , and established a camp at Wilmington , Delaware . Riding further south and west to perform reconnaissance on August 26 , Washington learned that the British had landed . 
 On August 25 , Howe 's army disembarked below a small town called Head of Elk ( now known as Elkton , and located at the head of navigation of the Elk River ) in Maryland , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of Philadelphia . Due to the relatively poor quality of the landing area , his troops moved immediately to the north , reaching Head of Elk itself on August 28 . Advance troops consisting of British light infantry and German jägers went east across Elk Creek and occupied Gray 's Hill , about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Iron Hill , near Cooch 's Bridge , which was a few miles south of Newark . The bridge was named for Thomas Cooch , a local landowner whose house was near the bridge . 
 Washington would normally have assigned the duties of advance guard to Daniel Morgan and his riflemen , but he had detached these to assist Horatio Gates in the defense of the Hudson River Valley against the advance of General John Burgoyne . Since they were unavailable , he organized a light infantry corps consisting of 700 picked men from Continental Army regiments ( including future Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall , who would go on to fight in the coming battle ) and about 1 @,@ 000 Pennsylvania and Delaware militia , and placed them under the command of Brigadier General William Maxwell . These troops occupied Iron Hill and Cooch 's Bridge . General Nathanael Greene advocating moving the entire Continental Army to this position , believing the Christina River to be a more defensible point , but Washington declined , instead ordering Maxwell to monitor British movements and slow its advance while the rest of the army fortified the Red Clay Creek and Wilmington . Maxwell 's men were encamped on either side of the road leading south from Cooch 's Bridge toward Aiken 's Tavern ( present @-@ day Glasgow , Delaware ) in a series of small camps designed to facilitate ambushes . On August 28 , Washington , atop Iron Hill , and Howe , on Gray 's Hill , observed each other as they took stock of the enemy 's position ; one of the Hessian generals wrote , " These gentlemen observed us with their glasses as carefully as we observed them . Those of our officers who know Washington well , maintained that the man in the plain coat was Washington . " 
 On September 2 , Howe 's right wing , under the command of the Hessian general , Wilhelm von Knyphausen , left Cecil County Court House and headed north , hampered by rain and bad roads . Early the next morning , Howe 's left wing , headed by troops under the command of Charles Cornwallis , left Head of Elk , expecting to join with Knyphausen 's division at Aiken 's Tavern , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east . Cornwallis reached the tavern first , and Howe , traveling with Cornwallis , decided to press on to the north without waiting for Knyphausen . 
 = = Battle = = 
 A small company of Hessian dragoons led by Captain Johann Ewald headed up the road from the tavern toward Cooch 's Bridge as Cornwallis 's advance guard . These were struck by a volley of fire from an American ambush , and many of them fell , either killed or wounded . Ewald did not , and he quickly alerted the Hessian and Ansbach jägers , who rushed forward to meet the Americans . This began a running skirmish that Major John André described as follows : " Here the rebels began to attack us about 9 o 'clock with a continued irregular fire for nearly two miles . " Howe rode to the front lines , and seeing Iron Hill crawling with enemy soldiers , ordered his troops to clear it . At this time , much of Maxwell 's force was defending Iron Hill , while the rest were protecting Cooch 's Bridge . The jägers , numbering over 400 men led by Lieutenant Colonel Ludwig von Wurmb , formed a line and , with the support of some artillery , advanced on the Americans . Von Wurmb sent one detachment to Maxwell 's left , hoping to flank his position , and supported the move with a bayonet charge against the American center . 
 The battle lasted for much of the day ; at Cooch 's Bridge , Maxwell 's men made a stand until they " had shot themselves out of ammunition " and " the fight was carried on with the sword " and bayonet ( the latter being a weapon Maxwell 's militia lacked experience in using ) . After seven hours of fighting , the Americans were forced to retreat from Iron Hill across Cooch 's Bridge , taking up a position on the far side . Howe ordered the 1st and 2nd British Light Infantry Battalion to assist the jägers in taking the bridge . While the 1st Battalion under Robert Abercromby became mired in swampy terrain attempting to ford the Christina River , the 2nd Battalion reached the right of the jägers and the bridge was taken . Maxwell 's army then retreated back toward Wilmington . 
 Casualty reports for the British range from 3 killed and 20 wounded to about 30 each killed and wounded . One British deserter reported that nine wagonloads of wounded were sent toward the fleet . The Americans claimed 20 killed and another 20 wounded , and Washington in a letter to Congress said the losses were " not very considerable " ; however , the British reported burying 41 Americans , and Howe 's official report claimed " not less than fifty killed and many more wounded " . General Maxwell was criticized for his leadership by a number of Washington 's subordinates . One foreign officer with service in the Army of Prussia commented to Henry Laurens in reference to Maxwell , " Your soldiers are very good mans , so good as any brave mans in the world , but your officers my dear colonel , your officers ... " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 General Cornwallis occupied the house of Thomas Cooch , and Howe 's forces remained at Iron Hill for five days . In a letter to Congress , Washington justified the defeat by saying , " This Morning the Enemy came out with considerable force and three pieces of Artillery , against our Light advanced Corps , and after some pretty smart skirmishing obliged them to retreat , being far inferior in number and without Cannon . " Certain that Howe would advance along the main road toward Wilmington in his bid to capture Philadelphia , Washington continued to fortify the city and the Red Clay Creek . He moved his headquarters from Wilmington to Newport , and the army formed defenses between Newport and Marshallton . While Howe 's army remained in place , the two forces engaged in small skirmishes over the next few days . One officer under Howe noted that the rebel patrols , which usually consist of 10 to 15 dragoons and 20 to 30 infantrymen , now appear more often , and they fire at our posts occasionally . " 
 Sensing an attack coming , Washington told his troops on September 5th , " Should they [ the British ] push their design against Philadelphia , on this route , their all is at stake — they will put the contest on the event of a single battle : If they are overthrown , they are utterly undone — the war is at an end . " Two days later , upon hearing that British ships had left the Chesapeake , Washington was sure Howe 's move was imminent . He rallied his troops , referencing Horatio Gates 's successes against the British in the north , saying " Who can forbear to emulate their [ Gates 's army ] noble spirit ? Who is there without ambition , to share with them , the applauses of their countrymen , and of all posterity , as the defenders of Liberty , and the <unk> of peace and happiness to millions in the present and future generations ? Two years we have maintained the war and struggled with difficulties innumerable . But the prospect has since brightened , and our affairs put on a better face — Now is the time to reap the fruits of all our toils and dangers ! ... The eyes of all America , and of Europe are turned upon us . " 
 But the attack never came . Instead , on September 8 , Howe moved his force north , through Newark and Hockessin into Pennsylvania . Upon realizing what the British were doing late in the night , Washington rushed his forces north as well to find a new defensive position . He settled on Chadds Ford , just across the Delaware border , upon the Brandywine River — the last natural defense before the Schuylkill River and Philadelphia . It was there that the two armies clashed again in the major Battle of Brandywine on September 11 . The British victory in that battle paved the way for their eventual entry into and occupation of the city of Philadelphia . 
 This success was more than offset by the failure of the expedition to the Hudson , in which General Burgoyne surrendered his army after the Battles of Saratoga , in October 1777 . News of Burgoyne 's surrender greatly changed the war , because it ( and the Battle of Germantown , fought after the British occupied Philadelphia ) was a major factor in France 's decision to enter the war as an American ally in 1778 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The site of the battle has been preserved as the Cooch 's Bridge Historic District , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . In 2003 , the Cooch family sold the state some land as well as development rights for an additional 200 acres ( 81 ha ) of land in the area of the battlefield . They also established a $ 1 @.@ 5 million fund to restore and maintain the property , and granted the state a right of first refusal to purchase the Thomas Cooch house , which remained with the family . 
 In 2007 , the 230th anniversary of the battle was commemorated by a re @-@ enactment event hosted by members of the recreated 2nd Virginia Regiment . 
 = Cantharellus lateritius = 
 Cantharellus lateritius , commonly known as the smooth chanterelle , is a species of edible fungus in the <unk> family of mushrooms . A ectomycorrhizal species , it is found in Asia , Africa , and North America . The species has a complex taxonomic history , and has undergone several name changes since its first description by American mycologist Lewis David de Schweinitz in 1822 . The fruit bodies of the fungus are brightly colored yellow to orange , and usually highly conspicuous against the soil in which they are found . At maturity , the mushroom resembles a filled funnel with the spore @-@ bearing surface along the sloping outer sides . The texture of the fertile undersurface ( hymenium ) of the caps is a distinguishing characteristic of the species : unlike the well @-@ known golden chanterelle , the hymenium of C. lateritius is much smoother . Chemical analysis has revealed the presence of several carotenoid compounds in the fruit bodies . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described in the scientific literature as Thelephora <unk> by the American Lewis David de Schweinitz in 1822 , based on specimens collected in Ohio . Elias Magnus Fries later transferred it to Craterellus in his 1838 Epicrisis Systematis Mycologici . In 1856 , Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis mentioned the fungus in their analysis of Schweinitz 's specimens , but changed the epithet , calling it Craterellus lateritius . The motivation for the name change is unclear ; Ronald H. Petersen , in a 1979 publication , suggests that Berkeley " was apparently reluctant to surrender his own name for the organism " . Petersen suggests that Berkeley may have foreseen the necessity to avoid giving the species a tautonym ( a situation where both the generic name and specific epithet are identical ) . However , as Petersen indicates , a future publication renders this explanation dubious : in 1873 Berkeley again referred to the species using his chosen name Craterellus lateritius , and indicated a type location ( Alabama ) different than the one mentioned by Schweinitz . Petersen considers Berkeley 's name to be a nomen novum ( new name ) , not a new species , as Berkeley clearly indicated that he thought Craterellus lateritius was synonymous with Schweinitz 's Thelephora <unk> . Normally in these circumstances , Schweinitz 's specimen would be considered the type , but Petersen was unable to locate Schweinitz 's original specimen , and thus according to the rules of botanical nomenclature , Berkeley 's epithet has precedence as it is the earliest published name that has an associated type specimen . 
 Another synonym is Trombetta <unk> , used by Otto Kuntze in his 1891 Revisio Generum Plantarum . American mycologist Rolf Singer transferred it to the genus Cantharellus in 1951 . The mushroom is commonly known as the " smooth chanterelle " . The specific name lateritius means " <unk> " , and refers to the smooth hymenium . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caps of the C. lateritius fruit bodies typically range between 2 to 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , with a flattened to somewhat funnel @-@ shaped top surface and a wavy margin . The cap surface is dry , slightly tomentose ( covered with a layer of fine hairs ) , and a deep and bright orange @-@ yellow color , with older specimens fading to more yellow in age ; the extreme margins of the cap are a paler yellow , and typically curve downward in young specimens . Fruit bodies can reach a height of 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The hymenophore ( the spore @-@ bearing surface ) is initially smooth and without wrinkles , but gradually develops channels or ridges , and what appear to be very shallow gills that are vein @-@ like , and less than 1 mm wide . The color is pale yellow , and is continuous with the surface of the stem . The stem is rather plump and stout , 1 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 8 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 7 in ) thick , more or less cylindrical , tapering downwards towards the base . Internally , the stems are either stuffed ( filled with cotton @-@ like mycelia ) or solid . Rarely , fruit bodies may be clumped together with stems joined at the base ; in these cases there are usually no more than three fused stems . The flesh is solid to partly hollow ( sometimes due to insect larvae ) , with a pale yellow color ; it is 0 @.@ 5 to 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick . 
 The spores are smooth , with a roughly ellipsoid shape , and have typical dimensions of 7 – 7 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 µm . In deposit , such as in a spore print , the spores are light yellow orange , while under the microscope they are a very pale yellowish . The spore bearing cells — the basidia — are 75 – 80 by 7 – 9 µm , 4 @-@ 5 @-@ 6 @-@ spored , slightly club @-@ shaped , and with a distinctly thickened wall at the base . Clamp connections ( short branches connecting one cell to the previous cell to allow passage of the products of nuclear division ) are present in the hyphae of all parts of the fruit body . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Cantharellus lateritius is pinker than the golden chanterelle ( C. cibarius ) , and has thicker flesh in addition to the smoother hymenial surface . C. odoratus is also similar in appearance , and is distinguished by a thinner flesh and a hollow stem . The poisonous " Jack O 'Lantern " mushroom , Omphalotus olearius , is roughly similar in stature and color , but can be differentiated from C. lateritius by its true gills with sharply defined edges , and growth on decaying wood ( although the wood may be buried in the soil ) , usually in large overlapping clusters . 
 One author considers Cantharellus lateritius to likely represent a species complex , including " all the chanterelles with a completely smooth hymenophore , sweet smell , and clamped hyphae . " 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Like all species in the genus Cantharellus , C. lateritius is edible , and considered choice by some . The odor resembles apricots , and the taste is mild , or " moderately to faintly acrid " . In the opinion of McFarland and Mueller , authors of a field guide to edible fungi of Illinois , compared to the well @-@ known C. cibarius , C. lateritius is " in general ... somewhat disappointing when compared with their delicious relatives " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Cantharellus lateritius is distributed in North America , Africa , Malaysia , and the Himalayas ( specifically , the Almora hills in Uttar Pradesh ) . In the United States , its range extends northward to Michigan and New England . 
 Typically found growing solitary , in groups or in clusters under hardwood trees , the fungus produces fruit bodies in the summer and autumn . In the New England area of the United States , mycologist Howard Bigelow has noted it to grow on road shoulders in grass near oaks ; it also has a predilection for growing on sloping creek banks . In Malaysia , it is found growing on the soil in forests , mostly under species of Shorea ( rainforest trees in the family Dipterocarpaceae ) . C. lateritius has been reported from the Western Ghats , Kerala , India , forming ectomycorrhizal association with endemic tree species like <unk> indica , Hopea parviflora , Diospyros <unk> , <unk> <unk> in semi @-@ evergreen to evergreen forests . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 In a 1998 study , the carotenoid composition of this species was compared to several other Cantharellus species , including C. <unk> , C. cibarius var. <unk> , and C. <unk> . The carotenoid content between species was " virtually identical " , comprising γ @-@ carotene , α @-@ carotene , and β @-@ carotene . The only significant difference was that C. lateritius contained a significant quantity of an unidentified carotene that was thought to be a breakdown product of β @-@ carotene . 
 = Beriah Magoffin = 
 Beriah Magoffin ( April 18 , 1815 – February 28 , 1885 ) was the 21st Governor of Kentucky , serving during the early part of the Civil War . Personally , Magoffin adhered to a states ' rights position , including the right of a state to secede from the Union , and he sympathized with the Confederate cause . Nevertheless , when the Kentucky General Assembly adopted a position of neutrality in the war , Magoffin ardently held to it , refusing calls for aid from both the Union and Confederate governments . 
 In special elections held in June 1861 , Unionists captured nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional seats and obtained two @-@ thirds majorities in both houses of the state legislature . Despite Magoffin 's strict adherence to the policy of neutrality , the Unionist legislature did not trust him and routinely overrode his vetoes . Unable to provide effective leadership due to a hostile legislature , Magoffin agreed to resign as governor in 1862 , provided he could choose his successor . Lieutenant governor Linn Boyd had died in office , and Magoffin refused to allow Speaker of the Senate John F. Fisk to succeed him as governor . Accordingly , Fisk resigned and the Kentucky Senate elected Magoffin 's choice , James F. Robinson , as speaker . Magoffin then resigned , Robinson ascended to the governorship , and Fisk was re @-@ elected as Speaker of the Senate . 
 After the war , he encouraged acceptance of the Union victory and passage of the Thirteenth Amendment . He died February 28 , 1885 . Magoffin County , Kentucky was named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Beriah Magoffin was born on April 18 , 1815 in Harrodsburg , Kentucky . He was the son of Beriah and Jane ( McAfee ) Magoffin . His father was an immigrant from County Down , Ireland , and his mother was the daughter of Samuel McAfee , a prominent pioneer in early Kentucky . 
 Magoffin 's early education was obtained in the common schools of Harrodsburg . In 1835 , he graduated from Centre College in Danville , Kentucky , and in 1838 , he earned a law degree from Transylvania University in Lexington , Kentucky . Afterward , he moved to Jackson , Mississippi where he began his legal career . From 1838 to 1839 , he served as Reading Clerk for the Mississippi state senate . 
 Magoffin returned to Kentucky in 1839 due to an illness . He continued his legal practice in Harrodsburg , and was appointed police judge of Harrodsburg by Governor Robert P. Letcher in 1840 . On April 21 , 1840 , he married Anna Nelson Shelby . Shelby was the granddaughter of Kentucky 's first and fifth governor , Isaac Shelby . Ten of the couple 's children survived infancy . 
 Magoffin became active in the Democratic Party , serving as a presidential elector in 1844 , 1848 , 1852 , and 1856 and as a delegate to the Democratic National Convention in 1848 , 1856 , 1860 , and 1872 . He served one term in the Kentucky Senate in 1850 , but declined his party 's nomination for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in 1851 . In 1855 was the Democratic nominee for lieutenant governor , running on a ticket with Beverly L. Clarke , who was defeated by Know Nothing candidate Charles S. Morehead . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Magoffin was elected governor of Kentucky by a vote of 76 @,@ 187 to 67 @,@ 283 over Joshua Fry Bell , taking office on August 30 , 1859 . He supported states ' rights and the institution of slavery . Although he believed in the right of states to secede from the union , he hoped to avoid this outcome by reaching an agreement between the southern and northern states . To that end , he wrote a circular letter to the governors of the slave states on December 9 , 1860 detailing a plan to save the Union . 
 Magoffin 's plan was to unite the slave states around a set of minimum concessions to see if the North would accept them as an alternative to war . The concessions included a constitutional amendment repealing any state law that interfered with enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act , passage of amendments to the Fugitive Slave Act ensuring that any state that would not return a fugitive slave or obstructed a slave 's return would compensate the owner of the slave , passage of a law requiring extradition of anyone indicted by a grand jury for enticing the escape of a slave , passage of an amendment to the constitution guaranteeing slavery in all current and future territories south of 36 degrees north latitude , passage of an amendment to the constitution guaranteeing all states the right of using the Mississippi River , and provide protection for southern states in the U.S. Senate from oppressive slavery legislation . After the slave state governors refused Magoffin 's plan , he endorsed the Crittenden Compromise , authored by fellow Kentuckian John J. Crittenden . 
 In January 1861 , Magoffin called the state legislature into special session and asked them to call a convention to determine Kentucky 's course in the Civil War . The Unionist majority in the legislature feared that the vote of the convention would be to take Kentucky out of the Union ; consequently , they refused to call the convention . In response to President Abraham Lincoln 's call for troops on April 15 , 1861 , Magoffin defiantly declared by telegram , " I will send not a man nor a dollar for the wicked purpose of subduing my sister Southern States . " Encouraged by Magoffin 's rebuff of Lincoln , Confederate Secretary of War LeRoy Pope Walker requested Kentucky troops for the southern cause a week later , but Magoffin similarly refused him . 
 Magoffin called another special session of the legislature in May 1861 . Again , the legislators refused to call a convention to determine the state 's course in the war . Instead , they approved a resolution of neutrality , and Magoffin proclaimed this position on May 20 , 1861 . Later that month , Magoffin sent a letter to Confederate President Jefferson Davis asking that he recognize and honor Kentucky 's neutrality . In August , he sent an identical letter to President Lincoln . 
 Although Magoffin pledged " to abide by the will of the majority of the people in the state " and to uphold the state and federal constitutions , Unionists in the legislature did not trust Magoffin . In the state 's special elections in June 1861 , Unionist candidates swept nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional districts and obtained two @-@ thirds majorities in both houses of the General Assembly . From then on , they routinely overrode Magoffin 's vetoes . 
 In early September 1861 , both federal and Confederate troops entered Kentucky . Magoffin declared both sides equally guilty of violating Kentucky 's neutrality and demanded that both sides withdraw . A resolution calling for immediate withdrawal by both Union and Confederate forces was defeated in the legislature . Instead , the legislature passed a resolution ordering only the Confederate troops out of the state . Magoffin vetoed the resolution , but his veto was overridden , and he obediently issued the order for the Confederates to withdraw . In November 1861 , a self @-@ constituted convention of southern sympathizers met at Russellville , Kentucky in order to form a provisional Confederate government for the state . Despite his southern sympathies , Magoffin denounced the actions of this convention . 
 Magoffin and the legislature continued to clash throughout the remainder of 1861 and into 1862 . They found agreement only on the most menial of legislation , such as a bill to allow the common schools to continue the sessions that had been interrupted by the outbreak of hostilities in 1861 . He found particularly onerous a bill forfeiting the citizenship of anyone who fought for or aided the Confederacy , but in March 1862 , his veto of the bill was overridden . Magoffin also opposed the military rule of Brigadier General Jeremiah T. Boyle , who he believed was violating the civil rights of states ' rights advocates , even if they did not advocate secession . 
 Calls by the legislature for Magoffin 's resignation had begun as early as September 30 , 1861 . On August 16 , 1862 , Magoffin declared his willingness to resign on the condition that he be allowed to choose his successor . Because Lieutenant Governor Linn Boyd had died in office in 1859 , Speaker of the Senate John F. Fisk was next in line for the governorship . Magoffin refused to accept Fisk as his successor , so Fisk resigned as speaker and the senate elevated Magoffin 's choice , James F. Robinson , to speaker . Magoffin resigned as governor on August 18 , 1862 , and Robinson assumed the office of governor for the remainder of Magoffin 's term . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After the war , Magoffin returned to his legal practice and engaged in agricultural pursuits in Harrodsburg . A series of land speculation ventures near Chicago , Illinois made him very wealthy . He encouraged his fellow Kentuckians to accept the results of the war . He advocated for civil rights for blacks and urged passage of the Thirteenth Amendment . 
 In his last act of public service , Magoffin represented Mercer County in the Kentucky House of Representatives from 1867 to 1869 . He died at home on February 28 , 1885 and was buried in Spring Hill Cemetery in Harrodsburg . In 1900 , a monument was erected in the cemetery in Magoffin 's honor . Magoffin County , Kentucky was created in 1860 and also named in his honor . 
 = Cyclone Bobby = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Bobby set numerous monthly rainfall records in parts of the Goldfields @-@ Esperance regions of Western Australia , dropping up to 400 mm ( 16 in ) of rain in February 1995 . The fourth named storm of the 1994 – 95 Australian region cyclone season , Bobby developed as a tropical low embedded within a monsoon trough situated north of the Northern Territory coastline on 19 February . The storm gradually drifted southwestward and later southward under low wind shear , strengthening enough to be assigned the name Bobby by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) . The storm rapidly deepened as it approached the coast of Western Australia , and attained its peak intensity of 925 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) at 0900 UTC on 24 February with 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . After making landfall as a somewhat weaker cyclone near Onslow , the remnants of Bobby drifted southeastward , gradually weakening , before dissipating over the southern reaches of Western Australia . 
 Bobby inflicted minor damage throughout Western Australia , dropping copious rainfall and forcing the closure of many facilities and roads . The storm 's destruction was most severe in Onslow , where 20 residences suffered damage . Elsewhere , Bobby knocked out power and water supplies , unroofed houses , tore off rain gutters , toppled fences , and smashed windows . The flooding of a 17 km ( 11 mi ) stretch of the Eyre Highway stranded approximately 1000 vehicles , although the backup was later cleared more than a week later . Flooding disrupted mining and drilling operations throughout southwestern Australia , costing the industry upwards of $ 50 million ( 1995 AUD ; $ 38 @.@ 7 million USD ) . Numerous Australian Army and State Emergency Service ( SES ) personnel were involved in cleanup and recovery efforts after the cyclone 's passage , while power and water service was restored to those cut off during the storm . Overall , the cyclone caused eight deaths and $ 11 million ( 1995 AUD ; $ 8 @.@ 5 million USD ) in damage along its course across Western Australia . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cyclone Bobby can be traced to a tropical low that formed within a monsoon trough off of the Northern Territory 's shores on 19 February 1995 . Further organization was initially hindered by strong easterly wind shear as it drifted toward the west @-@ southwest along the northern fringes of a mid @-@ level zonal ridge . The latitudinal ridge was perturbed by a broad frontal system from 21 to 22 February , reducing wind shear around the low and producing favorable conditions for development . Swift tropical cyclogenesis followed as the convection – thunderstorms – strengthened around the system 's surface circulation , and the storm was assigned the name Bobby by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) during the early morning hours of 22 February while stationed approximately 500 km ( 310 mi ) north of Port Hedland , making it the fourth named storm of the Australian region cyclone season . Bobby continued to strengthen over the following days while meandering south @-@ southwestward toward the mid @-@ level ridge , and attained Category 1 @-@ equivalent intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale at 0000 UTC on 23 February , with 1 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . 
 Bobby slowed slightly and moved erratically as it neared the Western Australian coastline , turning southward while rapidly strengthening . It attained its peak intensity of 925 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) at 0900 UTC on 24 February , producing 1 @-@ minute sustained winds upwards of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) and 10 @-@ minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale or a Category 4 cyclone on the Australian scale . Hurricane @-@ force winds ' radius around the cyclone 's center decreased from 80 km ( 50 mi ) to less than 30 km ( 19 mi ) ; however , gale @-@ force winds continued to reach as far as 150 km ( 93 mi ) outward from the center , consistent with satellite imagery . The cyclone continued to trek southward under the influence of a northeast @-@ moving frontal system , and made landfall near Onslow at 1800 UTC on 25 February with a minimum atmospheric pressure of 952 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 11 inHg ) . Bobby persisted for another two days , travelling southward for 24 hours before curving to the southeast and dissipating over southwestern Australia . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Prior to the storm 's arrival , approximately 1 @,@ 000 Aboriginals and individuals living on pastoral stations were evacuated from parts of Pilbara to safer regions ; another 7 people were evacuated to the local hospital in Onslow , the local designated evacuation center for the cyclone . The Onslow Airport was closed , as were Karratha 's airport , port , and the Griffin oil field managed by Woodside Petroleum . Many other airports , roads , and ports along the Western Australian shoreline were also shut down prior to Bobby 's landfall , including the North West Coastal Highway between Onslow and Karratha . In addition , three towns in Western Australia were placed under red alerts . 
 In Onslow , Bobby damaged or unroofed 20 homes and caused power outages after toppling power lines ; in addition , powerful winds tore off rain gutters , damaged radio antennas , toppled fences , and smashed windows . Over 400 mm ( 16 in ) of rain fell there , while numerous February rainfall records were broken in the Goldfields @-@ Esperance region ; Onslow received only 95 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) of rain in the six months before Bobby , and annual rainfall in the region averaged 225 to 285 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 to 11 @.@ 2 in ) ; most other parts of Western Australia received 100 to 175 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall from the cyclone . Although 11 fishermen were initially reported missing , all were later verified to be safe . The 61 @,@ 000 @-@ tonne ship Bulk Azores ran aground at Kendrew Island near Dampier while transporting iron ore , though no spillage was noted and the vessel resumed its journey shortly thereafter . Several other boats thought to be missing were driven ashore , although the Lady Pam and Harmony were not found ; despite an extensive search involving three helicopters , three airplanes , and numerous police divers , the seven on board were later presumed dead after the Harmony was found capsized and an empty lifeboat from the Lady Pam were located . In Karratha , the cyclone unroofed several homes , toppled trees and power lines , and caused localised flooding . The mining community of Pannawonica also experienced power outages , while elsewhere in Western Australia , the Fortescue , Ashburton , and Gascoyne river drainage basins were flooded . In southern portions of the state , Bobby 's remnants flooded the Eyre Highway at Balladonia and 26 km ( 16 mi ) east of Norseman , forcing the closure of a 17 km ( 11 mi ) stretch of road , and stranding 1000 vehicles . Among them included trucks carrying 45 tonnes of stage equipment for two Cliff Richard concerts in Perth , forcing postponement of both , and stage equipment for a performance of the play An Inspector Calls , which was cancelled as a result of the problems . 
 The cyclone also disrupted gold and mineral mining work in southern Western Australia , closing landing strips at Leinster and Wiluna . Nickel mining near Leinster , mostly from WMC Resources 's Mount Keith Mine , was impeded by rainfall which obstructed extraction of ore from the pit . The Super Pit gold mine at Kalgoorlie , meanwhile , was closed after 156 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) of precipitation fell within a three @-@ day period ; all major mines within the vicinity were forced to halt operations . Meanwhile , the Kanowna Belle , New Celebration , Sons of Gwalia , and dozens of other open @-@ pit mines also suspended mining activities due to obstructed roads as well as wet pits and facilities . Several mines suffered fuel shortages , with many roads inaccessible to fuel @-@ transporting vehicles . While the North Rankin A and Goodwyn oil platforms were in the path of Bobby , both facilities escaped damage , and in fact drilled considerably higher amounts as a result of increased demand for gas from utilities on land . The adjacent Perseus platform , however , temporarily shut down operations . Australian gold industry officials estimated total economic disruptions amounted to upwards of $ 50 million ( 1995 AUD ; $ 38 @.@ 7 million USD ) . 
 Officials coordinated the delivery of food supplies by Australian Army trucks , aircraft , and helicopters , though a military vehicle delivering tarpaulins , radios , and food parcels was caught in mud at Blackheart Creek near Onslow ; Australian Army personnel and six State Emergency Service ( SES ) vehicles were deployed to Onslow for cleanup efforts . Food supplies were airlifted to mostly unpopulated regions of central and eastern Pilbara , where several pastoral stations and Aboriginal localities were cut off by the storm ; many of the stations received moderate damage as a result of Bobby . Despite the area 's relative isolation , electrical and water service was restored relatively rapidly without issue . The Eyre Highway reopened on 5 March after police , road crews , and SES workers cleared out a jam involving more than 1500 individuals affected by the roadway 's flooding . Meanwhile , the government of Australia nullified fuel excises for foreign vessels carrying Australian cargo between parts of Western Australia affected by Bobby due to the lack of usable road and rail routes . In all , the cyclone caused eight deaths , seven out at sea and one due to drowning at Carnarvon , and insured damages totalled $ 11 million ( 1995 AUD ; $ 8 @.@ 5 million USD ) . Due to the cyclone 's severity , the name Bobby was retired after the season ended . 
 = U.S. Route 60 in Oklahoma = 
 U.S. Route 60 ( US @-@ 60 ) is a transcontinental U.S. highway extending from near Brenda , Arizona to Virginia Beach , Virginia on the Atlantic Ocean . Along the way , 352 @.@ 39 miles ( 567 @.@ 12 km ) of the route lies within the state of Oklahoma . The highway crosses into the state from Texas west of Arnett and serves many towns and cities in the northern part of the state , including Arnett , Seiling , Fairview , Enid , Ponca City , Pawhuska , Bartlesville , and Vinita . US @-@ 60 exits Oklahoma near Seneca , Missouri . In Oklahoma , US @-@ 60 has three business routes , serving Tonkawa , Ponca City , and Seneca . The first 60 @.@ 2 miles ( 96 @.@ 9 km ) of the route , from the Texas line to Seiling , is also designated as State Highway 51 ( SH @-@ 51 ) . 
 US @-@ 60 , as originally designated , did not enter Oklahoma . Instead , it ended in Springfield , Missouri , continuing east from there . AASHO approved an extension of US @-@ 60 on May 29 , 1930 , which extended it west through Oklahoma to Amarillo , Texas . US @-@ 60 's extension displaced US @-@ 164 in its entirety ; that designation was then retired . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US @-@ 60 enters Oklahoma in Ellis County , just east of Higgins , Texas . SH @-@ 51 begins at the state line concurrent with US @-@ 60 , and will remain so for the next 60 @.@ 2 miles ( 96 @.@ 9 km ) . The highways head due east from the state line for seven miles ( 11 km ) before coming to an intersection with US @-@ 283 . US @-@ 283 follows US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 51 into Arnett , where they serve as the southern terminus for SH @-@ 46 . East of Arnett , US @-@ 283 splits off to the south . US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 51 continue east through the unincorporated location of Harmon and on into Dewey County . 
 In the northwest part of Dewey County , US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 51 pass through Vici , where they share a brief concurrency with SH @-@ 34 . The highways continue east for 11 miles ( 18 km ) to <unk> , another unincorporated place , and proceed for eight miles ( 13 km ) to a junction with US @-@ 183 . US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 51 then enter the city of Seiling , where the two routes part ways . SH @-@ 51 turns southeast along eastbound US @-@ 270 , southbound US @-@ 281 , and southbound SH @-@ 3 ; US @-@ 60 instead follows westbound US @-@ 270 , northbound US @-@ 281 , and northbound SH @-@ 3 . The four routes pass through downtown Seiling . On the north side of town , US @-@ 270 and SH @-@ 3 continue to the northwest , while US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 281 take a more northerly tack that will take them towards Major County . 
 US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 281 cross the North Canadian River into Major County north of Seiling . They split at unincorporated Chester , five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Seiling ; US @-@ 281 continues north toward <unk> , while US @-@ 60 turns east . US @-@ 60 then passes through a series of unincorporated locations : Orion , Bado , Dane , and Cedar Springs . The highway next enters Fairview , the county seat . On the south side of town , US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 58 join in a concurrency and head north . In downtown Fairview , SH @-@ 58 leaves the concurrency but SH @-@ 8 joins US @-@ 60 as it continues north out of town . Six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Fairview , US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 8 meet US @-@ 412 at unincorporated Orienta ; US @-@ 412 joins the concurrency . The three highways cross the Cimarron River together before SH @-@ 8 splits off to the north towards Cleo Springs . US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 412 continue to the east , meeting up with SH @-@ 58 again on the north edge of Ringwood . The two US highways pass through Meno before coming to the Major – Garfield County line . 
 Soon after entering Garfield County , US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 412 run through Lahoma . Three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of there , they share a brief concurrency with SH @-@ 132 . The two highways enter the county seat of Garfield County , the city of Enid , along Owen K. Garriott Road , named in honor of the astronaut . In downtown Enid , US @-@ 60 turns off of Garriott and onto Van Buren Street , leaving US @-@ 412 and joining US @-@ 81 instead . The two routes proceed north towards a junction with US @-@ 64 , which joins the other US routes to form a three @-@ way concurrency — a wrong @-@ way concurrency , as US @-@ 60 eastbound is also US @-@ 64 westbound and vice versa . The routes straddle the line between Enid and North Enid and serve as the eastern terminus of SH @-@ 45 . All three highways then exit Enid , and continue north to leave Garfield County as well . 
 Upon leaving Garfield County , US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 64 / US @-@ 81 enter Grant County . Fourteen miles ( 23 km ) north of Enid , the three routes come to a T junction ; US @-@ 64 turns west here , while US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 81 head east . After four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , the highways come to the town of Pond Creek ; here US @-@ 81 splits off towards the county seat of Medford and on to Kansas . US @-@ 60 continues east , crossing the Salt Fork of the Arkansas River and briefly concurring with SH @-@ 74 to the west of Lamont , where the two part ways . 
 Kay County is the next county US @-@ 60 passes through , and the first settlement US @-@ 60 comes to is the city of Tonkawa . Here , US @-@ 60 has an interchange with one of the two interstate highways it will meet in Oklahoma , Interstate 35 ( I @-@ 35 ) . East of I @-@ 35 , US @-@ 60 begins a concurrency with US @-@ 77 ; this interchange is also the western terminus of US @-@ 60 Business , which serves downtown Tonkawa . US @-@ 177 joins the concurrency at the next interchange , which is also the other end of the Tonkawa business loop . Further east is an interchange with SH @-@ 156 , the northern terminus of that route . US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 77 / US @-@ 177 then reach the outskirts of Ponca City , Kay County 's largest city . Ponca City , too , has a business loop from US @-@ 60 , which begins at the next interchange east . The three U.S. routes mostly bypass the city to the south , only actually entering the city limits at its far southern extent . In Ponca City , US @-@ 60 Business reunites with mainline US @-@ 60 and ends . This intersection is also where the three @-@ way concurrency between the U.S. routes breaks ; US @-@ 77 heads north along US @-@ 60 Business , deeper into Ponca City , US @-@ 177 heads south toward Stillwater , and US @-@ 60 heads east to cross the Arkansas River . 
 Upon crossing the Arkansas , US @-@ 60 enters Osage County and the Osage Nation reservation , which is coterminous with the county . US @-@ 60 does not have another junction with a state highway for 21 miles ( 34 km ) , when it comes to an intersection with SH @-@ 11 and SH @-@ 18 southeast of Burbank . SH @-@ 11 splits away from SH @-@ 18 to follow US @-@ 60 instead . From the SH @-@ 18 junction , the highways ' next state highway junction lies 20 miles ( 32 km ) further east , in Pawhuska , the county seat . Here , US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 11 come to a T intersection with SH @-@ 99 ; eastbound SH @-@ 11 heads south along SH @-@ 99 while US @-@ 60 heads north . North of Pawhuska , US @-@ 60 splits off to the east once again , as SH @-@ 99 continues north to the Kansas line . US @-@ 60 serves as the northern terminus of a spur route to Osage Hills State Park ; this route , while state maintained and numbered as SH @-@ 35 , does not bear any conventional state highway signage . 
 US @-@ 60 next comes to a junction with SH @-@ 123 as it enters Bartlesville . The SH @-@ 123 junction lies a few feet into Washington County ; south of the junction , US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 123 form a concurrency , and the two routes curve slightly to the west and straddle the Washington – Osage county line . After only 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) , US @-@ 60 turns to the east along Adams Boulevard , splitting away from SH @-@ 123 , and fully enters Washington County . US @-@ 60 runs through downtown Bartlesville on Adams , then bridges the Caney River . The highway continues to an interchange with US @-@ 75 . At this interchange , US @-@ 60 turns south and overlaps US @-@ 75 before splitting off to the east once again , leaving Bartlesville and , soon , Washington County behind . 
 Next along US @-@ 60 's route is Nowata County , and the county seat of the same name , 17 miles ( 27 km ) east of Bartlesville . In Nowata , the route uses a series of local streets to pass through town , following , from west to east , Davis Avenue , Pecan Street , Delaware Avenue , and Pine Street before turning onto Cherokee Avenue . It intersects with US @-@ 169 Alternate at Maple Street , then with US @-@ 169 itself at Ash Street . In the east part of Nowata , US @-@ 60 transitions from Cherokee Avenue to Fairview Avenue , which it remains on as it exits town . Three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of Nowata , the highway passes through unincorporated <unk> Bluff , where it crosses the Verdigris River. five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of Coody 's Bluff , the highway junctions with SH @-@ 28 . US @-@ 60 continues into Craig County , leaving Nowata County . 
 US @-@ 60 's first highway junction in Craig County is at the eastern terminus of SH @-@ 66 east of the incorporated location of White Oak . US @-@ 60 then proceeds east , joining with US @-@ 69 as the two head into Vinita , the county seat . In Vinita , the highways serve as the southern terminus of the northern SH @-@ 2 . Just outside Vinita , US @-@ 60 has its first interchange with I @-@ 44 , which is also carrying the Will Rogers Turnpike at this point ( this is US @-@ 69 's second I @-@ 44 junction ; it previously intersected I @-@ 44 near Big Cabin ) . Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of the I @-@ 44 junction , US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 69 serve as the northern terminus of SH @-@ 82 . East of here , the two US highways clip the corner of Delaware County ; while in Delaware County , they meet SH @-@ 85 at is northern terminus . 
 Ottawa County is the final Oklahoma county that both US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 69 will pass through . The two routes first pass through the town of Afton . The first highway junction in the county is with US @-@ 59 , which concurs with the other two highways . Less than a mile north of the US @-@ 59 junction , the three highways pass through a cloverleaf interchange ; proceeding north through this interchange places a motorist on US @-@ 59 / US @-@ 69 bound for Miami , heading west leads to the toll booth for I @-@ 44 , and turning east puts the motorist on US @-@ 60 eastbound . US @-@ 60 , now with no other highways concurrent with it , will parallel the BNSF rail line for the remainder of its time in Oklahoma . The next town the route passes through is Fairland ; here , it has a brief concurrency with SH @-@ 125 . US @-@ 60 crosses the Neosho River ( also known as the Grand River ) into Twin Bridges State Park . Within the park , the highway serves as the southern terminus of SH @-@ 137 . US @-@ 60 crosses the Spring River to exit the park . Northeast of Wyandotte , US @-@ 60 has a brief concurrency with SH @-@ 10 . As it approaches the state line , US @-@ 60 Business splits from US @-@ 60 , serving Seneca , Missouri . US @-@ 60 then leaves Oklahoma , continuing into Newton County , Missouri . 
 = = History = = 
 US @-@ 60 as designated in the original U.S. highway system had a western terminus in Springfield , Missouri . On May 29 , 1930 , AASHO approved an extension westward to Amarillo , Texas , bringing the route through Oklahoma for the first time . From west to east , US @-@ 60 displaced US @-@ 164 ( from Amarillo to Enid , its entire length ) , SH @-@ 11 ( from Ponca City to Pawhuska ) , and SH @-@ 25 ( from Pawhuska to Vinita ) . The section of highway between what was then US @-@ 59 / US @-@ 66 / US @-@ 69 ( now only US @-@ 59 / US @-@ 69 ) north of Afton and Seneca , Missouri was purpose @-@ built as US @-@ 60 . 
 The first two changes to US @-@ 60 in Oklahoma after its inception occurred in the northeastern part of the state . The highway 's routing through Bartlesville was changed on September 15 , 1936 . On October 22 , 1936 , a section of US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 48 ( the precursor to SH @-@ 99 in that area ) in Osage County north of Pawhuska was abandoned in favor of a new alignment that led to a new grade separation . 
 At the request of the Ponca City Chamber of Commerce , the Oklahoma Highway Commission approved several changes to the highway marking in the vicinity of that city . Both US @-@ 77 and US @-@ 60 had a bypass route marked around town as a " Belt Line " , while city routes ( the precursor to business routes ) were marked through town . The US @-@ 60 Belt Line approximated the route of present @-@ day US @-@ 60 Business , while the US @-@ 60 City Route penetrated further into downtown Ponca City . These routes were established on September 9 , 1938 . 
 US @-@ 60 would be realigned through many of the towns it served in the late 1940s and early 1950s . The highway was adjusted through Fairland to use Connor Avenue , a shorter , straighter route through town ; this change was approved on July 11 , 1949 . The highway 's route through Nowata was altered next , on November 13 , 1950 . Previously , US @-@ 60 followed Delaware Avenue to Oak Street , where it turned south , before turning back to the east on Cherokee Avenue ; after the change , it turns south on Pine Street and joins Cherokee Avenue further west . On the same date , the highway was realigned through Bartlesville . The US @-@ 60 system through Ponca City was next to be reworked , on July 14 , 1952 . The previous US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 77 Belt Line routes and City Routes were removed in favor of a new US @-@ 60 route bypassing the city to the south on Harding Avenue and proceeding east across a new Arkansas River bridge — the present day route . Further west , US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 177 were realigned in Tonkawa on May 4 , 1953 , replacing an alternate US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 177 that previously paralleled the main highway there . 
 The mid @-@ 1950s saw two alterations of US @-@ 60 in rural areas . The first concerned the section of US @-@ 60 between then @-@ US @-@ 59 / US @-@ 66 / US @-@ 69 and Fairland . Previously , US @-@ 60 diverged from the other three U.S. routes further north and headed due east towards Fairview . The new ( present @-@ day ) alignment of US @-@ 60 , approved December 17 , 1956 , instead diverged at an interchange also serving the Will Rogers Turnpike , then headed northeast to Fairland . After realignment , the route was 1 @.@ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) shorter than before . The next change occurred on April 23 , 1957 , in Major County , northeast of Orienta . Here , the highway was realigned due to a new bridge over the Cimarron River ; the old highway was turned over to Major County to maintain . 
 On July 17 , 1958 , the Highway Commission approved a reroute of US @-@ 60 and US @-@ 81 through Enid . Rather than passing through the north half of the city on Grand Avenue and North Enid Boulevard as the two routes did previously , they now proceeded north along Van Buren Avenue . The next changes to the route occurred in Osage County . A 3 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 0 km ) segment of US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 11 west of Pawhuska with many curves was replaced with a newer , straighter alignment on October 6 , 1958 , with the old highway segment being transferred to the county . Further straightening of the route , further west , was approved on April 3 , 1961 . 
 The easternmost stretch of US @-@ 60 in Oklahoma was revised in 1965 . Previously , US @-@ 60 passed directly through Seneca , Missouri . In 1965 , the Oklahoma and Missouri Departments of Highways submitted a request to reroute US @-@ 60 to the south , and to <unk> a portion of old US @-@ 60 serving Seneca , as well as a segment of Missouri Route 43 connecting to the new US @-@ 60 , as US @-@ 60 Business . The remainder of the bypassed portion of US @-@ 60 in Missouri , east of Route 43 , was to be abandoned . This request was approved by the Oklahoma Highway Commission on March 1 , submitted to AASHO on May 5 , and approved by AASHO on July 12 . 
 Two realignments to US @-@ 60 occurred on March 6 , 1967 . First , a portion of US @-@ 60 west of Nowata was straightened . Second , a segment of US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 11 east of Burbank was rerouted to the south on a straighter alignment ; this new alignment also removed a concurrency with SH @-@ 18 . On April 3 , 1967 , the Oklahoma Highway Commission approved a realignment of a short segment of US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 64 / US @-@ 81 north of Enid in Garfield and Grant Counties . AASHO received applications for both the Burbank and Enid @-@ area relocations on April 24 and approved both of them at the organization 's June 20 meeting . 
 On July 14 , 1969 , US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 77 / US @-@ 177 west of Ponca City was moved to a new alignment , and a section of temporary highway linking the new road to the old road continuing west toward Tonkawa had the three U.S. designations applied to it . AASHO received the application for this move on August 25 , and it was approved on October 26 . Further west , the Oklahoma Department of Highways constructed a section of highway bypassing Tonkawa to the north and east . The Highway Commission approved moving US @-@ 60 to this highway and designating the old highway as US @-@ 60 Business on August 9 , 1971 . AASHO received an application for this change on October 8 of that year and approved it on December 4 . The section of highway between the Tonkawa bypass and the Ponca City bypass was upgraded next ; this road was designated as US @-@ 60 / US @-@ 77 / US @-@ 177 on November 7 , 1974 . This change was submitted to AASHO , now renamed to AASHTO , on April 29 , 1975 , received on May 1 , and approved on June 17 . 
 On January 6 , 1986 , the Oklahoma State Transportation Commission ( which had replaced the Highway Commission ) approved rerouting US @-@ 60 / SH @-@ 11 on the east side of Pawhuska . While the two highways still passed through Pawhuska from west to east , after turning north , the new route bypassed much of the city . The application for this alteration was submitted to AASHTO on September 22 , received the same day , and approved on November 8 . 
 The next change to US @-@ 60 did not take place until the 21st century . On March 19 , 2001 , 0 @.@ 73 miles ( 1 @.@ 17 km ) US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 51 west of Arnett were moved slightly in order to connect to a new bridge . Because ODOT demolished the old highway rather than turning it over to Ellis County , this change did not require approval from the Highway Commission . Finally , on October 4 , 2004 , the Transportation Commission approved the realignment of US @-@ 60 , US @-@ 412 , and SH @-@ 8 at their junction near Orienta . No further changes to the route are on record . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Elfin woods warbler = 
 The elfin woods warbler ( Setophaga angelae ) is a bird endemic to Puerto Rico where it is a local and uncommon species . Discovered in 1968 and described in 1972 , it is the most recently described species of New World warbler ( Parulidae family ) . The species name , angelae , is a tribute to Angela Kepler , one of its discoverers . An insectivore , it feeds by gleaning small insects off leaves . 
 Due to its small populations and restricted habitats , conservation efforts were begun in 1982 to protect this species but , as of 2005 , the warbler was still in need of protection . The species is not in immediate danger as the majority of its habitat is protected forest , but introduced species , such as rats and small Asian mongooses , habitat reduction , and natural disasters represent potential threats to the population . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 The elfin woods warbler is one of many species in the genus Setophaga of the New World warbler family Parulidae . It was first observed in 1968 by Cameron and Angela Kepler while they were conducting observations on two Puerto Rican endemic birds , the Puerto Rican amazon and the Puerto Rican tody . On May 18 , 1971 , a specimen was captured in El Yunque National Forest , which at the time was believed to be its only habitat . A year later Kepler and Parkes described and named the species making it the most recent warbler of the genus Setophaga discovered in the New World . Also , it is the first species described in the Caribbean since 1927 and the first Puerto Rican species described in the 20th century . The species name , angelae , is a tribute to Angela Kepler . Elfin @-@ woods warbler is an alternative spelling , and <unk> de Bosque <unk> is the Spanish name . The species was initially placed in the genus Dendroica but in 2011 the American Ornithologists ' Union reorganized the classification of the Parulidae family and transferred species in the Dendroica genus into Setophaga . This revised classification was adopted by the International Ornithologists ’ Union . 
 A phylogenetic analysis using mitochondrial DNA sequences from New World warblers has shown that within the genus Setophaga the elfin woods warbler is most closely related to the arrowhead warbler , a species which is endemic to Jamaica and the plumbeous warbler which is endemic to the islands of Dominica and Saint Lucia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The warbler 's upper body is predominantly black with white areas while its underparts are white with black streaks . Other identifying characteristics are dark brown eyes , white patches on its ears and neck , an incomplete white eyering , a white eyestripe , and two white spots on its outer tail feathers . Characteristic of Antillean warblers ( S. <unk> , S. <unk> , S. plumbea and S. <unk> ) , the species features a long bill and short , round wings ( 53 @.@ 8 mm or 2 @.@ 12 in average ) . Among Setophaga spp . , only S. <unk> has a shorter wing length average ( 50 mm or 2 @.@ 0 in ) than the elfin woods warbler . Juveniles differ from adults , retaining a grayish @-@ green back for approximately a year and partially molting from July to October . The warbler 's average mature length is 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 in ) and its average weight is 8 @.@ 4 g ( 0 @.@ 30 oz ) . Sexual dimorphism is not present in this species . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 The elfin woods warbler is often confused with the black @-@ and @-@ white warbler ( <unk> varia ) , a non @-@ breeding species in the Caribbean occurring in Puerto Rico from mid @-@ September to early May . The main physical distinction is in the eyes . The elfin woods warbler has an incomplete white eyering and the black @-@ and @-@ white warbler has a white band across the eye and a white lower half of the eyering . Another distinction is found in the crown , with the elfin woods warbler 's being entirely black and the black @-@ and @-@ white 's having a white band across . The latter species forages on larger branches compared with the elfin woods warbler 's foraging in the canopy and on smaller branch tips . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The elfin woods warbler 's song and call are difficult to hear . The species has a subtle voice and its call and song resemble those of the <unk> , the most abundant bird in Puerto Rico . The song is a series of " short , rapidly uttered , rather unmusical notes on one pitch , swelling in volume and terminating with a short series of distinct double syllables sounding slightly lower in pitch " while the call has been described as " a single , short , metallic chip " . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The elfin woods warbler breeds from March to June . Both parents are involved in the construction of the nest and in feeding the chicks . Nests are built close to the tree trunk within dry aerial leaf litter , usually Cecropia leaves ( a material used by no other Parulidae species ) , in <unk> <unk> trees . Nests are well @-@ concealed and located 1 @.@ 3 to 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 to 24 @.@ 9 ft ) above ground level . Nests are cup @-@ shaped and made from small roots and twigs , dry leaves of <unk> <unk> and B. <unk> , and dry Panicum maximum leaves . The interior is made from fibers of C. <unk> , dry leaves and other plant matter . Females lay two or three white colored eggs with red @-@ brown spots . The chick 's diet consists of insects — parents have been observed offering lepidopteran and orthopteran adults and lepidopteran larvae to hatchlings . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The elfin woods warbler is commonly found foraging the middle canopy for insects . While searching for food it often flocks with other birds , such as black @-@ and @-@ white warblers , Puerto Rican tanagers and Lesser Antillean <unk> . Three maneuvers used for catching prey — gleaning , sally @-@ hovering and probing — have been described . Gleaning is described as a hunting maneuver made by a standing or moving bird . Sally @-@ hovering is a hunting maneuver made by a bird in flight . Probing is a maneuver in which the bird , by digging with its beak , forages the substrate looking for food in a manner similar to chickens . Gleaning , especially off leaves , is the maneuver used with more frequency by the elfin woods warbler while probing is the least used . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 When first discovered , the elfin woods warbler was believed to exclusively occur in the high elevation , from 640 to 1 @,@ 030 metres ( 2 @,@ 100 to 3 @,@ 380 ft ) , dwarf or elfin forests of the El Yunque National Forest in eastern Puerto Rico . The wind @-@ clipped trees in these forests rarely exceed 5 metres ( 16 ft ) height and are characterized by stiff , thick twigs , leathery leaves and impenetrable , dense undergrowth ideal for hiding from predators . Later studies showed that the species migrated altitudinally to lower elevations , between 370 and 600 metres ( 1 @,@ 210 and 1 @,@ 970 ft ) , in <unk> and Palo Colorado forests . Three more populations were discovered in the Maricao State Forest ( 1972 , largest known population ) , the Carite State Forest ( 1977 ) and the Toro Negro State Forest ( late 1970s ) . 
 Presently , the species is presumed extirpated from two locales , occurring only at El Yunque National Forest and the Maricao State Forest . The elfin forest at El Yunque National Forest is characterized by high rainfall and humidity , low temperatures and insolation , and constant winds . It is found at mountain summits and is primarily composed of dense shrub and small trees with moss and epiphyte growth in its plants and floor . The species richness is low when compared to other types of forests ( tabonuco , palo Colorado and palma sierra forests ) found in the Luquillo Mountains . The elfin forest at the Maricao State Forest , located in western Puerto Rico , receives an annual average rainfall of 2 @,@ 250 millimetres ( 90 in ) , a high amount considering that a rainforest , by definition , receives a minimum of 1 @,@ 700 millimetres ( 67 in ) annually . However , since its soil has low water @-@ holding capacity its vegetation is more xeric than expected . The species 's highest density occurs in Podocarpus forests in the Maricao State Forest . Little information is available on the elfin forests at Toro Negro and Carite . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 In September 1989 , Hurricane Hugo struck the central and eastern region of Puerto Rico affecting three ( the El Yunque National Forest , Toro Negro and Carite populations ) of the four known populations of the elfin woods warbler . A survey conducted two years later in the Toro Negro Forest , located in the Cordillera Central , did not find any individuals . Recent surveys suggest that , for reasons yet unknown , the populations at Carite and Toro Negro were likely extirpated . Continued monitoring of the elfin woods warbler populations is achieved through bird counts performed every 3 to 4 years by the Puerto Rican Breeding Bird Survey ( <unk> ) . A survey conducted in 2001 found three individuals at the Maricao State Forest . An IUCN assessment of the elfin woods warbler , prepared in 2000 , estimated a stable population of 600 mature individuals . More recently the population has been estimated to comprise at least 1800 mature individuals , a figure which equates to at least 2700 individual birds . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 The survival of the elfin woods warbler faces two main threats , predation and the destruction or alteration of suitable habitat . Confirmed native predators are the pearly @-@ eyed thrasher ( <unk> fuscatus ) , the Puerto Rican sharp @-@ shinned hawk ( Accipiter striatus <unk> ) and the extirpated white @-@ necked crow ( Corvus <unk> ) while unconfirmed native predators include two endemic snakes and several carnivores ( from fossil records ) . Introduced species , such as cats ( Felis domesticus ) , dogs ( Canis lupus familiaris ) , black rats ( Rattus rattus ) and small Asian mongooses ( Herpestes javanicus ) are also potential nest predators . These species have proliferated due to the presence of human @-@ developed facilities , mainly for communication purposes , in the Maricao State Forest and El Yunque National Forest . Two factors contribute to the destruction of the elfin woods warbler 's habitat , humans and nature . Human @-@ related habitat destruction includes the construction of communication towers , acquisition of timber , and expansion of roads and trails . Nature 's contribution comes from natural disasters such as forest fires and hurricanes . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The elfin woods warbler was placed on the United States federal candidate list for the Endangered Species Act in 1999 and the announcement was published on the Federal Register of October 25 , 1999 , Volume 64 , No. 205 , pages <unk> – <unk> . The USFWS started to consider the need to protect the elfin woods warbler in 1982 . In 2005 , a group of scientists , scholars , artists and environmentalists petitioned the Bush administration to admit 225 species , among these the elfin woods warbler , to the Endangered Species Act . Of these 225 species , more than one third have been on the candidate list for 20 or more years and half for 10 or more years . Recent ( 2004 ) studies also show that since the creation of the Endangered Species Act in 1973 , 114 United States species have become extinct , many because of lack of habitat protection by the federal government . 
 The IUCN first evaluated the status of the elfin woods warbler in 1988 . At the time it was given a classification of lower risk / least concern . In 1994 , its status was changed to lower risk / near threatened and in 2000 , its status was changed to vulnerable , where it remains . The justification for maintaining the species ' status as vulnerable is that " There are no direct or immediate threats , but the combination of a very small range and population may have important implications for its chances of long @-@ term survival , and this species consequently qualifies as vulnerable " . 
 = = = Cited references = = = 
 = Women 's Boat Race 2013 = 
 The 68th Women 's Boat Race took place on 24 March 2013 . The race , between crews representing Oxford University Women 's Boat Club and Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club , was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races . It took place on a 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) stretch of water on 2012 Olympic venue Dorney Lake . Cambridge were the heavier of the crews and consisted of an all @-@ British crew , while Oxford 's boat included a Hungarian rower and an American cox . Oxford won the race by one and three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 7 minutes 11 seconds , their first win since the 2011 race . The victory took the overall record in the event to 41 – 27 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Women 's Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between Oxford University Women 's Boat Club ( OUWBC ) and the Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club ( CUWBC ) that has taken place since 1927 . It was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , which for 2013 was hosted at the 2012 Summer Olympics venue of Dorney Lake in Buckinghamshire instead of the traditional straight course at Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . Strong winds and stream conditions on the River Thames had precipitated the move to the Olympic venue . Cambridge went into the race as champions , having won the previous year 's race by one quarter of a length , and led 41 – 26 overall . The race was sponsored by Newton Investment Management , a subsidiary of The Bank of New York Mellon , for the third successive year . 
 Cambridge were led by Rob Baker who had previously coached Goldie to victory in 2006 and 2007 . Baker was assisted by British Olympic quadruple sculls silver medallist Annie Vernon . Oxford 's coach was Canadian former Olympic and University trainer Christine Wilson . She was assisted by British Olympic rower Natasha Page who was part of the women 's eights that came fifth in both the 2008 and 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Trials for the crews were held in December 2012 . Oxford 's trial boats raced at Henley and were named Quick and Easy while Cambridge 's trials took place at Dorney Lake with boats named Gin and Tonic . 
 The weigh @-@ in , held on 4 March 2013 , took place alongside the men for the first time in the history of the event . It was also the first time the weights of the female crews were made public . The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 0 lb 10 oz ( 70 @.@ 0 kg ) , 4 lb 3 oz ( 1 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw two rowers return to the crew in number three Mary Foord @-@ Weston and number six Harriet Keane , both of whom had participated in the 2012 race . Oxford 's boat club president Bridget Fryer was forced to withdraw from the race through injury . Cambridge 's crew included three rowers with Boat Race experience , in bow Caroline Reid , number two Faye Sandford ( who was earning her third Blue for CUWBC ) and stroke Holly Game . Cambridge 's boat club president Helena Schofield did not participate in the event , and instead rowed for the women 's reserve boat Blondie . 
 CUWBC 's cox Esther <unk> had previously steered the Cambridge reserve boat Blondie , while Oxford 's crew included three former Osiris participants in Amy Varney , Keane and cox Katie <unk> . Cambridge 's crew was entirely British while Oxford 's included Hungarian Mariann Novak at bow , British / Germans Alice Carrington @-@ Windo at two and Maxie Scheske at stroke , and American <unk> . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and selected the more sheltered side of the course . The race started at 3 : 00 p.m. on 24 March 2013 . Cambridge made the quicker start and led by a few feet after ten strokes . They were half a length ahead after 250 metres ( 270 yd ) , out @-@ rating Oxford by fours strokes per minute . OUWBC 's longer strokes enabled them to cope with the " choppy " conditions and at the 750 @-@ metre ( 820 yd ) mark they began to catch the Cambridge boat , getting level by the 1 @,@ 250 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 370 yd ) mark . Pushing on , Oxford pulled away to win by one and three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 7 minutes 11 seconds , the slowest winning time since the 2001 race . It was Oxford 's first win since the 2011 race but their fifth win in the last six events . The victory took the overall record in the event to 41 – 27 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 Oxford 's Foord @-@ Weston said the conditions were " pretty grim " but their training at Dorney during the week running up to the race had prepared them for the " horrible winds " . Cambridge 's number seven , Emily Day , said " it was pretty windy ... we had the race of our lives ... there 's nothing we could have done that we didn 't do . " 
 = Attack on Sydney Harbour = 
 In late May and early June 1942 , during World War II , submarines belonging to the Imperial Japanese Navy made a series of attacks on the cities of Sydney and Newcastle in New South Wales , Australia . On the night of 31 May – 1 June , three Ko @-@ hyoteki @-@ class midget submarines , each with a two @-@ member crew , entered Sydney Harbour , avoided the partially constructed Sydney Harbour anti @-@ submarine boom net , and attempted to sink Allied warships . Two of the midget submarines were detected and attacked before they could successfully engage any Allied vessels , and the crews scuttled their boats and committed suicide . These submarines were later recovered by the Allies . The third submarine attempted to torpedo the heavy cruiser USS Chicago , but instead sank the converted ferry HMAS Kuttabul , killing 21 sailors . This midget submarine 's fate was unknown until 2006 , when amateur scuba divers discovered the wreck off Sydney 's northern beaches . 
 Immediately following the raid , the five Japanese fleet submarines that carried the midget submarines to Australia embarked on a campaign to disrupt merchant shipping in eastern Australian waters . Over the next month , the submarines attacked at least seven merchant vessels , sinking three ships and killing 50 sailors . During this period , between midnight and 02 : 30 on 8 June , two of the submarines bombarded the ports of Sydney and Newcastle . 
 The midget submarine attacks and subsequent bombardments are among the best @-@ known examples of Axis naval activity in Australian waters during World War II , and are the only occasion in history when either city has come under attack . The physical effects were minimal : the Japanese had intended to destroy several major warships , but sank only an unarmed depot ship , caused minimal damage to Allied shipping , and failed to damage any significant targets during the bombardments . The main impact was psychological ; creating popular fear of an impending Japanese invasion and forcing the Australian military to upgrade defences , including the commencement of convoy operations to protect merchant shipping . 
 = = Forces = = 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 The Imperial Japanese Navy originally intended to use six submarines in the attack on Sydney Harbour : B1 @-@ type submarines I @-@ 21 , I @-@ 27 , I @-@ 28 , and I @-@ 29 , and C1 @-@ type submarines I @-@ 22 and I @-@ 24 . The six submarines made up the Eastern Attack Group of the 8th Submarine Squadron , under the command of Captain Hankyu Sasaki . 
 On 8 June 1942 , I @-@ 21 and I @-@ 29 — each carrying a Yokosuka <unk> " Glen " floatplane for aerial reconnaissance — scouted various Australasian harbours to select the ones most vulnerable to attack by midget submarines . I @-@ 21 scouted Nouméa in New Caledonia , Suva in Fiji , then Auckland in New Zealand , while I @-@ 29 went to Sydney , Australia . 
 On 11 May , I @-@ 22 , I @-@ 24 , I @-@ 27 , and I @-@ 28 were ordered to proceed to the Japanese naval base at Truk Lagoon , in the Caroline Islands , to each receive a Ko @-@ hyoteki @-@ class midget submarine . I @-@ 28 failed to reach Truk ; she was torpedoed on the surface by the US submarine USS <unk> on 17 May . The three remaining submarines left Truk around 20 May for a point south of the Solomon Islands . I @-@ 24 was forced to return a day later when an explosion in her midget submarine 's battery compartment killed the midget 's navigator and injured the commander . The midget submarine intended for I @-@ 28 replaced the damaged midget . 
 = = = Allies = = = 
 The naval officer @-@ in @-@ charge of Sydney Harbour at the time of the attack was Rear Admiral Gerard Muirhead @-@ Gould of the Royal Navy . On the night of the attack , three major vessels were present in Sydney Harbour ; the heavy cruisers USS Chicago and HMAS Canberra , and the light cruiser HMAS Adelaide . Other warships in the harbour included : destroyer tender USS Dobbin , auxiliary minelayer HMAS <unk> , corvettes HMAS Whyalla , HMAS Geelong , and <unk> Bombay , armed merchant cruisers HMS Kanimbla and HMAS Westralia , and Dutch submarine K @-@ IX . A converted ferry — HMAS Kuttabul — was alongside at Garden Island where she served as a temporary barracks for sailors transferring between ships . The hospital ship Oranje had also been in the harbour , but departed an hour before the attack . 
 = = Harbour defences = = 
 At the time of the attack , the static Sydney Harbour defences consisted of eight anti @-@ submarine indicator loops — six outside the harbour , one between North Head and South Head , and one between South Head and Middle Head , as well as the partially constructed Sydney Harbour anti @-@ submarine boom net between George 's Head on Middle Head and Green Point on Inner South Head . The central section of the net was complete and support piles were in place to the west , but 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) wide gaps remained on either side . Material shortages prevented the completion of the boom net prior to the attack . On the day of the attack , the six outer indicator loops were inactive ; two were not functioning and there were not enough trained personnel to man both the inner and outer loop monitoring stations . The North Head – South Head indicator loop had been giving faulty signals since early 1940 , and as civilian traffic regularly passed over the loop , readings were often ignored . 
 Harbour defence craft included the anti @-@ submarine vessels HMAS Yandra and <unk> ; the auxiliary minesweepers HMAS <unk> and Samuel Benbow ; pleasure launches converted to channel patrol boats ( and armed with depth charges ) , namely HMAS Yarroma , Lolita , Steady Hour , Sea Mist , <unk> , and <unk> ; and four unarmed auxiliary patrol boats . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Japanese Navy used five Ko @-@ hyoteki @-@ class midget submarines in an unsuccessful operation against US battleships during the attack on Pearl Harbor . The navy hoped that upgrades to the submarines , intensified crew training , and the selection of a less well defended target would lead to better results and an increased chance of the crews of the midgets to return alive from their mission . Therefore , on 16 December 1941 , the navy initiated plans for a second midget submarine operation . 
 The plans called for two simultaneous attacks against Allied naval vessels in the Indian and South Pacific oceans . These attacks were intended as diversions ahead of the attack on Midway Island in the North Pacific , with the Japanese hoping to convince the Allies that they intended to attack to the south or west of their conquests . Eleven submarines of the 8th Submarine Squadron were to carry out the two attacks , the five submarines of the Western Attack Group in the Indian Ocean , and the six submarines of the Eastern Attack Group in the Pacific Ocean . The submarine groups were to select a suitable port of attack , based on their own reconnaissance . 
 The Western Attack Group selected the port of <unk> @-@ Suarez in Madagascar . This attack — which occurred at nightfall on 30 May and resulted in the damaging of the battleship HMS Ramillies and the sinking of the tanker British Loyalty — came 22 days after the British captured the port from Vichy France at the beginning of the Battle of Madagascar . 
 The four potential targets for the Eastern Attack Group were Nouméa , Suva , Auckland , and Sydney . I @-@ 21 and I @-@ 29 were sent to select the final target , with I @-@ 29 sailing to Sydney . On the evening of 16 May , I @-@ 29 fired on the 5 @,@ 135 long tons ( 5 @,@ 217 t ) Russian merchant vessel Wellen , 30 mi ( 26 nmi ; 48 km ) from Newcastle , New South Wales . Although Wellen escaped with minimal damage , shipping between Sydney and Newcastle was halted for 24 hours while aircraft and all available anti @-@ submarine ships from Sydney , including Dutch light cruiser HNLMS Tromp , Australian destroyer HMAS Arunta and US destroyer USS Perkins , searched unsuccessfully for the submarine . Muirhead @-@ Gould concluded that the submarine had operated alone and had left the area immediately after the attack . 
 I @-@ 29 's floatplane made a reconnaissance flight over Sydney on 23 May . A secret radar unit set up in Iron Cove detected the flight , but authorities dismissed its report as a glitch , as there were no Allied aircraft operating over Sydney . The aircraft was damaged or destroyed on landing , although its two crew survived . They reported the presence of several capital ships , including two battleships or large cruisers , five other large warships , several minor war vessels and patrol boats , and prolific merchant shipping . The report , which the Allied FRUMEL signals intelligence network partially intercepted , resulted in the Japanese Navy selecting Sydney as the target . The three midget @-@ carrying submarines rendezvoused with I @-@ 29 and I @-@ 21 approximately 35 mi ( 30 nmi ; 56 km ) north @-@ east of Sydney Heads , with all five submarines in position by 29 May . 
 = = Midget submarine operation = = 
 = = = Final reconnaissance = = = 
 Before dawn on 29 May , [ I ] I @-@ 21 's floatplane performed a final reconnaissance flight over Sydney Harbour , with the mission of mapping the locations of the major vessels and of the anti @-@ submarine net . Multiple observers spotted the floatplane but assumed it was a US Navy Curtiss Seagull . No alarm was raised until 05 : 07 , when it was realised that the only ship in the area carrying Seagulls was the U.S. cruiser Chicago , and all four of her aircraft were on board . Richmond Air Force Base launched RAAF Wirraway fighters , which failed to locate I @-@ 21 or the floatplane . Therefore , the reconnaissance flight did not result in the authorities in Sydney taking any special defence measures . The floatplane was seriously damaged on landing and had to be scuttled , but both aircrew survived . 
 = = = Plan of attack = = = 
 The Japanese planned to launch the midgets one after the other between 17 : 20 and 17 : 40 , from points 5 – 7 nmi ( 5 @.@ 8 – 8 @.@ 1 mi ; 9 @.@ 3 – 13 @.@ 0 km ) outside Sydney Harbour . The first midget was to pass through the Heads just after 18 : 30 , but heavy seas delayed her by over an hour . The other two midgets followed at twenty @-@ minute intervals and were similarly delayed . 
 The choice of targets was left up to the midget commanders , with advice that they should primarily target aircraft carriers or battleships , with cruisers as secondary targets . The midgets were to operate to the east of the Harbour Bridge , although if no suitable targets were to be found in this area they were to move under the Bridge and attack a battleship and large cruiser believed to be in the inner harbour . When the second reconnaissance flyover revealed that the expected British battleship — HMS Warspite — was nowhere to be found , USS Chicago became the priority target . 
 After completing their mission , the midgets were to depart Sydney Harbour and head south for 20 nmi ( 23 mi ; 37 km ) to the recovery point off Port Hacking . Four of the mother submarines would be waiting in an east – west line 16 km ( 8 @.@ 6 nmi ; 9 @.@ 9 mi ) long , with the fifth waiting 6 km ( 3 @.@ 2 nmi ; 3 @.@ 7 mi ) further south . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 Midget submarine M @-@ 14 — launched from I @-@ 27 , was the first to enter Sydney Harbour . The Middle Head - South Head loop detected it at 20 : 01 , but dismissed the reading due to heavy civilian traffic . At 20 : 15 , a Maritime Services Board watchman spotted the midget after it passed through the western gap , collided with the Pile Light , then reversed and trapped its stern in the net . The submarine 's bow broke the surface ; the watchman rowed toward it to determine what it was and then rowed to the nearby patrol boat HMAS Yarroma to report his finding . Despite efforts by Yarroma to pass on this information , Sydney Naval Headquarters did not receive the report until 21 : 52 . HMAS Yarroma and Lolita were dispatched to investigate . Upon confirming that the object in the net was a " baby submarine " , Lolita dropped two depth charges while Yarroma 's commander requested permission from Sydney Naval Headquarters to open fire . The depth charges failed to detonate , as the water was too shallow for the hydrostatic fuse setting . At 22 : 35 , while Yarroma was waiting for permission to fire , and Lolita was setting up to deploy a third depth charge , the two crewmen on M @-@ 14 activated one of the submarine 's scuttling charges , killing themselves and destroying the submarine 's forward section . 
 Muirhead @-@ Gould gave the general alarm , along with orders for ships to take anti @-@ submarine measures , at 22 : 27 ; the alarm was repeated at 22 : 36 with advice for ships to take precautions against attack , as an enemy submarine might be in the harbour . At the time of the first alarm , Sydney Harbour was closed to external traffic , but Muirhead @-@ Gould ordered ferries and other internal traffic to continue , as he believed that having multiple ships travelling around at speed would help force any submarines to remain submerged . 
 Midget submarine M @-@ 24 [ II ] was the second to enter the harbour . HMAS <unk> grazed M @-@ 24 's hull and reported the contact to command . The report was not followed up . M @-@ 24 crossed the indicator loop undetected at 21 : 48 , and at approximately 22 : 00 followed a Manly ferry through the anti @-@ submarine net . At 22 : 52 , M @-@ 24 was spotted by a Chicago searchlight operator less than 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) to the moored cruiser 's starboard , and on a course roughly parallel to the ship 's facing . Chicago opened fire with a 5 in ( 130 mm ) gun and a quadruple machinegun mount , but inflicted minimal damage as the weapons could not depress far enough . Some of the 5 in ( 130 mm ) shells skipped off the water and hit Fort Denison 's Martello tower , while fragments were later found in the suburbs of Cremorne and Mosman . The senior officer present aboard Chicago ordered the crew to begin preparing for departure , and for USS Perkins to begin an anti @-@ submarine screening patrol around the cruiser , orders that were revoked by the sceptical Captain Howard Bode when he arrived on board at around 23 : 30 . 
 HMAS Whyalla and Geelong also fired upon M @-@ 24 as it fled west toward the Sydney Harbour Bridge , before the midget was able to submerge and escape . When it returned to periscope depth , the midget found itself west of Fort Denison . It turned and sailed east for about 1 nmi ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ; 1 @.@ 9 km ) , then took up a firing position south @-@ west of Bradley 's Head , from where its commander could see Chicago 's stern silhouetted against the construction floodlights at Garden Island 's new Captain Cook Graving Dock . 
 Midget submarine M @-@ 21 — from I @-@ 22 — probably entered the harbour at the same time that USS Chicago opened fire on M @-@ 24 . The unarmed auxiliary patrol boat HMAS <unk> spotted M @-@ 21 and illuminated the submarine 's conning tower , while sending an alert signal to the Port War Signal Station at South Head , and the nearby anti @-@ submarine vessel HMAS Yandra . Yandra attempted to ram the submarine , lost contact , regained contact at 23 : 03 , and dropped six depth charges . At the time of the attack , it was assumed that the depth charges had destroyed or disabled the midget , but M @-@ 21 survived . Historians believe that the midget took refuge on the harbour floor and waited until the Allied vessels had moved away before it resumed the attack . 
 At 23 : 14 , Muirhead @-@ Gould ordered all ships to observe blackout conditions . Just after 23 : 30 , he set off on a barge towards the boom net , to make a personal inspection . The Admiral reached Lolita at about midnight and indicated to her crew that he did not take the reports of enemy submarines seriously , reportedly saying : " What are you all playing at , running up and down the harbour dropping depth charges and talking about enemy subs in the harbour ? There 's not one to be seen . " The crew reiterated that a submarine had been seen , but Muirhead @-@ Gould remained unconvinced and before he left , added sarcastically : " If you see another sub , see if the captain has a black beard . I 'd like to meet him . " 
 Despite the blackout order , the Garden Island floodlights remained on until 00 : 25 the next morning . About five minutes later , M @-@ 24 fired the first of its two torpedoes ; it delayed firing the second torpedo for several minutes as the midget submarines would lose longitudinal stability immediately after firing a torpedo . Historians are divided as to the exact paths of the torpedoes relative to Chicago , although all agree that the US cruiser was the intended target . Both torpedoes missed Chicago , while one torpedo may have also passed close to Perkins ' starboard bow . One of the torpedoes continued underneath the Dutch submarine K @-@ IX and HMAS Kuttabul , then hit the breakwater Kuttabul was tied up against . The explosion broke Kuttabul in two and sank her , and damaged K @-@ IX . The attack killed 19 Royal Australian Navy and two Royal Navy sailors , and wounded another 10 . The explosion shook residences in the area and damaged Garden Island 's lights and telecommunications . The other torpedo ran aground on the eastern shore of Garden Island without exploding . M @-@ 24 then dived and moved to leave the harbour . 
 A crossing over the indicator loop that was recorded at 01 : 58 was initially believed to be another midget submarine entering the harbour , although later analysis showed that the reading indicated an outbound vessel and was therefore most likely represented M @-@ 24 's exit . M @-@ 24 did not return to its mother submarine , and its fate remained unknown until 2006 . 
 Ships were ordered to make for the open ocean . Chicago left her anchorage at 02 : 14 , leaving a sailor behind on the mooring buoy in her haste to depart . Bombay , Whyalla , Canberra , and Perkins began their preparations to depart . 
 Just before 03 : 00 , as Chicago was leaving the harbour , the lookouts spotted a submarine periscope passing alongside the cruiser . At 03 : 01 , the indicator loop registered an inbound signal ; M @-@ 21 was re @-@ entering Sydney Harbour after recovering from the attack four hours previously . HMS Kanimbla fired on M @-@ 21 in Neutral Bay at 03 : 50 , and at 05 : 00 , three auxiliary patrol boats — HMAS Steady Hour , Sea Mist , and Yarroma — spotted the submarine 's conning tower in Taylors Bay . The patrol boats had set their depth charge fuses to 15 m ( 49 ft ) , and when Sea Mist passed over where the submarine had just submerged and dropped a depth charge , she had only five seconds to clear the area . The blast damaged M @-@ 21 , which inverted and rose to the surface before sinking again . Sea Mist dropped a second depth charge , which damaged one of her two engines in the process and prevented her from making further attacks . Steady Hour and Yarroma continued the attack , dropping seventeen depth charges on believed visual sightings and instrument contacts of the midget over the next three and a half hours . At some point during the night , the crew of M @-@ 21 committed suicide . 
 At 04 : 40 , HMAS Canberra recorded that the Japanese may have fired torpedoes at her . This may have been one of many false alarms throughout the night . However , M @-@ 21 had attempted to fire its two torpedoes , but failed because of damage to the bow either from HMAS Yandra 's ramming or depth charges , or a possible collision with USS Chicago , making it possible that M @-@ 21 attempted to attack the cruiser . The observer aboard Canberra may have seen bubbles from the compressed air released to fire the torpedoes . 
 = = Secondary missions = = 
 As per the operation plan , the five mother submarines waited off Port Hacking on the nights of 1 and 2 June for the midget submarines to return . FRUMEL picked up wireless traffic between the five submarines , leading the RAAF to task three Lockheed Hudsons and two Bristol Beauforts with finding the source of the communications . They were unsuccessful . On 3 June , Sasaki abandoned hope of recovering the midget submarines , and the submarines dispersed on their secondary missions . 
 = = = Attacks on Allied merchant shipping = = = 
 Four of the submarines began operations against Allied merchant shipping . I @-@ 21 patrolled north of Sydney , while I @-@ 24 patrolled south of Sydney . I @-@ 27 began searching off Gabo Island for ships departing Melbourne , and I @-@ 29 travelled to Brisbane . I @-@ 22 left the group to conduct reconnaissance operations , first at Wellington and Auckland in New Zealand , and then at Suva in Fiji . 
 Between 1 and 25 June , when the four submarines arrived at Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands to re @-@ supply before proceeding to Japanese shipyards for maintenance , the four submarines attacked at least seven Allied merchant vessels . Three of these were sunk : Iron Chieftain by I @-@ 24 on 3 June , Iron Crown by I @-@ 27 on 4 June , and Guatemala by I @-@ 21 on 12 June . The first two attacks resulted in 12 and 37 fatalities respectively , though the third attack killed no one . The attacks forced the authorities to institute changes in merchant traffic ; travel north of Melbourne was restricted until a system of escorted convoys was established . 
 I @-@ 21 was the only submarine to return to Australian waters , where she sank three ships and damaged two others during January and February 1943 . During her two deployments , I @-@ 21 sank 44 @,@ 000 long tons ( 45 @,@ 000 t ) of Allied shipping , which made her the most successful Japanese submarine to operate in Australian waters . 
 = = = Bombardment = = = 
 On the morning of 8 June , I @-@ 24 and I @-@ 21 briefly bombarded Sydney and Newcastle . Just after midnight , I @-@ 24 surfaced 9 mi ( 14 km ) south @-@ south @-@ east of Macquarie Lighthouse . The submarine 's commander ordered the gun crew to target the Sydney Harbour Bridge . They fired 10 shells over a four @-@ minute period ; nine landed in the Eastern Suburbs and one landed in water . I @-@ 24 then crash dived to prevent successful retaliation by coastal artillery batteries . Only one shell detonated , and the only injuries inflicted were cuts and fractures from falling bricks or broken glass when the unexploded shells hit buildings . A United States Army Air Forces pilot , 1st Lieutenant George <unk> , based at Bankstown Airport was ordered into the air to retaliate , but was killed when engine failure caused his Airacobra to crash in a paddock at <unk> . In 1988 , following efforts by residents and the US Consulate in Sydney , the City of Bankstown established a memorial park in his honour . 
 At 02 : 15 , I @-@ 21 shelled Newcastle , from 9 km ( 4 @.@ 9 nmi ; 5 @.@ 6 mi ) north @-@ east of Stockton Beach . She fired 34 shells over a 16 @-@ minute period , including eight star shells . The target of the attack was the BHP steelworks in the city . However , the shells landed over a large area , causing minimal damage and no fatalities : the only shell to detonate damaged a house on Parnell Place , while an unexploded shell hit a tram terminus . Fort Scratchley returned fire , the only time an Australian land fortification has fired on an enemy warship during wartime , but the submarine escaped unscathed . 
