 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Vedaranyam March = 
 The Vedaranyam March or Vedaranyam Satyagraha was organised to protest the salt tax imposed by the British Raj in India . The march took place in April 1930 and was the second of its kind following the Dandi March organised by Mahatma Gandhi , both in the framework of the Civil Disobedience Movement . 
 The march was led by a group of 100 volunteers from the Indian National Congress ( INC ) under the leadership of C. Rajagopalachari — often referred to as " Rajaji " . It began at Trichinopoly ( now Tiruchirappalli ) and ended in Vedaranyam , a small coastal town in Tanjore District . By collecting salt directly from the sea , the marchers broke the salt law . Rajaji spoke to people along the march 's route about the importance of <unk> , issues of ' social disabilities ' ( cast discrimination ) and civil disobedience . The campaign ended on 28 April 1930 when the participants were arrested , following which Rajaji was imprisoned for six months . 
 = = Background = = 
 In response to a nationwide protest against the British salt tax , Gandhi initiated a salt march on 6 April 1930 to Dandi — then a small village in the Bombay Presidency on the western coast of India . Rajaji , a close associate of Gandhi who also participated in the Dandi march , organised a march to India 's east coast to make salt at Vedaranyam , Tanjore District in Madras Presidency . He chose Vedaranyam instead of Tuticorin , a larger salt @-@ making centre , because the former had convenient salt marshes and because Vedaratnam Pillai was a local resident , salt merchant , INC activist and philanthropist who would be able to supply moral and logistic support to the marchers . Rajaji started the march from Trichinopoly , 150 miles ( 240 km ) west of Vedaranyam . 
 Rajaji was unanimously elected president of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee ten days prior to the march , and insisted that only people willing to risk death or long prison terms should participate . Nearly 100 members of the INC , including T. S. S. Rajan , Sardar Vedaratnam , Rukmini <unk> , K. Kamaraj , M. Bhaktavatsalam , and C. R. Narasimhan , joined the rally . In addition , social activists such as A. <unk> Iyer and G. Ramachandran also joined the group . 
 = = The march = = 
 The march , coinciding with the Tamil New Year , commenced on 13 April 1930 from T. S. S. Rajan 's house in Trichinopoly Cantonment . As the march proceeded towards Tanjore district its " astute and energetic " District Collector J. A. Thorne ( ICS ) tried to stop it . Using newspapers , Tamil handbills and town @-@ <unk> , Thorne informed would @-@ be hosts that anyone offering food or shelter to the marchers was liable to six @-@ months ' imprisonment and a fine . When informed of the threat , Rajaji retorted that he could understand the mindset of his own people better than a British ICS officer could , and added , " Thorne and thistles cannot stem this tide of freedom . " 
 Ignoring Thorne 's order , Sri <unk> Iyer , a resident of Kumbakonam , and Sri Krishnaswami Iyer , a resident of <unk> provided accommodation for two days and arranged a grand dinner for the group at his house before being arrested . Iyer 's arrest inspired people to invent ways to help the marchers without getting caught . Food packets were found tied to branches of roadside trees , and when the group rested by the Cauvery riverbank , they found indicators where huge food containers were buried . By contrast , the British police suffered from starvation when local residents refused them food or even water . Indian staff who were employed by the British stopped carrying out their day @-@ to @-@ day activities , while barbers and <unk> refused service to government employees . 
 Despite various obstacles , the group reached Vedaranyam on 28 April , 15 days after setting out . When Gandhi was informed he wrote back : " It is good that our hands and feet are tied so that we can sing with joy . God is the help of the helpless . " The speeches made by Rajaji during the march highlighted the importance of Khadi — issues of ' social disabilities ' ( caste discrimination ) — and the significance of the Civil Disobedience Movement . The police , in spite of previous failures , heightened security at Vedaranyam to prevent the marchers from making illegal salt . As soon as they reached Vedaranyam , Rajaji declared that the salt laws would be broken on 30 April 1930 and called for more <unk> <unk> after 2 days trial came to join the march and gave support of Rajaji Sardar Vedaratnam offered accommodation to the group by constructing a camp on the shore . On the same day , when Rajaji and 16 others moved to a place called <unk> salt swamp 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the camp , a police force led by the District Superintendent arrived there . 
 The group was asked to surrender . When they refused , Rajaji was arrested and produced before the district magistrate Ponnusamy Pillai . He was sentenced to six @-@ months ' imprisonment and was immediately sent to Trichinopoly . Other participants were also arrested and tortured by the policemen . Rukmini <unk> was imprisoned for one year ; she was the first woman to serve a jail term for participating in the Salt Satyagraha movement . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The following day , shops all over the state closed . People continued to make salt at Vedaranyam , despite repeated arrests and the use of brutal force by police . Apart from the marchers , 375 people in the Tanjore district were arrested for protests against the British . Collector Thorne , who at first had been confident of his ability to prevent the march , was forced to report to his superiors , " If there ever existed a fervid sense of devotion to the ( British ) Government , it is now the defunct " . 
 At midnight on 5 May 1930 , Gandhi was arrested at his ashram in <unk> and sent to Poona , Bombay State . On 21 May , Sarojini Naidu and Gandhi 's son <unk> Gandhi broke into the " Dharasana salt works " together with 2 @,@ 500 volunteers . They were attacked and arrested by police , resulting in the death of two people and some 320 injured . A fortnight later , Rajaji was transferred From the Trichinopoly prison to Madras , then to the Bellary Central Jail . 
 = Anurag Kashyap = 
 Anurag Singh Kashyap ( born 10 September 1972 ) is an Indian film director , screenwriter , producer and actor . He is often regarded as the face of an emerging new wave cinema for producing numerous independent films with newcomers . For his contributions to film , the Government of France awarded him the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters ) in 2013 . 
 After writing a television serial , Kashyap got his major break as a co @-@ writer in Ram Gopal Varma 's crime drama Satya ( 1998 ) , and made his directorial debut with Paanch , which never had a theatrical release due to censorship issues . He then went on to direct Black Friday ( 2007 ) , a film based on the book by Hussain Zaidi about the 1993 Bombay bombings . Its release was held up for two years by the Central Board of Film Certification because of the pending verdict of the case at that time , but was released in 2007 to widespread critical appreciation . Kashyap 's followup , No Smoking ( 2007 ) met with negative reviews and performed poorly at the box @-@ office . His next venture Dev.D ( 2009 ) , a modern adaptation of Devdas was a critical and commercial success ; followed by the political drama Gulaal ( 2009 ) , and the thriller That Girl in Yellow Boots ( 2011 ) . His prominence increased with the two @-@ part crime drama , Gangs of Wasseypur ( 2012 ) . His next films were Bombay Talkies ( 2013 ) , Ugly ( 2014 ) and Bombay Velvet ( 2015 ) . 
 Apart from filmmaking , Kashyap serves as the Member of board of the Mumbai @-@ based NGO , Aangan , which helps protect vulnerable children around India . He is the founder of two film production companies : Anurag Kashyap Films , which is run by <unk> Monga , Phantom Films with partnership from directors Vikramaditya Motwane and Vikas Bahl and producer Madhu Mantena . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Anurag Kashyap was born on 10 September 1972 in Gorakhpur , Uttar Pradesh . His father Prakash Singh worked as a Deputy General Manager at Obra Thermal Power Station in <unk> district near Varanasi . He did his early schooling in Green School Dehradun and , age eight onwards , at the Scindia School in Gwalior . Some of the locations used in Gangs of Wasseypur are also influenced from his own old house where he himself lived with his parents , sister <unk> Kashyap and brother , Abhinav Kashyap . Abhinav is also a filmmaker , while his sister <unk> has been his assistant in most of his films . 
 Due to Kashyap 's desire to become a scientist , he went to Delhi for his higher studies and enrolled himself into a zoology course at the Hans Raj College ( University of Delhi ) ; he graduated in 1993 . He then eventually joined a street theatre group , Jana Natya <unk> ; and did many street plays . The same year , his couple of friends " urged [ him ] to catch a de Sica retrospective " at the International Film Festival of India . In ten days , he saw 55 films at the festival , and Vittorio De Sica 's Bicycle Thieves was the film that influenced him the most . 
 = = Career = = 
 After the de Sica experience , Kashyap arrived in Mumbai in 1993 with INR 5 @,@ 000 in his pocket . Soon the money ran out , and he spent months on the streets , staying in lofts , " sleeping on beaches , " " under a water tank and in the St Xavier 's [ college ] boys hostel . " He then managed to find work at Prithvi Theatre , but his first play remained incomplete because the director died . 
 = = = Writer and director = = = 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 In 1995 , an acquaintance introduced Kashyap to Shivam Nair . The day they met , Kashyap watched Taxi Driver ( 1976 ) at Nair 's place , and the film inspired him to " write something " . The team of Sriram Raghavan , Sridhar Raghavan and Shiv Subramaniam were working on two projects , one of which was a short TV series , Auto Narayan , based on the life of serial killer Auto Shankar ; the second one was a film scripted by Kashyap . Auto Narayan got delayed because the script written by Subramaniam was not " working " . Kashyap rewrote the script , and got credit for the same , but it was scrapped . In 1997 , he wrote the screenplay of Hansal Mehta 's first film , Jayate which failed to find a theatrical release ; and episodes of the TV series Kabhie Kabhie ( 1997 ) . 
 In 1998 , the then struggling actor Manoj Bajpayee suggested his name to Ram Gopal Varma to write a film . Varma liked Kashyap 's Auto Narayan and hired him , alongside Saurabh Shukla to write the script for his crime film , Satya ( 1998 ) . Satya was a critical and commercial success , and is regarded as one of the best films of Indian cinema . He later collaborated with Varma in scripting Kaun ( 1999 ) and writing dialogues for Shool ( 1999 ) . In 1999 , he made a short film , titled Last Train to Mahakali for television . 
 = = = = 2000s = = = = 
 While working with Nair , Kashyap came across files related to the Joshi @-@ Abhyankar serial murders that took place in Pune in 1976 , which became the inspiration for his directorial debut Paanch . A crime thriller about a group of five friends of a rock band who turn into criminals . The film faced trouble with the Central Board of Film Certification because , according to Kashyap : " They felt it wasn 't healthy entertainment because it dealt unapologetically with sex , drugs and misguided , alienated youths " . It was cleared by the Board in 2001 , but remains unreleased due to some problems faced by the producer . In these years , he also wrote dialogues for many films including <unk> Vasool ( 2004 ) , Mani Ratnam 's Yuva ( 2004 ) , the Canadian film Water ( 2005 ) , Main <unk> Hi Hoon ( 2005 ) and Mixed Doubles ( 2006 ) . 
 After a failed attempt to make <unk> <unk> in 2003 , Kashyap started working on Black Friday ( 2007 ) , a film based on the book by Hussain Zaidi about the 1993 Bombay bombings . The Bombay high court put a stay on the release of the film , until the judgement in the bomb blasts case was delivered . It was decided after a petition filed by a group of 1993 bomb blasts accused , challenging the release of the film based on their case . The film got censorship clearance in 2007 , and was released after two years meeting universal acclaim . Nikhat Kazmi gave the film a three star out of five rating and mentioned : " It was indeed a difficult film to make , yet the director has managed to grapple with all the loose threads and put them together in a composite whole . So much so , the film moves like a taut thriller , without ideology colouring the sepia frames . " 
 The same year , Kashyap adapted Stephen King 's short story " <unk> , Inc . " into No Smoking . A surrealistic thriller about a chain @-@ smoker who gets trapped in the maze of a person who guarantees will make him quit smoking . The film starring John Abraham , Ayesha Takia , Ranvir Shorey and Paresh Rawal in the leads with music by Vishal Bhardwaj , premiered at the Rome Film Festival . No Smoking received an overwhelming negative reception and failed at the box @-@ office . CNN @-@ IBN 's Rajeev Masand called it a " colossal disappointment " . His final release of the year was Return of Hanuman , an animation film about adventures of the Hindu god Hanuman . 
 In 2009 , Kashyap had two releases . Dev.D , a contemporary take on Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay 's novel Devdas . It was the twelfth film adaptation of the Bengali novel . Starring Abhay Deol who actually pitched the original idea of the film to Kashyap , with Mahie Gill and newcomer Kalki Koechlin portraying the characters of " Paro " and Chandramukhi respectively . The film met with generally positive reviews and strong box office results . Gulaal , a political drama , was his final release of that year . Kashyap started working on the film in 2005 , and had finished 70 @-@ 80 per cent of the film in 2006 , when its producer fell ill . Later on , Zee Motion Pictures took over the project and was finally finished in 2008 and released on 13 March 2009 . Anupama Chopra gave the film three stars and referred to Kashyap as " the Anti @-@ Yash Chopra " . Despite positive reviews , the film underperformed at the box office . 
 = = = = 2010s = = = = 
 Mumbai Cutting ( 2010 ) , an anthology film , was his next directorial venture . It consisted of eleven short films made by eleven directors . He directed one of the short film , It premiered at the 2008 Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles . 
 In 2011 , Kashyap directed That Girl in Yellow Boots , a thriller starring Kalki Koechlin who also co @-@ wrote the film with him . The film was screened at many festivals including 2010 Toronto International Film Festival , 67th Venice International Film Festival , Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles and the London Indian Film Festival . Shot in thirteen days , the film was released on September 2011 . Roger Ebert gave it 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , praising the character @-@ driven film and the portrayal of its lead alongside the city compared to most Hindi films : " a film like this provides a radically different view of India than you can find in the pleasures and excesses of Bollywood " . 
 In 2012 , Kashyap came up with his ambitious directorial venture Gangs of Wasseypur , which screened at the 2012 Cannes Directors ' Fortnight , London Indian Film Festival , Toronto film festival and the Sundance Film Festival in 2013 . The film with an ensemble cast , was a two @-@ part crime saga centered on the coal mafia of <unk> with the story spanning from the early 1940s to 2009 . The first part was released on 22 June , and the second on 8 August 2012 , both receiving appreciation from Indian and international critics alike . The combined budget of the two films allowed it to be a box @-@ office success . 
 In 2013 , Kashyap directed That Day After Everyday , a 20 @-@ minute short @-@ film that was released on YouTube ; starring Radhika Apte , <unk> Thapa and Sandhya <unk> . It showed the story of three working women facing troubles everyday , both inside and outside their houses and how they overcome them . Dealing with issues like eve teasing and public molestation , the video got four lakh hits in two days . Speaking about the purpose of the project , Kashyap showed his intension to make people feel angry : " .. the idea was not to offer a solution , just show something to create that feeling " . 
 The same year he teamed up with Dibakar Banerjee , Zoya Akhtar and Karan Johar to direct " <unk> " , one of the four segments of anthology film Bombay Talkies . It was made to celebrate the 100 years of Indian cinema , and was screened at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival . The film did not perform well at the box office , but was well received by critics . 
 His next film was Ugly ( 2014 ) , a thriller about the kidnapping of a struggling actor 's daughter , and the events followed by it . It was screened in the Directors ' Fortnight section at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival , receiving a standing ovation . The film 's theatrical release was halted for over a year regarding censorship issues over depiction of smoking in it . Though it was released on 26 December 2014 to generally positive reviews . 
 Kashyap 's next release was Bombay Velvet ( 2015 ) , a period film set in Bombay in the 1960s , based on Princeton University Historian Gyan Prakash 's book Mumbai Fables . It stars Ranbir Kapoor , Anushka Sharma and Karan Johar . The film was co @-@ edited by the Academy Award winner editor Thelma Schoonmaker , who is known for her collaboration with Martin Scorsese . Released on 15 May 2015 , the film opened to mixed to negative reception ; while critics appreciated its retro @-@ look , performances , styling and music , they criticised its faltered storytelling . It also emerged as a box @-@ office failure . 
 In 2016 , Kashyap co @-@ wrote and directed Raman <unk> 2 @.@ 0 , a thriller based on the notorious serial killer Raman <unk> . It starred Nawazuddin Siddiqui in the title character . The film premiered at the 2016 Sydney Film Festival and the 2016 Cannes Film Festival , in the Director 's Fortnight section to positive response . 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 Kashyap found his production company Anurag Kashyap Films in 2009 , which is managed by <unk> Monga . The companies ' first film was the critical hit <unk> ( 2010 ) , which was screened in the Un Certain Regard category at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival . Since then , he has produced a number of projects including Shaitan ( 2011 ) , Chittagong ( 2012 ) , <unk> ( 2012 ) , Luv Shuv Tey Chicken Khurana ( 2012 ) and Shorts ( 2013 ) . He has also co @-@ produced a number of films that have gone on to film festivals , but are yet to release theatrically , including Michael , Peddlers and Monsoon Shootout . In 2012 , Kashyap produced The Last Act , India 's first collaborative feature film from twelve directors to make ten @-@ minute short films , with each film being a part of a larger story written by him . 
 In 2013 , his company co @-@ produced the critically acclaimed drama The <unk> , which was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language ; along with the biographical drama Shahid . The same year Kashyap , with Viacom 18 Motion Pictures co @-@ produced five short films with the theme of ‘ India is Visual Journey ’ . The short films were Moi <unk> , Chai , Hidden Cricket , Geek Out and The Epiphany . He also served as the creative director in the Amitabh Bachchan starrer TV series <unk> ( 2014 ) , and subsequently presented two documentary film 's , The World Before Her ( 2012 ) and <unk> ( 2014 ) . 
 In 2011 Kashyap co @-@ founded his director driven production company Phantom Films with partnership from Vikas Bahl , Vikramaditya Motwane and Madhu Mantena . The companies first film was the period romance Lootera ( 2013 ) , starring Ranveer Singh and Sonakshi Sinha . Based O. Henry 's short story , The Last Leaf , the film was critically acclaimed . 
 He then went on to collaborate with Karan Johar 's Dharma Productions to produce the romantic comedy Hasee Toh Phasee ( 2014 ) . The film starring Parineeti Chopra and Sidharth Malhotra was directed by the debutant <unk> Mathew . Kashyap then co @-@ edited and co @-@ produced the comedy drama Queen , starring Kangana Ranaut . The film was a critical and commercial success , it also won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi . 
 In 2015 , Kashyap co @-@ produced Anushka Sharma 's production debut NH10 , and the sex comedy <unk> . Both films proved to be a success . <unk> , was Phantom 's fourth release of the year . The film won the FIPRESCI Award and the Promising Future award at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival . The final release of Phantom of 2015 was <unk> , which proved to be a box @-@ office flop . 
 In October 2015 , Kashyap teamed up with Ridley Scott and Richie Mehta for Google , as the executive producer for the documentary India in a Day . The project was for people across India to film a snapshot of their day and upload it on Google 's official website . 
 = = = Actor = = = 
 Kashyap has made cameo appearances in his films and those of others , including Black Friday , No Smoking , Tera Kya <unk> Johnny ( 2008 ) , Luck by Chance ( 2009 ) , Dev.D , Gulaal , Soundtrack ( 2011 ) , Trishna ( 2011 ) , <unk> Returns ( 2014 ) , Happy New Year ( 2014 ) and I Am ( 2010 ) , playing a child abuse . The same year , he played a police officer in the short film Encounter ( 2010 ) , co @-@ starring <unk> Kaur . In 2011 , he made his full @-@ fledged acting debut , playing the antagonist Bunty <unk> in Tigmanshu Dhulia 's crime thriller <unk> ( 2011 ) . 
 Kashyap will next be seen portraying the comic role of a lazy police officer in the Nawazuddin Siddiqui @-@ starrer comedy <unk> . As of June 2015 , he is filming for AR Murugadoss 's Akira , starring Sonakshi Sinha ; where he plays the antagonist . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 On 20 May 2013 , Kashyap was awarded the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters ) by the French government at 2013 Cannes Film Festival , when India was the guest country of the festival to commemorate 100 years of Indian cinema . 
 He has also served as one of the jury members at many film festivals including the 2009 Venice Film Festival , 2013 Sundance Film Festival , 13th Marrakech Film Festival , and the 20th Busan International Film Festival . In 2016 , Kashyap was awarded with Yash Bharti award by the Government of Uttar Pradesh for his contribution in the field of cinema . 
 In 1999 , Kashyap shared the Screen Award for Best Screenplay , along with Saurabh Shukla for Satya . The next year , his short film Last Train to Mahakali won the Special Jury Award at the same awards . His feature film debut Black Friday won the Grand Jury Prize at the 3rd Annual Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles , and was a nominee for the " Golden Leopard " ( Best Film ) at the 57th Locarno International Film Festival . 
 In 2011 , Kashyap shared the Best Story and Best Screenplay Award at the 56th Filmfare Awards with Vikramaditya Motwane for <unk> . The next year he shared the Filmfare Award for Best Dialogue with <unk> Quadri , Sachin <unk> and Akhilesh Jaiswal for Gangs of Wasseypur at the 58th Filmfare Awards ; the film also won the Critics Award Best Movie at the same award show . At the 60th Filmfare Awards , Kashyap won the Filmfare Award for Best Editing with Abhijit <unk> for Queen . 
 = = Style , themes and influences = = 
 Kashyap is regarded as an auteur and postmodern filmmaker . While promoting Bombay Talkies in Anupama Chopra 's show , Dibakar Banerjee described Kashyap 's aesthetics as " purely new age or purely Indian " ; projecting " modern post independence India " in his films . He prefers shooting on real locations by employing guerrilla @-@ filmmaking techniques with hidden cameras , and often makes his actors improvise their dialogues on set . In Ugly , he did not show the script to any of the lead actors . He frequently uses hand @-@ held camera and experimental soundtracks . 
 Film maker Zoya Akhtar wrote : " He has a very strong storytelling style and he proved that you could tell a great story with not a lot of money . " Actor Ranbir Kapoor added , " He 's very sensitive to actors , to performances and very attached to his cinema . All his films may not be big money spinners but the impact Anurag has , his contribution to Indian cinema , is immense . " 
 The protagonists of his films often deal with excessive drug , smoke or alcohol consumption , personal guilt , extreme rage and arrogance which leads them into self @-@ shattering situations . Often portrays small but strong female characters . Most of his films deal with realistic scenarios and take clues from real incidents . Like the 1976 @-@ 77 Joshi @-@ Abhyankar serial murders reference in Paanch , the 1993 Mumbai bombing in Black Friday , the 1999 Delhi hit @-@ and @-@ run case and DPS MMS Scandal in Dev.D and the depiction of real life gang wars in Gangs of Wasseypur . Ugly came from his " personal guilt " of not spending enough time with his daughter and the fear of losing her . With several real @-@ life incidents like IAS officer whose wife filed a case of brutality against him . A song " Sylvia " in Bombay Velvet was named after the Nanavati case , where Sylvia Nanavati was K. M. Nanavati 's wife . 
 Kashyap 's work inspired British director Danny Boyle , who has cited Black Friday and Satya as the inspirations for his Academy Award @-@ winning film Slumdog Millionaire ( 2008 ) . Boyle stated that a chase in one of the opening scenes of Slumdog Millionaire was based on a " 12 @-@ minute police chase through the crowded Dharavi slum " in Black Friday . He also described Satya 's " slick , often mesmerizing " portrayal of the Mumbai underworld , which included gritty and realistic " brutality and urban violence , " directly influenced the portrayal of the Mumbai underworld in Slumdog Millionaire . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kashyap serves as the Member of board of the NGO , Aangan , which helps protect vulnerable children around India . 
 He was first married to film editor Aarti Bajaj with whom he had a daughter . They divorced in 2009 . 
 He later married actress Kalki Koechlin , whom he first met during the making of Dev D , at her maternal home in Ooty . In 2013 , Kashyap and Kalki announced that : " they are taking time apart from their more than two @-@ year @-@ old marriage . " In May 2015 , they were divorced at the Bandra family court in Mumbai . 
 When asked about his religious views , Kashyap replied : " I am an atheist . Cinema is the only religion I believe in . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Directed features : 
 = Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band = 
 Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band is the eighth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles . Released on 1 June 1967 , it was an immediate commercial and critical success , spending 27 weeks at the top of the albums chart in the United Kingdom and 15 weeks at number one in the United States . Time magazine declared it " a historic departure in the progress of music " and the New Statesman praised its elevation of pop to the level of fine art . It won four Grammy Awards in 1968 , including Album of the Year , the first rock LP to receive this honour . 
 In August 1966 , the Beatles permanently retired from touring and began a three @-@ month holiday from recording . During a return flight to London in November , Paul McCartney had an idea for a song involving an Edwardian era military band that would eventually form the impetus of the Sgt. Pepper concept . Sessions for what was to become the Beatles ' eighth studio album began on 24 November in Abbey Road Studio Two with two compositions inspired from their youth , " Strawberry Fields Forever " and " Penny Lane " , but after pressure from EMI , the songs were released as a double A @-@ side single and were not included on the album . 
 In February 1967 , after recording " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " , McCartney suggested that the Beatles should release an entire album that would represent a performance by the fictional Sgt. Pepper band . This alter ego group would give them the freedom to experiment musically . During the recording sessions , the band endeavoured to improve upon the production quality of their prior releases . Knowing they would not have to perform the tracks live , they adopted an experimental approach to composition , writing songs such as " With a Little Help from My Friends " , " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " A Day in the Life " . Producer George Martin 's innovative recording of the album included the liberal application of sound shaping signal processing and the use of a 40 @-@ piece orchestra performing aleatoric crescendos . Recording was completed on 21 April 1967 . The cover , depicting the band posing in front of a tableau of celebrities and historical figures , was designed by the British pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth . 
 Sgt. Pepper is regarded by musicologists as an early concept album that advanced the use of extended form in popular music while continuing the artistic maturation seen on the Beatles ' preceding releases . It has been described as one of the first art rock LPs , aiding the development of progressive rock , and credited with marking the beginning of the Album Era . An important work of British psychedelia , the album incorporates a range of stylistic influences , including vaudeville , circus , music hall , avant @-@ garde , and Western and Indian classical music . In 2003 , the Library of Congress placed Sgt. Pepper in the National Recording Registry , honouring the work as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . That same year , Rolling Stone magazine ranked it number one in its list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . As of 2011 , it has sold more than 32 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best @-@ selling albums in history . Professor Kevin J. <unk> , writing in the Oxford Encyclopedia of British Literature , described it as " the most important and influential rock and roll album ever recorded " . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1966 , the Beatles had grown weary of live performance . In John Lennon 's opinion , they could " send out four waxworks ... and that would satisfy the crowds . Beatles concerts are nothing to do with music anymore . They 're just bloody tribal rites . " In June , two days after finishing the album Revolver , the group set off for a tour that started in Germany . While in Hamburg they received an anonymous telegram stating : " Do not go to Tokyo . Your life is in danger " . The threat was taken seriously in light of the controversy surrounding the tour among Japan 's religious and conservative groups , with particular opposition to the Beatles ' planned performances at the sacred Nippon Budokan arena . As an added precaution , 35 @,@ 000 police were mobilised and tasked with protecting the group , who were transported from hotels to concert venues in armoured vehicles . The polite and restrained Japanese audiences shocked the band , because the absence of screaming fans allowed them to hear how poor their live performances had become . By the time that they arrived in the Philippines , where they were threatened and manhandled by its citizens for not visiting the First Lady Imelda Marcos , the group had grown unhappy with their manager , Brian Epstein , for insisting on what they regarded as an exhausting and demoralising itinerary . After their return to London , George Harrison replied to a question about their long @-@ term plans : " We 'll take a couple of weeks to recuperate before we go and get beaten up by the Americans . " His comments would prove prophetic , as soon afterwards Lennon 's remarks about the Beatles being " more popular than Jesus " embroiled the band in controversy and protest in America 's Bible Belt . A public apology eased tensions , but a miserable US tour in August that was marked by half @-@ filled stadiums and subpar performances proved to be their last . The author Nicholas Schaffner writes : 
 To the Beatles , playing such concerts had become a charade so remote from the new directions they were pursuing that not a single tune was attempted from the just @-@ released Revolver LP , whose arrangements were for the most part impossible to reproduce with the limitations imposed by their two @-@ guitars @-@ bass @-@ and @-@ drums stage lineup . 
 Upon the Beatles ' return to England , rumours began to circulate that they had decided to break up . Harrison informed Epstein that he was leaving the band , but was persuaded to stay on the assurance that there would be no more tours . The group then took a seven @-@ week holiday , during which they focused on individual interests . Harrison travelled to India for six weeks to study the sitar under the instruction of Ravi Shankar , in addition to developing his interest in Hindu philosophy . Having been the last of the Beatles to concede that their live performances had become futile , Paul McCartney collaborated with George Martin on the soundtrack for the film The Family Way . Lennon acted in the film How I Won the War and attended art showings , such as one at the Indica Gallery where he met his future wife Yoko Ono . Ringo Starr used the break to spend more time with his wife Maureen and son Zak . 
 = = Concept and inspiration = = 
 In November 1966 , during a return flight to London from Kenya , where he had been on holiday with Beatles tour manager Mal Evans , McCartney had an idea for a song that eventually formed the impetus of the Sgt. Pepper concept . His idea involved an Edwardian @-@ era military band , for which Evans invented a name in the style of contemporary San Francisco @-@ based groups such as Big Brother and the Holding Company and Quicksilver Messenger Service . In February 1967 , McCartney suggested that the Beatles should record an entire album that would represent a performance by the fictional band . This alter ego group would give them the freedom to experiment musically . He explained : " I thought , let 's not be ourselves . Let 's develop alter egos . " Martin remembered : 
 " Sergeant Pepper " itself didn 't appear until halfway through making the album . It was Paul 's song , just an ordinary rock number ... but when we had finished it , Paul said , " Why don 't we make the album as though the Pepper band really existed , as though Sergeant Pepper was making the record ? We 'll dub in effects and things . " I loved the idea , and from that moment on it was as though Pepper had a life of its own . 
 In 1966 , the American musician and bandleader Brian Wilson 's growing interest in the aesthetics of recording and his admiration for both record producer Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound and the Beatles ' album Rubber Soul resulted in the Beach Boys ' Pet Sounds LP , which demonstrated his production expertise and his mastery of composition and arrangement . The author Thomas MacFarlane credits the release with influencing many musicians of the time , with McCartney in particular singing its praises and drawing inspiration to " expand the focus of the Beatles ' work with sounds and textures not usually associated with popular music " . McCartney thought that his constant playing of the album made it difficult for Lennon to " escape the influence " , adding : " It 's very cleverly done ... so we were inspired by it and nicked a few ideas . " Martin stated : " Without Pet Sounds , Sgt. Pepper never would have happened ... Pepper was an attempt to equal Pet Sounds . " 
 Freak Out ! by the Mothers of Invention has also been cited as having influenced Sgt. Pepper . According to the author Philip Norman , during the Sgt. Pepper recording sessions McCartney repeatedly stated : " This is our Freak Out ! " The music journalist Chet Flippo states that McCartney was inspired to record a concept album after hearing Freak Out ! , considered the first rock concept album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 According to the musicologist Walter Everett , Sgt. Pepper marks the beginning of McCartney 's ascendancy as the Beatles ' dominant creative force . He wrote more than half of the album 's material while asserting increasing control over the recording of his compositions . He would from this point on provide the artistic direction for the group 's releases . Sessions began on 24 November 1966 in Abbey Road Studio Two , the first time that the Beatles had come together since September . Afforded the luxury of a nearly limitless recording budget , they booked open @-@ ended sessions that allowed them to work as late as they wanted . They began with three songs that were thematically linked to their childhoods : " Strawberry Fields Forever " , " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " and " Penny Lane " . The first session saw the introduction of a new keyboard instrument called the Mellotron , the keys of which triggered tape @-@ recordings of a variety of instruments , enabling its user to play keyboard parts using those voices . McCartney performed the introduction to " Strawberry Fields Forever " using the flute setting . The track 's complicated production involved the innovative splicing of two takes that were recorded in different tempos and pitches . Emerick remembers that during the recording of Revolver , " we had got used to being asked to do the impossible , and we knew that the word ' no ' didn 't exist in the Beatles ' vocabulary . " In Martin 's opinion , Sgt. Pepper " grew naturally out of Revolver " , marking " an era of almost continuous technological experimentation " . 
 " Strawberry Fields Forever " and " Penny Lane " were subsequently released as a double A @-@ side in February 1967 after EMI and Epstein pressured Martin for a single . When it failed to reach number one in the UK , British press agencies speculated that the group 's run of success might have ended , with headlines such as " Beatles Fail to Reach the Top " , " First Time in Four Years " and " Has the Bubble Burst ? " After its release , at Epstein 's insistence the single tracks were not included on the LP . Martin later described the decision to drop these two songs as " the biggest mistake of my professional life " . Nonetheless , in his judgment , " Strawberry Fields Forever " , which he and the band spent an unprecedented 55 hours of studio time recording , " set the agenda for the whole album " . He explained : " It was going to be a record ... [ with songs that ] couldn 't be performed live : they were designed to be studio productions and that was the difference . " McCartney 's goal was to make the best Beatles album yet , declaring : " Now our performance is that record . " On 6 December 1966 , the group began work on " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " , the first track that would be included on the album . 
 Sgt. Pepper was recorded using four @-@ track equipment . Although eight @-@ track tape recorders were available in the US , the first units were not operational in commercial studios in London until late 1967 . As with previous Beatles albums , the Sgt. Pepper recordings made extensive use of the technique known as reduction mixing , in which one to four tracks from one recorder are mixed and dubbed down onto a master four @-@ track machine , enabling the Abbey Road engineers to give the group a virtual multitrack studio . EMI 's Studer <unk> four @-@ track machines were well suited to reduction mixing , as the high quality of the recordings that they produced minimised the increased noise associated with the process . Preferring to overdub his bass part last , McCartney tended to play other instruments when recording a song 's backing track . This approach afforded him the extra time required to write and record melodic basslines that complemented the song 's final arrangement . When recording the orchestra for " A Day in the Life " , Martin synchronised a four @-@ track recorder playing the Beatles ' backing track to another one taping the orchestral overdub . The engineer Ken Townsend devised a method for accomplishing this by using a 50 Hz control signal between the two machines . 
 A key feature of Sgt. Pepper is Martin and Emerick 's liberal use of signal processing to shape the sound of the recording , which included the application of dynamic range compression , reverberation and signal limiting . Relatively new modular effects units were used , such as running voices and instruments through a Leslie speaker . Several innovative production techniques feature prominently on the recordings , including direct injection , pitch control and <unk> . Another is automatic double tracking ( ADT ) , a system that uses tape recorders to create a simultaneous doubling of a sound . Although it had long been recognised that using multitrack tape to record doubled lead vocals produced an enhanced sound , before ADT it had been necessary to record such vocal tracks twice , a task that was both tedious and exacting . ADT was invented by Townsend during the Revolver sessions in 1966 especially for the Beatles , who disliked tracking sessions and regularly expressed a desire for a technical solution to the problem . The process soon became a common recording practice in popular music . Martin playfully explained to Lennon that his voice had been " treated with a double <unk> <unk> flange ... It doubles your voice , John . " Lennon realised that Martin was joking , but from that point on he referred to the effect as flanging , a label that was universally adopted by the music industry . Another important effect was <unk> . Martin cites " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " as having the most variations of tape speed on Sgt. Pepper . During the recording of Lennon 's vocals , the tape speed was reduced from 50 cycles per second to 45 , which produced a higher and thinner @-@ sounding track when played back at the normal speed . 
 In an effort to get the right sound , the Beatles attempted numerous re @-@ takes of " Getting Better " . When the decision was made to re @-@ record the basic track , Starr was summoned to the studio , but called off soon afterwards as the focus switched from rhythm to vocal tracking . For the album 's title track , " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " , the recording of Starr 's drum kit was enhanced by the use of damping and close @-@ miking . The musicologist Ian MacDonald credits the new recording technique with creating a " three @-@ dimensional " sound that – along with other Beatles innovations – engineers in the US would soon adopt as standard practice . McCartney played a grand piano on " A Day in the Life " and a Lowrey organ on " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " , while Martin played a Hohner Pianet on " Getting Better " , a harpsichord on " Fixing a Hole " and a harmonium on " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " While Harrison 's role as lead guitarist was limited during the sessions , Everett considers that " his contribution to the album is strong in several ways . " In addition to providing sitar on his composition " Within You Without You " , Harrison played tamboura on several tracks , including " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " Getting Better " . 
 According to Barry Miles , Lennon resented McCartney 's direction of the band as well as how , aside from " Strawberry Fields Forever " , he himself was now supplying " songs to order " rather than " writing from the heart " as he had on Revolver . Everett describes Starr as having been " largely bored " during the sessions , with the drummer later lamenting : " The biggest memory I have of Sgt. Pepper ... is I learned to play chess " . Speaking in 2000 , Harrison said he had little interest in McCartney 's concept of a fictitious group and that , after his experiences in India , " my heart was still out there … I was losing interest in being ' fab ' at that point . " Harrison added that , having enjoyed recording Rubber Soul and Revolver , he disliked how the group 's approach on Sgt. Pepper became " an assembly process " whereby , " A lot of the time it ended up with just Paul playing the piano and Ringo keeping the tempo , and we weren 't allowed to play as a band as much . " 
 Sgt. Pepper was the first pop album to be mastered without the momentary gaps that are typically placed between tracks as a point of demarcation . It made use of two crossfades that blended songs together , giving the impression of a continuous live performance . Although both stereo and monaural mixes of the album were prepared , the Beatles were minimally involved in what they regarded as the less important stereo mix sessions , leaving the task to Martin and Emerick . Emerick recalls : " We spent three weeks on the mono mixes and maybe three days on the stereo . " He estimates that they spent 700 hours on the LP , more than 30 times that of the first Beatles album , Please Please Me , which cost £ 400 to produce . The final cost of Sgt. Pepper was approximately £ 25 @,@ 000 . The album was completed on 21 April 1967 with the recording of random noises and voices that were included on the run @-@ out groove along with a high @-@ pitched tone , inaudible to human ears , that could be heard by dogs . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Sgt. Pepper , according to American musicologist Allan F. Moore , is composed mainly of rock and pop music , while Michael Hannan and Naphtali Wagner both believed it is an album of various genres ; Hannan said it features " a broad variety of musical and theatrical genres " . According to Hannan and Wagner , the music incorporates the stylistic influences of rock and roll , vaudeville , big band , piano jazz , blues , chamber , circus , music hall , avant @-@ garde , and Western and Indian classical music . Wagner felt the album 's music reconciles the " diametrically opposed aesthetic ideals " of classical and psychedelia , achieving a " <unk> synthesis " of the two forms . 
 Concerns that some of the lyrics in Sgt. Pepper refer to recreational drug use led to the BBC banning several songs from British radio , such as " A Day in the Life " because of the phrase " I 'd love to turn you on " , with the BBC claiming that it could " encourage a permissive attitude towards drug @-@ taking . " Although Lennon and McCartney denied any drug @-@ related interpretation of the song at the time , McCartney later suggested that the line was deliberately written to ambiguously refer to either illicit drugs or sexual activity . The meaning of " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " became the subject of speculation , as many believed that the song 's title was code for the hallucinogenic drug LSD . The BBC banned the track on those grounds . They also banned " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " because of the lyric , which mentions " Henry the Horse " , a phrase that contains two common slang terms for heroin . Fans speculated that Henry the Horse was a drug dealer and " Fixing a Hole " was a reference to heroin use . Others noted lyrics such as " I get high " from " With a Little Help from My Friends " , " take some tea " – slang for cannabis use – from " Lovely Rita " and " digging the weeds " from " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " . 
 The author Sheila Whiteley attributes Sgt. Pepper 's underlying philosophy not only to the drug culture , but also to metaphysics and the non @-@ violent approach of the flower power movement . The musicologist Oliver Julien views the album as an embodiment of " the social , the musical , and more generally , the cultural changes of the 1960s " . The American psychologist and counterculture figure Timothy Leary contends that the LP " gave a voice to the feeling that the old ways were over ... it came along at the right time " and stressed the need for cultural change based on a peaceful agenda . The album 's primary value , according to Moore , is its ability to " capture , more vividly than almost anything contemporaneous , its own time and place " . Whiteley agrees , crediting the album with " provid [ ing ] a historical snapshot of England during the run @-@ up to the Summer of Love " . Several scholars have applied a hermeneutic strategy to their analysis of Sgt. Pepper 's lyrics , identifying loss of innocence and the dangers of overindulgence in fantasies or illusions as the most prominent themes . 
 = = Songs = = 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 Sgt. Pepper opens with the title track , starting with 10 seconds of the combined sounds of a pit orchestra warming up and an audience waiting for a concert , introducing the illusion of the album as a live performance . The musicologist Kenneth Womack describes the lyric as " a revolutionary moment in the creative life of the Beatles " that bridges the gap – sometimes referred to as the Fourth wall – between the audience and the artist . He argues that , paradoxically , the lyrics " exemplify the mindless rhetoric of rock concert banter " while " mock [ ing ] the very notion of a pop album 's capacity for engendering authentic interconnection between artist and audience " . In his view , the mixed message ironically serves to distance the group from their fans while simultaneously " gesturing toward " them as alter egos , an authorial quality that he considers to be " the song 's most salient feature " . He credits the recording 's use of a brass ensemble with distorted electric guitars as an early example of rock fusion . MacDonald agrees , describing the track as an overture rather than a song , and a " shrewd fusion of Edwardian variety orchestra " and contemporary hard rock . The musicologist Michael Hannan describes the track 's unorthodox stereo mix as " typical of the album " , with the lead vocal in the right speaker during the verses , but in the left during the chorus and middle eight . " Sgt. Pepper " was the first Beatles track that benefitted from the production technique known as direct injection , which according to Womack " afforded McCartney 's bass with richer textures and tonal clarity " . The song 's arrangement utilises a rock and roll orientated Lydian mode chord progression during the introduction and verses that is built on parallel sevenths , which Everett describes as " the song 's strength " . The five @-@ bar bridge is filled by an Edwardian horn quartet that Martin arranged from a McCartney vocal melody . The track turns to the pentatonic scale for the chorus , where its blues rock progression is augmented by the use of electric guitar power chords played in consecutive fifths . 
 McCartney acts as the master of ceremonies near the end of the " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " track , introducing Starr as an alter ego named Billy Shears . The song then segues into " With a Little Help from My Friends " amidst a moment of crowd cheer that Martin had recorded during a Beatles concert at the Hollywood Bowl . Womack describes Starr 's baritone lead vocals as " charmingly sincere " and he credits them with imparting an element of " earnestness in sharp contrast with the ironic distance of the title track " . Lennon and McCartney 's call and response backing vocals ask Starr questions about the meaning of friendship and true love . In MacDonald 's opinion , the lyric is " at once communal and personal ... touchingly rendered by Starr [ and ] meant as a gesture of inclusivity ; everyone could join in . " Womack agrees , identifying " necessity of community " as the song 's " central ethical tenet " , a theme that he ascribes to the album as a whole . Everett notes the track 's use of a major key double @-@ plagal cadence that would become commonplace in pop music following the release of Sgt. Pepper . He characterises the arrangement as clever , particularly its reversal of the question and answer relationship in the final verse , in which the backing singers ask leading questions and Starr provides unequivocal answers . The song ends on a vocal high note that McCartney , Harrison and Lennon encouraged Starr to achieve despite his lack of confidence as a singer . 
 Despite widespread suspicion that the title of " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " contained a hidden reference to LSD , Lennon insisted that it was derived from a pastel drawing by his four @-@ year @-@ old son Julian . A hallucinatory chapter from Lewis Carroll 's 1871 novel , Through the Looking @-@ Glass , inspired the song 's atmosphere . McCartney confirms the existence of the drawing and Carroll 's influence on the track , noting that although the title 's apparent drug reference was unintentional , the lyrics were purposefully written for a psychedelic song . The first verse begins with what Womack characterises as " an invitation in the form of an imperative " through the line : " Picture yourself in a boat on a river " , and continues with imaginative imagery , including " tangerine trees " , " rocking horse people " and " newspaper taxis " . Martin describes the introduction 's melody , which he regards as " crucial to the staying power of the song " , as " a falling scale in the left hand , a rocking scale in the right " . In his opinion , the verse might have sounded monotonous if not for the juxtaposition " of that almost @-@ single @-@ note vocal against the inspired introductory notes " , which he describes as " mesmeric , compelling " . In Womack 's view , with the merging of Lennon 's lyrics and McCartney 's Lowrey organ introduction " the Beatles achieve their most vivid instance of musical timbre " . The musicologist Tim Riley identifies the track as a moment " in the album , [ where ] the material world is completely clouded in the mythical by both text and musical atmosphere " . According to MacDonald , " the lyric explicitly recreates the psychedelic experience " . 
 MacDonald considers " Getting Better " to contain " the most ebullient performance " on Sgt. Pepper . Womack credits the track 's " driving rock sound " with distinguishing it from the album 's overtly psychedelic material ; its lyrics inspire the listener " to usurp the past by living well and flourishing in the present " . He cites it as a strong example of Lennon and McCartney 's collaborative songwriting , particularly Lennon 's addition of the line " couldn 't get no worse " , which serves as a " sarcastic rejoinder " to McCartney 's chorus : " It 's getting better all the time " . McCartney describes Lennon 's lyric as " sardonic " and " against the spirit of the song " , which he characterises as " typical John " . MacDonald characterises the beginning of the track as " blithely unorthodox " , with two staccato guitars – one panned left and one right – playing the dominant against the subdominant of an F major ninth chord , with the tonic C resolving as the verse begins . The dominant , which acts as a drone , is reinforced through the use of octaves played on a bass guitar and plucked on piano strings . McCartney 's bass line accents non @-@ roots on the recording 's downbeat . 
 Womack interprets the lyric to " Fixing a Hole " as " the speaker 's search for identity among the crowd " , in particular the " quests for consciousness and connection " that differentiate individuals from society as a whole . MacDonald characterises it as a " distracted and introverted track " , during which McCartney forgoes his " usual smooth design " in favour of " something more preoccupied " . He cites Harrison 's electric guitar solo as serving the track well , capturing its mood by conveying detachment . McCartney drew inspiration for the song in part from his work restoring a Scottish farmhouse . Womack notes his adaptation of the lyric " a hole in the roof where the rain leaks in " from Elvis Presley 's " We 're Gonna Move " . The song deals with McCartney 's desire to let his mind wander freely and to express his creativity without the burden of self @-@ conscious insecurities . 
 In Everett 's view , the lyrics to " She 's Leaving Home " address the problem of alienation " between disagreeing peoples " , particularly those distanced from each other by the generation gap . McCartney 's " descriptive narration " , which details the plight of a " lonely girl " who escapes the control of her " selfish yet well @-@ meaning parents " , was inspired by a piece about teenage runaways published by the Daily Mail . It is the first track on Sgt. Pepper that eschews the use of guitars and drums , featuring a string nonet with a harp and drawing comparison with " Yesterday " and " Eleanor Rigby " , which utilise a string quartet and octet respectively . While Richard Goldstein 's 1967 review in The New York Times characterises the song as uninspiring , MacDonald identifies the track as one of the two best on the album . Moore notes that the writers judge the work from " opposing criteria " , with Goldstein opining during the dawn of the counterculture of the 1960s whereas MacDonald – writing in 1995 – is " intensely aware of [ the movement 's ] failings " . 
 Lennon adapted the lyric for " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " from an 1843 poster for Pablo Fanque 's circus that he purchased at an antique shop in Kent on the day of filming the promotional film for " Strawberry Fields Forever " . Womack praises the track 's successful blending of a print source and music : " The interpretive power of the mixed @-@ media application accrues its meaning through the musical production with which the group imbues the Ur @-@ text of the poster . " MacDonald notes Lennon 's request for a " fairground production wherein one could smell the sawdust " , an atmosphere that Martin and Emerick attempted to create with a sound collage that comprised randomly assembled recordings of harmoniums , harmonicas and <unk> . MacDonald describes the song as " a spontaneous expression of its author 's playful hedonism " . Everett thinks that the track 's use of Edwardian imagery thematically links it with the album 's opening number . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 After Martin decided that " Only a Northern Song " was not good enough for inclusion on Sgt. Pepper , Harrison wrote the Hindustani classical music @-@ inspired " Within You Without You " . MacDonald describes the track as an " ambitious essay in cross @-@ cultural fusion and meditative philosophy " that most commentators dismiss as boring , with critics characterising the music as lacking " harmonic interest " and the lyric as " sanctimonious ... didactic and dated " . Moore defends the recording 's reliance on melody at the expense of harmony as an entirely appropriate musical attribute for the genre . He characterises the critical response as " extremely varied " , noting that Goldstein identifies the track as one of the album 's highlights and others see it as an apt summary of the material from the first side . MacDonald regards the song as a " distant departure " from the Beatles ' sound and a " remarkable achievement " that represents the " conscience " of the LP . Womack agrees , calling it " quite arguably , the album 's ethical soul " . <unk> the recording 's " capacity for expressiveness " , the track features a tempo rubato that is without precedent in the Beatles ' catalogue . The pitch is derived from the eastern Khamaj scale , which is akin to the Mixolydian mode in the West . The track ends with a burst of laughter that some listeners interpret as a mockery of the song , but Harrison explains : " Well , after all that long Indian stuff you want some light relief . It 's a release after five minutes of sad music ... You were supposed to hear the audience anyway , as they listen to Sergeant Pepper 's Show . That was the style of the album . " Martin used the moment of levity as a segue for what he describes as the album 's " jokey track " – " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " . 
 MacDonald characterises McCartney 's " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " as a song " aimed chiefly at parents " , borrowing heavily from the English music hall style of George Formby , while invoking images of the illustrator Donald McGill 's " seaside postcards " . Its sparse arrangement includes chimes , clarinet and piano . MacDonald notes that the track receives a " cool reception " from most younger listeners , and Everett singles it out as a case of McCartney 's " penchant for the audience @-@ charming vaudeville ... that Lennon detested " . Moore characterises the song as a synthesis of ragtime and pop , noting that its position following " Within You Without You " – a blend of Indian classical music and pop – demonstrates the diversity of the album 's material . McCartney asked that the clarinets be arranged " in a classical way " , which according to Martin " got ... round the lurking schmaltz factor ... [ and ] gave added bite to the song , a formality that pushed it firmly towards satire " . MacDonald notes that the song 's inclusion amidst Sgt. Pepper 's " multi @-@ layered psychedelic textures ... provid [ es ] a down @-@ to @-@ earth interlude " . Moore credits Martin 's clarinet arrangement and Starr 's use of brushes with establishing the music hall atmosphere , which is reinforced by McCartney 's vocal delivery and the recording 's use of chromaticism , a harmonic pattern that can be traced to Scott Joplin 's " The Ragtime Dance " and The Blue Danube by Johann Strauss . <unk> was used on the track , raising the music 's pitch by a semitone in an attempt to make McCartney sound younger . Everett notes that the lyric 's protagonist is sometimes associated with the Lonely Hearts Club Band , but in his opinion the song is thematically unconnected to the others on the album . 
 Womack characterises " Lovely Rita " as a work of " full @-@ tilt psychedelia " that contrasts sharply with the preceding track . He identifies the song as an example of McCartney 's talent for " creating imagistic musical portraiture " , but considers it to be among the album 's weakest offerings , presaging what he describes as the " less effectual compositions " that the Beatles would record post @-@ Sgt. Pepper . In his view , " the song accomplishes little in the way of advancing the album 's journey toward a more expansive human consciousness " . Despite his reservations , he considers the track to be " irresistibly charming " . Moore agrees , describing the composition as a " throwaway " while praising what he characterises as its " strong sense of harmonic direction " . MacDonald describes the song as a " satire on authority " that is " imbued with an exuberant interest in life that lifts the spirits , dispersing self @-@ absorption " . 
 " Good Morning Good Morning " was inspired by a television commercial for Kellogg 's Corn Flakes , from which Lennon adapted a jingle as the song 's refrain . The track utilises the bluesy mixolydian mode in A , which Everett credits with " perfectly express [ ing ] Lennon 's grievance against complacency " . Lennon regarded the song as " a throwaway piece of garbage " , and McCartney viewed it as Lennon 's reaction to the frustrations of domestic life . Womack praises the song 's varied time signatures , including 5 / 4 , 3 / 4 and 4 / 4 , calling it a " masterpiece of electrical energy " . MacDonald notes Starr 's " fine performance " and McCartney 's " coruscating pseudo @-@ Indian guitar solo " , which he credits with delivering the track 's climax . A series of animal noises are heard during the fade @-@ out that are sequenced – at Lennon 's request – so that each successive animal is large enough to devour the preceding one . Martin spliced the sound of a chicken clucking at the end of the track to overlap with a guitar being tuned in the next one , making a seamless transition between the two songs . 
 " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( Reprise ) " serves as a bookend for the album and a segue to its finale . The hard @-@ rocking song was written after the Beatles ' assistant , Neil Aspinall , suggested that since " Sgt. Pepper " opened the album , the fictional band should make an appearance near the end . The reprise omits the brass section from the title track and features a faster tempo . MacDonald notes the Beatles ' apparent excitement , which is tangibly translated during the recording . 
 As the last chord of the " Sgt. Pepper " reprise plays , an acoustic guitar strumming offbeat quavers begins , introducing what Moore describes as " one of the most harrowing songs ever written " . " A Day in the Life " consists of four verses by Lennon , a bridge , two aleatoric orchestral crescendos and an interpolated middle part written and sung by McCartney . The first crescendo serves as a segue between the third verse and the middle part , leading to a bridge known as the " dream sequence " , which features Lennon 's vocalisations . In Martin 's opinion , the " vocal wailings " , which are treated with tape echo and slowly panned from right to left and back again before suddenly ending in the left speaker , contribute to the song 's " reception as a ' marijuana dream ' " . The accompanying brass section loudly indicates the end of the sequence and the start of the fourth and final verse , after which the song enters the last crescendo before finishing with a piano chord that is allowed to fade out for nearly a minute . The idea to use an orchestra was McCartney 's ; he drew inspiration from the avant @-@ garde composers John Cage and Karlheinz Stockhausen . The 24 @-@ bar crescendos feature forty musicians selected from the London and Royal Philharmonic Orchestras and tasked with filling the space with what Womack describes as " the sound of pure apocalypse " . Martin notes Lennon 's request for " a tremendous build @-@ up , from nothing up to something absolutely like the end of the world " . Lennon recalled drawing inspiration for the lyrics from a newspaper : " I was writing the song with the Daily Mail propped up in front of me at the piano ... there was a paragraph about 4000 [ pot ] holes in Blackburn , Lancashire " . He strongly disliked the sound of his own voice and often asked for generous amounts of tape echo to be added to his vocal in an effort to bury it deep in the mix . For " A Day in the Life " , he wanted his voice to sound like Elvis Presley on " Heartbreak Hotel " . Martin and Emerick obliged by adding 90 milliseconds of echo . Womack describes Starr 's performance as " one of his most inventive drum parts on record " , a part that McCartney encouraged him to attempt despite his protests against " flashy drumming " . The thunderous piano chord that concludes the track and the album was produced by recording Lennon , Starr , McCartney and Evans simultaneously sounding an E major chord on three separate pianos ; Martin then augmented the sound with a harmonium . Riley characterises the song as a " postlude to the Pepper fantasy ... that sets all the other songs in perspective " , while shattering the illusion of " Pepperland " by introducing the " parallel universe of everyday life " . MacDonald describes the track as " a song not of disillusionment with life itself , but of disenchantment with the limits of mundane perception " . According to him , it " remains among the most penetrating and innovative artistic reflections of its era " , representing the Beatles ' " finest single achievement " . 
 As " A Day in the Life " ends , a 15 @-@ kilohertz high @-@ frequency tone is heard ; it was added at Lennon 's suggestion with the intention that it would annoy dogs . This is followed by the sounds of backwards laughter and random gibberish that was pressed into the record 's concentric run @-@ out groove , which loops back into itself endlessly on any record player not equipped with an automatic needle return . Lennon can be heard saying , " been so high " , followed by McCartney 's response : " never could be any other way " . 
 = = Cover artwork = = 
 Sgt. Pepper 's album cover was designed by the pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth from an ink drawing by McCartney . It was art @-@ directed by Robert Fraser and photographed by Michael Cooper . The front of the LP included a colourful collage featuring the Beatles in costume as the Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , standing with a group of life @-@ sized cardboard cut @-@ outs of famous people . Each of the Beatles sported a heavy moustache , after Harrison had first grown one as a disguise during his visit to India . The moustaches reflected the growing influence of hippie style trends , while the group 's clothing " spoofed the vogue in Britain for military fashions " , writes the Beatles biographer Jonathan Gould . The centre of the cover depicts the Beatles standing behind a drum skin , on which the fairground artist Joe <unk> painted the words of the album 's title . In front of the drum skin is an arrangement of flowers that spell out " Beatles " . The group were dressed in satin day @-@ glo @-@ coloured military @-@ style uniforms that were manufactured by the theatrical costumer M. Berman Ltd in London . Right next to the Beatles are wax sculptures of the bandmembers in their suits and moptop haircuts from the Beatlemania era , borrowed from Madame Tussauds . The album 's lyrics were printed in full on the back cover , the first time this had been done on a rock LP . 
 The 30 March 1967 photo session with Cooper also produced the back cover and the inside gatefold , which the musicologist Ian Inglis describes as conveying " an obvious and immediate warmth ... which distances it from the sterility and artifice typical of such images " . McCartney explained : " One of the things we were very much into in those days was eye messages ... So with Michael Cooper 's inside photo , we all said , ' Now look into this camera and really say I love you ! Really try and feel love ; really give love through this ! It 'll come out ; it 'll show ; it 's an attitude . ' And that 's what that is , if you look at it you 'll see the big effort from the eyes . " The album 's inner sleeve featured artwork by the Dutch design team the Fool that eschewed for the first time the standard white paper in favour of an abstract pattern of waves of maroon , red , pink and white . Included with the album as a bonus gift was a sheet of cardboard cut @-@ outs designed by Blake and Haworth , a postcard @-@ sized portrait of Sgt. Pepper based on a statue from Lennon 's house that was used on the front cover , a fake moustache , two sets of sergeant stripes , two lapel badges and a stand @-@ up cut @-@ out of the Beatles in their satin uniforms . Moore believes that the inclusion of these items helped fans " pretend to be in the band " . 
 The collage includes 57 photographs and nine waxworks that depict a diversity of famous people , including actors , sportsmen , scientists and – at Harrison 's request – the Self @-@ Realization Fellowship gurus Mahavatar Babaji , Lahiri Mahasaya , Sri Yukteswar and Paramahansa Yogananda . Inglis views the tableau " as a guidebook to the cultural topography of the decade " , demonstrating the increasing democratisation of society whereby " traditional barriers between ' high ' and ' low ' culture were being eroded " . The final grouping included singers such as Bob Dylan and Bobby Breen ; the film stars Marlon Brando , Tony Curtis , Marlene Dietrich and Marilyn Monroe ; the artist Aubrey Beardsley ; the boxer Sonny Liston and the footballer Albert Stubbins . Also included were the comedians Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy ( as well as comedian W.C. Fields ) and the writers H. G. Wells , Oscar Wilde , Lewis Carroll and Dylan Thomas . Adolf Hitler and Jesus Christ were requested by Lennon , but ultimately rejected . When McCartney was asked why the Beatles did not include Elvis Presley , he replied : " Elvis was too important and too far above the rest even to mention ... so we didn 't put him on the list because he was more than merely a ... pop singer , he was Elvis the King . " The final cost for the cover art was nearly £ 3 @,@ 000 , an extravagant sum for a time when album covers would typically cost around £ 50 . For their work on Sgt. Pepper , Blake and Haworth won the 1968 Grammy Award for Best Album Cover , Graphic Arts . 
 = = Release = = 
 After finishing Sgt. Pepper , but prior to the album 's commercial release , the Beatles took an acetate disc of the album to the American singer Cass Elliot 's flat off King 's Road in Chelsea , where at six in the morning they played it at full volume with speakers set in open window frames . The group 's friend and former press agent , Derek Taylor , remembered that residents of the neighbourhood opened their windows and listened without complaint to what they understood to be unreleased Beatles music . On 1 June 1967 , Sgt. Pepper became the first Beatles album to be issued simultaneously worldwide . It was also the first Beatles album where the track listings were exactly the same for the UK and US versions . The band 's eighth LP , it debuted in the UK at number one – where it stayed for 22 consecutive weeks – selling 250 @,@ 000 copies during the first seven days . On 4 June , the Jimi Hendrix Experience opened a show at the Saville Theatre in London with their rendition of the title track . Epstein owned the Saville at the time , and Harrison and McCartney attended the performance . McCartney described the moment : " The curtains flew back and [ Hendrix ] came walking forward playing ' Sgt. Pepper ' . It 's a pretty major compliment in anyone 's book . I put that down as one of the great honours of my career . " Rolling Stone magazine 's Langdon Winner recalls : 
 The closest Western Civilization has come to unity since the Congress of Vienna in 1815 was the week the Sgt. Pepper album was released . In every city in Europe and America the radio stations played [ it ] ... and everyone listened ... it was the most amazing thing I 've ever heard . For a brief while the irreparable fragmented consciousness of the West was unified , at least in the minds of the young . 
 Sgt. Pepper was widely perceived by listeners as the soundtrack to the " Summer of Love " . In Riley 's opinion , the album " drew people together through the common experience of pop on a larger scale than ever before " . American radio stations interrupted their regular scheduling , playing the album virtually non @-@ stop – often from start to finish . It occupied the number one position of the Billboard Top LPs in the US for 15 weeks , from 1 July to 13 October 1967 . With 2 @.@ 5 million copies sold within three months of its release , Sgt. Pepper 's initial commercial success exceeded that of all previous Beatles albums . None of its songs were issued as singles at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The vast majority of contemporary reviews were positive , with Sgt. Pepper receiving a widespread critical acclaim that matched its immediate commercial success . Kenneth Tynan of The Times described it as " a decisive moment in the history of Western civilisation " . Richard Poirier wrote : " listening to the Sgt. Pepper album one thinks not simply of the history of popular music but the history of this century . " Time magazine declared it " a historic departure in the progress of music – any music " . Newsweek 's Jack Kroll called it a " masterpiece " , comparing the lyrics with literary works by Edith Sitwell , Harold Pinter and T. S. Eliot , particularly " A Day in the Life " , which he compared to Eliot 's The Waste Land . The New York Times Book Review characterised Sgt. Pepper as a harbinger of a " golden Renaissance of Song " and the New Statesman 's Wilfrid Mellers praised its elevation of pop music to the level of fine art . 
 One of the best @-@ known American critics at the time , Richard Goldstein , wrote a scathing contemporary review in The New York Times that described Sgt. Pepper as " spoiled " and " reek [ ing ] " of " special effects , dazzling but ultimately fraudulent " . According to the music journalist Robert Christgau , The New York Times was subsequently " deluged with letters , many abusive and every last one in disagreement " , a backlash that he credits as " the largest response to a music review " in the newspaper 's history . Goldstein published a defence of his review in which he explained that , although the album was not on @-@ par with the best of the Beatles ' previous work , he considered it " better than 80 per cent of the music around " , but felt that underneath the production when " the compositions are stripped to their musical and lyrical essentials " the LP is shown to be " an elaboration without improvement " on the group 's music . In Christgau 's 1967 column for Esquire magazine , he described Sgt. Pepper as " a consolidation , more intricate than Revolver but not more substantial " , suggesting that Goldstein had fallen " victim to <unk> " , identifying his primary error as " allow [ ing ] all the filters and reverbs and orchestral effects and overdubs to deafen him to the stuff underneath , which was pretty nice " . 
 At the 10th Annual Grammy Awards in 1968 , Sgt. Pepper won in the categories of Best Album Cover , Graphic Arts , Best Engineered Recording , Non @-@ Classical and Best Contemporary Album . It also won Album of the Year , the first rock LP to receive this honour . 
 = = Retrospective criticism = = 
 While gathering material for his 1979 anthology , Stranded : Rock and Roll for a Desert Island , the editor Greil Marcus polled the 20 rock critic contributors regarding their choice for the best rock album of all time , and while Rubber Soul was mentioned , Sgt. Pepper was not . He asserts that by 1968 the album appeared vacuous against the emotional backdrop of the political and social upheavals of American life , describing it as " a triumph of effects " , but " a Day @-@ Glo tombstone for its time " . He characterises the LP as " playful but contrived " and " less a summing up of its era than a concession to it " . Marcus believes that the album " strangled on its own conceits " while being " vindicated by world @-@ wide acclaim " . 
 In 1981 , Christgau stated that although few critics agreed with Goldstein at the time of his negative contemporary review , many later came to appreciate his sentiments . In the opinion of Lester Bangs – the so @-@ called " godfather " of punk rock journalism , also writing in 1981 – " Goldstein was right in his much @-@ vilified review ... predicting that this record had the power to almost singlehandedly destroy rock and roll . " He notes : " In the sixties rock and roll began to think of itself as an ' art form ' . Rock and roll is not an ' art form ' ; rock and roll is a raw wail from the bottom of the guts . " The musicologist John Kimsey cites the preservation of authenticity as a guiding tenet of rock music and suggests that many purists denounce Sgt. Pepper in that respect , accusing the album of " mark [ ing ] a fall from primal grace into pretense , production and self @-@ consciousness . " In his opinion , detractors regard the LP as less a breakthrough and more a " break with all that 's good , true and rocking " . According to Christgau : " Although Sgt. Pepper is thought of as the most influential of all rock masterpieces , it is really only the most famous . In retrospect it seems peculiarly <unk> – precise , controlled , even stiff – and it is clearly peripheral to the rock mainstream " . In Moore 's estimation , " because its cultural impact was so large , it was simply being asked to do too much . " 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 According to Womack , with Sgt. Pepper 's first song " the Beatles manufacture an artificial textual space in which to stage their art . " The reprise of the title song appears on side two , just prior to the climactic " A Day in the Life " , creating a framing device . In Starr 's opinion , only the first two songs and the reprise are conceptually connected . Lennon agreed and in 1980 he commented : " Sgt. Pepper is called the first concept album , but it doesn 't go anywhere ... it works because we said it worked . " He was especially adamant that his contributions to the LP had nothing to do with the Sgt. Pepper concept . Further , he suggested that most of the other songs were equally unconnected , stating : " Except for Sgt. Pepper introducing Billy Shears and the so @-@ called reprise , every other song could have been on any other album " . Martin became worried upon the album 's completion that its lack of musical unity might draw criticism and accusations of pretentiousness . 
 MacFarlane notes that – despite these concerns – Sgt. Pepper " is widely regarded as the first true concept album in popular music " . In his view , the Beatles " chose to employ an overarching thematic concept in an apparent effort to unify individual tracks . " Everett contends that the album 's " musical unity results ... from motivic relationships between key areas , particularly involving C , E , and G. " Moore argues that the recording 's " use of common harmonic patterns and falling melodies " contributes to its overall cohesiveness , which he describes as narrative unity , but not necessarily conceptual unity . MacFarlane agrees , suggesting that with the exception of the reprise the album lacks the melodic and harmonic continuity that is consistent with cyclic form . In a May 1967 review published by The Times , the music critic William Mann made a similar observation , indicating a thematic connection between the title track , its reprise and " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " , while suggesting that – aside from those songs – the album 's " unity is slightly specious " . In 1972 , the musicologist Richard Middleton suggested that the album was " <unk> " , in that listeners could grasp only a general understanding of the material that , in his opinion , was not particularly meaningful . Nonetheless , the author Martina <unk> asserts that Sgt. Pepper 's release familiarised critics and fans alike with the notion of a " concept and unified structure underlying a pop album " , thus originating the term concept album . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Musicologists regard Sgt. Pepper as a continuation of the artistic maturation seen on the Beatles ' two preceding albums , Revolver and Rubber Soul . Moore credits it with aiding the development of progressive rock through its self @-@ conscious lyrics , its studio experimentation , and its efforts to expand the barriers of conventional three @-@ minute tracks . Jones locates Pet Sounds and Sgt. Pepper 's to the beginning of art rock ; Julien considers the latter a " masterpiece of British psychedelia " . The album was described by NME as an " orchestral baroque pop masterpiece " . Rolling Stone 's Andy Greene credits it with marking the beginning of the Album Era . For several years following Sgt. Pepper 's release , straightforward rock and roll was supplanted by a growing interest in extended form , and for the first time in the history of the music industry sales of albums outpaced sales of singles . Julien credits Sgt. Pepper with contributing towards the evolution of long @-@ playing albums from a " distribution format " to a " creation format " . In Moore 's view , the album assisted " the cultural legitimization of popular music " while providing an important musical representation of its generation . It is regarded by journalists as having influenced the development of the counterculture of the 1960s . During the 1970s , glam rock acts co @-@ opted Sgt. Pepper 's use of alter ego personas and in 1977 the LP won Best British Album at the first Brit Awards . 
 With certified sales of 5 @.@ 1 million copies , Sgt. Pepper is the third @-@ best @-@ selling album in UK chart history . Sgt. Pepper is one of the most commercially successful albums in the US , where the RIAA certifies sales of 11 million copies . It has sold more than 32 million copies worldwide , making it one of the highest @-@ selling albums of all time . In a 1987 review for Q magazine , the music journalist and author Charles Shaar Murray asserted that the album " remains a central pillar of the mythology and iconography of the late ' 60s " . That same year Rolling Stone 's Anthony DeCurtis described it as an " enormous achievement " that " revolutionized rock and roll " . In 1994 , Sgt. Pepper was ranked first in Colin Larkin 's All Time Top 1000 Albums . He described it as " the album that revolutionized , changed and re @-@ invented the boundaries of modern popular music . " In 2003 , it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , honouring the work as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . In 2003 , Rolling Stone placed it at number one in their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , describing it as " the pinnacle of the Beatles ' eight years as recording artists " . In the Encyclopedia of Popular Music , Larkin wrote : " [ it ] turned out to be no mere pop album but a cultural icon , embracing the constituent elements of the 60s ' youth culture : pop art , garish fashion , drugs , instant mysticism and freedom from parental control . " In 2006 it was chosen by Time as one of the 100 best albums of all time . That same year the music scholar David Scott <unk> described Sgt. Pepper as " the most important and influential rock and roll album ever recorded " .The album was included in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = = Recording and cover = = = 
 Producers from the 1960s , such as Phil Spector and Brian Wilson , are credited with transforming popular music into an art which could only exist in the recording studio , while George Martin and Wilson are credited with popularising the idea of the recording studio as a musical instrument which could then be used to aid the process of composition . In MacFarlane 's opinion , Sgt. Pepper 's most important musical innovation is its " integration of recording technology into the compositional process " . He credits Edgard Varèse 's Poème électronique as the piece of music that made this advance feasible , by " expand [ ing ] the definition of sound recording from archival documentation to the <unk> of the musical canvass " ; he identifies " A Day in the Life " as the Sgt. Pepper track that best exemplifies this approach . Although early analogue synthesisers were available – Robert Moog was working on the second generation of the first commercially available keyboard around the same time as the Sgt. Pepper recording sessions – none were used during the album 's recording , which relied solely on electric and acoustic instruments and field recordings that were available at Abbey Road Studios . The musician and producer Alan Parsons believes that with Sgt. Pepper " people then started thinking that you could spend a year making an album and they began to consider an album as a sound composition and not just a musical composition . The idea was gradually forming of a record being a performance in its own right and not just a reproduction of a live performance . " 
 According to Julien , Sgt. Pepper represents the " epitome of the transformation of the recording studio into a compositional tool " , marking the moment when " popular music entered the era of phonographic composition . " Its lasting commercial success and critical impact are largely due to Martin and his engineers ' creative use of studio equipment while originating new processes . Artistic experimentation , such as the placement of random gibberish in the run @-@ out groove , is one of the album 's defining features . In the opinion of the Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn , Sgt. Pepper represents the group 's last unified effort , displaying a cohesion that would begin deteriorating immediately following the album 's completion and that had entirely disappeared by the release of The Beatles in 1968 . Emerick notes the minimal involvement of Harrison and Starr , viewing Sgt. Pepper as a work of Lennon and McCartney that was less a group effort than any of their previous releases . 
 Inglis notes that almost every account of the significance of Sgt. Pepper emphasizes the cover 's " unprecedented correspondence between music and art , time and space " . After its release , album sleeves were no longer " a superfluous thing to be discarded during the act of listening , but an integral component of the listening that expanded the musical experience . " The cover helped to elevate album art as a respected topic for critical analysis whereby the " structures and cultures of popular music " could henceforth justify intellectual discourse in a way that – before Sgt. Pepper – would have seemed like " fanciful conceit " . He writes : Sgt. Pepper 's " cover has been regarded as groundbreaking in its visual and aesthetic properties , congratulated for its innovative and imaginative design , credited with providing an early impetus for the expansion of the graphic design industry into popular music , and perceived as largely responsible for the connections between art and pop to be made explicit . " Riley describes it as " one of the best @-@ known works that pop art ever produced " . In the late 1990s , the BBC included it in its list of British masterpieces of twentieth @-@ century art and design . In 2008 , the iconic bass drum skin used on the front cover sold at auction for € 670 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sgt. Pepper was the first Beatles album to be released with identical track listings in the UK and the US . 
 First American pressings on the black / <unk> Capitol label erroneously show track 2 on side one as " A Little Help From My Friends " ; this was corrected for subsequent pressings 
 All songs written and composed by Lennon – McCartney except " Within You Without You " , by George Harrison . 
 Track list information according to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald : 
 The Beatles 
 John Lennon – lead , harmony and background vocals ; rhythm , acoustic and lead guitars ; Hammond organ and final piano E chord ; harmonica , tape loops , sound effects , and comb and tissue paper ; handclaps , tambourine and maracas 
 Paul McCartney – lead , harmony and background vocals ; bass and lead guitars ; electric and acoustic pianos , Lowrey and Hammond organs ; handclaps ; vocalisations , tape loops , sound effects , and comb and tissue paper 
 George Harrison – harmony and background vocals ; lead , rhythm and acoustic guitars ; sitar ; tamboura ; harmonica and kazoo ; handclaps and maracas ; lead vocals on " Within You Without You " 
 Ringo Starr – drums , congas , tambourine , maracas , handclaps and tubular bells ; lead vocals on " With a Little Help from My Friends " ; harmonica ; final piano E chord 
 Additional musicians and production 
 Sounds Incorporated – the saxophone sextet on " Good Morning , Good Morning " 
 Neil Aspinall – tamboura and harmonica 
 Geoff Emerick – audio engineering ; tape loops and sound effects 
 Mal Evans – counting , harmonica , alarm clock and final piano E chord 
 George Martin – producer and mixer ; tape loops and sound effects ; harpsichord on " Fixing a Hole " , harmonium , Lowrey organ and glockenspiel on " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " , Hammond organ on " With a Little Help from My Friends " , and piano on " Getting Better " and the piano solo in " Lovely Rita " ; final harmonium chord . 
 Session musicians – four French horns on " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " : Neill Sanders , James W. Buck , John Burden , Tony Randall , arranged and conducted by Martin and McCartney ; string section and harp on " She 's Leaving Home " , arranged by Mike Leander and conducted by Martin ; tabla , dilrubas , tamboura and swarmandal on " Within You Without You " , played by members of the Asian Music Circle , with eight violins and four cellos arranged and conducted by Harrison and Martin ; clarinet trio on " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " : Robert Burns , Henry MacKenzie , Frank Reidy , arranged and conducted by Martin and McCartney ; saxophones on " Good Morning , Good Morning " , arranged and conducted by Martin and Lennon ; and forty @-@ piece orchestra , including strings , brass , woodwinds and percussion on " A Day in the Life " , arranged by Martin , Lennon and McCartney and conducted by Martin and McCartney . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Sgt. Pepper appeared on the Billboard 200 chart in the US for 175 non @-@ consecutive weeks through 1987 . 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 In the US , the album sold 2 @,@ 360 @,@ 423 copies by 31 December 1967 and 3 @,@ 372 @,@ 581 copies by the end of the decade . 
 BPI certification awarded only for sales since 1994 . 
 = Kennet and Avon Canal = 
 The Kennet and Avon Canal is a waterway in southern England with an overall length of 87 miles ( 140 km ) , made up of two lengths of navigable river linked by a canal . The name is commonly used to refer to the entire length of the navigation rather than solely to the central canal section . From Bristol to Bath the waterway follows the natural course of the River Avon before the canal links it to the River Kennet at Newbury , and from there to Reading on the River Thames . In all , the waterway incorporates 105 locks . 
 The two river stretches were made navigable in the early 18th century , and the 57 @-@ mile ( 92 km ) canal section was constructed between 1794 and 1810 . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the canal gradually fell into disuse after the opening of the Great Western Railway . In the latter half of the 20th century the canal was restored in stages , largely by volunteers . After decades of dereliction and much restoration work , it was fully reopened in 1990 . The Kennet and Avon Canal has been developed as a popular heritage tourism destination for boating , canoeing , fishing , walking and cycling , and is also important for wildlife conservation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early plans = = = 
 The idea of an east to west waterway link across southern England was first mentioned in Elizabethan times , between 1558 and 1603 , to take advantage of the proximity of the rivers Avon and Thames , only 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) apart at their closest . Later , around 1626 , Henry Briggs made a survey of the two rivers and noted that the land between them was level and easy to dig . He proposed a canal to connect them , but following his death in 1630 the plan was dropped . After the English Civil War four bills were presented to parliament , but all failed after opposition from gentry , farmers and traders worried about cheaper water transport reducing the value of fees on turnpike roads they controlled , and cheaper produce from Wales undercutting locally produced food . 
 The main alternative to road transport for the carriage of goods between Bristol and London was a hazardous sea route through the English Channel . The small coastal sailing ships of the day were often damaged by Atlantic storms , and risked being attacked by warships of the French Navy and privateers during a succession of conflicts with France . 
 = = = River navigations = = = 
 Plans for a waterway were shelved until the early 18th century . However , in 1715 , work was authorised to make the River Kennet navigable from Reading to Newbury . Work commenced in 1718 , under the supervision of surveyor and engineer John Hore of Newbury . In 1723 , despite considerable local opposition , the Kennet Navigation opened , comprising stretches of natural riverbed alternating with 11 miles ( 18 km ) of artificially created lock cuts . 
 The River Avon had historically been navigable from Bristol to Bath , but construction of watermills on the river in the early years of the 13th century had forced its closure . In 1727 , navigation was restored , with the construction of six locks , again under the supervision of John Hore . The first cargo of " Deal boards , Pig @-@ Lead and Meal " reached Bath in December . 
 The two river navigations were built independently of one another , in order to meet local needs , but they eventually led to plans to connect them and form a through route . 
 = = = Closing the gap = = = 
 In 1788 a " Western Canal " was proposed to improve trade and communication links to towns such as Hungerford , Marlborough , Calne , Chippenham and Melksham . The following year the engineers Barns , Simcock and Weston submitted a proposed route for this canal , although there were doubts about the adequacy of the water supply . The name was changed from Western Canal to Kennet and Avon Canal to avoid confusion with the Grand Western Canal , which was being proposed at the same time . 
 In 1793 a further survey was conducted by John Rennie , and the route of the canal was altered to take a more southerly course through Great Bedwyn , Devizes , Trowbridge and Newbury . The proposed route was accepted by the Kennet and Avon Canal Company , chaired by Charles Dundas , and the company started to take subscriptions from prospective shareholders . In July 1793 Rennie suggested further alterations to the route , including the construction of a tunnel in the Savernake Forest . On 17 April 1794 the Kennet and Avon Canal Act received the Royal Assent and construction began . The Newbury to Hungerford section was completed in 1798 , and was extended to Great Bedwyn in 1799 . The section from Bath to Foxhangers was finished in 1804 , and Devizes Locks were completed in 1810 . 
 The canal opened in 1810 after 16 years of construction . Major structures included the Dundas and Avoncliff aqueducts , the Bruce Tunnel under Savernake Forest , and the pumping stations at Claverton and Crofton , needed to overcome water supply problems . The final engineering task was the completion of the Caen Hill Locks at Devizes . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 In 1801 , trade along the canal commenced ; goods initially had to be unloaded at Foxhangers at the bottom of what is now Caen Hill Locks , transported up the hill by a horse @-@ drawn railway , and reloaded into barges at the top . When the flight of locks opened in 1810 , allowing the same vessel to navigate the entire canal , the rate of carriage per ton from London to Bath was £ 2 9s 6d . This compared well with carriage by road , which cost £ 6 3s to £ 7 per ton , and trade on the canal flourished . In 1812 , the Kennet and Avon Canal Company bought the Kennet Navigation , which stretched from Newbury to the junction with the Thames at Kennet Mouth , near Reading . The purchase from Frederick Page cost £ 100 @,@ 000 , of which £ 70 @,@ 000 was paid in cash with the balance paid back gradually . The purchase was authorised by the Kennet Navigation Act of June 1813 , which enabled the company to raise the funds through the sale of 5 @,@ 500 shares at £ 24 each . At the same time work was undertaken to improve the Avon Navigation , from Bristol to Bath , with the Kennet and Avon Canal Company purchasing a majority shareholding in the Avon Navigation in 1816 . 
 By 1818 , seventy 60 @-@ ton barges were working on the canal , the majority of the tonnage being coal and stone travelling via the Somerset Coal Canal . The journey from Bath to Newbury took an average of three and a half days . By 1832 , 300 @,@ 000 tons of freight was being carried each year and , between 1825 and 1834 , the company had an annual revenue of around £ 45 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The opening of the Great Western Railway in 1841 removed much of the canal 's traffic , even though the canal company lowered tariffs . In 1852 the railway company took over the canal 's operation , levying high tolls at every toll point and reducing the amount spent on maintenance . Ice @-@ breaking was stopped in 1857 , and traders were further encouraged by preferential tolls to use the railway rather than the canal . In 1861 a new order prohibited any traffic on the canal at night , and , in 1865 , boats were forced to pass through locks in pairs to reduce water loss . By 1868 the annual tonnage had fallen from 360 @,@ 610 in 1848 to 210 @,@ 567 . In the 1870s water abstraction from the canal near Fobney Lock followed the regulations introduced in the Reading Local Board Waterworks , Sewerage , Drainage and Improvements Act of 1870 , and contributed to the silting up of locks and stretches of the canal . Several wharves and stretches of towpath were closed . In 1877 the canal recorded a deficit of £ 1 @,@ 920 and never subsequently made any profit . 
 The Somerset Coal Canal and Wilts & Berks Canal , which each supplied some of the trade from the Somerset Coalfield to the Kennet and Avon , closed in 1904 and 1906 respectively . In 1926 , following a loss of £ 18 @,@ 041 the previous year , the Great Western Railway sought to close the canal by obtaining a Ministry of Transport Order , but the move was resisted and the company charged with improving its maintenance of the canal . Cargo trade continued to decline , but a few pleasure boats started to use the canal . 
 During the Second World War a large number of concrete pillboxes were built as part of the GHQ Line - Blue to defend against an expected German invasion ; many of these are still visible along the banks of the canal . They were generally built close to road and rail bridges , which would have formed important crossing points for enemy troops and vehicles . After the war the Transport Act of 1947 transferred control of the canal to the British Transport Commission , but by the 1950s large sections of the canal had been closed because of poor lock maintenance following a breach in the bank west of the Avoncliff Aqueduct . The last through passage was made in 1951 by nb Queen . 
 = = = Closure avoided = = = 
 A group supporting the restoration of the canal had been set up in the early 1950s independently of the Inland Waterways Association , with which it was subsequently merged . In 1955 John Gould , a trader on the eastern section of the waterway , successfully petitioned against the commission 's failure to maintain the waterway and obtained damages for loss of business . In March 1956 a clause in the British Transport Commission ( no 2 ) Act was presented to Parliament that would have removed the right of navigation between Reading and Bath . The Act was opposed by Gould and by the local authorities along the canal . They were supported by a 22 @,@ 000 @-@ signature petition to the Queen , brought to London from Bristol by water ; parts of the canal had to be traversed by canoe . This campaign led to an inquiry by a Parliamentary Select Committee . The committee supported the suspension of the right of navigation , and the Bill passed through the House of Commons but was amended by the House of Lords to include a clause to enforce " no further deterioration " . In July 1958 , the Bowes Committee published their Inquiry into Inland Waterways which specifically mentioned the Kennet and Avon finding " no justification for restoring the section from Reading to Bath " . 
 A government white paper followed the Bowes Report in February 1959 , recommending that an Inland Waterways Redevelopment Advisory Committee should assist schemes to regenerate canals that were no longer able to collect enough fees from tolls to pay for their upkeep . Further reports followed , and in 1962 the Advisory Committee reported that the canal should be redeveloped , and allocated £ 20 @,@ 000 for maintenance and £ 20 @,@ 000 to begin restoration . The Kennet and Avon Canal Trust was formed in 1962 to restore the canal from Reading to Bristol as a through navigation and as a public amenity . It was originally a voluntary group which had previously been known as the Kennet and Avon Canal Association . The Trust gained charitable status in April and was incorporated under the Companies Act on 6 June 1962 . In 1963 the newly formed British Waterways , which was created by the Transport Act of the previous year , and replaced the British Transport Commission as the statutory body for inland waterways , took over the canal and , in partnership with the Trust and riparian local authorities , restoration work began . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Restoration work involved a collaboration between staff from British Waterways and volunteer labour . In 1966 Sulhamstead Lock was rebuilt and the re @-@ puddling of the dry section at Limpley Stoke was begun . In 1968 , restoration work was undertaken on the Bath Locks and Burghfield Lock . In Reading at Bridge Street the navigable headroom had been reduced from 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 59 m ) to 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 37 m ) by girders added to the underside of the bridge . This was replaced with a new bridge , enabling craft to pass more easily . The canal was reopened from the Thames to Hungerford Wharf in July 1974 . Re @-@ puddling was a long process , so experiments with the use of heavy gauge polythene to line the canal were undertaken . The Avoncliff Aqueduct was lined with a concrete " cradle " and made water @-@ tight in 1980 . 
 Further works continued during the 1980s . The County Council in Berkshire , supported by local councils , estimated that £ 1 @,@ 275 @,@ 000 was needed for works at the eastern end of the canal and commenced work on replacing some of the bridges . In Wiltshire concerns over the limited water supply to the summit , at the highest point of the canal , indicated that back @-@ pumping would be required , which increased the estimated cost for the county to £ 761 @,@ 560 . The Wilton Water reservoir was estimated to produce less than 750 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 3 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 l ) per day , and the Seend feeder only 250 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 l ) . Wessex Water Authority agreed to the extraction of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 l ) per day from the Avon at Claverton to be pumped east ; the costs of the pumps was £ 175 @,@ 000 . 
 Various fund @-@ raising schemes , along with some financial support from local authorities , allowed small @-@ scale work on the locks to continue , but the projected timescales for completion were missed . In 1983 the Manpower Services Commission , which had a remit to co @-@ ordinate employment and training services in the United Kingdom , agreed to employ 50 men on work that included restoration of Aldermaston Lock , its adjacent wharf , and <unk> Lock . The restoration of the Dundas Aqueduct and several smaller schemes were later added to the list . Maintenance agreements were signed with local authorities along the route , while fund @-@ raising activities continued . The National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders sponsored a workshop , which opened in Shrivenham in 1987 , to create new lock gates for the Crofton and Devizes flights . In 1988 the restoration of Woolhampton Lock was completed , but obstructions remained on either side . <unk> swing bridge could not be opened and the restoration of Midgham Lock had not been finished ; both were completed the following year . Re @-@ puddling of the Crofton pounds was carried out in 1989 , along with the reconstruction of Midgham Bridge . Restoration of the turf @-@ sided Monkey Marsh Lock proved difficult because of its status as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , and the consequent need to protect the historic site while improving safety . 
 The stretch between Reading and Newbury was completed on 17 July 1990 ; at a ceremony held at Monkey Marsh Lock several boats competed to be the first craft through . Concerns about the adequacy of the water supply still remained when Queen Elizabeth II formally reopened the canal on 8 August 1990 . The Queen was able to travel on the Trust 's boat Rose of Hungerford through locks 44 and 43 on the Caen Hill flight , breaking a ceremonial tape between them . The shortage of water was addressed in 1996 by the installation of new back pumps at the flight of 29 locks at Caen Hill in Devizes , at a cost of £ 1 million . The pumps raise water 235 feet ( 72 m ) at a rate of 300 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 l ; 360 @,@ 000 US gal ) per hour ( 380 litres per second ) . In October 1996 , the Kennet & Avon Canal Partnership attracted the largest single National Lottery grant awarded by the Heritage Lottery Fund , £ 25 million towards a £ 29 million project , to complete the restoration and to make it operational , sustainable and accessible for the enjoyment of future generations . The work funded included complete rebuilding of Foxhangers Lock and bridge at Caen Hill , replacement of lock gates at Seend and Crofton , channel lining at Claverton , embankment repairs at <unk> , improvements at Claverton pumping station and dredging at various sites . The restoration 's completion was celebrated in May 2003 by a visit from HRH Prince Charles , but upgrading and maintenance continues . Between 2002 and 2004 the Dundas Aqueduct , which had been relined with polythene and concrete in 1984 without disturbing a colony of bats living under the aqueduct , was further restored by the replacement of engineering bricks used by the Great Western Railway with Bath Stone to match the original work . 
 In 2011 the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs designated the canal a national " <unk> " as defined by the Transport Act 1968 . The listing imposes a legal requirement on British Waterways to maintain the canal to a standard that ensures cruising craft can safely navigate the entire length of the waterway . In November 2011 the navigation between Bath and Bristol was closed because of safety concerns about Victoria Bridge , but traffic now continues as does remedial work to the bridge . Repairs are expected to finish in April 2014 . 
 = = Route = = 
 = = = Bristol to Bath = = = 
 The River Avon was navigable from Bristol to Bath during the early years of the 13th century , until the construction of mills on the river forced its closure . The modern Avon is navigable from its mouth at Avonmouth , through the Floating Harbour in Bristol , as far as Pulteney Weir in the centre of Bath and just beyond the start of the canal . Beyond Pultney Weir the Avon is still navigable as far as the weir and site of the old " flash lock " at Bathampton but the lock at Pultney has been replaced only with a small boat slide for dinghies and canoes . The stretch from Bristol to Bath is made navigable by the use of locks and weirs at Hanham , Keynsham , Swineford , Saltford , Kelston and Weston , which together overcome a rise of 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) within 12 miles ( 19 km ) . Lock number one on the Kennet and Avon Canal is Hanham Lock , first opened as part of the Avon Navigation in 1727 . It is the first lock east of Netham , the upstream limit of the Floating Harbour , beyond the suburbs of the city of Bristol . A colliery wharf was sited just west of the lock , but the nearby coal mines closed in the 19th century . The river below Hanham Lock is considered to be tidal , as high tides often pass over the weir at Netham . Some spring tides pass over the weir at Hanham , making the river tidal up to Keynsham Lock . Heading east , the river passes the Somerdale Factory , on its southern bank , which was a chocolate production factory for Cadbury plc – originally built by the Fry family in the 1920s and ' 30s . On the northern bank is Cleeve Wood , the primary scientific importance of which lies in its particularly large population of Bath Asparagus ( <unk> <unk> ) . A public house has been built on the island between Keynsham Lock and the weir . The weir side of the island is also the mouth of the River Chew . 
 The river then passes through Avon Valley Country Park and past Stidham Farm , another SSSI that contains Pleistocene terrace @-@ gravels of the river . A depth of at least 7 feet ( 2 m ) of sandy gravels are recorded , consisting mainly of limestone clasts , but also with Millstone Grit , Pennant Sandstone , flint , and chert clasts . The river passes under the old railway line that now forms the Avon Valley Railway , a three @-@ mile @-@ long heritage railway , before reaching Swineford Lock . Here , between 1709 and 1859 , there was an active brass and copper industry served by the river , which also provided water power for the cloth industry . The remains of Kelston Brass Mill , which was working until 1925 , are next to Saltford Lock . The lock was opened in 1727 but destroyed by rival coal dealers in 1738 , to prevent the river being used for transportation . 
 The Bristol and Bath Railway Path crosses the navigation several times before reaching the suburb of Newbridge on the outskirts of Bath . Here the A4 crosses close to the Newton St Loe SSSI , which is designated an SSSI because it represents the only remaining known exposure of fossiliferous Pleistocene gravels containing the remains of mammoths ( Mammuthus ) and horses ( Equus ) along the river , and has aided the development of a scientific understanding of the history of early glaciation in South West England . The final lock before entering Bath is Weston Lock , opened in 1727 . Its construction created an island between the cut and the river weir , which became known as Dutch Island after the owner of the brass mill established on the riverside in the early 18th century . 
 = = = Bath to Devizes = = = 
 The restored Bath Bottom Lock marks the divergence of the River Avon and the canal . It is situated south of Pulteney Bridge . Just upstream of the Bottom Lock are a side pound and a pumping station that pumps water " upstream " of the locks , to replace that used each time a boat passes through . The next of the six Bath Locks is Bath Deep Lock , numbered 8 / 9 as two locks were combined when the canal was restored in 1976 . The new chamber has a depth of 19 feet 5 inches ( 5 @.@ 92 m ) , making it the UK 's second @-@ deepest canal lock . Just above the Deep Lock is another side pound as a reservoir for refilling the lock , followed by Wash House Lock . After a slightly longer pound is Abbey View Lock , beside which there is another pumping station and then , in quick succession , Pultney Lock and Bath Top Lock . 
 Above the Top Lock the canal passes through Sydney Gardens via two short tunnels and under two cast iron footbridges dating from 1800 . Cleveland Tunnel is 173 feet ( 53 m ) long and runs under Cleveland House , the former headquarters of the Kennet and Avon Canal Company and now a Grade II * listed building . A trap @-@ door in the tunnel roof was used to pass paperwork between clerks above and bargees below . Many of the bridges over the canal are listed buildings . 
 On the eastern outskirts of Bath a toll bridge near the George Inn links Bathampton to <unk> , on the north bank of the canal . When the <unk> Bathampton by @-@ pass was built , the 22 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) Bathampton Meadow was created to provide additional flood relief . The resultant wet meadows and oxbow lake have proved attractive to a number of migrants ; wading birds such as dunlin , ringed and little ringed plover , and green and common sandpiper are frequent visitors in spring and autumn . Sand martin and kingfisher have been seen regularly by the lake , and other migrants have included yellow wagtail , whinchat and hobby . The canal turns south into a valley between Bathampton Wood and Bathford Hill which includes Brown 's Folly a 99 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) biological and geological Site of Special Scientific Interest . 
 In the Avon Valley to the east of Bath the classic geographical example of a valley with all four forms of ground transport is found : road , rail , river , canal . The canal passes the remains of a loading dock , once used for Bath Stone from the quarries on Bathampton Down , which was carried down a straight track to the canal over the Dry Arch rock bridge ( demolished in 1958 to allow double @-@ decker buses to use the A36 ) . Next , the canal passes the waterwheel @-@ powered Claverton Pumping Station , which pumped water from the River Avon into the canal . The building was completed in 1810 and the pump was working by 1813 . 
 On the eastern bank Warleigh Wood and Inwood are ash @-@ wych elm and ash @-@ maple dry woodland , which comes right down to the canal . 
 The canal then crosses over the river and the Wessex Main Line railway at the Dundas Aqueduct , past <unk> Wood , before recrossing the river and railway at the Avoncliff Aqueduct . At the western end of the Dundas Aqueduct it is joined by the remains of the Somerset Coal Canal , a short stretch of which has been restored to create the <unk> Basin . Excavations of the old stop lock showed that it was originally a broad 14 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) lock that at some point was narrowed to 7 feet ( 2 m ) by moving the lock wall . The Somerset Coal Canal was built around 1800 from basins at Paulton and Timsbury , giving access to London from the Somerset Coalfield , which at its peak contained 80 collieries . 
 After the Avoncliff Aqueduct the canal passes through Barton Farm Country Park , past <unk> Quarry and a 14th @-@ century Grade II * listed tithe barn , 180 feet ( 55 m ) long and 30 feet ( 9 m ) wide , on its way into Bradford on Avon . 
 The first sod for the Kennet and Avon Canal was turned in Bradford on Avon in 1794 , and soon there were wharves above and below Bradford Lock . Further east , an aqueduct carries the canal over the River <unk> . There are locks at <unk> and Seend , where water flows into the canal from the <unk> Brook , otherwise known as the Seend Feeder . In the village of <unk> the Wilts & Berks Canal joined the canal , linking the Kennet and Avon to the River Thames at Abingdon . The North Wilts Canal merged with it to become a branch to the Thames and Severn Canal at <unk> near Cricklade . The 52 @-@ mile ( 84 km ) canal was opened in 1810 , but abandoned in 1914 – a fate hastened by the collapse of Stanley Aqueduct in 1901 . In 1977 the Wilts & Berks Canal <unk> Group was formed with the aim of fully restoring the canal to re @-@ connect the Kennet and Avon to the upper reaches of the Thames . 
 Caen Hill Locks , at Devizes , provides an insight into the engineering needed to build and maintain the canal . The main flight of 16 locks , which take 5 – 6 hours to navigate in a boat , is part of a longer series of 29 locks built in three groups : seven at Foxhangers , sixteen at Caen Hill , and six at the town end of the flight . The total rise is 237 feet ( 72 m ) in 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) or a 1 in 30 gradient . The locks were the last part of the 87 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) route of the canal to be completed . The steepness of the terrain meant that there was no space to use the normal arrangement of water pounds between the locks . As a result , the 16 locks utilise unusually large side ponds to store the water needed for their operation . Because a large volume of water is needed a back pump was installed at Foxhangers in 1996 , capable of returning 7 million imperial gallons ( 32 million litres ) of water per day to the top of the flight , equivalent to one <unk> every 11 minutes . While the locks were under construction in the early 19th century a tramroad provided a link between Foxhangers at the bottom of the flight and Devizes at the top , the remains of which can be seen in the towpath arches in the road bridges over the canal . From 1829 until 1843 the flight , which includes the narrowest lock on the canal , Lock 41 , was illuminated by gas lights . 
 At the top of the flight is Devizes Wharf , home to the Kennet & Avon Canal Museum , which has a range of exhibits on the conception , design , usage , and eventual commercial decline of the Kennet and Avon Canal , as well as its subsequent restoration . It is operated by the Kennet and Avon Canal Trust , which has its headquarters and a shop within the Canal Centre . The Wharf Theatre is in an old warehouse on the same site . Devizes wharf is the starting point for the Devizes to Westminster International Canoe Marathon , which has been held since 1948 . 
 = = = Devizes to Newbury = = = 
 Heading east from Devizes the canal passes through the Wiltshire countryside and a series of locks and swing bridges before another flight of locks at Crofton . 
 At <unk> is the remains of a wharf that was the home of boat builders Robbins , Lane and <unk> , which served as the boat building headquarters of the Canal Company . They built many of the boats used on the canals of southern England before closing in about 1950 . Next to the wharf is the Barge Inn , a substantial public house once known as the George Inn . It was roughly half @-@ way along the canal and served as a bakehouse , slaughterhouse and shop for provisions for those living and working on the canal . The building was destroyed by fire in 1858 and rebuilt within six months . It was built just within the parish boundary of Stanton St Bernard to " serve the Honey Street wharf in Alton parish , which refused to allow drinking establishments " . 
 Jones 's Mill is a 29 @-@ acre ( 12 ha ) area of fen vegetation , scrub and woodland lying along the headwaters of the Salisbury Avon northeast of <unk> . It has been designated a biological Site of Special Scientific Interest because it is " the best known example of a calcareous valley mire in Wiltshire " . 
 The four locks at Wootton Rivers mark the end of the climb from the Avon . Between Wootton Top Lock and Crofton is the summit pound of the canal at 450 feet ( 140 m ) above sea level , stretching for about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) and including the 502 @-@ yard ( 459 m ) long Bruce Tunnel . The tunnel is named after the local land owner , Thomas Brudenell @-@ Bruce , 1st Earl of Ailesbury ( 1729 – 1814 ) , who refused to allow a deep cutting through his property and insisted on a tunnel . The tunnel has red brick portals , capped with Bath stone , each with a decorative plaque of Pennant stone . The tunnel was begun in 1806 and finished in 1809 . It is lined with English bond brickwork and has a wide bore to cope with the Newbury barges used on the canal . There is no towpath through the tunnel , so walkers and cyclists must walk across the top of the hill . When canal boats were pulled by horses the boatmen had to haul their barges through the tunnel by hand , pulling on chains that ran along the inside walls . 
 The Crofton Locks flight marks the start of the descent from the summit to the Thames ; the nine locks have a total rise / fall of 61 feet ( 19 m ) . When the canal was built there were no reliable water sources available to fill the summit by normal gravitational means . A number of usable springs were found adjacent to the canal route about one mile ( 2 km ) east of the summit pound , and about 40 feet ( 12 m ) below it , and arrangements were made for them to feed the pound below lock 60 at Crofton . Some years later the Wilton Water reservoir was created to enhance the supply to this pound using the springs and the River Dun . 
 Water is pumped to the summit at the western end of the locks , from Wilton Water , by the restored Crofton Pumping Station . The original steam @-@ powered pumping station is preserved and contains one of the oldest operational Watt @-@ style beam engines in the world , dating from 1812 . The steam engines still pump water on selected weekends , but for day @-@ to @-@ day operation electric pumps are used , automatically controlled by the water level in the summit pound . 
 Near Crofton are Savernake Forest and the remains of a railway bridge that carried the Midland and South Western Junction Railway over the canal . Mill Bridge at Great Bedwyn is unusual in being a skew arch ; on its completion in 1796 it was the first of its kind . From there to Hungerford the canal follows the valley of the River Dun through Freeman 's Marsh , which consists of unimproved meadows , marsh and reedbed . It is an important site for overwintering , migratory and breeding birds , and supports many varieties of flora scarce in Southern England . It was cited by English Nature in 1986 , and forms part of the North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . There are plans to construct a marina and hotel complex adjacent to the site , but the potential environmental impacts ( particularly to water voles ) of such a development on Freeman 's Marsh have led to local opposition . To the north of the canal are seven separate small areas , four in the Kennet Valley and three in the Lambourn Valley , which make up the Kennet and Lambourn Floodplain SSSI . Occupying a total of 57 acres ( 23 ha ) , it supports particularly large populations of <unk> 's whorl snail . 
 There are several locks and bridges in Hungerford , including one which carries the A338 . Hungerford Marsh Lock is unique on the Kennet and Avon Canal in that it has a swing bridge directly over the centre of the lock that must be opened before the lock may be used . In the area around the lock , called Hungerford Marsh Nature Reserve , more than 120 bird species have been recorded . 
 Between <unk> Lock and Newbury , passing to the north of <unk> Marshall , the canal is very close to the River Kennet , which flows into the canal via several channels . The canal passes through an area known as the Kennet Valley <unk> , the largest remaining fragments of damp , ash @-@ alder woodland in the River Kennet floodplain . The SSSI includes two woods – the Wilderness and part of <unk> 's Plantation – which are important because they support a very great diversity of plants associated with this woodland type , dominated by alder ( Alnus glutinosa ) ; though ash ( Fraxinus excelsior ) is abundant in places and there is occasional oak ( Quercus robur ) and wych elm ( Ulmus glabra ) . In addition to the wide range of higher plants the woods support a diverse bryophyte flora including the uncommon epiphytes Radula <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> affine . Nearby is Irish Hill Copse . This site of coppiced ancient woodland includes an extensive area of calcareous ash / wych elm coppice on the hill sides , merging into wet ash / maple and acid oak / ash / hazel woodland with aspen , on the higher parts of the site . The lower slopes are dominated by dog 's mercury ( Mercurialis perennis ) , with abundant herb paris ( Paris <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Solomon 's seal ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> and early purple orchids ( <unk> ovata ) and Orchis mascula and , locally , wild daffodil ( Narcissus pseudonarcissus ) . 
 A wooden bridge was built close to Newbury Lock in 1726 , replaced in stone between 1769 and 1772 by James Clarke , and now known as the Town Bridge or Water Bridge . As there is no tow path , a line to haul the barge had to be floated under the bridge and then re @-@ attached to the horse where the tow path resumed . 
 = = = Newbury to Reading = = = 
 The River Kennet is navigable from Newbury downstream to the confluence with the River Thames at Kennet Mouth , in Reading . 
 The stretch from Newbury to High Bridge in Reading is an improved river navigation known as the Kennet Navigation , opened in 1723 . Throughout this navigation stretches of natural riverbed alternate with 11 miles ( 18 km ) of artificial lock cuts and a series of locks that overcome a fall of 130 feet ( 40 m ) . 
 East of Newbury town centre the Kennet passes through the Thatcham Reed Beds a 169 acres ( 68 ha ) Site of Special Scientific Interest , nationally important for its extensive reedbed , and species @-@ rich alder woodland and fen habitats . The latter supports <unk> 's whorl snail ( Vertigo <unk> ) , which is of national and European importance . A large assemblage of breeding birds including nationally rare species such as Cetti 's warbler ( <unk> <unk> ) make use of the reedbed , fen and open water habitats found at Thatcham Reed Beds . Thatcham 's network of gravel pits , reed bed , woodland , hedges and grassland is rich in wildlife and has been made into The Nature Discovery Centre by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . 
 Monkey Marsh Lock at Thatcham is one of only two remaining working examples of turf @-@ sided locks on the canal today . It is listed as a Scheduled Ancient Monument by English Heritage . 
 Below <unk> Lock in Thatcham the river leaves behind the built @-@ up area of Newbury and runs in generally rural surroundings . It passes through the Woolhampton Reed Bed , another SSSI which consists of dense reed bed with smaller areas of tall fen vegetation and carr woodland . It is notable for the diversity of insects it supports and its nesting passerine bird populations , which include several uncommon species such as reed warbler ( Acrocephalus <unk> ) , a species that in Britain nests almost exclusively in this habitat . 
 Aldermaston Gravel Pits consist of mature flooded gravel workings surrounded by dense fringing vegetation , trees and scrub , affording a variety of habitats for breeding birds and a refuge for wildfowl . The irregular shoreline with islands , promontories , sheltered eutrophic pools and narrow lagoons , provides undisturbed habitat for many water birds , including surface @-@ feeding ducks such as teal ( Anas crecca ) and shoveler ( Anas clypeata ) . The surrounding marsh and scrub are important for numerous birds including nine breeding species of warblers , water rails ( Rallus aquaticus ) , kingfishers ( <unk> <unk> ) and an important breeding colony of nightingales ( Luscinia <unk> ) . In 2002 English Nature bought Aldermaston Gravel Pits from the mineral extraction company <unk> and it is managed as a nature reserve by the Berkshire , Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire Wildlife Trust . The River Kennet itself , from near its sources west of Marlborough down to Woolhampton , has been designated as a SSSI primarily because it has an extensive range of rare plants and animals that are unique to chalk watercourses . 
 The village of Woolhampton and the canal settlement of Aldermaston Wharf are the only significant settlements until the river enters the built @-@ up area of Reading at Sheffield Lock in <unk> . Even after this , the river is isolated from Reading 's suburbs by a wide floodplain surrounding the river . In this stretch is Garston Lock , the other turf @-@ sided lock on the navigation . 
 Shortly after passing Fobney Lock and the associated water treatment works , the Kennet flood plain narrows and the river enters a narrow steep @-@ sided gap in the hills forming the southern flank of the Thames flood plain . At County Lock the river enters the centre of Reading , where it formerly flowed through the centre of a large brewery . This narrow and twisting stretch of the river became known as Brewery Gut . Because of poor visibility and the difficulty of boats passing in this stretch , traffic has long been controlled by a set of maritime traffic lights . Today the Brewery Gut is a major feature of Reading 's The Oracle shopping centre . 
 Immediately after The Oracle the river flows under the arched High Bridge , which forms a historical and administrative divide on the river . The last mile of the River Kennet in Reading below the bridge has been navigable since at least the 13th century . Because there is no wide floodplain , wharves could be built during the Middle Ages that allowed Reading to establish itself as a river port . Originally this short stretch of river , which includes Blake 's Lock , was under the control of Reading Abbey , but today it is administered by the Environment Agency as if it were part of the River Thames . The Horseshoe Bridge at Kennet Mouth was built as a railway bridge in 1839 , and the timber @-@ clad iron @-@ truss accommodation bridge was added in 1892 . 
 = = Canal today = = 
 The canal today is a heritage tourism destination . Boating , with narrowboats and cruisers , is a popular tourist attraction particularly in the summer months . It is a favourite haunt of several famous canal enthusiasts including canal boat veterans and original K & A restoration supporters , Prunella Scales and Timothy West . Privately owned craft and hire boats from the range of marinas are much in evidence , and there are numerous canoe clubs along its length . The annual Devizes to Westminster International Canoe Marathon starts from Devizes Wharf , the site of the Kennet & Avon Canal Museum , at first light on Good Friday each year and the competitors have to negotiate 75 locks in the 125 @-@ mile ( 201 km ) route between Devizes and the finish at Westminster . The winning time is usually around 17 ½ hours . 
 Cycling is permitted along the canal towpath except for a 656 yards ( 600 m ) section near Woolhampton . Some sections of the canal towpath have been improved and widened to make them more suitable for cyclists and disabled users . Under a partnership arrangement involving British Waterways , Sustrans , and the riparian local authorities , two main sections of the canal have been improved , and , with a few short diversions , run from Reading to Marsh Benham and from Devizes to Bath as part of the National Cycle Network ( <unk> ) Route 4 . Fishing for bream , tench , roach , rudd , perch , gudgeon , pike and carp is permitted throughout the year from the towpath of the canal , but almost its whole length is leased to angling associations or fishing clubs . There are a variety of riverside public houses , shops and tea rooms . The Kennet and Avon Canal Trust operates shops and tearooms at Aldermaston Lock , Newbury Wharf , Crofton Pumping Station , Devizes , and Bradford on Avon . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 The canal and its environs are important for wildlife conservation . There are several Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , which exhibit great biodiversity . Key sites that are home to several rare species include the Aldermaston Gravel Pits , Woolhampton , Thatcham Reed Beds , and Freeman 's Marsh , Hungerford . There are also many non @-@ statutory nature reserves along the canal . More than 100 different species of bird have been recorded in surveys over the length of the canal , of which 38 could be classified as specialist waterway birds , including grey heron ( Ardea cinerea ) , reed bunting ( Emberiza schoeniclus ) and common kingfisher ( Alcedo <unk> ) . Fourteen species have been confirmed as breeding including sand martins ( Riparia riparia ) , which nest in drain @-@ pipes in the brick walls of the canal in the centre of Reading . Wilton Water by Crofton Locks and the Kennet Valley gravel pits provide habitats for breeding and wintering waterfowl . Several species of Odonata ( dragonflies and damselflies ) and other invertebrates have also been recorded . Common reed ( Phragmites australis ) is among the plant species growing along the edges of the canal . Measures to preserve and create water vole ( Arvicola amphibius or A. <unk> ) habitat have had considerable impact on the restoration of the canal , and new " vole @-@ friendly " techniques of bank protection have been developed . 
 = Evolution of Worcestershire county boundaries since 1844 = 
 The boundaries of Worcestershire , England have been fluid for over 150 years since the first major changes in 1844 . There were many detached parts of Worcestershire in the surrounding counties , and conversely there were islands of other counties within Worcestershire . The 1844 Counties ( Detached Parts ) Act began the processing of eliminating these , but the process was not completed until 1966 , when Dudley was absorbed into Staffordshire . 
 The expansion of Birmingham and the Black Country during and after the Industrial Revolution also altered the county map considerably . Local government commissions were set up to recommend changes to the local government structures , and as early as 1945 recommendations were made to merge Worcestershire with Herefordshire . Eventually in 1974 , a form of this recommendation was carried out , most of Worcestershire was combined with Herefordshire to form a new county named Hereford & Worcester , while the northern Black Country towns and villages of Worcestershire , along with adjoining areas of Staffordshire and Warwickshire , formed the new county of West Midlands . 
 Hereford & Worcester was re @-@ divided into the separate counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire in 1998 . Since that time Worcestershire 's boundaries have not changed . Redditch opted to join the West Midlands Combined Authority as an associate ' non @-@ constituent ' member in October 2015 , although this will not affect the borough 's status within Worcestershire . 
 = = Boundaries before 1844 = = 
 Worcestershire 's boundaries were relatively stable before the Victorian era , although some parishes or Manors changed hands with neighbouring counties , usually as ' gifts ' by the monarchy , church or through conquest . In 1844 ; the administration of Worcestershire was carried out by the Courts of Quarter Sessions , who were responsible for law and order , civil jurisdiction and certain administrative functions in the county . These roles included the licensing of alehouses , police , weights and measures , construction / maintenance of highways and bridges , poor law disputes and setting taxes . The county was then divided into five hundreds ( a county subdivision ) , four separate boroughs for the larger towns ( Bewdley , Kidderminster , Droitwich , and Evesham ) , and Worcester itself , which was a county corporate . Worcester was autonomous from Worcestershire and the boroughs had a certain degree of autonomy within the hundreds . 
 Worcestershire 's remaining hundreds prior to the reforms were <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Pershore . 
 The main township part of St. John in <unk> parish was incorporated into the City of Worcester in 1837 . 
 The fractured layout of the hundreds was at best confusing . Most of the hundreds were split into two or even three divisions in differing parts of the county . As the above table and Fig 1 shows , some of these parishes were islands surrounded by other hundreds . Meanwhile , some of Worcestershire 's parishes existed in other counties jurisdictions , known as enclaves , exclaves , " outliers " or simply " islands " . There were also parishes that stretched over the county boundary as part of their contiguous area ; Old Swinford parish included Amblecote from Staffordshire for instance . 
 = = = <unk> and enclaves = = = 
 Worcestershire had an unusually large number of exclaves ( see Fig 1 ) , which were cut off from the main county and completely surrounded by the nearby counties of Warwickshire , Staffordshire , Gloucestershire , Herefordshire , Shropshire ( Detached ) and Oxfordshire . This relationship with neighbouring counties mirrored the confusing and fragmented layout of parishes within Worcestershire 's own hundreds ( See images and table below ) . The most notable islands were Dudley , <unk> , Blockley and the area around Shipston @-@ on @-@ Stour . Herefordshire , Staffordshire , Warwickshire and Shropshire had their own exclaves within the main part of Worcestershire at Rochford , Broome , Clent , Tardebigge ( <unk> and Cobley ) and Halesowen respectively . Tardebigge 's history outside the county is even more colourful , changing hands from Worcestershire to Staffordshire and Warwickshire , before returning to Worcestershire at differing times over the centuries . The southern boundary of the county was also complex , with parish boundaries penetrating deep into Gloucestershire and vice versa . 
 The exclaves and enclaves of Worcestershire 
 = = Counties ( Detached Parts ) Act 1844 = = 
 The Counties ( Detached Parts ) Act 1844 was an Act of Parliament which abolished many of the exclaves of counties in England and Wales . The precursor to this legislation was the Reform Act 1832 and Parliamentary Boundaries Act 1832 , which redefined the boundaries for members of parliament . These acts changed the status of many exclaves and enclaves , starting the process of incorporating these ' outliers ' into their surrounding county . This Act of Parliament was designed to eradicate the issue of " islands " or " exclaves " , but numerous exclaves remained part of Worcestershire until the enactment of the Provisional Order Confirmation ( Gloucestershire , Warwickshire and Worcestershire ) Act 1931 . Dudley was Worcestershire 's final exclave ; it was transferred to Staffordshire in 1966 by the West Midlands Order 1965 . 
 = = = Warley Wigorn , Cradley and Lutley = = = 
 Halesowen parish became a detached part of Shropshire when it was gifted to the Earl of Shrewsbury in the late 11th century ; lying between Worcestershire 's northern border and Staffordshire 's southern border . Some small islands within Halesowen were excluded from the gift : Warley Wigorn , which was retained by the Barony of Dudley ( and which consisted of over a dozen disconnected fragments of land ) ; the manor of Cradley ; and Lutley . All three became detached parts of Worcestershire , isolated within Halesowen . Halesowen was returned to Worcestershire in 1844 , ending the detached status of these three islands . Forty years later , Warley Wigorn and the neighbouring parish of " Warley Salop " , which had been in the Shropshire part of Halesowen , joined to become a new parish , Warley . 
 = = = Civil Parishes = = = 
 Historically ; the division into ancient parishes was linked to the manorial system , with parishes and manors often sharing the same boundaries . However the Poor Law Amendment Act 1866 declared a divergence between the historic ecclesiastical parish and administrative functions within the locality , thus creating civil parishes . These administrative units formed the bottom @-@ tier of local government within England and were established from 1866 . 
 = = = Political Reform = = = 
 By the 1880s there was increasing pressure to reform the structure of English counties and the question of county government had become a major political issue . Both the Liberal and Conservative party manifestos for the 1886 general election contained promises to introduce elected local authorities . The Local Government ( Boundaries ) Act 1887 received Royal Assent in September 1887 and appointed Boundary Commissioners to review the existing county boundaries , except for the ' Counties Corporate ' . Worcestershire would have witnessed the formation of a county administration and a loss of territory to Birmingham . The Act also legislated for Dudley to unite with the rest of the county , although this would be achieved through a transfer of territory from Staffordshire . This Act was repealed in favour of the alternative Local Government Act 1888 . 
 = = 1888 – 1958 = = 
 Worcestershire County Council or the administrative county of Worcestershire came into existence following the Local Government Act 1888 and was a level of subnational division of England used for the purposes of local government from 1889 . This new structure replaced many of the administrative functions carried out by the quarter sessions of Worcestershire . The administrative county covered the historic shire of Worcestershire , except for two newly designated county boroughs at Dudley and Worcester . A ' county borough ' was a ' single tier ' authority and regarded within the Local Government Act 1888 as independent of county council jurisdiction or an " administrative county of itself " . This was due to the size of the general population or historic status as ' Counties Corporate ' . The Act also ensured that Worcestershire 's boundaries for what was classified as " non @-@ administrative purposes " would match that of the administrative county ( including the county boroughs in most cases ) . The non @-@ administrative purposes were stated to be " sheriff , lieutenant ( custos rotulorum ) , justices , militia , coroner , or other " . Thus resembling the functions of modern ceremonial counties . 
 = = = Local Government Act 1894 = = = 
 The hundreds were replaced by a new district council formation of either urban or rural districts following implementation of the Local Government Act 1894 . These new ' districts ' were ' second @-@ tier ' administrative units under county council jurisdiction , but did not form part of a county borough which were ' single tier ' authorities . The Act did not legislate the abolition of the hundreds , but their remaining powers were given to the new district councils . The district council boundaries were also self @-@ contained in one administrative county as per the legislation and therefore , unlike some of their predecessors , did not stray over the external shire boundaries . For example , the former Poor Law Union of Alcester in Warwickshire included Abbots Morton , <unk> , <unk> and Oldberrow within its area until the 1894 changes . The Act also introduced structural changes to civil parishes , abolishing vestries and established elected civil parish councils in all rural parishes with more than 300 electors . These were grouped into their rural districts . Boundaries were altered to avoid parishes being split between counties . 
 = = = Birmingham , Oldberrow , Upper Arley and Edvin Loach ( 1891 – 1911 ) = = = 
 Within a short time after the 1888 Act , Worcestershire 's northern external boundaries began to alter ( See Fig 3 ) . The district of Balsall Heath , which had originally constituted the most northerly part of the Parish of King 's Norton , was the first area of the county to be added to the newly designated City of Birmingham on 1 October 1891 . This was followed by the small island of Edvin Loach near <unk> , which was transferred to Herefordshire in 1893 . Two years following the loss of Edvin Loach , the county gained the parish of Upper Arley , which was a Staffordshire parish nearly surrounded by Worcestershire and Shropshire ( See Fig 2 ) . Oldberrow parish , which was situated in the north east Worcestershire border area was transferred to Warwickshire County Council jurisdiction during 1896 . 
 The continuous expansion of Birmingham city has been a large contributory factor to Worcestershire 's fluid boundary changes and associated housing issues . Balsall Heath was followed into Birmingham by Quinton Urban District in November 1909 , and then by both the Rural District of Yardley and the greater part of the Urban District of King 's Norton and Northfield . These latter transfers into the city were as part of the Greater Birmingham Act on 9 November 1911 , which saw a considerable expansion of the city into its surrounding districts . As a consequence of the transfer to Birmingham ; these areas ( and Balsall Heath ) were regarded as part of Warwickshire , though Birmingham 's status as a ' county borough ' ensured these areas were not administered by Warwickshire County Council . 
 = = = Expansion of Dudley and Smethwick ( 1926 – 1928 ) = = = 
 The compact size of Dudley County Borough combined with an increasing population , the high cost of reclaiming derelict land and urgent slum clearance contributed to a dire housing and land shortage . This resulted in the council " acquiring land from adjacent local authorities " . At the expense of Staffordshire , Worcestershire grew slightly in 1926 to allow for the construction of the Priory Estate on land which was mostly situated in Sedgley . These boundary changes also saw the purchase of the town 's castle and priory ruins by the council , primarily to free up surrounding land for social housing . Several thousand homes ( mostly council owned ) were built between 1929 and 1955 on what became known as the Priory , Wren 's Nest and Old Park Farm estates . 
 A similar housing and land shortage existed in nearby Smethwick County Borough , which also resulted in the authority acquiring land from adjoining council areas . By 1914 ; the urban area of <unk> had already spread over the border of Oldbury Urban District as far as Rathbone Road and Warley Park . A further adjustment of the county boundary took place in 1928 and on this occasion however , Staffordshire gained territory from Worcestershire at Warley Woods ( See Fig 4 ) . This enabled Smethwick to build new housing estates at Londonderry and to the west of Rathbone Road . 
 The housing and land shortage within Smethwick continued after World War II , rendering the council to concentrate primarily on constructing medium @-@ rise <unk> , flats and high @-@ rise tower blocks for social housing needs . 
 = = = Provisional Order Confirmation ( Gloucestershire , Warwickshire and Worcestershire ) Act 1931 = = = 
 The Counties ( Detached parts ) Act 1844 was originally designed to eradicate exclaves or ' islands ' and amalgamate the area with the surrounding county ; Worcestershire however , still possessed many ' outliers ' to the south east . This was before enactment of the Provisional Order Confirmation ( Gloucestershire , Warwickshire and Worcestershire ) Act 1931 which nearly completed the task of amalgamating Worcestershire 's islands into their surrounding county , except for Dudley . This act transferred Blockley , Daylesford and <unk> to Gloucestershire , whilst Warwickshire gained <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The whole of Shipston @-@ on @-@ Stour Rural District was also merged into Warwickshire and subsequently amalgamated with <unk> Rural District . 
 The outliers were not the only boundary realignments as part of the Act . The south western tip of Worcestershire at Redmarley D 'Abitot and Staunton was transferred to Gloucestershire , whilst the county gained the parish of <unk> from Alcester Rural District in Warwickshire ( See Fig 5 ) , which was added to the expanding Redditch Urban District 
 = = = Local Government Boundary Commission ( 1945 – 1949 ) = = = 
 The Local Government Boundary Commission proposed radical changes to the local government structures during 1948 . The plans included merging Worcestershire with Herefordshire to form a new administrative unit , except Dudley and Oldbury which would become part of a new " Stafford South " county . Worcester and Dudley would remain as county boroughs , however some services would be carried out by the respective county council . While the commission 's proposals were abandoned , revised proposals for a combined Herefordshire & South Worcestershire county were to surface twenty years later . 
 = = Local Government Act 1958 = = 
 Over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries , the Birmingham and Black Country urban areas were coalescing into a single extensive conurbation spanning the borders of three counties : Warwickshire , Staffordshire and Worcestershire . Other similar urban areas in England , such as Lancashire , Tyneside , London and within Yorkshire West Riding , had grown in size since the Industrial Revolution . The expansion of these conurbations saw economic and physical integration with neighbouring towns and communities . This process became more prominent due to growing housing issues , extensive bombing during World War II , slum clearance , and continuing migration into urban areas . The Black Country contained a combination of county boroughs , urban districts , municipal boroughs and county councils ( See Fig 6 ) taking responsibility for services , which resulted in a fragmented local government infrastructure . The Local Government Act 1958 appointed a Local Government Commission to review administrative structures and boundaries in England outside London . The Act designated a West Midlands Special Review Area , whose recommendations would ultimately form the West Midlands Order 1965 legislation . A second report known as the West Midlands General Review looked into the administrative authorities within the wider region , including the remainder of Worcestershire . 
 = = = West Midlands Special Review Area = = = 
 The commission made its report in July 1961 . It recommended that the Black Country area be administered by large county boroughs , and that the remaining urban districts or municipal boroughs be merged into these authorities . The original county council 's responsibility for services within the majority of the conurbation were curtailed and association with the historic shire was for ceremonial purposes only . The West Midlands Special Review Area included Dudley , Oldbury , Stourbridge and Halesowen ( as per Fig . 6 ) . The latter two council areas were not incorporated into a county borough , as part of the eventual West Midlands Order 1965 . Halesowen was proposed to be included within an enlarged Smethwick County Borough , but a successful campaign entitled " Hands off Halesowen " orchestrated by a non @-@ partisan group called the " Halesowen Independence Committee " helped stop the plans . 
 Meanwhile , the second report into the West Midland General Review area was also delivered in July 1961 and a proposal for Worcester to lose its county borough status was not implemented . 
 = = = West Midlands Order 1965 = = = 
 In April 1966 , Dudley expanded beyond its historical boundaries and took in the surrounding Staffordshire districts of Sedgley , Brierley Hill , <unk> and part of Amblecote . The West Midlands Order 1965 redefined its status and the Dudley County Borough became part of Staffordshire . Worcestershire County Council retained Halesowen and Stourbridge , but ceded Oldbury to an enlarged Smethwick County Borough which was renamed Warley County Borough . This enlarged county borough would be regarded as part of Worcestershire for " non @-@ administrative purposes " , but not under county council jurisdiction ( see Fig 7 ) . Warley was an amalgamation of Oldbury Urban District , Rowley Regis Urban District , and Smethwick as well as the Oakham area of Dudley and <unk> area of Tipton . Subsequent associated legislation established the West Midlands Constabulary , which policed the area , and the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive . 
 = = = Amblecote and Redditch New Town = = = 
 During these reorganisations , the territory of the county council grew only where Stourbridge took in the majority of Amblecote Urban District from Staffordshire ( See Fig 6 ) and the designation of Redditch in April 1964 as a " New town " . Historically , Redditch lies on the county boundary , so any expansion of the newly designated town would either fall under the Green Belt to the north , or the surrounding area of Warwickshire at <unk> . Therefore , the boundary between the two counties was realigned in favour of Worcestershire , as a consequence of the Warwickshire and Worcestershire ( Boundaries ) Order 1969 legislation ( Fig 7 ) . The Redditch New Town designation coincided with a programme of considerable social housing development , mainly due to enactment of the Town Development Act 1952 . Numerous housing developments took place across the county , especially in Droitwich , Worcester and near to the Birmingham boundary at Frankley , <unk> , <unk> , Rednal , Rubery and Walkers Heath . The majority of these developments were designed to help alleviate the housing and land shortages within Birmingham 's boundaries . 
 = = = Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report ( 1966 – 1969 ) = = = 
 The Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report ( Cmnd . <unk> ) recommended the abolition of all the existing county , county borough , borough , urban district and rural district councils and replacement with new authorities . These new unitary ( i.e. single tier ) authorities were largely based on major towns , which acted as regional employment , commercial , social and recreational centres and took into account local transport infrastructure and travel patterns . 
 The proposals for the county included a considerable loss of territory to a proposed " West Midlands Metropolitan Area " , as per Fig 8 . Stourbridge was including in the planned Metropolitan District of Dudley , whilst West Bromwich @-@ Warley would have included Halesowen , and a district known as North Worcestershire was planned to incorporate Bewdley , Bromsgrove , Kidderminster , Redditch and Stourport @-@ on @-@ Severn . The remaining part of central and southern Worcestershire ( including Worcester ) , would be amalgamated with Herefordshire to form a new county . All of these areas would exist under an overarching " West Midlands Provincial Council " covering the entire region in a devolved capacity . The Conservative party won the 1970 general election and committed to a two @-@ tier system in local government . In 1971 a further White Paper entitled Local Government in England : Government Proposals for Reorganisation ( Cmnd 4584 ) , which ultimately led to the 1974 re @-@ organisation saw a great deal of Redcliffe @-@ Maud 's recommendations discontinued . 
 = = Halesowen , Stourbridge and <unk> ( 1971 – 1974 ) = = 
 The Local Government in England : Government Proposals for Reorganisation ( Cmnd 4584 ) 1971 White Paper and Bill , which ultimately became the Local Government Act 1972 , did not go as far as the Redcliffe – Maud Report . Plans for the amalgamation of Herefordshire , Worcester and the majority of Worcestershire remained , except for Halesowen , Stourbridge and Warley . These three areas would join a proposed metropolitan county along with Dudley . The West Midlands Order 1965 and associated legislation ( i.e. the formation of the West Midlands Constabulary ) instigated a large degree of local government integration within the West Midlands conurbation , however this was carried out under a county borough system in place since 1889 . 
 Stourbridge would be incorporated into an enlarged Dudley administrative unit , plus Halesowen would join Warley and West Bromwich . During the debates associated with the Local Government Bill , Terry Davis MP ( Bromsgrove ) tabled Amendment Numbers 73 , 74 and 100 which proposed maintaining Worcestershire and Herefordshire as separate counties . He also stated that the bill " is not welcomed in Halesowen or Stourbridge or the county as a whole " and " The situation has therefore been reluctantly accepted in Worcestershire , and this group of amendments would not change this part of the Bill . " He said that whilst agreement was in place for Worcester to be " included in the County of Worcestershire " , the merger with Herefordshire was " intensely unpopular " , especially from within the neighbouring county . Dr. John Gilbert MP ( Dudley ) said in the amendment debate regarding the future of Seisdon Rural District that whilst Dudley has " no imperialist ambitions . ... We have no wish to engorge Stourbridge or Halesowen . Although the merger is going through smoothly , as a result of the exercise of tact and co @-@ operation on the part of all the local authorities and between and within all the political parties ... " . These amendments were defeated in the subsequent vote paving the way for the future " Hereford & Worcester " , as were with Amendment Numbers 294 and 295 which would have consented to the transfer of <unk> Parish from Seisdon in Staffordshire to the new combined Herefordshire & Worcestershire authority . In the accompanying debates in the House of Lords , Worcestershire Peer Lord Sandys said that Stourbridge and Halesowen 's respective borough council 's " duly elected , are wholly opposed to being joined to the conurbation " . He continued by stating that " a reason for the support of the county council , which is wholeheartedly for the boroughs of Halesowen and Stourbridge in their opposition to joining the conurbation , is the question of the Green Belt . " which could become threatened by future development . 
 Originally the combined authority was to be called <unk> and this term was used in the early Local Government Bill debates and statistics . By the time the Bill became law , the county was renamed Hereford and Worcester . 
 = = = County of West Midlands = = = 
 The Local Government Act 1972 legislated for a new metropolitan administrative unit to be known as the County of West Midlands , incorporating the North West Warwickshire , South Staffordshire and North Worcestershire border area . The Act also legislated that the new county would be sub @-@ divided into metropolitan districts , although most districts became metropolitan boroughs after being granted or regranted Royal charters giving them borough status . The West Midlands was to be largely centred on the Birmingham and Black Country county boroughs , but with a boundary roughly matching the conurbation , as per Fig 9 . However the Meriden Gap in Warwickshire was included , enabling Coventry to be incorporated into the new structure . Within this new authority ; Dudley County Borough along with Stourbridge and Halesowen formed Dudley Metropolitan District ( later to become Dudley Metropolitan Borough ) , whilst Warley County Borough merged with West Bromwich to create Sandwell . Most of the rural hinterland proposed by Redcliffe @-@ Maud was discarded ; thus permitting Bewdley , Bromsgrove , Kidderminster , Redditch and Stourport @-@ on @-@ Severn to become part of the new Hereford & Worcester authority . On 1 April 1974 ; ( the day of local government reorganisation ) an article in The Times quoted an unnamed ' Department of the Environment ' official who said " The new county boundaries are solely for the purpose of defining areas of first @-@ level government of the future : They are administrative areas and will not alter the traditional boundaries of counties , nor is it intended that the loyalties of people living in them will change " 
 The West Midlands County Council existed for only a short period before abolition in April 1986 via enactment of the Local Government Act 1985 , which abolished the Metropolitan County Councils and Greater London Council . The individual metropolitan boroughs resumed most services which were provided at county level or through joint bodies such as the West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority . 
 = = Hereford and Worcester ( 1974 – 1998 ) = = 
 Legislation from the Local Government Act 1972 came into force on 1 April 1974 , which saw most of the county amalgamated with Herefordshire and Worcester City to form a single non @-@ metropolitan county of " Hereford and Worcester " . 
 The new county was divided into nine districts : 
 Meanwhile , the Local Government Boundary Commission for England started its periodic structural reviews and looked at all administrative areas on an individual basis . Leominster District Council proposed a boundary change at Burford , near Tenbury Wells to incorporate the area into Hereford & Worcester from Shropshire during 1987 / 1988 . This proposal was rejected by the LGBCE as well as a minor adjustment at Upper Arley . The commission also investigated splitting Hereford & Worcester in 1990 , following submissions by Hereford City Council and the " Herefordshire Action Committee " , although the proposals were rejected at that time . Boundary changes between Hereford & Worcester and Warwickshire at <unk> Green , Pebworth , Long Marston and Studley were also proposed , and some were accepted resulting in minor changes to both counties . In 1993 there were more minor adjustments of the county boundary , this time between Bromsgrove and Dudley Metropolitan Borough near to <unk> and Solihull Metropolitan Borough near Hockley Heath . 
 = = = Review of the West Midlands ( City of Birmingham ) Boundaries with Bromsgrove ( Hereford and Worcester ) = = = 
 The most recent transfer of territory between the West Midlands County and Hereford & Worcester or Worcestershire occurred along sections of the Birmingham and Bromsgrove district boundary . The draft proposals and final report of the <unk> Review of the West Midlands ( City of Birmingham ) Boundaries with Bromsgrove ( Hereford & Worcester ) proposed that Frankley , <unk> Estate , Rednal , Rubery , Walkers Heath and the remainder of Bartley Reservoir transfer to Birmingham , as per Fig 10 . These changes were intended to unify several housing estates built and maintained by Birmingham City Council under the Town Development Act 1952 , but which fell within the Bromsgrove boundary . Frankley was split into two parts with New Frankley and the area around Bartley Reservoir transferred from Bromsgrove to Birmingham in April 1995 . The small village of Frankley remained in Hereford & Worcester and formed a new Civil Parish under the same name . Hopwood 's surrounding areas were transferred from the city to Bromsgrove . Rubery remained within Hereford & Worcester and also Worcestershire after the county was recreated in 1998 , contrary to the LGBCE final proposal . 
 These boundary changes were relatively minor in comparison to previous transfers . 
 = = = Local Government Act 1992 = = = 
 Following the Local Government Act 1992 legislation ; the LGBCE was once again charged with examining all English non @-@ metropolitan counties , but was given authority to recommend proposals that would significantly alter or abolish administrative areas . Accompanying legislation known as the Local Government Changes for England Regulations 1994 also established a new single @-@ tier form of administrative unit known as a ' Unitary authority ' . These new councils would be responsible for all services carried out by non @-@ metropolitan district and county authorities within their area , thus resembling county boroughs . The county of Hereford & Worcester was to be reviewed again , despite an earlier structural review which recommended no change to the county . 
 Various options were put to consultation , including : 
 Other ideas put forward and discounted before the consultation stage included a complete restoration of the pre @-@ 1974 Worcestershire county boundary . This option included Stourbridge and Halesowen , as they were under the jurisdiction of Worcestershire County Council until 1 April 1974 . The LGBCE deemed that this Local Government review did not include metropolitan counties ( except a one @-@ off review of Sefton on Merseyside ) , so there would be no change to the boundaries of Dudley Metropolitan Borough . 
 The Local Government Boundary Commission recommended that Hereford & Worcester should be split into three unitary authorities centred on Herefordshire , North Worcestershire and South Worcestershire . However , Parliament chose the hybrid unitary and two @-@ tier option instead , resulting in the abolition of the county of Hereford & Worcester . 
 = = New Worcestershire ( 1998 to present ) = = 
 Hereford and Worcester County Council ceased to exist on 1 April 1998 and was replaced by the new non @-@ metropolitan and ceremonial county of Worcestershire . The new county regained its historic border with Herefordshire , which became a unitary authority . 
 The former " Hereford & Worcester " districts of Redditch , Worcester , Bromsgrove , Wychavon and Wyre Forest were retained with little or no change . The Leominster and Malvern Hills districts crossed over the historic border , so a new Malvern Hills district was created from the parts of those two districts within the restored Worcestershire <unk> . The external boundaries of the new county are shown in Fig 11 ; they have not altered since the 1998 split . 
 Following the abolition of the county of Hereford & Worcester some cross @-@ boundary organisations and resources remain shared by the two counties . These include waste management , the youth offending service , Hereford & Worcester Fire & Rescue Service and the radio station BBC Hereford & Worcester . Meanwhile , the BBC 's commercial radio counterpart ; Free Radio ( formerly Radio Wyvern ) broadcasts to the two counties and is regarded as a single licence area by the Office of Communications . West Mercia Police is still shared with Herefordshire , Shropshire and Telford & Wrekin . The Hereford & Worcester Ambulance Service was merged into the wider West Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust in 2006 . 
 The West Midlands legally exists to this day as a metropolitan and ceremonial county , with countywide functions such as West Midlands Police , West Midlands Fire Service and the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive ( known as Centro ) . Most of the original metropolitan counties are now combined authorities , which are ' top tier ' statutory bodies resembling the former metropolitan county councils . However ' Non @-@ Metropolitan Authority ' groupings are also becoming involved with the combined authority process . 
 = = = Devolution = = = 
 There has been intense media debate and discussion throughout 2014 and 2015 about possible ' Combined Authorities ' within the West Midlands region , especially following the Scottish Independence Referendum 2014 , the ' Greater Manchester Agreement ' on devolution and the 2015 General Election . Five local authorities within the West Midlands County initially agreed to start the process to form a combined authority , however the official announcement in June 2015 encompassed all seven metropolitan councils . The new body will be known as the West Midlands Combined Authority and aims to be established in June 2016 . Originally the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership , covering Birmingham , Solihull and several district councils in Staffordshire and Worcestershire ( Bromsgrove , Redditch and Wyre Forest ) , discussed setting up a " Supervisory Board " with " a formal governance structure between a Joint Committee and a Combined Authority " . Sir Albert Bore , Birmingham City Council 's leader said that he envisioned a combined authority stretching from Wolverhampton to Coventry and beyond , and from East Staffordshire to Redditch would form the core of a Midlands powerhouse to compete with city regions around the world . 
 The Local Government Chronicle stated that Bromsgrove , Redditch and Wyre Forest have been invited to form part of a possible West Midlands combined authority , because of their membership of the ' Greater Birmingham & Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership ' . So far ; Redditch is the only Worcestershire authority to join the new combined authority as an associate ' non @-@ constituent ' member , whilst Bromsgrove and Wyre Forest opted not to join " at this time " . The present Secretary of State for Business , Innovation and Skills – Sajid Javid MP ( Bromsgrove ) said he welcomed the ambition shown by the new combined authority and will back them in their mission to drive forward the " Midlands Engine " . Previously ; Robin Walker MP ( Worcester ) and Sir Peter <unk> ( former MP for Mid Worcestershire ) , along with Adrian Hardman ( former leader of Worcestershire County Council ) have spoken out against a future ' Birmingham and The Black Country ' combined authority incorporating the county . Councillor Hardman also said that empowering the city regions is essential to any new English devolution settlement , but the great counties of England have an equal role in ensuring the economic success of the UK . The possibility of a Worcestershire combined authority , focusing on four key areas of " transport , infrastructure planning , skills development and land planning " has been mooted by local media and politicians . The ' County Councils Network ' document " County Devolution – Final Report " states that the collective local authorities and the ( Worcestershire ) Local Enterprise Partnership are currently considering options to establish an economic prosperity board , combined authority or similar . The same document mentions the name " World Class Worcestershire Combined Authority " , which provides consistency with present county council branding . 
 = = = A unitary future ? = = = 
 The subsequent local government restructuring in April 2009 , which abolished more two @-@ tier counties ( including Shropshire and Cheshire ) did not affect Worcestershire . The county still maintains a two @-@ tier administrative system as per the Local Government Act 1992 , although Lord Heseltine 's No stone unturned : in pursuit of growth review for the Department of Business , Innovation & Skills suggested that all English local authorities should be unitary or combined authority models similar to the existing structures in Scotland and Wales . As of 2014 , conversations are taking place within the local media about the positives and negatives of a possible unitary council structure within Worcestershire . Possibilities being put forward in these discussions are broadly similar to the Local Government Boundary Commission for England proposals prior to the ' Hereford & Worcester ' abolition . These ideas consist of either two unitary authorities based in North Worcestershire ( Bromsgrove , Redditch , Wyre Forest ) and South Worcestershire ( Malvern Hills , Worcester , Wychavon ) or a single countywide council as per Herefordshire . Already the three district councils in the south of the county have successfully worked together to produce the South Worcestershire Development Plan , which replaced the existing Local Plans of these three partner councils when it was adopted in February 2016 ; it also superseded elements of Worcestershire County Council 's County Structure Plan . There are also joint service provisions between the North Worcestershire districts including building control shared services , economic development and regeneration , water management and the emergency planning and business continuity service . 
 = = = Historic county revival = = = 
 Separately , the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government announced on St. George 's Day 2013 in a symbolic move that England 's historic and traditional counties still exist . They are now recognised by the government , who will now encourage the marking and continued use of such traditional county names by the existing tiers of local government and residents . A follow up announcement in April 2014 put forward an initiative in changing planning regulations , stating that ' traditional county ' names can be placed on <unk> . The same Government department also published an online map comparing the current and historic counties . The main body of the pre @-@ 1889 boundaries appear to be acknowledged , but Worcestershire 's islands including Dudley and Shipston @-@ on @-@ Stour are omitted . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 The table below features official statistics from the United Kingdom Census relating to Worcestershire 's size and population from 1801 onwards . The statistics are compiled across England and Wales on a decennial basis by the Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) . The population of Worcestershire increased over five @-@ fold between 1801 and the 1971 census , reaching a peak of 693 @,@ 253 people . According to the 1971 survey ; Warley County Borough accounted for 163 @,@ 567 people , Worcester with 73 @,@ 456 , whilst the remaining 456 @,@ 230 resided within the administrative county area . However this survey was based on different external boundaries as opposed to the present county . 
 The current population of Worcestershire is estimated at 566 @,@ 200 people , according to the 2011 census . 
 † – No census taken due to World War II 
 ‡ – Statistics for the county of Hereford & Worcester , no individual statistics available for Worcestershire 
 = Noriko Matsueda = 
 Noriko Matsueda ( <unk> <unk> , Matsueda Noriko , born December 18 , 1971 ) is a Japanese former video game composer . She is best known for her work on the Front Mission series , The Bouncer , and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . Matsueda collaborated with fellow composer Takahito Eguchi on several games . Composing music at an early age , she began studying the piano and electronic organ when she was three years old . She graduated from the Tokyo Conservatoire Shobi , where she met Eguchi . 
 She joined Square ( now Square Enix ) in 1994 , where she created music for nine games . Her last credited work was Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's piano arrangement album , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection from 2004 , after which she decided to leave the company alongside Eguchi . She composed mostly jazz music for the scores she worked on . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Born in Tochigi , Japan , Noriko Matsueda began creating music at an early age . She received a scholarship in music at the age of three and went on to study the piano and electronic organ . Matsueda took various composition and performance courses at the Tokyo Conservatoire Shobi , where she also met long @-@ term collaborator Takahito Eguchi . She joined Square in 1994 , where her first assignment was to score the 1995 title Front Mission alongside Yoko Shimomura . She subsequently contributed the track " Boss Battle 1 " to Chrono Trigger , arranged by Nobuo Uematsu . Matsueda 's first solo work was Bahamut Lagoon , which also represented her first collaboration with Eguchi , who arranged and orchestrated " Theme of Bahamut Lagoon ~ Opening " for the bonus disc of its original soundtrack . In 1996 , she created the composition " Tower Block " for the multi @-@ composer game Tobal No. 1 . The following year , she created the soundtrack to Front Mission 2 . 
 In 1999 , Matsueda and Eguchi made their first major collaboration by scoring the role @-@ playing racing game Racing Lagoon , with synthesizer programmer Ryo Yamazaki providing three tracks . Matsueda was responsible for all the music except the battle , opening , and ending themes . They collaborated again on the soundtrack to the PlayStation 2 title The Bouncer in 2000 , whereas the two took a more equal share of the music . A large amount of the compositions produced was not used in the game and there were also many post @-@ production demands . Afterward , Matsueda created 25 pieces of background music for Square 's PlayOnline viewer used for Final Fantasy XI and Tetra Master . 
 She reunited with Eguchi to create the soundtrack to Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 in 2003 , with Matsueda contributing most of the setting themes . Having replaced Final Fantasy 's regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu to create a work entirely different from the predecessor Final Fantasy X , their score has become one of the most criticized soundtracks in the series . However , despite the negative response and a low budget , it was commercially successful . The following year , she worked on Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's international version Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission and provided three arrangements to the Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection album . The Piano Collections album was her last credited work , and she has since left Square Enix along with Eguchi . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Matsueda is noted for her jazzy style , which she often incorporated into the soundtracks she worked on ; she also touched on genres like jazz fusion , lounge , and ambient . For the scores that she collaborated on with Eguchi , she was responsible for most of the jazzy tracks , while Eguchi provided the majority of the electronic music . Matsueda has said that the best qualities of a composer are their curiosity and sensitivity , and that watching many things , listening , touching , and feeling are important factors in composition . When asked why she creates music , Matsueda replied that she feels it is an appropriate way to express herself . 
 She cites George Gershwin , Herbie Hancock , Chick Corea , Igor Stravinsky , and Gustav Mahler as musical influences . When composing music for games , Matsueda draws inspiration from all parts of the game , including the story , the world view , the personality of the characters , the graphics , and the tone of color . She has stated that she makes the music thinking about the goal of the sounds for the game and its total balance . 
 = = Works = = 
 = No Exit ( Miami Vice ) = 
 " ' No Exit " is the seventh episode of the first season of the American police procedural television series Miami Vice . It premiered on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) on November 9 , 1984 . The episode was written by Charles R. <unk> and Maurice Hurley , and directed by David Soul . " No Exit " featured guest appearances by Bruce Willis and Katherine <unk> . 
 Miami Vice focuses on the lives of two undercover Metro @-@ Dade police officers , James " Sonny " Crockett ( Don Johnson ) and Ricardo Tubbs ( Philip Michael Thomas ) . In this episode , the detectives investigate an arms dealer selling military hardware . The dealer 's abuse of his spouse complicates the surveillance . 
 Written under the working title " Three @-@ Eyed Turtle " , the episode has been seen as exploring existentialist themes , including Jean @-@ Paul Sartre 's theory that all relationships are based on a struggle for dominance . The episode features a contemporary pop soundtrack , using Phil Collins ' " I Don 't Care Anymore " and " Stay With Me " by Teddy Pendergrass . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Metro @-@ Dade detectives James " Sonny " Crockett ( Don Johnson ) and Ricardo Tubbs ( Philip Michael Thomas ) , and lieutenant Martin Castillo ( Edward James Olmos ) are undercover to arrest a pair of arms dealers . After a brief shoot @-@ out , the dealers are taken into custody , and during the course of their confessions , reveal their supplier to be a man named Tony Amato . 
 Amato ( Bruce Willis ) is an international arms dealer who the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been tracking , as they believe Amato is planning the sale of FIM @-@ 92 Stinger missiles stolen from a military arms depot . The FBI agrees to allow Metro @-@ Dade to conduct the surveillance as its equipment was in place first . Crockett and Tubbs watch Amato 's abusive relationship with his wife Rita ( Katherine <unk> ) . When Rita attempts to hire a hitman to kill Amato , Crockett intercepts the call and meets with her , arranging her help in their case in return for her safety . She explains that she has tried to leave Amato before , but he hired thugs to rape her divorce lawyer 's wife to scare her into place . 
 Amato 's prospective buyer is intercepted and arrested . The FBI had initially planned to send one of their agents undercover in his place , but Tubbs volunteers for the role , fearing the agent is too inexperienced . Tubbs meets with Amato and his henchmen , who demonstrate one of the Stingers and explain how to take out a civilian airplane with an unarmed missile . Tubbs agrees to purchase all of Amato 's inventory and arranges another meet to make the buy . That night , Crockett , surveilling Amato 's house , sees him beat Rita again , and is unable to intervene . 
 When Amato breaks his telephone in a rage , he finds one of the surveillance devices . Tubbs quickly calls him , claiming to have been bugged as well , and the two arrange to move the buy to that evening . Amato is noticeably on @-@ edge during the meet , and is desperate to unload the missiles . The buy is set to take place at the docks , and the remainder of the Metro @-@ Dade vice squad arrive to complete the bust , taking Amato into custody safely . 
 However , when Amato is due to be arraigned the next morning , a group of federal agents arrive with paperwork offering him immunity from prosecution in exchange for working for them to supply South American anti @-@ Communist groups . Rita arrives to see Amato going free , draws a gun from her handbag , and shoots him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " No Exit " was originally given the working title " Three @-@ Eyed Turtle " , which was changed when an executive at the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) ' s Standards and Practices office realized this was slang for a sexual act . The amended title , " No Exit " , has been seen by critics Stephen Sanders and Aeon <unk> as a reference to Jean @-@ Paul Sartre 's 1944 play No Exit , as the episode features " an early series engagement with existentialism " . The pair have argued that the fractured relationship between Tony and Rita Amato echoes the philosopher 's assertion that all human relationships are defined by a struggle for control and supremacy . 
 " No Exit " was directed by David Soul , whose Starsky and Hutch co @-@ star Paul Michael Glaser had also directed for the series . Writer Maurice Hurley would receive writing credits on a number of other Miami Vice episodes , including " The Dutch Oven " , " Whatever Works " , and " Golden Triangle " . The location used for Amato 's home was the " Pink House " , a nickname for the Spear House in Coral Gables , Florida ; a 1978 building designed by architecture firm <unk> . The location was chosen for use in the episode by executive producer Michael Mann . Guest star Bruce Willis was one of a number of New York stage actors cast in the series , having only appeared in an Off @-@ Broadway performance of Fool for Love before being cast as Tony Amato . 
 As was customary for episodes of Miami Vice episodes , " No Exit " makes use of contemporary pop music in its soundtrack , featuring the songs " Stay With Me " by Teddy Pendergrass and " I Don 't Care Anymore " by Phil Collins . The latter song featured in a scene of Crockett driving at night , echoing the use of Collins ' " In the Air Tonight " in a similar scene in the pilot , " Brother 's Keeper " . The alienation discussed in " I Don 't Care Anymore " has been described as mirroring the violent rift in Amato 's marriage , and also the detachment with which Crockett must approach this aspect of the case . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " No Exit " was first broadcast on NBC on November 9 , 1984 . NBC repeated the episode twice in 1985 , before airing it once more in 1986 . 
 Writing for DVD Talk , Todd Douglass Jr. described " No Exit " as being " definitely one of the highlights " of Miami Vice 's first season . Douglass felt that the episode 's tight focus left it " one of the more entertaining " installments of the series . " No Exit " has been seen as a " turning point " for Miami Vice , finalizing what would become the overall tone of the series . This has been credited to the addition of Edward James Olmos to the cast , and Mann becoming the sole executive producer after the departure of Anthony <unk> . The episode has also been noted as an example of the series ' criticism of the presidency of Ronald Reagan , linking the villain Amato with United States intervention in South America . This critique of the federal government and its handling of foreign intervention would prove to be a recurring element of the series , featuring in the second season episode " Prodigal Son " and the fourth season episode " Baseballs of Death " . 
 Willis ' portrayal of Amato has been described by critic Mark T. Conard as an example of a recurring character archetype in the series , that of a troubled male with a checkered past . Other examples given by Conard are Bruce McGill 's guest role in " Out Where the Buses Don 't Run " and G. Gordon Liddy 's appearance in " Stone 's War " . Conard also identifies the three male protagonists — Crockett , Tubbs and Castillo — among this archetype . 
 = German occupation of Belgium during World War II = 
 The German occupation of Belgium ( French : Occupation <unk> , Dutch : <unk> <unk> ) during World War II began on 28 May 1940 when the Belgian army surrendered to German forces and lasted until Belgium 's liberation by the Western Allies between September 1944 and February 1945 . It was the second time that Germany had occupied Belgium in under thirty years . 
 After the success of the invasion , a military administration was established in Belgium , bringing the territory under the direct rule of the Wehrmacht . Thousands of Belgian soldiers were taken as prisoners of war , and many were not released until 1945 . The German administration juggled competing objectives of maintaining order while extracting material from the territory for the war effort . They were assisted by the Belgian civil service , which believed that limited co @-@ operation with the occupiers would result in the least damage to Belgian interests . Belgian Fascist parties in both Flanders and Wallonia , established before the war , collaborated much more actively with the occupiers ; they helped recruit Belgians for the German army and were given more power themselves toward the end of the occupation . Food and fuel were tightly rationed , and all official news was closely censored . Belgian civilians living near possible targets such as railway junctions were in danger of Allied aerial bombing . 
 From 1942 , the occupation became more repressive . Jews suffered systematic persecution and deportation to concentration camps , as measures were taken against potential political opposition . Despite vigorous protest , the Germans deported Belgian civilians to work in factories in Germany . Meanwhile , the Belgian Resistance , formed in late 1940 , expanded vastly . From 1944 , the SS and Nazi Party gained much greater control in Belgium , particularly after the military government was replaced in July by a Nazi civil administration , the Reichskommissariat Belgien @-@ Nordfrankreich . In September 1944 , Allied forces arrived in Belgium and quickly moved across the country . That December , the territory was incorporated de jure into the Greater German Reich although its collaborationist leaders were already in exile in Germany and German control in the region was virtually non @-@ existent . Belgium was declared fully liberated in February 1945 . In total , 40 @,@ 690 Belgians , over half of them Jews , were killed during the occupation and the country 's pre @-@ war gross domestic product ( GDP ) was reduced by eight percent . 
 = = Background = = 
 Belgium had pursued a policy of neutrality since its independence in 1830 , successfully avoiding becoming a belligerent in the Franco @-@ Prussian War ( 1870 – 71 ) . In World War I , the German Empire invaded Belgium . During the ensuing occupation , the Allies encouraged Belgian workers to resist the occupiers through non @-@ compliance , leading to large @-@ scale reprisals against Belgian civilians by the German army . 
 As political tensions escalated in the years leading to World War II , the Belgian government again announced its intention to remain neutral in the event of war in Europe . The military was reorganised into a defensive force and the country left several international military treaties it had joined in the aftermath of World War I. Construction began of defences in the east of the country . When France and Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939 , Belgium remained strictly neutral while mobilising its reserves . 
 Without warning , the Germans invaded Belgium on 10 May 1940 . During the following 18 Days ' Campaign , the Belgian army was pushed back into a pocket in the north @-@ west of Belgium and surrendered on 28 May . The government fled to France , and later the United Kingdom , establishing an official government in exile under pre @-@ war Prime Minister Hubert Pierlot . They were responsible for forming a small military force made up of Belgian and colonial troops , known as the Free Belgian Forces and which fought as part the Allied forces . 
 = = Administration and governance = = 
 Shortly after the surrender of the Belgian army , the Militärverwaltung in Belgien und Nordfrankreich ( a " Military Administration " covering Belgium and the two French departments of Nord and Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais ) was created by the Germans with Brussels as administrative centre . Germany annexed Eupen @-@ Malmedy , a German @-@ speaking region given to Belgium under the Treaty of Versailles of 1919 . The Military Government was placed under the control of General Alexander von Falkenhausen , an aristocrat and career soldier . Under von Falkenhausen 's command , the German administration had two military units at its disposal : the <unk> ( " Field Gendarmerie " , part of the Wehrmacht ) and the Gestapo ( the " Secret State Police " , part of the SS ) . The section of the Military Government that dealt with civil matters , the <unk> , commanded by Eggert Reeder , was responsible for all economic , social and political matters in the territory . 
 Before leaving the country in 1940 , the Belgian government had installed a panel of senior civil @-@ servants , the so @-@ called " Committee of Secretaries @-@ General " , to administer the territory in the absence of elected ministers . The Germans retained the Committee during the occupation ; it was responsible for implementing demands made by the <unk> . The Committee hoped to stop the Germans becoming involved in the day @-@ to @-@ day administration of the territory , allowing the nation to maintain a degree of autonomy . The Committee also hoped to be able to prevent the implementation of more radical German policies , such as forced labour and deportation . In practice , the Committee merely enabled the Germans to implement their policies more efficiently than the Military Government could have done by force . 
 In July 1944 , the military administration was replaced by a civilian government ( <unk> ) , led by Josef Grohé . The territory was divided into <unk> , considerably increasing the power of the Nazi Party and SS in the territory . By 1944 the Germans were increasingly forced to share power , and day @-@ to @-@ day administration was increasingly delegated to Belgian civil authorities and organisations . 
 = = = Leopold III = = = 
 Leopold III became King of the Belgians in 1934 , following the death of his father in a mountaineering accident . Leopold was one of the key exponents of Belgian political and military neutrality before the war . Under the Belgian Constitution , the King played an important political role and served as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the military , and personally commanded the Belgian army during the 18 Days ' Campaign of May 1940 . 
 On 28 May 1940 , the King surrendered to the Germans alongside his soldiers . This violated the constitution , as it contradicted the orders of his ministers , who wanted him to follow the example of the Dutch Queen Wilhelmina and flee to France or England to rally resistance . His refusal to leave Belgium undermined his political legitimacy in the eyes of many Belgians and was viewed as a sign of his support for the new order . He was denounced by the Belgian Prime Minister , Hubert Pierlot , and declared " incompetent to reign " by the government in exile . 
 Leopold was keen to find an accommodation with Germany in 1940 , hoping that Belgium would remain as a unified and semi @-@ autonomous state within a German @-@ dominated Europe . As part of this plan , in November 1940 , Leopold visited Adolf Hitler , the Führer of Germany , in Berchtesgaden to ask for Belgian prisoners of war to be freed . An agreement was not reached and Leopold returned to Belgium . This fueled the belief that Leopold , who had expressed anti @-@ Semitic views before the war , was collaborating with the Nazis rather than defending his country 's interests . 
 For the rest of the war , Leopold was held under house @-@ arrest in the Palace of Laeken . In 1941 , while still incarcerated , he married Mary Lilian Baels , undermining his popularity with the Belgian public which disliked Baels and considered the marriage to discredit his claim to martyr status . Despite his position , he remained prominent in the occupied territory , and coins and stamps continued to carry his portrait or <unk> . While imprisoned , he sent a letter to Hitler in 1942 credited with saving an estimated 500 @,@ 000 Belgian women and children from forced deportation to munitions factories in Germany . In January 1944 , Leopold was moved to Germany where he remained for the rest of the war . 
 Despite his position , Leopold remained a figurehead for right @-@ wing resistance movements and Allied propaganda portrayed him as a martyr , sharing his country 's fate . Attempts by the government in exile to pursue Leopold to defect to the Allied side were unsuccessful ; Leopold consistently refused to publicly support the Allies or to denounce German actions such as the deportation of Belgian workers . After the war , allegations that Leopold 's surrender had been an act of collaboration provoked a political crisis over whether he could return to the throne ; known as the Royal Question , the crisis ended with Leopold 's abdication in 1951 . 
 = = Life in occupied Belgium = = 
 Living standards in occupied Belgium decreased significantly from pre @-@ war levels . Wages stagnated , while the occupying authorities tripled the amount of money in circulation , leading to rampant inflation . 
 The occupying authorities tightly controlled which newspapers could be published and what news they could print . Newspapers of pro @-@ Nazi political parties continued to be printed , along with so @-@ called " stolen " newspapers such as Le Soir or Het <unk> Nieuws , which were published by pro @-@ German groups without their owners ' permission . Despite the tight censorship and propagandist content , the circulation of these newspapers remained high , as did the sales of party newspapers such as Le Pays Réel and Volk en Staat . Many civilians listened to regular broadcasts from Britain , so @-@ called Radio Belgique , despite being officially prohibited from December 1940 . 
 Most Belgians continued their pre @-@ war professions during the occupation . The Belgian cartoonist Hergé , whose work since 1928 had contributed to the popularisation of comics in Europe , completed three volumes of The Adventures of Tintin under the occupation , serialised in the pro @-@ German newspaper Le Soir . 
 = = = Rationing = = = 
 Before the war , the Belgian government had planned an emergency system of rationing , which was implemented on the day of the German invasion . The German occupying authority used Belgium 's reliance on food imports as a bargaining tool . The amount of food permitted to Belgian citizens was roughly two @-@ thirds of that allowed to comparable German citizens and was amongst the lowest in occupied Europe . On average , scarcity of food led to a loss of five to seven kilograms of weight per Belgian in 1940 alone . 
 A Belgian citizen was entitled to 225 grams ( 7 @.@ 9 oz ) of bread each day , and 250 grams ( 8 @.@ 8 oz ) of butter , 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) sugar , 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) meat and 15 kilograms ( 33 lb ) of potatoes each month . Later in the war , even this was not always available and many civilians survived by fishing or by growing vegetables in allotments . 
 Because of the tight rationing , a black market in food and other consumer goods emerged . Food on the black market was extremely expensive . Prices could be 650 percent higher than in legal shops and rose constantly during the war . Because of the profits to be made , the black market spawned large and well @-@ organised networks . Numerous members of the German administration were involved in the black market , stealing military or official supplies and reselling them . 
 = = = Allied bombing = = = 
 Factories , ports and other strategic sites used by the German war effort were frequent targets of Allied bombers from both the British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and American United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) . Many of these were located in towns and cities , and inaccuracy of the bombing resulted in substantial civilian casualties . 
 In the early years of the occupation , Allied bombing took the form of small @-@ scale attacks on specific targets , such as the ports of <unk> and Zeebrugge , and on Luftwaffe airfields . The Germans encouraged the building of 6 @,@ 000 air @-@ raid shelters between 1941 and 1942 , at a cost of 220 million francs . From 1943 , the Allies began targeting sites in urban areas . In a raid on the <unk> Motor Works in the town of <unk> ( near Antwerp ) in April 1943 , just two bombs dropped by the B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses of the U.S. 8th Air Force fell on the intended target . The remaining 24 tonnes of bombs fell on civilian areas , killing 936 and injuring 1 @,@ 340 more . 
 During the preparation for D @-@ Day in the spring of 1944 , the Allies launched the Transport Plan , carrying out intensive bombing of railway junctions and transport networks across northern France and Belgium . Many of these targets were in towns near densely populated civilian areas , such as La Louvière and Kortrijk in Belgium , which were bombed in March 1944 . The phase of bombing in the lead up to D @-@ Day alone resulted in 1 @,@ 500 civilian casualties . Bombing of targets in Belgium steadily increased as the Allies advanced westward across France . Allied bombing during the liberation in September 1944 killed 9 @,@ 750 Belgians and injured 40 @,@ 000 . 
 The Allied policy was condemned by many leading figures in Belgium , including Cardinal van Roey , who appealed to Allied commanders to " spare the private possessions of the citizens , as otherwise the civilised world will one day call to account those responsible for the terrible treatment dealt out to an innocent and loyal country " . 
 = = Economic situation = = 
 The German government levied the costs of the military occupation on the Belgians through taxes , while also demanding " external occupation costs " ( or " Anti @-@ Bolshevik charges " ) to support operations elsewhere . In total , Belgium was forced to pay nearly two @-@ thirds of its national income for these charges , equalling 5 @.@ 7 billion Reichsmarks over the course of the occupation . The value of the Belgian franc was artificially suppressed , further increasing the size of the Anti @-@ Bolshevik charge and benefitting German companies exporting to the occupied country . 
 The considerable Belgian gold reserves , on which the Belga had been secured , were mostly transported to Britain , Canada and the United States before the German invasion . Over 198 tonnes , however , had been entrusted to the Banque de France before the war , and shipped to Dakar in French West Africa . Under the pro @-@ German Vichy régime , the gold was seized by the Germans , who used it to buy munitions from neutral Switzerland and Sweden . 
 = = = Galopin Doctrine = = = 
 Before fleeing in May 1940 , the Belgian government established a body of important economic figures , under the leadership of Alexandre Galopin , known as the " Galopin Committee " . Galopin was the director of the Société Générale de Belgique ( <unk> ) , a company which dominated the Belgian economy and controlled almost 40 percent of the country 's industrial production . The Committee was able to negotiate with the German authorities and was also in contact with the government in exile . 
 Galopin pioneered a controversial policy , known as the " Galopin Doctrine " . The Doctrine decreed that Belgian companies continue producing goods necessary for the Belgian population ( food , consumer goods etc . ) under the German occupiers , but refused to produce war materiel or anything which could be used in the German war effort . The policy hoped to prevent a repeat of World War I , when the Allies had encouraged Belgian workers to passively resist the Germans by refusing to work . The Germans instead deported Belgian workers and industrial machinery to German factories , benefitting their economy more . The policy also hoped to avoid an industrial decline which would have negative effects on the country 's recovery after the war ; however , many viewed the policy as collaboration . Between 1941 and 1942 , the German authorities began to force Belgian businessmen to make an explicit choice between obeying the Doctrine ( and refusing to produce war materials , at risk of death ) and circumventing the doctrine as collaborators . 
 = = = Deportation and forced labour = = = 
 Before 1941 , Belgian workers could volunteer to work in Germany ; nearly 180 @,@ 000 Belgians signed up , hoping for better pay and living conditions . About 3 @,@ 000 Belgians joined the Organisation Todt ( OT ) , and 4 @,@ 000 more joined the paramilitary German supply corps , the <unk> <unk> ( NSKK ) . The numbers , however , proved insufficient . Despite the protestation of the Secretaries @-@ General , compulsory deportation of Belgian workers to Germany began in October 1942 . At the beginning of the scheme , Belgian firms were obliged to select 10 percent of their work force , but from 1943 workers were conscripted by age class . 145 @,@ 000 Belgians were conscripted and sent to Germany , most to work in manual jobs in industry or agriculture for the German war effort . Working conditions for forced workers in Germany were notoriously poor . Workers were paid little and worked long hours , and those in German towns were particularly vulnerable to Allied aerial bombing . 
 Following the introduction of compulsory deportation 200 @,@ 000 Belgian workers ( dubbed réfractaires ) went into hiding for fear of being conscripted . The réfractaires were often aided by resistance organisations , such as Organisation Socrates run by the Front de l 'Indépendance , who provided food and false papers . Many réfractaires went on to enlist in resistance groups , swelling their numbers enormously from late 1942 . 
 = = Belgian prisoners of war = = 
 After the Belgian defeat , around 225 @,@ 000 Belgian soldiers ( around 30 percent of the total force mobilised in 1940 ) who had been made prisoners of war in 1940 were sent to prisoner of war camps in Germany . The majority of those in captivity ( 145 @,@ 000 ) were Flemish , and 80 @,@ 000 were Walloons . Most had been reservists , rather than professional soldiers , before the outbreak of war and their detention created a large labour shortage in civilian occupations . 
 As part of their Flamenpolitik , the Germans began repatriating Flemish prisoners of war in August 1940 . By February 1941 , 105 @,@ 833 Flemish soldiers had been repatriated . Gradually , more prisoners were released , but 67 @,@ 000 Belgian soldiers were still in captivity by 1945 . Many prisoners of war were forced to work in quarries or in agriculture and around 2 @,@ 000 died in captivity . 
 = = Repression = = 
 In the first year of the occupation , the German administration pursued a conciliatory policy toward the Belgian people in order to gain their support and co @-@ operation . This policy was , in part , because there was little resistance activity and because the demands the Germans needed to place on Belgian civilians and businesses were relatively small on account of their military success . During the fighting in Belgium , however , there were incidents of massacres against Belgian civilians by German forces , notably the <unk> Massacre in which 86 civilians were killed . 
 From 1941 , the regime became significantly more repressive . This was partly a result of the increasing demands on the German economy created by the invasion of the Soviet Union , as well as the decision to implement Nazi racial policies . From August 1941 , the Military Government announced that for every German murdered by the resistance , five Belgian civilian hostages would be executed . Although the German military command , the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( OKW ) , had advised a ratio of 50 civilians for every one German soldier killed , von Falkenhausen moderated the policy and decreed that the hostages be selected from political prisoners and criminals rather than civilians picked at random . The systematic persecution of minorities ( such as Jews , Roma and Freemasons ) began from 1942 , and was also coupled with much stricter repression of Belgian political dissent . 
 = = = Persecution of Jews and the Holocaust = = = 
 At the start of the war , the population of Belgium was overwhelmingly Catholic . Jews made up the largest non @-@ Christian population in the country , numbering between 70 – 75 @,@ 000 out of a population of 8 million . Most lived in large towns and cities in Belgium , such as Antwerp and Brussels . The vast majority were recent immigrants to Belgium fleeing persecution in Germany and Eastern Europe and , as a result , only a small minority actually possessed Belgian citizenship . 
 Shortly after the invasion of Belgium , the Military Government passed a series of anti @-@ Jewish laws ( similar to the Vichy laws on the status of Jews ) in October 1940 . The Committee of Secretaries @-@ General refused from the start to co @-@ operate on passing any anti @-@ Jewish measures and the Military Government seemed unwilling to pass further legislation . The German government began to seize Jewish @-@ owned business and forced Jews out of positions in the civil service . In April 1941 , without orders from the German authorities , members of the Algemeene @-@ SS Vlaanderen and other Flemish fascists pillaged two synagogues in Antwerp and burned the house of the chief Rabbi of the town in the so @-@ called " Antwerp Pogrom . " The Germans also created a Judenrat in the country , the Association des Juifs en Belgique ( AJB ; " Association of Jews in Belgium " ) in which all Jews were required to inscribe . 
 As part of the " Final Solution " from 1942 , the persecution of Belgian Jews escalated . From May 1942 , Jews were forced to wear yellow Star @-@ of @-@ David badges to mark them out in public . Using the registers compiled by the AJB , the Germans began deporting Jews to concentration camps built by Germans in occupied Poland . Jews chosen from the lists were required to turn up at the newly established Mechelen transit camp ; they were then deported by train to concentration camps at Auschwitz and Bergen @-@ Belsen . Between August 1942 and July 1944 , around 25 @,@ 000 Jews and 350 Roma were deported from Belgium ; more than 24 @,@ 000 were killed before their camps were liberated by the Allies . Among them was the celebrated artist Felix Nussbaum . 
 From 1942 and the introduction of the Star @-@ of @-@ David badges , opposition to the treatment of the Jews among the general population in Belgium grew . By the end of the occupation , more than 40 percent of all Jews in Belgium were in hiding ; many of them hid by gentiles and in particular Catholic priests and nuns . Some were helped by the organised resistance , such as the Comité de Défense des Juifs ( CDJ ) , which provided food and safe housing . Many of the Jews in hiding went on to join the armed resistance . The treatment of Jews was denounced by the senior Catholic priest in Belgium , Cardinal Jozef @-@ Ernest van Roey , who described their treatment as " inhuman . " The Partisans Armés had a notably large Jewish section in Brussels . In April 1943 , members of the CDJ attacked the twentieth rail convoy to Auschwitz and succeeded in rescuing many of the passengers . 
 = = = Political dissent = = = 
 Because of the Nazi @-@ Soviet Pact , signed in 1939 , the Communist Party was briefly tolerated in the early stages of the occupation . Coinciding with the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 however , the Germans rounded up a large number of Communists ( identified in police dossiers compiled before the war ) in an operation codenamed " Summer Solstice " ( <unk> ) . In September 1942 , the Germans arrested over 400 workers which they feared were plotting a large @-@ scale strike action . 
 Many important politicians who had opposed the Nazis before the war were arrested and deported to concentration camps in Germany and German @-@ occupied Poland , as part of the Nacht und Nebel ( literally " Night and Fog " ) decree . Among them was the 71 @-@ year @-@ old Paul @-@ Émile Janson who had served as Prime Minister between 1937 and 1938 . He was arrested at his home in Belgium in 1943 and deported to Buchenwald concentration camp where he died in 1944 . Many captured members of the resistance were also sent to concentration camps . Albert <unk> ( one of the leading members of the " Pat " escape line ) was imprisoned at Dachau and briefly served as president of the camp 's " International Prisoners ' Committee " after its liberation by the United States Army . 
 In 1940 , the German army had requisitioned a former Belgian army fort at Breendonk and transformed it into an Anhaltelager or prison camp . Initially , the prison camp was used for detaining Jews , but from 1941 most of those detained at Breendonk were political prisoners or captured members of the resistance . Though it was reasonably small , the camp was infamous for its poor conditions and high death rate . It was also where summary executions of hostages as reprisals for resistance actions occurred . Unusually , Breendonk was mainly guarded by Flemish collaborators of the Vlaamse SD @-@ <unk> , rather than German soldiers . Prisoners were often tortured , or even mauled by the camp commander 's dog , and forced to move tonnes of earth around the fort by hand . Many were summarily executed and still more died as a result of the conditions at the camp . Of the 3 @,@ 500 people incarcerated in Breendonk between November 1942 and April 1943 , around 300 people were killed in the camp itself with at least 84 dying as a result of deprivation or torture . Few inmates remained long in Breendonk itself and were sent on to larger concentration camps in Germany . 
 = = Collaboration = = 
 Both Flanders and Wallonia had right @-@ wing Fascist parties which had been established in the 1930s , often with their own newspapers and paramilitary organisations . All had supported the Belgian policy of neutrality before the war , but after the start of the occupation began to collaborate actively with the Germans . Because of their different ideological backgrounds , they often differed with the Nazis on a variety of ideological issues such as the role of Catholicism or the status of Flanders . Though allowed more freedom than other political groups , the Germans did not fully trust these organisations and , even by the end of 1941 , identified them as a potential " threat to state security " . 
 After the war , 53 @,@ 000 Belgian citizens ( 0 @.@ 6 percent of the population ) were found guilty of collaboration , providing the only estimate of the number involved during the period . Around 15 @,@ 000 Belgians served in two separate divisions of the Waffen @-@ SS , divided along linguistic lines . In particular , many Belgians were persuaded to work with the occupiers as a result of long @-@ running hostility to Communism , particularly after the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 . 
 By 1944 , Belgian collaborationist groups began to feel increasingly abandoned by the German government as the situation deteriorated . As resistance attacks against them escalated , collaborationist parties became more violent and launched reprisals against civilians , including the Courcelles Massacre in August 1944 . 
 = = = In Flanders = = = 
 Before the war , several Fascist movements had existed in Flanders . The two major pre @-@ war Flemish Movement parties , the Vlaams Nationaal Verbond ( VNV ) and Verdinaso , called for the creation of an independent authoritarian Flanders or " <unk> Staat " encompassing both Flanders and the Netherlands . Shortly after the occupation , VNV decided to collaborate with the Germans and soon became the biggest group in Flanders , gaining many members after Verdinaso disbanded in 1941 and after fusing with the Flemish wing of the nationwide Fascist Rex Party . There was also an organisation , the <unk> @-@ Vlaamse <unk> ( " German @-@ Flemish Work Community " , known by its acronym DeVlag ) , which advocated Nazi @-@ style anti @-@ clericalism and the inclusion of Flanders into Germany itself . 
 During the occupation in World War I , the Germans had favoured the Flemish area of the country in the so @-@ called Flamenpolitik , supporting Flemish cultural and political movements . This policy was continued during World War II , as the military government encouraged Flemish Movement parties , especially the VNV , and promoted Flemish nationalists , like Victor Leemans , to important administrative positions in the occupied territory . In turn , the VNV was important in recruiting men for a new " Flemish Legion " , an infantry unit within the Wehrmacht , formed in July 1941 after the invasion of Russia . In 1943 , the legion was " annexed " into the Waffen SS as the 27th SS Langemarck Division , despite the protestations of the party . The unit fought on the Eastern Front , where it suffered 10 percent casualties . The Germans also encouraged the formation of independent Flemish paramilitary organisations , such as the Vlaamse Wacht ( " Flemish Guard " ) , founded in May 1941 , which they hoped would eventually be able to act as a garrison in the region , freeing German troops for the front . 
 From 1942 , VNV 's dominance was increasingly challenged by the more radical DeVlag , which had the support of the SS and Nazi Party . DeVlag was closely affiliated to the paramilitary Algemeene @-@ SS Vlaanderen ( " General @-@ SS Flanders " ) , which was stationed in Belgium itself and involved in the so @-@ called Antwerp Pogrom of 1941 . 
 = = = In Wallonia = = = 
 Though both Fascist and anti @-@ Semitic , Rex 's ideology had been more closely aligned with Benito Mussolini 's Partito Nazionale <unk> than with the Nazi Party before the war . Rex 's newspaper Le Pays Réel , which frequently attacked perceived Nazi anti @-@ clericalism , had even been banned from circulation in Germany in the 1930s . With the German invasion , however , Rex rapidly accepted the occupation and became a major force in collaboration in Wallonia . 
 As a result of the Flamenpolitik , Rex was not given the same favoured status accorded to Flemish Fascists . Nevertheless , it was permitted to republish its newspaper and re @-@ establish and expand its paramilitary wing , the Formations de Combat , which had been banned before the war . In April 1943 , Rex declared itself part of the SS . The Formations de Combat were responsible for numerous attacks against Jews and , from 1944 , also participated in arbitrary reprisals against civilians for attacks by the resistance . In 1944 , Rexist paramilitaries massacred 20 civilians in the village of Courcelles in retaliation for an assassination of a Rexist politician by members of the resistance . 
 Léon Degrelle , the founder and leader of Rex , offered to form a " Walloon Legion " in the Wehrmacht , but his request was denied by the Germans who questioned its feasibility . It was finally accepted in July 1941 , after the invasion of Russia , and Degrelle enlisted . As part of the Flamenpolitik , the Germans refused Degrelle 's demands for a " Belgian Legion " , preferring to support the creation of separate linguistic units . After a brief period of fighting , it became clear that the Walloon Legion suffered from a lack of training and from political infighting . It was reformed and sent to the Eastern Front , and became part of the Waffen SS ( as the 28th SS Wallonien Division ) in 1943 . During the fighting at the Korsun – Cherkassy Pocket , the unit was nearly annihilated and its popular commander , Lucien Lippert , was killed . In order to make up numbers , and because of a lack of Belgian volunteers , the unit was allocated French and Spanish volunteers . 
 = = Resistance = = 
 Resistance to the German occupiers began in Belgium in the winter of 1940 , after the German defeat in the Battle of Britain made it clear that the war was not lost for the Allies . Involvement in illegal resistance activity was a decision made by a minority of Belgians ( approximately five percent of the population ) but many more were involved in passive resistance . If captured , resistance members risked torture and execution , and around 17 @,@ 000 were killed during the occupation . 
 Striking was the most notable form of passive resistance and often took place on symbolic dates , such as 10 May ( the anniversary of the German invasion ) , 21 July ( National Day ) and 11 November ( anniversary of the German surrender in World War I ) . The largest was the " Strike of the 100 @,@ 000 " , which broke out on 10 May 1941 in the Cockerill steel works in Seraing . News of the strike spread rapidly and soon at least 70 @,@ 000 workers were on strike across the province of <unk> . The Germans increased workers ' salaries by eight percent and the strike finished rapidly . The Germans repressed later large @-@ scale strikes , though further important strikes occurred in November 1942 and February 1943 . Passive resistance , however , could also take the form of much more minor actions , such as offering one 's seat in trams to Jews , which was not explicitly illegal but which subtly subverted the German @-@ imposed order . 
 Active resistance in Belgium took the form of sabotaging railways and lines of communication as well as hiding Jews and Allied airmen . The resistance produced large numbers of illegal newspapers in both French and Dutch , distributed to the public to provide news about the war not available in officially approved , censored newspapers . Some such publications achieved considerable success , such as La Libre Belgique , which reached a circulation of 70 @,@ 000 . Attacks on German soldiers were comparatively rare as the German administration made a practice of executing at least five Belgian hostages for each German soldier killed . At great personal risk , Belgian civilians also hid large numbers of Jews and political dissenters hunted by the Germans . 
 The resistance was never a single group ; numerous groups evolved divided by political affiliation , geography or specialisation . The danger of infiltration posed by German informants meant that some groups were extremely small and localised , and although nationwide groups did exist , they were split along political and ideological lines . They ranged from the far left , such as the Communist Partisans Armés or Socialist Front de l 'Indépendance , to the far @-@ right , such as the monarchist Mouvement National Royaliste and the Légion Belge , which had been created by members of the pre @-@ war Fascist Légion Nationale movement . Some , such as Groupe G , had no obvious political affiliation , but specialised in particular types of resistance activity and recruited only from very specific demographics . 
 = = Liberation = = 
 In June 1944 , the Western Allies landed in Normandy in Northern France , around 400 kilometres ( 250 mi ) west of the Belgian border . After fierce fighting in the areas around the landing sites , the Allies broke through the German lines and began advances toward Paris and then toward the Belgian border . By August , the main body of the German army in Northern France ( with the exception of the garrisons of fortified towns such as Dunkirk ) was openly retreating eastward . As the Allies neared the border , coded messages broadcast on Radio Belgique encouraged the resistance to rise up . The German civil administrator , Joseph Grohé , ordered a general retreat from the country on 28 August , and on 1 September the first Allied units ( amongst them the Free Belgian SAS ) crossed the Belgian frontier . By 4 September , Brussels was in Allied hands . The Belgian government in exile returned to the country on 8 September and began rebuilding the Belgian state and army . Leopold III 's brother , Charles , was appointed Prince @-@ Regent while a decision was made about whether the King could return to his functions . As the German army regrouped and the Allies ' supply lines became stretched , the front line stabilised along Belgium 's eastern border . Areas in the south @-@ east of the country remained in German hands , and were briefly recaptured during the German Ardennes Offensive in the winter of 1944 . This no more than delayed the total liberation of the country and on 4 February 1945 , with the capture of the village of <unk> , the entire country was in Allied hands . 
 Over the course of the occupation , a total of 40 @,@ 690 Belgians were killed , over half of them Jews . Around eight percent of the country 's pre @-@ war GDP had been destroyed or removed to Germany . 
 = Skopje = 
 Skopje ( Macedonian : <unk> , [ <unk> ] , is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Macedonia . It is the country 's political , cultural , economic , and academic center . It was known in the Roman period under the name Scupi . 
 The territory of Skopje has been inhabited since at least 4000 BC ; remains of Neolithic settlements have been found within the old Kale Fortress that overlooks the modern city centre . On the eve of the 1st century AD , the settlement was seized by the Romans and became a military camp . When the Roman Empire was divided into eastern and western halves in 395 AD , Scupi came under Byzantine rule from Constantinople . During much of the early medieval period , the town was contested between the Byzantines and the Bulgarian Empire , whose capital it was between 972 and 992 . From 1282 , the town was part of the Serbian Empire and acted as its capital city from 1346 . In 1392 , the city was conquered by the Ottoman Turks who called the town <unk> . The town stayed under Turkish control for over 500 years , serving as the capital of <unk> of Üsküb and later the Vilayet of Kosovo . At that time the city was famous for its oriental architecture . In 1912 , it was annexed by the Kingdom of Serbia during the Balkan Wars and after the First World War the city became part of the newly formed Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) . In the Second World War the city was conquered by the Bulgarian Army , which was part of the Axis powers . In 1944 , it became the capital city of Democratic Macedonia ( later Socialist Republic of Macedonia ) , which was a federal state , part of Democratic Federal Yugoslavia ( later Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ) . The city developed rapidly after World War II , but this trend was interrupted in 1963 when it was hit by a disastrous earthquake . In 1991 , it became the capital city of an independent Macedonia . 
 Skopje is located on the upper course of the Vardar River , and is located on a major north @-@ south Balkan route between Belgrade and Athens . It is a center for metal @-@ processing , chemical , timber , textile , leather , and printing industries . Industrial development of the city has been accompanied by development of the trade , logistics , and banking sectors , as well as an emphasis on the fields of transportation , culture and sport . According to the last official count from 2002 , Skopje has a population of 506 @,@ 926 inhabitants ; according to two more recent unofficial estimates , the city has a population of 668 @,@ 518 or 491 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Skopje is located in the north of the Republic of Macedonia , in the center of the Balkan peninsula , and halfway between Belgrade and Athens . The city is built in the Skopje valley , oriented on a west @-@ east axis , along the course of the Vardar river , which flows into the Aegean Sea in Greece . The valley is approximately 20 km wide and it is limited by several mountain ranges to the North and South . These ranges limit the urban expansion of Skopje , which spreads along the Vardar and the <unk> , a small river which comes from the North . In its administrative boundaries , the City of Skopje stretches for more than 33 km , but it is only 10 km wide . 
 Skopje is approximately <unk> above sea level and covers 571 @.@ 46 km2 . The urbanised area only covers 337 km2 , with a density of 65 inhabitants per hectare . Skopje , in its administrative limits , encompasses many villages and other settlements , including Dračevo , Gorno Nerezi and <unk> . According to the 2002 census , the City of Skopje comprised 506 @,@ 926 inhabitants , whereas the sole urban area only comprised 444 @,@ 800 inhabitants . 
 The City of Skopje reaches the Kosovo border to the North @-@ East . Clockwise , it is also bordered by the Macedonian municipalities of <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Ilinden , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Jegunovce . 
 = = = Hydrography = = = 
 The Vardar river , which flows through Skopje , is at approximately 60 km from its source near <unk> . In Skopje , its average discharge is 51 m3 / s , with a wide amplitude depending on seasons , between 99 @.@ 6 m3 / s in May and 18 @.@ 7 m3 / s in July . The water temperature is comprised between 4 @.@ 6 ° C in January and 18 @.@ 1 ° C in July . 
 Several rivers meet the Vardar within the city boundaries . The largest is the Treska , which is 130 km long . It crosses the Matka Canyon before reaching the Vardar on the western extremity of the City of Skopje . The <unk> , coming from Kosovo , flows into the Vardar on the northwestern end of the urban area . The <unk> , also coming from the North , had flowed through the Old Bazaar until the 1960s , when it was diverted towards the West because its waters were very polluted . Originally , it met the Vardar close to the seat of the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts . Nowadays , it flows into the Vardar near the ruins of Scupi . Finally , the Markova Reka , the source of which is on Mount Vodno , meets the Vardar at the eastern extremity of the city . These three rivers are less than 70 km long . 
 The city of Skopje comprises two artificial lakes , located on the Treska . The lake Matka is the result of the construction of a dam in the Matka Canyon in the 1930s , and the Treska lake was dug for leisure purpose in 1978 . Three small natural lakes can be found near <unk> , on the northeastern edge of the urban area . 
 The river Vardar historically caused many floods , such as in 1962 , when its outflow reached 1110 m3 / s − 1 . Several works have been carried since Byzantine times to limit the risks , and since the construction of the Kozjak dam on the Treska in 1994 , the flood risk is close to zero . 
 The subsoil contains a large water table which is <unk> by the Vardar river and functions as an underground river . Under the table lies an aquifer contained in marl . The water table is 4 to 12 m under the ground and 4 to 144 m deep . Several wells collect its waters but most of the drinking water used in Skopje comes from a karstic spring in <unk> , located west of the city . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The Skopje valley is bordered on the West by the Šar Mountains , on the South by the <unk> range , on the East by hills belonging to the <unk> range , and on the North by the Skopska Crna Gora . Mount Vodno , the highest point inside the city limits , is 1066 m high and is part of the <unk> range . 
 Although Skopje is built on the foot of Mount Vodno , the urban area is mostly flat . It comprises several minor hills , generally covered with woods and parks , such as Gazi Baba hill ( 325 m ) , <unk> Rid ( 327 m ) , the foothills of Mount Vodno ( the smallest are between 350 and 400 m high ) and the promontory on which Skopje Fortress is built . 
 The Skopje valley is located near a seismic fault between the African and Eurasian tectonic plates and experiences regular seismic activity . This activity in enhanced by the porous structure of the subsoil . Large earthquakes occurred in Skopje in 518 , 1505 and 1963 . 
 The Skopje valley belongs to the Vardar <unk> region , the subsoil of which is formed of Neogene and Quaternary deposits . The substratum is made of Pliocene deposits including sandstone , marl and various conglomerates . It is covered by a first layer of Quaternary sands and silt , which is between 70 and 90 m deep . The layer is topped by a much smaller layer of clay , sand , silt and gravel , carried by the Vardar river . It is between 1 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 2 m deep . 
 In some areas , the subsoil is karstic . It led to the formation of canyons , such as the Matka Canyon , which is surrounded by ten caves . They are between 20 and 176 m deep . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Skopje is usually classified as continental sub @-@ Mediterranean , while according to the Köppen climate classification it has a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) , with a mean annual temperature of 13 @.@ 5 ° C ( 56 ° F ) . Precipitation is relatively low due to the pronounced rain shadow of the <unk> mountains to the northwest , being only a quarter of what is received on the Adriatic Sea coast at the same latitude . The summers are long , hot and humid , while the winters are short , relatively cold , and wet . Snowfalls are common in the winter period , but heavy snow accumulation is rare and the <unk> lasts only for a few days . In summer , temperatures are usually above 31 ° C ( 88 ° F ) and sometimes above 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) . In spring and autumn , the temperatures range from 15 to 24 ° C ( 59 to 75 ° F ) . In winter , the day temperatures are roughly 6 ° C ( 43 ° F ) , but at nights they often fall below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) and sometimes below − 10 ° C ( 14 ° F ) . Typically , <unk> throughout one year range from − 13 ° C to 39 ° C. Occurrences of precipitation are evenly distributed throughout the year , being heaviest from October to December and from April to June . 
 = = = Nature and environment = = = 
 The city of Skopje encompasses various natural environments and its fauna and flora are rich . However , it is threatened by the intensification of agriculture and the urban extension . The largest protected area within the city limits is Mount Vodno , which is a popular leisure destination . A cable car connects its peak to the downtown , and many pedestrian paths run through its woods . Other large natural spots include the Matka Canyon . 
 The city itself comprises several parks and gardens amounting to 4 @,@ 361 hectares . Among these are the City Park ( Gradski Park ) , built by the Ottoman Turks at the beginning of the 20th century ; <unk> <unk> Park , located in front of the Parliament ; the University arboretum ; and Gazi Baba forest . Many streets and boulevards are planted with trees . 
 Skopje experiences many environmental issues which are often overshadowed by the economic poverty of the country . However , alignment of Macedonian law on European law has brought progress in some fields , such as water and waste treatment , and industrial emissions . 
 Steel processing , which a crucial activity for the local economy , is responsible for soil pollution with heavy metals such as lead , zinc and cadmium , and air pollution with nitrogen oxide and carbon monoxide . Vehicle traffic and district heating plants are also responsible for air pollution . The highest pollution levels usually occur in autumn and winter . 
 Water treatment plants are being built , but much polluted water is still discharged untreated into the Vardar . Waste is disposed of in the open @-@ air municipal landfill site , located 15 km north of the city . Every day , it receives 1 @,@ 500 m3 of domestic waste and 400 m3 of industrial waste . Health levels are better in Skopje than in the rest of the Republic of Macedonia , and no link has been found between the low environmental quality and the health of the residents . 
 = = Urbanism = = 
 = = = Urban morphology = = = 
 The urban morphology of Skopje was deeply impacted by the 26th of July 1963 earthquake which destroyed 80 % of the city and by the reconstruction that followed . For instance , neighbourhoods were rebuilt in such a way that the demographic density remains low to limit the impact of potential future earthquakes . 
 Reconstruction following the 1963 earthquake was mainly conducted by the Polish architect Adolf <unk> , who had already planned the reconstruction of Warsaw after World War II . <unk> divided the city in blocks dedicated to specific activities . The banks of the Vardar river became natural areas and parks , areas located between the main boulevards were built with highrise housing and shopping malls , and the suburbs were left to individual housing and industry . Reconstruction had to be quick in order to relocate families and to relaunch the local economy . To stimulate economic development , the number of thoroughfares was increased and future urban extension was anticipated . 
 The south bank of the Vardar river generally comprises highrise tower blocks , including the vast Karpoš neighbourhood which was built in the 1970s west of the centre . Towards the East , the new municipality of Aerodrom was planned in the 1980s to house 80 @,@ 000 inhabitants on the site of the old airport . Between Karpoš and Aerodrom lies the city centre , rebuilt according to plans by Japanese architect Kenzo Tange . The centre is surrounded by a row of long buildings suggesting a wall ( " Gradski Zid " ) . 
 On the north bank , where the most ancient parts of the city lie , the Old Bazaar was restored and its surroundings were rebuilt with low @-@ rise buildings , so as not to spoil views of the Skopje Fortress . Several institutions , including the university and the Macedonian academy , were also relocated on the north bank in order to reduce borders between the ethnic communities . Indeed , the north bank is mostly inhabited by Muslim Albanians , Turks and Roma , whereas Christian ethnic Macedonians predominantly reside on the south bank . 
 The earthquake left the city with few historical monuments , apart from the Ottoman Old Bazaar , and the reconstruction , conducted between the 1960s and 1980s , turned Skopje into a modernist but grey city . At the end of the 2000s , the city center experienced profound changes . An urban project , " Skopje 2014 " , was adopted by the municipal authorities in order to give the city a more monumental and historical aspect , and thus to transform it into a proper national capital . Several neoclassical buildings destroyed in the 1963 earthquake were rebuilt , including the national theatre , and streets and squares were refurbished . Many other elements were also built , including fountains , statues , hotels , government buildings and bridges . The project has been criticised because of its cost and its historicist aesthetics . The large Albanian minority felt it was not represented in the new monuments , and launched side projects , including a new square over the boulevard that separate the city centre from the Old Bazaar . 
 Some areas of Skopje suffer from a certain anarchy because many houses and buildings were built without consent from the local authorities . 
 = = = Localities and villages = = = 
 Outside of the urban area , the City of Skopje encompasses many small settlements . Some of them are becoming outer suburbs , such as <unk> , located on the road to Belgrade , which has more than 23 @,@ 000 inhabitants , and Dračevo , which has almost 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Other large settlements are located north of the city , such as <unk> , with 9 @,@ 000 inhabitants , whereas smaller villages can be found on Mount Vodno or in Saraj municipality , which is the most rural of the ten municipalities that form the City of Skopje . 
 Some localities located outside the city limits are also becoming outer suburbs , particularly in Ilinden and Petrovec municipality . They benefit from the presence of major roads , railways and the airport , located in Petrovec . 
 = = = Urban sociology = = = 
 Skopje is an ethnically diverse city , and its urban sociology primarily depends on ethnic and religious belonging . Macedonians form 66 % of the city population , while Albanians and Roma account respectively for 20 % and 6 % . Each ethnic group generally restrict itself to certain areas of the city . Macedonians live south of the Vardar , in areas massively rebuilt after 1963 , and Muslims live on the northern side , in the oldest neighbourhoods of the city . These neighbourhoods are considered more traditional , whereas the south side evokes to Macedonians modernity and rupture from rural life . 
 The northern areas are the poorest . This is especially true for <unk> , in Čair municipality , and for Šuto Orizari municipality , which are the two main Roma neighbourhoods . They are made of many illegal constructions not connected to electricity and water supply , which are passed from a generation to the other . <unk> , located close to the Old Bazaar , is a very old area : it was first mentioned as a Roma neighbourhood in the beginning of the 14th century . It has between 3 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Šuto Orizari , located on the northern edge of the city , is a municipality of its own , with Romani as its local official language . It was developed after the 1963 earthquake to accommodate Roma who had lost their house . 
 The population density varies greatly from an area to the other . So does the size of the living area per person . The city average was at 19 @.@ 41 square metres ( 208 @.@ 93 square feet ) per person as of 2002 , but at 24 square metres ( 258 square feet ) in Centar on the south bank , and only 14 square metres ( 151 square feet ) in Čair on the north bank . In Šuto Orizari , the average was at 13 square metres ( 140 square feet ) . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 The current name of the city comes from " Scupi " , which was the name of a Roman colony located nearby . However , before the colony was created , the site had already been settled by Illyrians and " Scupi " is probably of Illyrian origin . The meaning of that name is unknown . 
 After Antiquity , Scupi was occupied by various people and consequently its name was translated several times in several languages . Thus Scupi became " <unk> " ( Bulgarian : <unk> ) for Bulgarians , and later " Üsküb " ( Ottoman Turkish : <unk> ) for the Turks . This name was adapted in Western languages in " Uskub " or " <unk> " , and these two appellations were used in the Western world until 1912 . Some Western sources also cite " <unk> " and " <unk> " . 
 When Vardar Macedonia was annexed by the Kingdom of Serbia in 1912 , the city officially became " <unk> " and this name was adopted by many languages . The city eventually became " Skopje " ( Macedonian : <unk> ) after the Second World War , when standard Macedonian became the official language of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia . The Albanian minority calls the city " <unk> " and " <unk> " , the latter being the definite form , and Roma call it " <unk> " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The rocky promontory on which stands the Fortress was the first site settled by man in Skopje . The earliest vestiges of human occupation found on this site date from the Chalcolithic ( 4th millennium BC ) . 
 Although the Chalcolithic settlement must have been of some significance , it declined during the Bronze Age . Archeological research suggest that the settlement always belonged to a same culture , which progressively evolved thanks to contacts with Balkan and Danube cultures , and later with the Aegean . The locality eventually disappeared during the Iron Age when Scupi emerged . Scupi was originally an Illyrian settlement <unk> during the 1st millennium BC but it later became a <unk> town . It was located on <unk> Rid hill , some 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) west of the fortress promontory . Located at the centre of the Balkan peninsula and on the road between Danube and Aegean Sea , it was a prosperous locality , although its history is not well known . 
 = = = Roman Scupi = = = 
 <unk> , who lived in present @-@ day Kosovo , invaded the region around Skopje during the 3rd century BC . Scupi , the ancient name for Skopje , became the capital of Dardania , which extended from Naissus to <unk> in the second century BC . The <unk> had remained independent after the Roman conquest of Macedon , and it seems most likely that Dardania lost independence in 28 BC . Roman expansion east brought Scupi under Roman rule as a colony of legionnaires , mainly veterans of the Legio <unk> Claudia in the time of Domitian ( 81 – 96 AD ) . However , several legions from the Roman province of Macedonia of Crassus ' army may already have been stationed in there around 29 – 28 BC , before the official imperial command was instituted . The first mention of the city was made at that period by Livy , who died in 17 AD . Scupi first served as a military base to maintain peace in the region and was officially named " Colonia Flavia <unk> " , Flavia being the name of the emperor 's dynasty . Shortly afterwards it became part of the province of Moesia during Augustus 's rule . After the division of the province by Domitian in 86 AD , Scupi was elevated to colonial status , and became a seat of government within the new province of Moesia Superior . The district called Dardania ( within Moesia Superior ) was formed into a special province by Diocletian , with the capital at Naissus . 
 The city population was very diverse . Engravings on tombstones suggest that only a minority of the population came from Italy , while many veterans were from Dalmatia , South Gaul and Syria . Because of the ethnic diversity of the population , Latin maintained itself as the main language in the city at the expense of Greek , which was spoken in most of the Moesian and Macedonian cities . During the following centuries , Scupi experienced prosperity . The period from the end of the 3rd century to the end of the 4th century was particularly flourishing . A first church was founded under the reign of Constantine the Great and Scupi became the seat of a diocese . In 395 , following the division of the Roman Empire in two , Scupi became part of the Eastern Roman Empire . 
 In its heyday , Scupi covered 40 hectares and was closed by a 3 @.@ 5 m wide wall . It had many monuments , including four <unk> , a theatre , thermae , and a large Christian basilica . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In 518 , Scupi was destroyed by a violent earthquake , possibly the most devastating one Macedonia has ever experienced . At that time , the region was threatened by the Barbarian invasions , and the city inhabitants had already fled in forests and mountains before the disaster occurred . Scupi was eventually rebuilt by Justinian I. During his reign , many Byzantine towns were relocated on hills and other easily defendable places to face invasions . Scupi was thus transferred on another site : the promontory on which stands the fortress . However , Scupi was sacked by Slavs at the end of the 6th century and the city seems to have fallen under Slavic rule in 695 . The Slavic tribe which settled in Scupi were probably the <unk> who had invaded the entire Vardar valley . The city is not mentioned during the three following centuries but along with the rest of Upper Vardar it became part of the expanding First Bulgarian Empire in the 830s . 
 Starting from the end of the 10th century Skopje experienced a period of wars and political troubles . Bulgarian capital from 972 to 992 , Samuil ruled it from 976 until 1004 when its governor Roman surrendered it to Byzantine Emperor Basil the Bulgar Slayer in 1004 in exchange of the titles of patrician and strategos . Later , Skopje was briefly seized twice by Slavic insurgents who wanted to restore a Bulgarian state . At first in 1040 under Peter Delyan 's command , and in 1072 under the orders of Georgi <unk> . In 1081 , Skopje was captured by Norman troops led by Robert Guiscard and the city remained in their hands until 1088 . Skopje was subsequently conquered by the Serbian Grand Prince <unk> in 1093 , and again by the Normans four years later . However , because of epidemics and food shortage , Normans quickly surrendered to the Byzantines . 
 During the 12th and 13th centuries , Bulgarians and Serbs took advantage of Byzantine decline to create large kingdoms stretching from Danube to the Aegean Sea . Kaloyan brought Skopje back into reestablished Bulgaria in 1203 until his nephew Strez declared autonomy along the Upper Vardar with Serbian help only five years later . In 1209 Strez switched allegiances and recognized Boril of Bulgaria with whom he led a successful joint campaign against Serbia 's first internationally recognized king Stefan Nemanjić . From 1214 to 1230 Skopje was a part of Byzantine successor state Epirus before recaptured by Ivan Asen II and held by Bulgaria until 1246 when the Upper Vardar valley was incorporated once more into a Byzantine state – the Empire of Nicaea . Byzantine conquest was briefly reversed in 1255 by the regents of the young Michael Asen I of Bulgaria . Meanwhile , in the parallel civil war for the Crown in Tarnovo Skopje <unk> and grandson to Stefan Nemanja Constantine Tikh gained the upper hand and ruled until Europe 's only successful peasant revolt the Uprising of Ivaylo deposed him . In 1282 Skopje was captured by Serbian king Milutin . Under the political stability of the Nemanjić rule , Skopje slowly spread outside the walls of the fortress towards Gazi Baba hill . Churches , monasteries and markets were built and tradesmen from Venice and Dubrovnik opened shops . The town greatly benefited from its location on the roads between Europe , Middle @-@ East and Africa . In the 14th century , Skopje became such an important city that king Dušan made it the capital of the Serbian kingdom . In 1346 , he was crowned " Emperor of the Serbs and Greeks " in Skopje . After his death the Serbian Empire collapsed into many small principalities which were unable to defend themselves against the Turks . Skopje was first inherited by the Lordship of Prilep and finally taken by Vuk Branković in the wake of the Battle of Maritsa ( 1371 ) before becoming part of the Ottoman Empire in 1392 . 
 = = = Ottoman period = = = 
 Skopje economic life greatly benefited from its position in the middle of Turkish Europe . Until the 17th century , Skopje experienced a long golden age . Around 1650 , the number of inhabitants in Skopje was between 30 @,@ 000 and 60 @,@ 000 and the city contained more than 10 @,@ 000 houses . It was then one of the only big cities on the territory of future Yugoslavia , together with Belgrade and Sarajevo . At that time , Dubrovnik , which was a busy harbour , had not even 7 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Following the Ottoman conquest , the city population changed . Christians were forcibly converted to Islam or were replaced by Turks and Jews . At that time , Christians of Skopje were mostly non converted Slavs and Albanians , but also Ragusan and Armenian tradesmen . Ottoman Turks drastically changed the appearance of the city . They organised the Bazaar with its caravanserais , mosques and baths . 
 The city severely suffered from the Great Turkish War at the end of the 17th century and consequently experienced recession until the 19th century . In 1689 , Austrians seized Skopje which was already weakened by a cholera epidemic . The same day , general Silvio Piccolomini set fire to the city to end the epidemic . It is however possible that he wanted to avenge damages that Turks caused in Vienna in 1683 . Skopje burned during two days . The Austrian presence in Macedonia motivated Slav uprisings . Nevertheless , Austrians left the country within the year and <unk> , leaders of the uprisings , had to follow them in their retreat north of the Balkans . Some were arrested by the Turks , such as Petar <unk> , who was impaled on Skopje Stone Bridge . 
 After the war , Skopje was in ruins . Most of the official buildings were restored or rebuilt , but the city experienced new plague and cholera epidemics and many inhabitants emigrated . The Ottoman Turkish Empire as a whole entered in recession and political decline . Many rebellions and pillages occurred in Macedonia during the 18th century , either led by Turkish outlaws , Janissaries or <unk> . An estimation conduced by French officers around 1836 revealed that at that time Skopje only had around 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants . It was largely overwhelmed by two towns of the present @-@ day Republic of Macedonia : Bitola ( 40 @,@ 000 ) and Štip ( 15 – 20 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Skopje began to recover from decades of decline after 1850 . At that time , the city experienced a slow but steady demographic growth , mainly due to the rural exodus of Slav Macedonians . It was also fuelled by the exodus of Muslims from Serbia and Bulgaria , which were gaining autonomy and independence from the Empire at that time . During the Tanzimat reforms , nationalism arose in the Empire and in 1870 a new Bulgarian Church was established and its separate diocese was created , based on ethnic identity , rather than religious principles . The Slavic population of the bishopric of Skopje voted in 1874 overwhelmingly , by 91 % in favour of joining the Exarchate and became part of the Bulgarian Millet . Economic growth was permitted by the construction of the Skopje @-@ Salonica railway in 1873 . The train station was built south of the Vardar and this contributed to the relocation of economic activities on this side of the river , which had never been urbanised before . Because of the rural exodus , the share of Christians in the city population arose . Some of the newcomers became part of the local elite and helped to spread nationalist ideas Skopje was one of the five main centres of the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization when it organised the 1903 Ilinden uprising . Its revolutionary network in Skopje region was not well @-@ developed and the lack of weapons was a serious problem . At the outbreak of the uprising the rebel forces derailed a military train . On 3 and 5 August respectively , they attacked a Turkish unit guarding the bridge on the Vardar river and gave a battle in the " St. Jovan " monastery . In the next few days the band was pursued by numerous <unk> and moved to Bulgaria . 
 In 1877 , Skopje was chosen as the capital city of the new Kosovo Vilayet , which encompassed present @-@ day Kosovo , northwestern Macedonia and the Sanjak of Novi Pazar . In 1905 , the city had 32 @,@ 000 inhabitants , making it the largest of the vilayet , although closely followed by Prizren with its 30 @,@ 000 inhabitants . At the beginning of the 20th century , local economy was focused on dyeing , weaving , tanning , ironworks and wine and flour processing . 
 Following the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 , the Ottoman Turkish Empire experienced democracy and several political parties were created . However , some of the policies implemented by the Young Turks , such as a tax rise and the interdiction of ethnic @-@ based political parties , discontented minorities . Albanians opposed the nationalist character of the movement and led local uprisings in 1910 and 1912 . During the latter they managed to seize most of Kosovo and took Skopje on 11 August . On 18 August , the insurgents signed the Üsküb agreement which provided for the creation of an autonomous Albanian province and they were amnestied the day later . 
 = = = From the Balkan Wars to present day = = = 
 Following an alliance contracted in 1912 , Bulgaria , Greece and Serbia declared war on the Ottoman Turkish Empire . Their goal was to definitely expel Turks from Europe . The First Balkan War started on 8 October 1912 and lasted six weeks . Serbians reached Skopje on 26 October . The Turkish forces had left the city the day before . The Serbian annexation led to the exodus of many Turks : 725 Turkish families left the city on 27 January 1913 . The same year , the city population was evaluated at 37 @,@ 000 by the Serbian authorities . 
 In 1915 , during the First World War , Serbian Macedonia was invaded by Bulgaria , which captured Skopje on 22 October 1915 . Serbia , allied to the Triple Entente , was helped by France , Britain , Greece , and Italy , which formed the Macedonian Front . Following a great Allied offensive in 1918 , the Armée française d 'Orient reached Skopje 29 September and took the city by surprise . After the end of the World War , Macedonia became part of the new Kingdom of Serbs , Croats , and Slovenes , which became " Kingdom of Yugoslavia " in 1929 . A mostly foreign ethnic Serb ruling class gained control , imposing a repression unknown under the previous Turkish rulers . The policies of de @-@ <unk> and assimilation were pursued . At that time part of the young locals , repressed by the Serbs , tried to find a separate way of ethnic Macedonian development . In 1931 , in a move to formally decentralize the country , Skopje was named the capital of the Vardar Banovina of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . Until the Second World War , Skopje experienced strong economic growth , and its population increased . The city had 41 @,@ 066 inhabitants in 1921 , 64 @,@ 807 in 1931 , and 80 @,@ 000 in 1941 . Although located in an underdeveloped region , it attracted wealthy Serbs who opened businesses and contributed to the modernisation of the city . In 1941 , Skopje had 45 factories , half of the industry in the whole of Macedonia . 
 In 1941 , during the Second World War , Yugoslavia was invaded by Nazi Germany . Germans seized Skopje 8 April and left it to their Bulgarian allies on 22 April 1941 . To ensure <unk> of the society , authorities closed Serbian schools and churches and opened new schools and a higher education institute , the King Boris University . The 4 @,@ 000 Jews of Skopje were all deported in 1943 to Treblinka where almost all of them died . Local Partisan detachments started a widespread guerrilla after the proclamation of the " Popular Republic of Macedonia " by the <unk> on 2 August 1944 . Skopje was liberated on 13 November 1944 by Yugoslav Partisan units of the Macedonian National Liberation Army , together with units of the newly allied Bulgarian People 's Army ( Bulgaria having switched sides in the war in September ) . 
 After World War II , Skopje greatly benefited from Socialist Yugoslav policies which encouraged industry and the development of Macedonian cultural institutions . Consequently , Skopje became home to a national library , a national philharmonic orchestra , a university and the Macedonian Academy . However , its post @-@ war development was altered by the 1963 earthquake which occurred 26 July . Although relatively weak in magnitude , it caused enormous damage in the city and can be compared to the 1960 Agadir earthquake . The disaster killed 1 @,@ 070 people , injuring 3 @,@ 300 others . 16 @,@ 000 people were buried alive in ruins and 70 % of the population lost their home . Many educational facilities , factories and historical buildings were destroyed . 
 After the earthquake , reconstruction was quick . It had a deep psychological impact on the population because neighbourhoods were split and people were relocated to new houses and buildings they were not familiar with . Reconstruction was finished by 1980 , even if many elements were never built because funds were exhausted . Skopje cityscape was drastically changed and the city became a true example of modernist architecture . Demographic growth was very important after 1963 , and Skopje had 408 @,@ 100 inhabitants in 1981 . However , during the 1980s and the 1990s , the Republic of Macedonia experienced inflation and recession and the local economy heavily suffered . The situation became better during the 2000s thanks to new investments . Many landmarks were restored and the " Skopje 2014 " project renewed the appearance of the city centre . 
 = = Emblems = = 
 The Flag of Skopje is a red banner in proportions 1 : 2 with a gold @-@ coloured coat of arms of the city positioned in the upper @-@ left corner . It is either vertical or horizontal , but the vertical version was the first to be used . 
 The coat of arms of the city was adopted in the 1950s . It depicts the Stone Bridge with the Vardar river , the Kale Fortress and the snow @-@ capped peaks of the Šar mountains . 
 = = Administration = = 
 = = = Status = = = 
 Being the capital and largest city of the Republic of Macedonia , Skopje enjoys a particular status granted by law . The last revision of its status was made in 2004 . Since then , the City of Skopje has been divided into 10 municipalities which all have a council and a mayor , like all the municipalities of the Republic of Macedonia . Municipalities only deal with matters specific of their territory , and the City of Skopje deals with matters that concern all of them , or that cannot be divided between two or more municipalities . 
 The City of Skopje is part of Skopje Statistical Region , which has no political or administrative power . 
 = = = City Council = = = 
 The City Council consists of 45 members who serve a four @-@ year term . It primarily deals with budget , global orientations and relations between the City and the government . Several commissions exist to treat more specific topics , such as urbanism , finances , environment of local development . 
 The President of the Council is elected by the Council Members . Since 2009 the president has been Irena <unk> , member of the VMRO @-@ DPMNE . 
 Following the 2013 local elections , the City Council is constituted as follows : 
 = = = Mayor = = = 
 The Mayor of Skopje is elected every four years . The current mayor has been <unk> <unk> since 2009 . A former deputy and mayor of Gazi Baba municipality , he is a member of the VMRO @-@ DPMNE . 
 The mayor represents the City of Skopje and he can submit ideas to the Council . He manages the administrative bodies and their officials . 
 = = = Municipalities = = = 
 Skopje was first divided into administrative units in 1945 , but the first municipalities were created in 1976 . They were five : Centar , Čair , Karpoš , Gazi Baba and Kisela Voda . After the independence of the Republic of Macedonia , power was centralised and municipalities lost much of their competences . A 1996 law restored them and created two new municipalities : Gjorče Petrov and Šuto Orizari . After the insurgency between Albanian rebels and Macedonian forces in 2001 , a new law was enacted in 2004 to incorporate Saraj municipality into the City of Skopje . Saraj is mostly populated by Albanians and , since then , Albanians represent more than 20 % of the city population . Thus Albanian became the second official language of the city administration , something which was one of the claims of the Albanian rebels . The same year , Aerodrom Municipality separated itself from Kisela Voda , and Butel municipality from Čair . 
 Municipalities are administered by a council of 23 members elected every four years . They also have a mayor and several departments ( education , culture , finances ... ) . The mayor primarily deals with these departments . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Economic weight = = = 
 Skopje is a medium city at European level , but because of their administrative function , they can be compared to small regional metropolis like Sofia and Thessaloniki . Being the capital and largest city in the Republic of Macedonia , Skopje concentrates a large share of the national economy . The Skopje Statistical Region , which encompasses the City of Skopje and some neighbouring municipalities , produces 45 @,@ 5 % of the Macedonian GDP . In 2009 , the regional GDP per capita amounted to USD 6 @,@ 565 , or 155 % of the Macedonian GDP per capita . This figure is however smaller than the one of Sofia ( USD 10 @,@ 106 ) , Sarajevo ( USD 10 @,@ 048 ) or Belgrade ( USD 7 @,@ 983 ) , but higher than the one of Tirana ( USD 4 @,@ 126 ) . 
 Because there are no other large city in the Republic of Macedonia , and because of political and economical centralisation , a large number of Macedonians living outside of Skopje work in the capital city . The dynamism of the city also encourages rural exodus , not only from Macedonia , but also from Kosovo , Albania and Southern Serbia . 
 = = = Firms and activities = = = 
 In 2009 , Skopje had 26 @,@ 056 firms but only 145 of them had a large size . The large majority of them are either small ( 12 @,@ 017 ) or very small ( 13 @,@ 625 ) . A large share of the firms deal with trade of goods ( 9 @,@ 758 ) , 3 @,@ 839 are specialised in business and real estate , and 2 @,@ 849 are manufacturers . Although few in number , large firms account for 51 % of the local production outside finance . 
 The city industry is dominated by food processing , textile , printing and metal processing . In 2012 , it accounted for 30 % of the city GDP . Most of the industrial areas are located in Gazi Baba municipality , on the major routes and rail lines to Belgrade and Thessaloniki . Notably , the ArcelorMittal and <unk> steel plants are located there , and also the Skopje Brewery . Other zones are located between Aerodrom and Kisela Voda , along the railway to Greece . These zones comprise <unk> Skopje ( pharmaceuticals ) , Rade Končar ( electrical supplies ) , Imperial Tobacco , and <unk> ( fertilisers ) . Two special economic zones also exist , around the airport and the <unk> refinery . They have attracted several foreign companies , such as Johnson Controls , Johnson Matthey and Van <unk> . 
 As the financial capital of the Republic of Macedonia , Skopje is the seat of the Macedonian Stock Exchange , of the National Bank and of most of the Macedonian banking , insurance and telecommunication companies , such as <unk> Telekom , <unk> banka Skopje and <unk> Banka . The services sector produces 60 % of the city GDP . 
 Besides many small traditional shops , Skopje has two large markets , the " <unk> Pazar " ( green market ) and the " Bit Pazar " ( flea market ) . They are both considered as local institutions . However , since the 1970s , retailing has largely been modernised and Skopje now has many supermarkets and shopping malls . The largest , Skopje City Mall , opened in 2012 . It comprises a Carrefour hypermarket , 130 shops and a cinema , and employs 2 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 51 % of Skopje active population is employed in small firms . 52 % of the population work in the services sector , 34 % in industry , and the remaining is mainly employed in administration . 
 The unemployment rate for the Skopje Statistical Region was at 27 % in 2009 , three points under the national rate ( 30 % ) . The neighbouring Polog Region had a similar rate , but the less affected region was the South @-@ West , with 22 % . Unemployment in Skopje mainly concern men , who represent 56 % of job @-@ seekers , people between 25 and 44 years old ( 45 % of job @-@ seekers ) , and non @-@ qualified people ( 43 % ) . Unemployment also concerns Roma people , who represent 4 @.@ 63 % of the city population . Unemployment concerns 70 % of the active population in the community . 
 The average net monthly wage in Skopje was at € 400 in October 2010 , which represented 120 % of the national figure . The average wage in Skopje was then lower than in Sarajevo ( € 522 ) Sofia ( € 436 ) and in Belgrade ( € 440 ) . 
 = = Population = = 
 = = = Demography = = = 
 The City of Skopje had 506 @,@ 926 inhabitants within its administrative limits in 2002 , while the urban unit itself had 378 @,@ 243 inhabitants . A 2006 estimation gave 668 @,@ 518 inhabitants to the City in its administrative limits . Skopje 's employment area covers a large part of the Republic of Macedonia , including Veles , Kumanovo and Tetovo , and totaling more than one million inhabitants . 
 Skopje concentrates a third of Macedonia 's population and other Macedonian towns are much smaller . The second most populous municipality , Kumanovo , had 107 @,@ 632 inhabitants in 2011 , and an urban unit of 76 @,@ 272 inhabitants in 2002 . 
 Before the Austro @-@ Turkish war and the 1698 Great Fire , Skopje was one of the biggest cities in the Balkans , with a population estimated between 30 @,@ 000 and 60 @,@ 000 inhabitants . After the fire , it experienced a long period of decline and only had 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 1836 . However , the population started to rise again after 1850 and reached 32 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 1905 . In the 20th century , Skopje was one of the fastest growing cities in Yugoslavia and it has 448 @,@ 200 inhabitants in 1971 . Since then , the demographic growth has continued at a steady pace . 
 = = = Ethnic groups = = = 
 Skopje , as the Republic of Macedonia as a whole , is characterised by a large ethnic diversity . The city is located in a region where Ethnic Albanians and Macedonians meet , and it welcomed Romani , Turks , Jews and Serbs throughout its history . Skopje was mainly a Muslim city until the 19th century , when large number of Christians started to settle there . According to the 2002 census , Macedonians were the largest ethnic group in Skopje , with 338 @,@ 358 inhabitants , or 66 @.@ 75 % of the population . Then came Albanians with 103 @,@ 891 inhabitants ( 20 @.@ 49 % ) , Roma people with 23 @,@ 475 ( 4 @.@ 63 % ) , Serbs ( 14 @,@ 298 inhabitants ) , Turks ( 8 @,@ 595 ) , Bosniaks ( 7 @,@ 585 ) and Vlachs ( 2 @,@ 557 ) . 8 @,@ 167 people did not belong to any of these groups . 
 Ethnic Macedonians form an overwhelming majority of the population in the municipalities of Aerodrom , Centar , Gjorče Petrov , Karpoš and Kisela Voda , which are all located south of the Vardar . They also form a majority in Butel and Gazi Baba which are north of the river . Albanians form a majority in Čair which roughly corresponds to the Old Bazaar , and in Saraj . They form a large minority in Butel and Gazi Baba . Šuto Orizari , located on the northern edge of the city , is predominantly Roma . 
 When an ethnic minority forms at least 20 % of the population in a municipality , its language can become official on the local level . Thus , in Čair and Saraj schools and administration use Albanian , and Romani in Šuto Orizari . The latter is the only municipality in the world where Romani is an official language . 
 Relations between the two largest groups , Macedonians and Albanians , are sometimes difficult , as in the rest of the country . Each group tolerate the other but they tend to avoid each other and live in what can appear as two parallel worlds . The Roma minority is on its side very deprived . Its exact size is not known because many Macedonian Roma declare themselves as belonging to other ethnic groups or simply avoid censuses . However , even if official figures are underestimated , Skopje is the city in the world with the largest Roma population . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Religious affiliation is closely linked to ethnicity : Macedonians , Serbs and Vlachs are mainly Orthodox , while Albanians , Turks and Roma ( Gypsies ) are usually Muslim . Skopje also has a Catholic Albanian minority , to which belonged Mother Teresa . 
 According to the 2002 census , 68 @.@ 5 % of the population of Skopje belonged to the Eastern Orthodox Church , while 28 @.@ 6 % of it belonged to Islam . The city also had a Catholic ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) and Protestant ( 0 @.@ 04 % ) minorities . The Catholics are served by the Latin bishopric of Skopje , in which is also vested the Byzantine Rite Macedonian Apostolic Exarchate of Macedonia . 
 Until World War II , Skopje had a significant Jewish minority which mainly descended from Spanish <unk> who had escaped the Inquisition . The community comprised 2 @,@ 424 members in 1939 and most of them were deported and killed by Nazis . After the war , most of the survivors settled in Israel . 
 Because of its Ottoman past , Skopje has more mosques than churches . Religious communities often complain about the lack of infrastructure and new places of worship are often built . Skopje is the seat of many Macedonian religious organisations , such as the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Islamic Religious Union of Macedonia . It has an Orthodox cathedral and seminary , several madrasahs , a Roman Catholic cathedral and a synagogue . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Skopje has several public and private hospitals and specialised medical institutions , such as a psychiatric hospital , two obstetric hospitals , a gerontology hospital and institutes for respiratory and ocular diseases . In 2012 , Skopje had a ratio of one physician per 251 @.@ 6 inhabitants , a figure higher than the national ratio ( one per 370 @.@ 9 ) . The ratio of medical specialists was also higher than in the rest of the country . However , the ratio of hospital beds , pharmacists and dentists was lower in Skopje . The population in Skopje enjoys better health standards than other Macedonians . In 2010 , the mortality rate was at 8 @.@ 6 ‰ in Skopje and 9 @.@ 3 ‰ on the national level . The infant mortality rate was at 6 @.@ 8 ‰ in Skopje and 7 @.@ 6 ‰ in Macedonia . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Skopje 's citizenry is generally more educated than the rest of the country . For one , 16 % of <unk> graduated university in contrast to 10 % for the rest of the country . The amount of people with a complete lack of education or ones who received a partial education is lower in Skopje at 9 % compared to the provincial average of 17 % . 80 % of Macedonian citizens who hold a PhD take up residence in Skopje . 
 Skopje has 21 secondary schools ; 5 of which serve as general high @-@ school gymnasiums and 16 vocational schools . The city is also host to several higher education institutions , the most notable of which is Ss . Cyril and Methodius University , founded in 1949 . The university has 23 departments , 10 research institutes and is attended by an average of 50 @,@ 000 students . After the declaration of independence for the Republic of Macedonia in 1991 , several private universities were brought to <unk> . The largest private universities in Skopje are currently European University with 7 departments and <unk> University with 9 departments respectively . 
 = = Media = = 
 Skopje is the largest media center in Macedonia . Of the 818 newspapers surveyed in 2000 by the Ministry of Information , over 600 had their headquarters in Skopje . The daily <unk> , founded in 1996 , with 60 000 runs per day is the most printed in the country . Also based in Skopje , <unk> is pulled 50 @,@ 000 copies and the state owns one third of its capital , as well as Nova Makedonija , reprinted 20 @,@ 000 copies . Other major newspapers in Skopje , totally private , are <unk> <unk> ( 30 @,@ 000 copies ) , Vest ( 25 @,@ 000 copies ) and <unk> ( 15 @,@ 000 copies ) . Magazines Fokus ( 12 @,@ 000 copies ) , Start ( 10 @,@ 000 copies ) , and Denes ( 7 @,@ 500 copies ) also have their headquarters in Skopje . 
 The city is home of the studios of Macedonian Radio @-@ Television ( MRT ) , the country 's public radio and television . Founded in 1966 , it operate <unk> three national broadcast channels , twenty @-@ four hours at day . The most popular private television stations are Sitel . Kanal 5 , Telma , Alfa TV and <unk> are another major private television companies . MRT also operates radio stations with national coverage , the private station Skopje 's Kanal 77 is the only one to have such a span . Radio Antenna 5 and Metropolis are two other major private stations that have their headquarters in Skopje . 
 Also , the city boasts big news agencies in the country , both public , as the Macedonian Information Agency , and private , such as the <unk> . 
 = = Sports = = 
 As the capital and largest city of Macedonia , Skopje has many major sporting facilities . The city has three large swimming pools , two of which feature Olympic pools . These pools are particularly relevant to coaching water polo teams . Skopje also boasts many football stadiums , like Ilinden in Čair and <unk> , which can accommodate between 4 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 500 spectators . The basketball court Kale can accommodate 5 000 people and the court of Jane <unk> , 4000 people . 
 <unk> largest stadium remains the Philip II Arena . The stadium , built in 1947 and named until 2008 , City Stadium Skopje experienced a total renovation , begun in 2009 to meet the standards of FIFA . Fully renovated the stadium contains 32 @,@ 580 seats , and a health spa and fitness . The Boris Trajkovski Sports Center is the largest sports complex in the country . It was opened in 2008 and named after president Boris Trajkovski , who died in 2004 . It includes room dedicated to handball , basketball and volleyball , a bowling alley , a fitness area and an ice hockey court . Its main hall , which regularly hosts concerts , holds around 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 FK Vardar and FK Rabotnički are the two most popular football teams , playing in the first national league . Their workouts are held at Philip Arena II , like those of the national team . The city is also home to many smaller football clubs , such as : FK Makedonija Gjorče Petrov , FK Gorno <unk> , FK <unk> Skopje , FK Metalurg Skopje , FK <unk> Solidarnost and FK Skopje , who play in first , second or third national league . Another popular sport in Macedonia is basketball , represented in particular by the teams Rabotnički and <unk> Skopje . Handball is illustrated by RK Vardar PRO and RK Metalurg Skopje , also the women 's team <unk> Metalurg and <unk> Vardar . The city co @-@ hosted the 2008 European Women 's Handball Championship together with Ohrid . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Main connections = = = 
 Skopje is located near three other capital cities , Prishtina ( 87 km away ) , Tirana ( 291 km ) and Sofia ( 245 km ) . Thessaloniki is 233 km south and Belgrade is 433 km north . Skopje is also at the crossroad of two Pan @-@ European corridors : Corridor X , which runs between Austria and Greece , and Corridor VIII , which runs from the Adriatic in Albania to the Black sea in Bulgaria . Corridor X links Skopje to Thessaloniki , Belgrade and Western Europe , while Corridor VIII links it with Tirana and Sofia . 
 Corridor X locally corresponds to the M @-@ 1 motorway ( E75 ) , which is the longest Macedonian highway . It also corresponds to the <unk> @-@ <unk> railway . Corridor VIII , less developed , corresponds to the M @-@ 4 motorway and the Kičevo @-@ <unk> railway . Skopje is not quite on the Corridor X and the M @-@ 1 does not pass on the city territory . Thus the junction between the M @-@ 1 and M @-@ 4 is located some 20 km east , close to the airport . Although Skopje is geographically close to other major cities , movement of people and goods is not optimised , especially with Albania . This is mainly due to poor infrastructure . As a result , 61 @.@ 8 % of <unk> have never been to Tirana , while only 6 @.@ 7 % have never been to Thessaloniki and 0 % to Sofia . Furthermore , 26 % of Thessalonians , 33 % of <unk> and 37 % of <unk> have never been to Skopje . 
 = = = Rail and coach stations = = = 
 The main station in Skopje is serviced by the Belgrade @-@ Thessaloniki and Skopje @-@ Prishtina international lines . After the completion of the Corridor VIII railway scheduled for 2022 , the city will also be linked to Tirana and Sofia . Daily trains also link Skopje with other Macedonian towns , such as Kumanovo , Kičevo , Štip , Bitola or Veles . 
 Skopje has several minor train stations but the city does not have its own railway network and they are only serviced by intercity or international lines . On the railway linking the main station to Belgrade and Thessaloniki are Dračevo and <unk> <unk> stations , and on the railway to Kičevo are Skopje @-@ North , Gjorče Petrov and Saraj stations . Several other stations are freight @-@ only . 
 Skopje coach station opened in 2005 and is built right under the main train station . It can host 450 coaches in a day . Coach connections to and from Skopje are much more efficient and diverse than train connections . Indeed , it is regularly linked to many Macedonian localities and foreign cities including Istanbul , Sofia , Prague , Hamburg and Stockholm . 
 = = = Public transport = = = 
 Skopje has a bus network managed by the City and operated by three companies . The oldest and largest is JSP Skopje , a public company founded in 1948 . JSP lost its monopoly on public transport in 1990 and two new companies , <unk> <unk> and Mak Ekspres , obtained several lines . However , most of the network is still in the hands of JSP which operates 67 lines on 80 . Only 24 lines are urban , the others serving localities around the city . Many of the JSP buses are red double @-@ decker buses designed to look like the British @-@ made buses that were in use in the 1950s and 1960s . 
 A tram network has long been planned in Skopje and the idea was first proposed in the 1980s . The project became real in 2006 when the mayor <unk> <unk> asked for feasibility studies . His successor <unk> <unk> launched a call for tenders in 2010 and the first line is scheduled for 2019 . 
 A new network for small buses started to operate in June 2014 , not to replace but to decrease the number of big buses in the city center . 
 = = = Airport = = = 
 Skopje has an international airport , Skopje " Alexander the Great " Airport . It is located in Petrovec , some 20 km east of the city . Since 2008 , it has been managed by the Turkish TAV Airports Holding and it can accommodate up to four million passengers per year . The annual traffic has constantly risen since 2008 , reaching one million passengers in 2014 . 
 Skopje airport has connections to several European cities , including Vienna , Zürich , Brussels , Istanbul , London and Rome . It also maintains a direct connection with Dubai . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Cultural institutions = = = 
 Being the capital of the Republic of Macedonia , Skopje is home to the largest cultural institutions of the country , such as the National and University Library " St. Kliment of Ohrid " , the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts , the National Theatre , the National <unk> Orchestra and the Macedonian Opera and Ballet . Among the local institutions are the Brothers <unk> Library which has more than a million documents , the Cultural Information Centre which manages festivals , exhibitions and concerts , and the House of Culture <unk> <unk> which is dedicated to contemporary art and young talents . 
 Skopje has also several foreign cultural centres , such as a Goethe @-@ Institut , a British Council , an Alliance française , an American Corner . 
 The city has several theatres and concert halls . The <unk> Sala , seating 1 @,@ 570 , was built in 1966 and is used for concerts , fashion shows and congresses . The Metropolis Arena , designed for large concerts , has 3 @,@ 546 seats . Other large halls include the Macedonian Opera and Ballet ( 800 seats ) , the National Theatre ( 724 ) , and the Drama Theatre ( 333 ) . Other smaller venues exist , such as the Albanian Theatre and the Youth Theatre . A Turkish Theatre and a Philharmonic hall are under construction . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The largest museum in Skopje is the Museum of Macedonia which details the history of the country . Its icons and lapidary collections are particularly rich . The Macedonian Archeological Museum , opened in 2014 , keeps some of the best archeological finds in Macedonia , dating from Prehistory to the Ottoman period . The National Gallery of Macedonia exhibits paintings dating from the 14th to the 20th century in two former Turkish baths of the Old Bazaar . The Contemporary Art Museum of Macedonia was built after the 1963 earthquake thanks to international assistance . Its collections include Macedonian and foreign art , with works by Fernand Léger , André Masson , Pablo Picasso , Hans Hartung , Victor <unk> , Alexander Calder , Pierre Soulages , Alberto <unk> and Christo . 
 The Skopje City Museum is located inside the remains of the old train station , destroyed by the 1963 earthquake . It is dedicated to the local history and it has four departments : archeology , ethnology , history and art history . The Memorial House of Mother Teresa was built in 2009 on the site where stood the church were the Saint was baptised . The Museum of the Macedonian Struggle is dedicated to the modern national history and the struggle of Macedonians for their independence . Nearby is the Holocaust Memorial Center for the Jews of Macedonia . The Macedonian Museum of Natural History showcases some 4 @,@ 000 items while the 12 @-@ ha Skopje Zoo is home to 300 animals . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Although Skopje has been destroyed many times trough its history , it still has many historical landmarks which reflect the successive occupations of the city . Skopje has one of the biggest Ottoman urban complexes in Europe , with many Ottoman monuments still serving their original purpose . It was also a ground for modernist experiments in the 20th century , following the 1963 earthquake . In the beginning of the 21st century , it is again the subject of massive building campaigns , thanks to the historicist and nationalist " Skopje 2014 " project . Skopje is thus an environment where old , new , <unk> , reactionary , eastern and western perspectives coexist . 
 Skopje has some remains of <unk> architecture which can be seen on the <unk> <unk> Neolithic site . On the other side of the city lie the remains of the ancient Scupi , with ruins of a theatre , thermae and a basilica . The Skopje Aqueduct , located between Scupi and the city centre , is rather mysterious because its date of construction is unknown . It seems to have been built by the Byzantines ot the Turks , but it was already out of use in the 16th century . It consists of 50 arches , worked in cloisonné masonry . 
 The Skopje Fortress was rebuilt several times before it was destroyed by the 1963 earthquake . Since then , it has been restored to its medieval appearance . It is the only medieval monument in Skopje , but several churches located around the city illustrate the Vardar architectural school which flourished around 1300 . Among these churches are the ones around Matka Canyon ( St Nicholas , St Andrew and Matka churches ) . The church of St. Panteleimon in Gorno Nerezi dates from the 12th century . Its expressive frescoes anticipate the Italian primitives . 
 Examples of Ottoman Turkish architecture are located in the Old Bazaar . Mosques in Skopje are usually simple in design , with a square base and a single dome and minaret . There entrance is usually emphasised by a portico , as on Mustafa Pasha Mosque , dating from the 15th century . Some mosques show some originality in their appearance : Sultan Murad and Yahya Pasha mosques have lost their dome and have a pyramidal roof , while Isa Bey mosque has a rectangular base , two domes and two side wings . The <unk> Mosque was originally covered with blue faience , but it disappeared in the 1689 Great Fire . However , some tiles are still visible on the adjoining türbe . Other Turkish public monuments include the 16th @-@ century clock tower , a <unk> , three caravanserais , two Turkish baths and the Stone Bridge , first mentioned in 1469 . 
 The oldest churches in the city centre , the Ascension and St Dimitri churches , were built in the 18th century , after the 1689 Great Fire . They were both renovated in the 19th century . The Church of the Ascension is particularly small it is half @-@ buried in order not to overlook neighbouring mosques . In the 19th century , several new churches were built , including the Church of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary , which is a large three @-@ nave building designed by Andrey <unk> . 
 After 1912 , when Skopje was annexed by Serbia , the city was drastically westernised . Wealthy Serbs built mansions and town houses such as the 1926 <unk> Palace . Architecture of that time is very similar to the one of Central Europe , but some buildings are more creative , such as the Neo @-@ Moorish Arab House and the Neo @-@ Byzantine train station , both built in 1938 . Modernism appeared as early as 1933 with the former Ethnographic Museum ( today the City Gallery ) , designed by Milan <unk> . However , modernist architecture only fully developed in Skopje after the 1963 earthquake . The reconstruction of city centre was partially planned by Japanese Kenzo Tange who designed the new train station . Macedonian architects also took part to the reconstruction : Georgi <unk> designed the City Archives building in 1968 and the Hall of residence <unk> <unk> in 1975 , while Janko Konstantinov designed the Telecommunication Centre and the main post office ( 1974 – 1989 ) . Slavko <unk> designed the Church of St. Clement of Ohrid . These two buildings are noted for their originality although they are directly inspired by brutalism . 
 The reconstruction turned Skopje into a proper modernist city , with large blocks of flats , austere concrete buildings and scattered green spaces . The city centre was considered as a grey and unattractive place when local authorities unveiled the " Skopje 2014 " project in 2010 . It made plans to erect a large number of statues , fountains , bridges , and museums at a cost of about € 500 million . 
 The project has generated controversy : critics have described the new landmark buildings as signs of reactionary historicist aesthetics . Also , the government has been criticised for its cost and for the original lack of representation of national minorities in the coverage of its set of statues and memorials . However , representations of minorities have since been included among the monuments . The scheme is accused of turning Skopje to a theme park , which is viewed as nationalistic kitsch , and has made Skopje an example to see how national identities are constructed and how this construction is mirrored in the urban space . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 The Skopje Jazz Festival has been held annually in October since 1981 . It is part of the European Jazz Network and the European Forum of World Wide Festivals . The artists ' profiles include fusion , acid jazz , Latin jazz , smooth jazz , and avant @-@ garde jazz . Ray Charles , Tito Puente , <unk> Project , Al Di Meola , Youssou N 'Dour , among others , have performed at the festival . Another music festival in Skopje is the Blues and Soul Festival . It is a relatively new event in the Macedonian cultural scene that occurs every summer in early July . Past guests include Larry Coryell , Mick Taylor & the All @-@ Stars Blues Band , Candy <unk> & Funky Stuff , João Bosco , The Temptations , Tolo Marton Trio , Blues Wire , and Phil Guy . 
 The Skopje Cultural Summer Festival is a renowned cultural event that takes place in Skopje each year during the summer . The festival is a member of the International Festivals and Events Association ( IFEA ) and it includes musical concerts , operas , ballets , plays , art and photograph exhibitions , movies , and multimedia projects that gather 2 @,@ 000 participants from around the world each year including the St Petersburg Theatre , the Chamber Orchestra of the Bolshoi Theatre , Irina <unk> , Viktor <unk> , The Theatre of Shadows , Michel <unk> , and David Burgess . 
 May Opera Evenings is a festival that has occurred annually in Skopje since 1972 and is dedicated to promoting opera among the general public . Over the years , it has evolved into a stage on which artists from some 50 countries have performed . There is one other major international theater festival that takes place each year at the end of month September , the Young Open Theater <unk> ( MOT ) , which was organized for the first time in May 1976 by the Youth Cultural Center – Skopje . More than 700 theatrical performances have been presented at this festival so far , most of them being alternative , experimental theatre groups engaging young writers and actors . The MOT International theater festival is also a member of the International Network for Contemporary Performing Arts or <unk> . Within the framework of the MOT Festival , the Macedonian National Center of the International Theater Institute ( ITI ) was established , and at the 25th ITI World Congress in Munich in 1993 , it became a regular member of this theater association . The festival has an international character , always representing theaters from all over the world that present and enhance exchange and circulation of young @-@ fresh @-@ experimental @-@ avant guard theatrical energy and experience between its participants on one side and the audience on the other . 
 The Skopje Film Festival is an annual event held in the city every March . Over 50 films are shown at this five @-@ day festival , mostly from Macedonia and Europe , but also including some non @-@ commercial film productions from all over the world . 
 = = = Nightlife = = = 
 Skopje has a diverse nightlife . There is a large emphasis on casinos , many of which are associated with hotels , such as that of the Holiday Inn . Other casinos include Helios <unk> , Olympic , Bon <unk> , and Sherry . Among young people the most popular destinations are bars , discos , and nightclubs which can be found in the center and the City Park . Among the most popular nightclubs are Midnight , Hard Rock , <unk> , B2 , Havana and Colosseum where world famous disc jockeys and idiosyncratic local performances are frequent . In 2010 , the Colosseum club was named fifth on a list of the best clubs in Southeastern Europe . Armin van Buuren , Above and Beyond , The Shapeshifters are just some of the many musicians that have visited the club . Nighttime concerts in local , regional and global music are often held at the Philip II National Arena and Boris Trajkovski Sports Center . For middle @-@ aged people , places for having fun are also the <unk> where traditional Macedonian food is served and traditional Macedonian Music ( <unk> <unk> ) is played , but music from all the Balkans , particularly Serbian folk music is also popular . Apart from the traditional Macedonian restaurants , there are restaurants featuring international cuisines . Some of the most popular cafés in Skopje are Café <unk> , Café Trend , Drama Café , Lex Café and Blue Café . The Old Bazaar was a popular nightlife destination in the past . The national government has created a project to revive nightlife in the Old Bazaar . The closing time in shops , cafés and restaurants was extended due to the high attendances recorded . In the bazaar 's restaurants , along with the traditional Macedonian wine and food , dishes of the Ottoman cuisine are also served . 
 = = People from Skopje = = 
 Notable people from Skopje include : 
 Mother Teresa , Roman Catholic humanitarian ( honorary citizen of Skopje 27 June 1980 ) ( http : / / <unk> / EN / <unk> ? <unk> = 0 & <unk> = 26 ) 
 Milčo Mančevski , film director 
 Darko <unk> , former footballer 
 Simon <unk> , pianist 
 <unk> Kerim , former UN General Assembly president 
 Yahya Kemal <unk> , poet and diplomat 
 = = International relations = = 
 = = = Twin towns – Sister cities = = = 
 Skopje is twinned with : 
 = = = Partnerships = = = 
 = 1975 Pacific Northwest hurricane = 
 The 1975 Pacific Northwest hurricane was an unusual Pacific tropical cyclone that attained hurricane status farther north than any other Pacific hurricane . It was officially unnamed , with the cargo ship <unk> providing vital meteorological data in assessing the storm . The twelfth tropical cyclone of the 1975 Pacific hurricane season , it developed from a cold @-@ core upper @-@ level low merging with the remnants of a tropical cyclone on August 31 , well to the northeast of Hawaii . Convection increased as the circulation became better defined , and by early on September 2 it became a tropical storm . Turning to the northeast through an area of warm water temperatures , the storm quickly strengthened , and , after developing an eye , it attained hurricane status late on September 3 , while located about 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 1 @,@ 950 km ) south of Alaska . After maintaining peak winds for about 18 hours , the storm rapidly weakened , as it interacted with an approaching cold front . Early on September 5 , it lost its identity near the coast of Alaska . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 26 , the tropical cyclone that was once Hurricane Ilsa degenerated into a remnant low pressure area about 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 1 @,@ 950 km ) west of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . The remnants of Ilsa drifted northwestward through the Stratocumulus cloud field of the eastern north Pacific Ocean . At the same time , a mid @-@ tropospheric trough slowly intensified while gradually undergoing cyclogenesis to develop into a cold @-@ core upper @-@ level low . Early on August 31 , a low @-@ level circulation formed within the upper @-@ level low about 930 miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) northeast of Hawaii ; at that time , the circulation and the remnants of Ilsa were located within 370 miles ( 600 km ) of each other . The cold @-@ core low rapidly intensified as convection increased , and late on August 31 it absorbed the remnants of Ilsa , which influenced the development of the system . Convection steadily organized as it tracked westward , and it is estimated it transitioned into a subtropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC on September 1 . 
 With warm water temperatures , the system strengthened and began to develop tropical characteristics . Subsequent to the development of banding features , convection contracted and deepened over the increasingly well @-@ defined center , and is estimated it became a tropical storm by early on September 2 while located about 685 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) north of the Hawaiian island of Kauai . The storm quickly developed a central dense overcast , and by 00 : 00 UTC on September 3 Dvorak classifications began on the cyclone . With water temperatures of over 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) , it strengthened rapidly as an approaching cold front caused it to accelerate to the northeast . An eye became apparent on satellite imagery , and the storm intensified into a hurricane at 18 : 00 UTC on September 3 , while located about 1 @,@ 170 miles ( 1 @,@ 885 km ) south of <unk> National Monument and Preserve in Alaska . Upon becoming a hurricane , the cyclone was small , measuring about 85 miles ( 140 km ) in diameter . 
 Operationally , the hurricane was not classified due to lack of ship confirmation ; by the time it became a hurricane , the strongest winds reported by a ship was 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) about 80 miles ( 130 km ) southeast of the center . Additionally , upon developing a closed eyewall , the cyclone was beginning to interact with the frontal system to its west . However , late on September 3 , a ship reported a pressure of 1003 mbar with a 3 @-@ hour tendency increase of 13 @.@ 5 mb , suggesting a minimum pressure of under 990 mbar . At the time , the storm maintained a T @-@ number of 4 @.@ 0 , resulting in estimated winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and an estimated pressure of 987 mbar . Maintaining hurricane status for about 18 hours , the storm continued rapidly northeastward and weakened due to strong wind shear from the approaching cold front . Early on September 5 , it is estimated the cyclone became extratropical in the Gulf of Alaska while located about 315 miles ( 510 km ) southwest of Juneau , Alaska . The circulation was rapidly absorbed by the front , and the remnants quickly reached the coast of British Columbia . The remnants of the storm turned southeastward , and was last tracked definitively to a point north of Montana . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 At 18 : 00 UTC on September 3 , a ship named <unk> recorded 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) winds near the center of the storm . At 06 : 00 UTC on September 4 , the U.S. Navy @-@ chartered cargo ship <unk> recorded winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) about 120 miles ( 200 km ) , the strongest reported winds in association with the tropical cyclone ; the ship also reported 27 foot ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) swells . No significant land impact occurred in association with the cyclone , and no fatalities were reported . 
 Forming at 31 ° N , the storm formed farther north than any other Pacific tropical cyclone at the time , though , in 2000 , Tropical Storm Wene formed farther to the north . The cyclone marked the first known occurrence of a mid @-@ Pacific upper tropospheric low developing into a tropical cyclone , though Tropical Storm Fausto in 2002 redeveloped in a similar occurrence to the hurricane . The cyclone attained hurricane status at 40 ° N , a record for a Pacific hurricane . Only Tropical Storm Dot in 1970 , Hurricane John in 1994 , Tropical Depression Guillermo in 1997 , and Tropical Storm Wene in 2000 were tropical cyclones north of the latitude , of which only John was a hurricane ; none maintained tropical cyclone status further north than the cyclone . 
 = SR Merchant Navy class = 
 The SR Merchant Navy class ( originally known as the 21C1 class , and later informally known as Bulleid Pacifics , Spam Cans or Packets ) is a class of air @-@ smoothed 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific steam locomotives designed for the Southern Railway of the United Kingdom by Oliver Bulleid . The Pacific design was chosen in preference to several others proposed by Bulleid . The first members of the class were constructed during the Second World War , and the last of the 30 locomotives in 1949 . 
 Incorporating a number of new developments in British steam locomotive technology , the design of the Merchant Navy class was among the first to use welding in the construction process ; this enabled easier fabrication of components during the austerity of the war and post @-@ war economies . The locomotives featured thermic syphons and Bulleid 's innovative , but controversial , chain @-@ driven valve gear . The class members were named after the Merchant Navy shipping lines involved in the Battle of the Atlantic , and latterly those which used Southampton Docks , a publicity masterstroke by the Southern Railway , which operated Southampton Docks during the period . 
 Due to problems with some of the more novel features of Bulleid 's design , all members of the class were modified by British Railways during the late 1950s , losing their air @-@ smoothed casing in the process . The Merchant Navy class operated until the end of Southern steam in July 1967 . A third of the class has survived and can be seen on heritage railways throughout Great Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Southern Railway was the most financially successful of the " Big Four " , but this was largely based on investment in suburban and main line electrification . After the successful introduction of the SR Schools class in 1930 , the railway had lagged behind the others in terms of modernising its aging fleet of steam locomotives . Following the retirement of the General Manager of the Southern Railway Sir Herbert Walker and Richard Maunsell the Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) in 1937 , their successors considered that the time had come to change this situation . In March 1938 , the new General Manager Gilbert <unk> authorised Oliver Bulleid , Maunsell 's replacement , to prepare designs for twenty express passenger locomotives . The deteriorating international situation prior to the Second World War was an additional factor in this decision . 
 Bulleid 's first suggestion was for an eight @-@ coupled locomotive with a 4 @-@ 8 @-@ 2 wheel arrangement for the heavily loaded Golden Arrow and Night Ferry Continental express trains , although this was quickly modified to a 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 2 equipped with a Helmholtz " Bissel bogie " – a system already successfully applied on the Continent . However , both proposals for eight @-@ coupled locomotives were resisted by the Southern Railway 's Chief Civil Engineer , so a new 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific design was settled upon instead . The new design was intended for express passenger and semi @-@ fast work in Southern England , though it had to be equally adept at freight workings due to the nominal " mixed traffic " classification Bulleid applied to the class for them to be built during wartime . Administrative measures had been put in place by the wartime government , preventing the construction of express passenger locomotives , due to shortages of materials and a need for locomotives with freight @-@ hauling capabilities . Classifying a design as " mixed traffic " neatly circumvented this restriction . 
 = = Design = = 
 Most of the detailed design for the Merchant Navy class was undertaken by the drawing office at Brighton works , but some work was also undertaken by Ashford and Eastleigh . This division of responsibility was possibly due to Bulleid 's wish to restrict knowledge of the new class to a limited number of personnel . The design incorporated a number of novel features , compared to then @-@ current steam locomotive practice in Great Britain . 
 = = = Cylinders , valve gear , wheels and brakes = = = 
 Three 18 inches ( 46 cm ) diameter cylinders drove the centre coupled axle . The inside cylinder was steeply inclined at 1 : 7 @.@ 5 but the outside cylinders were horizontal . It was originally intended to use a gear @-@ driven valve gear , but space restrictions within the frames and wartime material shortages led Bulleid to design his novel chain @-@ driven valve gear . This component was unique amongst British locomotive design practices . It later gained a bad reputation , because it could cause highly irregular valve events , a problem compounded by the fast @-@ moving Bulleid steam reverser . The entire system was located in a sealed oil bath , another unique design , providing constant lubrication to the moving parts . 
 The locomotives were equipped with the unusual 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) Bulleid Firth Brown ( BFB ) driving wheels which were lighter , yet stronger than the spoked equivalent . These proved to be successful and were later used on other Bulleid classes . The leading bogie was based upon that of the SR Lord Nelson class , although it had a 6 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 90 m ) wheelbase as opposed to Maunsell 's 7 ft 6 in ( 2 @.@ 28 m ) design , and featured 3 ft 1 in ( 0 @.@ 94 m ) BFB wheels . A long coupled driving wheelbase was incorporated into the design , to keep the locomotives within the lineal loading of the Southern Railway 's narrower bridges . The supporting rear trailing truck was a one @-@ piece steel casting that gave the smoothest of rides ; the design was utilised in the future BR Standard Class 7 . 
 The spaces between driving wheels housed steam @-@ powered clasp brakes , that gripped the wheels by way of a " scissor " action . The two middle brake hangers held two brake blocks each , whilst the two outside hanger on the leading and rear driving wheels held one block each . These were connected together by outside rodding for ease of access , and the whole system was operated from the footplate . 
 = = = Boiler and welded firebox = = = 
 The maximum boiler pressure was higher than any other British regular service locomotive ( except the GWR County class ) at 280 psi . Bulleid originally intended to use welding in the construction of the boilers , but he soon discovered that the Southern Railway lacked the facilities to manufacture welded boilers of this size . The first ten boilers were ordered on outside contract from the North British Locomotive Company , and were of rivetted construction in the barrel . The tube plates that held the fire tubes and superheater elements inside the boiler were also made of steel to reduce maintenance . 
 The inner and outer firebox of the Merchant Navy class was constructed using welding , as opposed to the <unk> that was more common practice . This made for cheaper construction and a firebox 1 @.@ 5 long tons ( 1 @.@ 5 t ) lighter than a copper example of equal size . Steel plate also lacked the elasticity of copper when exposed to water at high temperatures , reducing maintenance . Two welded steel <unk> syphons were implemented to improve water circulation between the boiler and the top of the firebox ( the " crown " ) . These were subcontracted to Beyer Peacock . 
 = = = Air @-@ smoothed casing , smokebox and blastpipe = = = 
 The boiler was enveloped by Bulleid 's air @-@ smoothed sheet steel casing , which was not for the purposes of streamlining , as demonstrated by the extremely flat front end , but as a way of lifting exhaust gases . The flat sides were also an aid to cleaning the locomotive with a carriage washer , representing an attempt to reduce labour costs . It followed the profile of the Belpaire firebox and extended to a curved profile forward of the smokebox front . Spun glass mattresses were used for boiler lagging . The smokebox was a sheet metal fabrication to the same profile as the firebox , acting as a former to maintain the shape of the air @-@ smoothed casing . In between , the casing was supported by channel @-@ section steel crinolines ( <unk> used to maintain the shape ) attached to the frames . The smokebox housed the five @-@ nozzle Lemaître blastpipe arranged in a circle within a large @-@ diameter chimney . 
 = = = Tender = = = 
 Bulleid designed a new 5 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 22 @,@ 730 L ; 6 @,@ 000 US gal ) tender which could carry 5 tons ( 5 @.@ 1 t ) of coal on a six @-@ wheel chassis . It featured BFB wheels and streamlined panels , or " raves " , that gave the top of the tender a similar cross @-@ sectional outline to the carriages hauled by the locomotive . The water tank was of welded sheet construction to save weight , and the tender was fitted with vacuum braking equipment of a clasp @-@ type similar to that used on the locomotive . Three train @-@ brake vacuum reservoirs of cylindrical construction were grouped on the tank top , behind the coal space . Unusually for a British locomotive , two extra water filler caps were incorporated into the tender front , for access from the footplate . The original tender design proved to be inadequately braced and subject to serious leakage if even slightly damaged , or when water surges caused the welded joints to split . The problem was not solved until 1944 when additional baffling was fitted . 
 = = = Other innovations = = = 
 Electric lighting was also provided on both the locomotive and the footplate , supplied by a steam @-@ powered generator fitted below the footplate . The gauges were lit by ultra @-@ violet light . This enabled clearer night @-@ time vision of the boiler steam pressure gauge and the brake pipe vacuum pressure gauge , whilst eliminating dazzle , making it easier for the crew to see signals along the track . Close attention was also paid to the ergonomics of the driving cab , which was designed with the controls required for operation grouped according to the needs of both fireman and driver , thus promoting safe operation . As an aid to the fireman , a steam @-@ operated treadle was provided that used steam pressure to open the firehole doors ( where the coal is shovelled into the firebox ) . The footplate was entirely enclosed , improving crew working conditions in winter . 
 = = Construction = = 
