 For construction history of the class , see : List of SR Merchant Navy class locomotives 
 The Southern Railway placed an order for ten of the new locomotives to be built at Eastleigh Works , although the boilers had to be supplied from private industry and the tenders were built at Ashford . The prototype was completed in February 1941 , numbered 21C1 , and named Channel Packet at a ceremony at Eastleigh works on 10 March 1941 . It underwent extensive trials and minor modifications before joining Southern Railway stock 4 June 1941 . A second prototype , <unk> Union Castle was completed in June and named at Victoria railway station 4 July . Both prototypes were found to be seven tons over the specified weight , and , at the insistence of the Southern Railway Civil Engineer , production of the remainder was halted until steps were taken to remedy this . This was achieved by using thinner steel plates for the frame stretchers and covering the boiler cladding , and enlarging the existing lightening holes in the main frames . The remaining eight locomotives in the batch were delivered between September 1941 and July 1942 . 
 A second batch of ten followed , beginning in December 1944 and culminating in June 1945 . These were entirely constructed at Eastleigh and equipped with 5 @,@ 100 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 23 @,@ 190 L ; 6 @,@ 120 US gal ) tenders . The Merchant Navy class spawned the design and construction of a lighter version of the same locomotive with consequently increased route availability . These were the West Country and Battle of Britain class Light Pacifics , the first of which entered service in 1945 . 
 Just prior to the nationalisation of the railways in 1948 , the Southern Railway placed an order for ten more Merchant Navy locomotives , with larger 6 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 27 @,@ 280 L ; 7 @,@ 210 US gal ) tenders . A shortage of materials meant that delivery was delayed until September 1948 , and completed in 1949 ; the batch never carried Southern Railway numbers . Eastleigh was responsible for the assembly of the final batch , which were in the series <unk> – <unk> . Construction was undertaken in @-@ house by Eastleigh works , with the boilers and tenders constructed at Brighton , the frames at Ashford and the rest at Eastleigh . These were equipped with wedge @-@ shaped cab fronts from the outset , and greater use of welding ensured lighter locomotives . The batch was also fitted with the <unk> ( " Traitement Integral Armand " ) chemical feed @-@ water equipment used on the Light Pacifics . This precipitated scale @-@ forming constituents in the " hard @-@ water " of southern England into a non @-@ adhesive mud that could be cleared from the locomotive using a manual " blow @-@ down " valve . A delay in the construction of the new larger tenders for the new locomotives meant that some were fitted with the smaller examples intended for use with Light Pacifics that were under construction at the time . Two spare boilers for the class were also constructed at Brighton and Eastleigh during 1950 / 1 . 
 = = Numbering and naming the locomotives = = 
 For details of Merchant Navy class locomotive names , see : List of SR Merchant Navy class locomotives 
 Bulleid adopted a new numbering scheme for all his locomotives based on Continental practice , following his experiences at the French branch of Westinghouse Electric before the First World War , and those of his tenure in the rail operating department during that conflict . The Southern Railway numbers followed an adaptation of the UIC classification system of using letters and numbers to designate the powered and unpowered axles , together with a running number . Thus the first 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 locomotive became 21C1 – where " 2 " and " 1 " refer to the number of unpowered leading and trailing axles respectively , and " C " refers to the number of driving axles , in this case three . The remainder were numbered <unk> @-@ <unk> . The scheme was abandoned by British Railways in 1949 and the existing locomotives were renumbered under the British Railways standard system in the series <unk> @-@ <unk> ; the final batch appeared in traffic as 35020 @-@ <unk> . 
 The Southern Railway considered naming the locomotives after victories of the Second World War , to the extent that a mocked @-@ up nameplate River Plate was produced . In the event , when early successes for the British proved few and far between , the chairman of the Union Castle Line suggested naming them after shipping companies which had called at Southampton Docks in peacetime . This idea resonated in 1941 because the shipping lines were heavily involved in the Atlantic convoys to and from Britain during the Second World War . 
 A new design of nameplate was created , featuring a circular plate with a smaller circle in the centre . The inner circle carried the colours of the shipping company on a stylised flag , on an air force blue background . Around the outer circle was the name of the locomotive , picked out in gilt lettering . A horizontal rectangular plate was attached to either side of the circular nameplate , with " Merchant Navy Class " in gilt lettering . This acted as a class plate , as indicated on the nameplate photograph , above left . 
 During their operational career , the class gained several nicknames ; the most obvious , Bulleid Pacific , simply denoted the designer and wheel arrangement . The colloquial name Spam Can arose from their utilitarian appearance , enhanced by the flat , boxy air @-@ smoothed casing , and the resemblance of this to the distinctive tin cans in which SPAM was sold . The nickname Packets was also adopted by locomotive drivers , as the first member of the class was named Channel Packet . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 As the class appeared during the War , there were no heavily laden Continental Boat Trains from Dover and Folkestone , for which they had been designed . They were however used on express trains on the South Western Main Line to Southampton , and Exeter . In August 1945 a series of test runs were made between London Victoria and Dover and from October the class were used on the resumed Continental expresses . The prestigious Bournemouth Belle Pullman train was reinstated in October 1946 and entrusted to the class for the next two decades . However , their heavy axle loading and length meant that they were banned from many areas of the Southern Railway , and later , the British Railways Southern Region network . 
 = = Subsequent development = = 
 As mentioned , the main production batch of Southern @-@ built locomotives differed from the two prototypes , Channel Packet and Union Castle . The steam @-@ operated firehole door treadle was removed , and a new type of boiler cladding was utilised in response to the worsening supply situation during the Second World War . Modification was also made to the air @-@ smoothed casing surrounding the smokebox after reports were made of drifting smoke obscuring the locomotive crew 's vision ahead . Initially , the only form of smoke deflection was a narrow slot in front of the chimney , intended to enable air to lift the smoke when the locomotive was travelling . This proved inadequate because of the relatively soft exhaust blast that came from the multiple @-@ jet blastpipe , which failed to be caught by the air flow . After several trials , the air flow was increased by extending the casing roof over the front of the smokebox to form a cowling whilst side smoke deflector plates were also incorporated into the front of the air @-@ smoothed casing . The latter added to the poor visibility from the footplate and the expedients combined never fully solved the smoke drift problem . 
 During the brief time they operated under the Southern Railway , further modifications were applied to the class , such as the reduction in boiler pressure to 250 psi ( 1 @.@ 72 MPa ) and the redesign of the footplate spectacle plates . These are the small windows on the front face of the cab , which were redesigned to a wedge @-@ shaped profile , a feature to be seen on all Bulleid @-@ designed locomotives post @-@ nationalisation . They had been introduced in Britain in 1934 with the Gresley @-@ designed Cock o ' the North . Originally , the spectacle plates of the Bulleid Pacifics were at the conventional right @-@ angle to the direction of the locomotive , and offered limited vision ahead along the air @-@ smoothed casing . The Southern @-@ built batches also had variations in the material used for the air @-@ smoothed casing with a change from sheet steel to an asbestos compound , forced upon the manufacturer by wartime expediency . This resulted in several class members having a horizontal strengthening rib running down the length of the casing . The final Southern Railway @-@ initiated experiment involved equipping <unk> Canadian Pacific with a Berkeley mechanical stoker imported from Canada . Little improvement in performance was seen when trialled under British Railways auspices in 1948 and the locomotive was re @-@ converted to hand @-@ firing . 
 As mentioned , the British Railways batch had detail differences to previous versions . The most significant modification was the reduction of weight using lighter materials unavailable during wartime . From 1952 the air @-@ smoothed casing ahead of the cylinders was removed to ease maintenance and lubrication . This coincided with the removal of the tender ' raves ' on all locomotives , as they obstructed the packing of coal into the bunker and restricted the driver 's view when reversing the locomotive . The resultant ' cut @-@ down ' tender included new , enclosed storage for fire @-@ irons , revised step ladders and glass spectacle plates to protect the crew from flying coal dust when running tender @-@ first . 
 = = Performance of the unmodified locomotives = = 
 The new locomotives demonstrated that they could generate enormous power using mediocre quality fuel , due largely to Bulleid 's excellent boiler . They also ran very smoothly at high speed . Partly as a result of having so many novel features , the first few years of service by the Merchant Navy class were beset by a variety of technical problems . Some of these were merely teething troubles , but others remained with the class throughout their working lives . These may be summarised as follows : 
 <unk> problems . The locomotives were often prone to <unk> , and required very careful driving when starting a heavy train from rest , but once into their stride they were noted for their free running , excellent steam production and being remarkably stable when hauling heavy expresses . 
 Maintenance problems . The chain driven valve gear proved to be expensive to maintain and subject to rapid wear . Leaks from the oil bath onto the wheels caused oil to splash onto the boiler lagging in service . Once saturated with oil , the lagging attracted coal dust and ash which provided a combustible material , and as a result of the heavy braking of the locomotives , sparks would set the lagging on fire underneath the air @-@ smoothed casing . The fires were also attributed to oil overflowing from <unk> lubricators onto the wheels when stationary to be flung upwards into the boiler lagging in service . In either case , the local fire brigade would invariably be called to put the fire out , with cold water coming into contact with the hot boiler , causing stress to the casing . Many photographs show an unmodified with ' buckled ' ( warped ) casing , the result of a lagging fire . 
 High fuel consumption . This became very apparent in the 1948 Locomotive Exchange Trials and at trials at the Rugby locomotive testing plant in 1952 . 
 Restricted driver visibility due to the air @-@ smoothed casing . The exhaust problem was never adequately resolved , and continued to beat down onto the air @-@ smoothed casing when the engine was on the move , obscuring the driver 's vision from the cab . 
 As a result of these problems serious consideration was given to scrapping the class in 1954 , and replacing them with Britannia class locomotives . However , the locomotives had excellent boilers and several other good features and so the decision was taken to rebuild them removing several of Bulleid 's less successful ideas . 
 = = = Incident at Crewkerne = = = 
 On 24 April 1953 the crank axle on the central driving wheel of No. 35020 " Bibby Line " fractured whilst approaching Crewkerne station at speed . No @-@ one was injured , but the incident resulted in the withdrawal of all Merchant Navy class locomotives from service whilst the cause was ascertained . An examination of other class members showed that the fracture , caused by metal fatigue , was a common fault . To cover the motive power shortage caused by the mass withdrawal of thirty locomotives , classes from other British Railways regions were drafted in to deputise . The incident resulted in a redesign and replacement of the crank axle . 
 = = Modification = = 
 Partially because of the Crewkerne incident , and due to the incessant modification of Bulleid ’ s original design , British Railways took the decision to rebuild the entire class to a more conventional design by R. G. Jarvis , adopting many features from the BR ' Standard ' locomotive classes that had been introduced since 1950 . The air @-@ smoothed casing was removed and replaced with conventional boiler cladding , and the chain @-@ driven valve gear was replaced with three separate sets of Walschaerts valve gear . The rebuilds were provided with a completely revised cylindrical smokebox , a new Lord Nelson @-@ type chimney and LMS @-@ style smoke deflectors . Together with the lack of air @-@ smoothed casing , these helped reduce the problem of smoke and steam obscuring the driver 's vision of the line . 
 The fast @-@ moving and unpredictable Bulleid steam reverser was replaced with a screw @-@ link version , whilst the mechanical lubricators were moved to the <unk> along the boiler sides . <unk> was also added to the leading driving axle , whilst rearward application was incorporated to the middle driving axle . The first ' modified ' to be released from Eastleigh was <unk> British India Line in 1956 . The final example , <unk> Clan Line , was completed in 1960 . The success of the modification programme for the Merchant Navy class was also to influence the design of the future modification of 60 ' Light Pacifics ' . 
 = = Performance of the modified locomotives = = 
 There is no doubt that rebuilding the class solved most of the maintenance problems whilst retaining the good features , thereby creating excellent locomotives . One minor drawback was that the ' <unk> ' put greater loads on the track as a result of hammerblow , caused by the balance weights for the outside Walschaerts valve gear , whereas the original valve gear design was largely self @-@ balanced . On 26 June 1967 , <unk> Royal Mail recorded the highest speed ever for the class . Hauling a train comprising three carriages and two parcels vans ( 164 tons tare , 180 tons gross ) between Weymouth and Waterloo , the mile between milepost 38 and milepost 37 ( located between <unk> and Fleet ) was covered in 34 seconds , a speed of 105 @.@ 88 mph . This was also the last authenticated speed in excess of 100 mph achieved by a steam locomotive in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 Their principal work was on the South Western Main Line to Southampton and Bournemouth until 1967 . However , the main reason why the class began to be withdrawn in 1964 was the transfer of the main line between Salisbury and Exeter to the Western Region and the introduction of " Warship " class diesel @-@ hydraulic locomotives on these services . The rebuilt locomotives were therefore withdrawn relatively soon after their rebuilding , whilst still in excellent condition . The first two to be withdrawn were the second prototype <unk> Union Castle and <unk> Rotterdam Lloyd in February 1964 . Nearly half of the class had been withdrawn by the end of 1965 , but seven survived until the end of steam on the Southern Region in the summer of 1967 . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Many of the class have survived into preservation thanks to the high workload of Woodham Brothers scrapyard in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan , South Wales , which found it easier and more commercially lucrative to scrap railway wagons , keeping the more technical steam locomotives for a down turn in workload . 
 One engine , <unk> Clan Line , was bought by the Merchant Navy Locomotive Preservation Society direct from British Railways in 1967 , and has since been regarded as the ' flagship ' of the class . Although eleven members of the class have survived into the preservation era , it is very likely that many will never steam again , with only three having been restored to working order thus far . This is because the class is too large and heavy for use on most of today 's heritage railways . As the entire class was rebuilt from 1956 onwards , no Merchant Navy class locomotives exist in as @-@ built condition , although a team are attempting to reverse @-@ engineer <unk> General Steam Navigation to original condition . Other relics of the class have survived in the guise of locomotive nameplates and smokebox number plates , which were taken from their locomotives towards the end of steam on the British Railways Southern Region in the 1960s . As a result , many exist in private collections , and several have been seen at auction , selling for several thousands of pounds . 
 = = = Preserved Merchant Navy class locomotives = = = 
 For full location details and current status of the preserved locomotives , see : List of SR Merchant Navy class locomotives 
 = = Livery = = 
 = = = Southern Railway = = = 
 Livery was Southern Railway malachite green with " sunshine yellow " horizontal lining and lettering . The first five locomotives were given a matt finish so as to obscure small irregularities in the casing . All class members that operated during the Second World War were eventually repainted in Southern Railway wartime black livery , with green @-@ shaded " Sunshine " lettering . However , this was reverted to Malachite Green livery upon the ending of hostilities . 
 21C1 Channel Packet originally had an inverted horseshoe on the smokebox door , indicating its Southern origin , however , crews believed this to be unlucky . A resultant re @-@ design meant that this became a roundel , the gap being filled by the year of construction , therefore acting as a builder 's plate . The background was painted red . Early members of the class had cast iron numberplates and gilt ' Southern ' plates on the tender , however these were subsequently replaced by transfers . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 After nationalisation in 1948 , the locomotives ' initial livery was a slightly modified Southern malachite green livery , where " British Railways " replaced " Southern " in Sunshine Yellow lettering on the tender sides . The Bulleid numbering system was temporarily retained , with an additional " S " prefix , such as <unk> . A short @-@ lived second livery was an experimental blue with red lining as applied to <unk> East Asiatic Company . This was replaced by British Railways express passenger blue with black and white lining . From 1952 the locomotives carried the standard British Railways Brunswick green livery with orange and black lining and the British Railways crest on the tender tank sides . This livery was perpetuated after rebuilding . 
 = = Operational assessment = = 
 The class in both as @-@ built and modified forms have been subject to a range of divergent opinions . The utilisation of welded steel construction and the various innovations that had not previously been seen in British locomotive design meant that the class earned Bulleid the title " Last Giant of Steam " . The constant concern for ease of maintenance and utility had not previously been seen on locomotives of older design , whilst their highly efficient boilers represented the ultimate in British steam technology , the hallmark of a successful locomotive design . Despite this , the number of innovations introduced at the same time made the class unreliable and difficult to maintain during the first few years of service . Many of these difficulties were overcome during the rebuilding , leading to D.L. Bradley 's statement that the modified locomotives were " the finest express locomotives to work in the country " . Overall the class was largely successful , with half of the locomotives completing more than 1 million miles in revenue earning service . 
 = = Models = = 
 The Merchant Navy class has been the subject of several models by different manufacturers , including Hornby Railways , Graham Farish and <unk> . The first OO gauge model of an as @-@ built locomotive was produced by Hornby / Wrenn in 1962 , followed by the modified version . 
 Hornby and Graham Farish currently produce the rebuilt version of the class in OO gauge and N gauge respectively . The Hornby model was introduced in the 2000 edition of the Hornby catalogue . As of December 2010 , fifteen members of the class have been produced . 
 In March 2015 Hornby announced the inclusion of a new as @-@ built version of the class in OO gauge in their 2016 range , this model was subsequently postponed to the 2017 range . 
 = Let the Blind Lead Those Who Can See but Cannot Feel = 
 Let the Blind Lead Those Who Can See but Cannot Feel is the first studio album by Atlas Sound , the solo project of Deerhunter lead vocalist Bradford Cox . The album was released in North America by Kranky Records on February 19 , 2008 and in Europe by 4AD on May 5 , 2008 . The tracks of Let the Blind Lead were constructed with computer @-@ generated and recorded instruments in music software Ableton Live . Described as being stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness in nature by Cox , each song was created over the span of several hours ; in addition , the music and lyrics were written and sung on the spot . For its release , the tracks were arranged in the order in which they were recorded ; Cox described the album as a whole as having a " dynamic arc " to it . The North American cover art is a modified photograph of a painting of a doctor treating a sick boy . The face of the child is obscured by a camera flash , although Cox feels that this gives the picture a " romantic " element . 
 The lyrics of Let the Blind Lead are autobiographical in nature , reflecting life experiences of Cox . These include abuses he received as a child , past drug addictions , and the time he spent hospitalized as a teenager due to his genetic disorder Marfan syndrome . Several songs concern his best friend Lockett Pundt , the guitarist for Deerhunter , whom the album is dedicated to . " Winter Vacation " is a reflection on the first time the two met , while in " Ativan " , Cox examines his relationship with Pundt . Let the Blind Lead was generally well @-@ received by critics ; some praised Cox 's emotional lyrics , while others criticized his music for lacking substance . The record charted at number 32 on Billboard magazine 's Top Heatseekers chart for one week . 
 = = Production = = 
 The music of Atlas Sound utilizes computer @-@ based MIDI instruments , created and recorded in musical software Ableton Live ; the program allows Cox " to turn pretty much any sound into a MIDI @-@ controllable keyboard " , according to him . Effects that were not already built into the program were seldom used . Brian Foote of the band Nudge assisted Cox in the production of Let the Blind Lead , by showing him the basics of the software , and aiding in the selection of equipment that would be used on the record . Cox described the process of recording the album as being stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness : " with Atlas Sound , the songs are being written as they 're recorded . " In addition , all of the lyrics on the album were created as they were being recorded on the first take . 
 The album 's title is derived from a dream Cox had in which he saw a group of protesters , one of whom was holding up a sign reading " Let the blind lead those who can see but cannot feel " . Upon waking , Cox wrote down the phrase on a notebook beside his bed . He described the concept to Out magazine as being " like you are able to see , but you might not know the right direction to go in . But somebody who can ’ t see might — just by instinct — lead you that way . " The arrangement of the tracks on Let the Blind Lead is chronological , presented in the order in which they were recorded . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The North American album cover artwork originates from a medical journal Cox discovered in a thrift store . A painting in the journal depicts a doctor treating an ill boy , " while his mom looks on , concerned " , as described by Cox . In photographing the painting , the face of the boy was obscured by the flash of the camera . While it " kind of took away from the photo " according to him , the picture became " somehow … romantic , the idea that there was so much emotion in the face that it got whited out . " Cox described the boy as being " the saddest boy … lovesick and emaciated " , adding , " I related to that boy so much that I literally , in the thrift store , almost started crying . " The European album artwork was created by <unk> , a group that designs cover art for label 4AD . 
 = = Style = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Let the Blind Lead has been characterized as ambient , psychedelic , and pop music , similar in style to Cox 's previous work with Deerhunter , such as the band 's 2007 album Cryptograms . Cox is drawn to ambient music due to its ambiguous , repetitive , and " emotive " nature . He considers himself inspired in part by the style and " sonic picture " of girl groups and doo @-@ wop music . Instruments heard on the record include the guitar , drums , glockenspiel , mbira , and Ghanaian bells . Cox also considers his voice an instrument of its own . While moving toward using less layering effects on the vocal tracks in his music , because he does not consider himself a songwriter , Cox prefers to use such effects to make his voice more instrumental and ambiguous in nature . He has said he is " always more interested in the parts that are like vocalists , wordless vocals : the harmonizing , the oohs when the vocals become like an instrument . " 
 To create tracks on Let the Blind Lead , Cox continually adds elements to a song until he " feel [ s ] like it 's getting crowded … When it sounds done , it 's done . And if it seems like it 's missing something , I 'll go back and add something . " Most of his music is the product of several hours ' work , rather than that of a few days . To Pitchfork Media Cox said that , with each song , " The genesis is usually a beat . " Cox considers the music of Let the Blind Lead to have a " dynamic arc " : the first half of the record contains " more accessible songs . I was very depressed in the middle , and it created this kind of black hole of misery . Then I tried to bring it up again at the end . " Cox intended for his music to be " therapeutic " , for both himself and his audience . In addition , he wanted the album to have a healing element , and be something " somebody could listen to all the way through and feel like they went through a bad period of time and came out of it . " Pauline Oliveros , a composer who runs an organization that studies music therapy , was described by Cox as having " a big influence " on him and his ideas of therapeutic music . He considers music " the only art form I know of that has such an immediate effect on the human psyche " , and found the time he first met and talked with Oliveros as being " like meeting a hero of mine . " 
 The album 's opening track , " A Ghost Story " , contains a sample of a young boy telling a ghost story , obtained by Cox from an internet audio archive of free music samples . Cox found the sample " moving " , and used it to create an intro that would set the tone for the rest of the album . Said Cox , " I wanted to create a haunted record , you know ? Kind of filled with ghosts . I thought it just set up the album nicely . " He summarized the song as consisting of " basically just a cassette and effected hammer dulcimers . " The sounds of " Small Horror " were intended to represent " banging depression . " Cox described the song as being " the most depressing song " on Let the Blind Lead , and as being " concrete " musically . Instrumental track " Ready Set Glow " is supposed to " create the impression of passing out and falling back into a bed of strobe lights . " Another instrumental song , " After Class " , is a " sonic rearrangement " of a track produced by Deerhunter for the 2008 compilation album Living Bridge . The self @-@ titled final song of Let the Blind Lead , another instrumental track , was intended to bring the album full circle , having it start and end on an " ambient note " . Lockett Pundt , a recurring focus of the album 's lyrics , created a guitar loop which was the basis for the song " Cold as Ice " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 While Cox was working with Deerhunter to produce Cryptograms , it was considered Kranky Records policy to not print the lyrics of an album in its liner notes . This was a rule enforced by label owner Joel <unk> , who believed the practice " <unk> [ ed ] the experience of a rock record . " Despite largely agreeing with this sentiment , Cox chose to print the lyrics of Let the Blind Lead , in part because he wanted to " see what they looked like , " having ad @-@ libbed the words of every song on their first take . In an interview with Pitchfork Media , Cox described the lyrical origins of each song on Let the Blind Lead ; they are largely autobiographical in nature , reflecting life experiences of his . The song " Recent Bedroom " conveys an experience Cox had when his aunt died : " She was in her bedroom , and everybody knew she was about to pass away , and she went out , she faded out , and everybody just started crying . " Although he was " overwhelmed " by her death , it did not bring him to tears like the rest of his family . This event is expressed in the song by the lines " I walked outside , I could not cry / I don ’ t know , I don ’ t know why " . Cox ’ s inability to cry stemmed from his having been " very involved in drugs " at the time , which he believes eliminated his " childhood instinct … to cry . " The song attempts to communicate an emotional vacancy and sense of detachment characterized by " moving from childhood to adolescence " . 
 " River Card " is based on a Puerto Rican short story entitled " There ’ s a Little Coloured Boy at the Bottom of the River " . The story tells of a boy who falls in love with his reflection in a river , believing it is another person , similar to the Greek myth of Narcissus . Cox attempted to capture " this childhood homoerotic energy … I remember experiencing and relating to . " In the conclusion of the story , the boy jumps into the water and drowns , thus making " River Card " " a song about a dead child . " The lyrical contents of " <unk> " were inspired by a Russian article Cox read about children born with AIDS , confined in hospitals due to the " various lifestyles and mistakes " of their parents . Cox , who has a genetic condition known as Marfan syndrome , related the article to his own experiences with children 's hospitals . Having had many chest and back surgeries when he was sixteen , he " got real used to children 's hospitals " , finding them " kind of haunted , weird places . " " On Guard " is described as " a sad song " , the lyrics of which illustrate having to age and dealing with the " newfound anxiety " that comes with meeting new people . Cox explains that this anxiety stems from lacking " the energy to represent yourself to people . You ’ re always on guard . " 
 The lyrical content of " Cold as Ice " is based on a relationship Cox had with a girl named Alice . Having fallen in love with her in the fifth grade , he proposed to marry her on the school 's playground . Alice rejected Cox , calling the ring he had given her " a cheap piece of crap . " Years later , Cox worked with Alice at a Subway restaurant . Occasionally , " for no reason " , she would ask him to watch her change into her uniform in the restaurant 's refrigerator , which he described as having been as " cold as ice " . Cox suspects that " she was trying to torture me or something . " The song " Bite Marks " is about " sadomasochism and boy prostitution . " In the song , Cox references an experience he had when he was kissing a man who bit him " really , really hard " on his shoulder , leaving bite marks " for like two weeks . " This experience , along with other abuses he received as a child , formed the lyrical basis of the song . 
 A recurring source of lyrical subject matter in Let the Blind Lead is Cox 's best friend , Deerhunter guitarist Lockett Pundt , whom the album is dedicated to . " Winter Vacation " concerns the first time the two met . Seeing him at a bus stop while vacationing in Savannah , Georgia , Cox was " attracted to him , but not in some kind of like , just physical way . " Seeing " his melancholy , his sitting alone , staring at the ground " , he " fell in love " with him . Cox and his family later drove to a beach ; " Winter Vacation " relates to Cox ’ s memory of the beach , being " infected with that new love " found after meeting Pundt . The words of " <unk> Past " are about " moving on … And wondering if somebody is going to come with you or … stay behind . " This uncertainty is characterized by several lines Cox considers " pop song clichés " , referencing " rain that comes and goes . " In the song , Cox asks Pundt , " Are you going to come with me , or are you staying here ? " In " Ativan " Cox examines his addiction to the drug of the same name , as well as his relationship with Pundt . " It talks a lot about how things have changed between me and Lockett 's relationship and how he 's met a girl and … our friendship is never gonna change , but it 's difficult sometimes . " Cox asserts that he would " rather just take whatever drugs it takes to go to sleep and sleep through it … I 'm not prepared to face it yet . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 On Metacritic , Let the Blind Lead Those Who Can See but Cannot Feel has received an average critic score of 81 out of 100 , based on 23 reviews , indicating " Universal Acclaim " . Upon release , the album received Pitchfork Media 's " Best New Music " accolade , and was later placed 26th on the publication 's 50 Best Albums of 2008 . For one week , the album peaked at number 32 on Billboard magazine 's Top Heatseekers chart . 
 Marc Hogan of Pitchfork Media praised the album in his review , writing that it " works best as a swirling , disorienting whole , " and " those drawn to his lovesick , evolving audio presence have … an entire world to explore . " Dominic <unk> of PopMatters found the album 's " lovesickness and confessions " to be " as tenderly delivered as its hazy atmospherics are " , and , in their " bare authenticity … far more compelling in repeat indulgences than Deerhunter ’ s explorations . " Tiny Mix Tapes rewarded the album 4 / 5 stars , saying that , while each song has a " distinctive quality " allowing it to stand on its own , by backing out to view the album as a whole , the " individual elements unify … mak [ ing ] a greater holistic product . " 
 Wilson McBee of Slant Magazine was more negative towards the album , writing that " Let the Blind Lead presents an intriguing mixture of sounds , but rarely does Cox whip them into anything very exciting . " In his review , he likened the album to a " tempered " version of Deerhunter 's Cryptograms . Under the Radar magazine wrote that many of the tracks of Let the Blind Lead " never materialize into anything more substantial than vapor . " Sean O 'Neal of The Onion 's A.V. Club said that , considering the number of free songs Cox has released on his blog , a full @-@ length album " seems almost beside the point . " He wrote that the record 's songs suggest the work of " a bedroom @-@ pop auteur who doesn 't know when to quit tweaking " . Allmusic writer Marisa Brown found that , with Let the Blind Lead , " as with Deerhunter , Cox has the tendency to try too hard to be profound ( take the title -- or the title track -- for example ) , wanting so badly to say something important that he sounds trite and forced , and untrustworthy . " Jonathen Cohen wrote in his review for Magnet that " Cox ’ s narratives make little sense " , noting " much of the time , he ’ s not even singing so much as wailing wordlessly " . 
 In an interview with John Norris of MTV News , Cox said of the reception to Let the Blind Lead : " The response to this Atlas Sound record … the general response was very , very positive , but very , very much rooted in the concept that this is an emotional album . This is an album that has a lot of feeling behind it , and it 's very naked … That might in fact be [ the case ] , but the reason it is that way is because it was done stream @-@ of @-@ consciously . [ sic ] [ … ] I 'm not calculated . I don 't mind sentimentality , as long as it 's not calculated . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were written by Bradford Cox . 
 " A Ghost Story " – 2 : 44 
 " Recent Bedroom " – 3 : 46 
 " River Card " – 3 : 20 
 " <unk> " – 4 : 20 
 " On Guard " – 3 : 40 
 " Winter Vacation " – 4 : 00 
 " Cold As Ice " – 3 : 33 
 " <unk> Past " – 4 : 30 
 " Small Horror " – 2 : 54 
 " Ready , Set , Glow " – 2 : 58 
 " Bite Marks " – 4 : 18 
 " After Class " – 3 : 29 
 " Ativan " – 2 : 51 
 " Let the Blind Lead Those Who Can See but Cannot Feel " – 3 : 45 
 = = = Bonus disc = = = 
 Included with the European release by 4AD . This collection of tracks was also released digitally by Kranky as Another Bedroom EP . 
 " Another Bedroom " – 5 : 41 
 " It <unk> " – 3 : 05 
 " Stained Glass Swan " – 2 : 58 
 " The Abandoned Closet " – 2 : 16 
 " Spring Break " – 4 : 57 
 " ABC Glasgow " – 5 : 02 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bradford Cox – engineering , mixing 
 Brian Foote – mixing 
 Craig S. McCaffrey – layout assistance 
 Bob Weston – mastering 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Flight deck cruiser = 
 The flight @-@ deck cruiser was a proposed type of aircraft cruiser , warships combining features of aircraft carriers and light cruisers designed by the United States Navy during the period between World War I and World War II . Several designs were proposed for the type , but none were approved for construction . The final design was developed just before World War II , and the entry of the United States into the war saw the project come to an end . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1920s , following the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty , the United States Navy converted two incomplete battlecruisers into aircraft carriers , USS Lexington and USS Saratoga . These conversions proved to be extremely expensive , and designs were sought that would provide aircraft carrying capability for the fleet at a more reasonable cost . USS Ranger , America 's first purpose @-@ built aircraft carrier , was of a smaller , more economical design than the battlecruiser conversions , however the ship sacrificed the big @-@ gun scouting capability of the earlier ships . In an attempt to develop a ship capable of both carrying aircraft and engaging the enemy in the scouting role , the " flight @-@ deck cruiser " concept was developed , following a series of studies proposing the conversion of cruisers under construction into carriers , all of which were rejected . In addition to providing an economical method of providing additional aircraft for the fleet , the " flight @-@ deck cruiser " was seen to have an additional advantage ; it would be considered a cruiser under the terms of the Washington Treaty , not an aircraft carrier , and thus the Navy would not be restricted in the number of ships of the type that could be built . 
 = = Designs = = 
 Several designs were proposed for a ship carrying both aircraft and a gun armament equivalent to a light cruiser 's . One design , from 1930 , was described as " a Brooklyn @-@ class light cruiser forwards [ and ] one half of a Wasp @-@ class aircraft carrier aft " , and utilized an early version of the angled deck that would in the 1950s be adopted for use by fleet carriers . The vessel , 650 feet ( 200 m ) in length , had a 350 @-@ foot ( 110 m ) flight deck and hangar aft for twenty @-@ four aircraft , while forwards three triple 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) gun turrets were mounted , the standard armament for a light cruiser of the time . A secondary dual purpose armament of eight 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns was also projected to be carried for defense against enemy torpedo @-@ boats and aircraft . 
 In 1934 , another design for a flight @-@ deck cruiser was proposed , featuring twelve 6 in ( 152 mm ) guns , mounted forwards and aft with a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) flight deck in between ; while a 1939 revival of the concept proposed two triple turrets , fore and aft , again with an amidships flight deck . 
 In December 1939 , a design for a much larger flight @-@ deck cruiser , displacing 12 @,@ 000 tons , was proposed , fitted with two catapults , a triple turret for 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns , and a 420 @-@ foot ( 130 m ) flight deck ; by January 1940 the design had been shrunk to a flight deck 390 feet ( 120 m ) in length and two triple 6 in ( 152 mm ) guns for main armament . 
 = = Abandonment = = 
 Despite the continued designs and interest in the idea , no funding was ever appropriated for the construction of a flight @-@ deck cruiser ; in addition , evaluation of the design by the Naval War College determined that even a 12 @,@ 000 @-@ ton ship was too small for the concept 's intended characteristics to be effectively realized , and thus the ship would be ineffective in battle . In 1940 , the design was formally shelved , although provision was made for reconsideration of the concept at a future date . The entry of the United States into World War II following the bombing of Pearl Harbor , however , removed the primary justifications for the concept of a hybrid warship , as naval limitations treaties were now moot and adequate funding was now available for the construction of more conventional ships . As a result , the flight deck cruiser concept was never revisited . 
 = = Similar ships = = 
 Although no flight @-@ deck cruisers were ever built by the U.S. Navy , the Soviet Union 's Kiev @-@ class aircraft carrier , developed in the 1970s , is remarkably similar to that of the original flight @-@ deck cruiser design , featuring an angled flight deck aft with anti @-@ ship missile launchers forwards . In addition , during the early 1980s , plans were proposed for the reactivation of the U.S. Navy 's Iowa @-@ class battleships that entailed the removal of each ship 's aft turret and the installation of a flight deck for operating V / STOL aircraft ; in the end a much more modest conversion , lacking the flight deck , was carried out . 
 = Ted Jolliffe = 
 Edward Bigelow " Ted " Jolliffe , QC ( March 2 , 1909 – March 18 , 1998 ) was a Canadian social democratic politician and lawyer from Ontario . He was the first leader of the Ontario section of the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation ( CCF ) and leader of the Official Opposition in the Ontario Legislature during the 1940s and 1950s . He was a Rhodes Scholar in the mid @-@ 1930s , and came back to Canada to help the CCF , after his studies were complete and being called to the bar in England and Ontario . After politics , he practised labour law in Toronto and would eventually become a labour adjudicator . In retirement , he moved to British Columbia , where he died in 1998 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 His family had lived in Ontario for generations . His parents , the Reverend Charles and Gertrude Jolliffe , were missionaries for the Methodist Church of Canada , and were living near what was then known as <unk> , China . He was born at the Canadian Missionary hospital in <unk> , near <unk> on March 2 , 1909 . He was home @-@ schooled in China by his mother until his early teens . When his family returned to Ontario , he attend Rockwood Public School and then went to high school at Guelph Collegiate Institute . He was an undergraduate at the University of Toronto 's Victoria College , the United Church College . He became the head of the Victoria Student Council , and was a member of the Hart House Debates Committee . In 1930 , he won the Maurice Cody scholarship , and then became one of Ontario 's Rhodes Scholars that same year . He attended Oxford University for three years , and was affiliated with its Christ Church College . As a member of Oxford 's Labour Club , he met David Lewis , the club 's leader and a fellow Canadian . Together they fought the Communist Red October club and fascists such as Lord Haw @-@ Haw – William Joyce . Both he and Lewis planned a ' silent ' protest at Joyce 's February 1934 speech at Oxford . They carefully made sure that enough members from the Labour Club attended the meeting , and then in groups of two or three , strategically walked out of the speech , across the creaking wooden floors , effectively blotting out Joyce 's speech . The Blackshirts in the audience then caused riots in the street after the meeting and Jolliffe and Lewis were in the thick of it . 
 His Oxford experiences made him a socialist and he joined the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation shortly after it was formed in 1932 during his summer vacation . He helped form an overseas branch of the CCF at Oxford that year . He was called to the bar in England , and was the first Canadian to win the Arden scholarship . When Jolliffe permanently returned from Oxford , he worked as the CCF 's Ontario organizer and was called to the bar in Ontario and practised law in Toronto from 1938 onwards . 
 He was a candidate in the 1935 Canadian election in the Toronto riding of St. Paul 's , placing fourth . He ran again in the 1940 federal election , this time in the York East electoral district . He was noted for calling out the former federal Conservative government for neglecting WWI soldiers on their return home , and that this time , " proper measures be taken to protect the future of Canadian soldiers and their dependents . " He countered that a <unk> government would stop war profiteering and the protect the interests of the country 's soldiers and " small taxpayers . " He was soundly defeated , like every other Ontario CCF candidate , placing a distant third . 
 = = Leader and 1943 election = = 
 He became the first leader of the Ontario CCF in 1942 . The following year , he led the party to within five seats of victory with 34 seats and 32 % of the vote in the election of 1943 that elected a Conservative minority government under George Drew . He won the York South seat , and became its Member of Provincial Parliament ( MPP ) . 
 Note : 
 1 The Conservative Party renamed itself the " Progressive Conservative Party " in 1943 . 
 <unk> and MacLeod , members of the banned Communist Party , ran and were elected as " Labour " candidates . The Labor @-@ Progressive Party was formally founded several days after the election and <unk> and Macleod agreed to sit in the legislature as LPP representatives . 
 <unk> 1940 , United Farmers of Ontario MLA Farquhar Oliver formally joined the Liberal Party when he entered Hepburn 's Cabinet after having supported the Hepburn government from outside the Liberal caucus for several years . Oliver was re @-@ elected as a Liberal in the 1943 election . 
 4 The Liberal @-@ Progressive MLAs supported the Liberal government of Mitchell Hepburn since it took office in 1934 . Liberal @-@ Progressive leader Harry Nixon formally joined the Liberal Party in 1937 and was elected its leader in 1943 . Two remaining Liberal @-@ Progressives were elected in 1937 , Liberal @-@ Progressive MLA Roland Patterson was re @-@ elected as a Liberal in 1943 while the other Liberal @-@ Progressive , Douglas Campbell of Kent East left the legislature . 
 = = 1945 " Gestapo " campaign = = 
 In the 1945 Ontario election , Drew ran an anti @-@ Semitic , union bashing , Red @-@ baiting campaign . The previous two years of anti @-@ socialist attacks by the Conservatives and their supporters , like Gladstone Murray and Montague A. Sanderson , were devastatingly effective against the previously popular CCF . Much of the source material for the anti @-@ CCF campaign came from the Ontario Provincial Police ( OPP ) ' s Special Investigation Branch 's agent D @-@ 208 : Captain William J. Osbourne @-@ Dempster . His office was supposed to be investigating war @-@ time 5th column saboteurs . Instead , starting in November 1943 , he was investigating , almost exclusively , Ontario opposition MPPs , mainly focusing on the CCF caucus . The fact that Jolliffe knew about these ' secret ' investigations as early as February 1944 led to one of the most infamous incidents in 20th @-@ century Canadian politics . 
 = = = May 24 , 1945 radio speech = = = 
 As can be discerned from the previous description , the 1945 campaign was anything but genteel and polite . Jolliffe replied by giving a radio speech ( written with the assistance of Lister Sinclair ) that accused Drew of running a political Gestapo in Ontario . In the speech excerpt below , Jolliffe alleged that a secret department of the Ontario Provincial Police was acting as a political police – spying on the opposition and the media . 
 The dramatic tone of the speech is Sinclair 's , as at the time , he was a dramatist , mostly writing for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) . At the time , there was speculation among CCF supporters as to whether or not the speech damaged the party 's reputation . But as Gerald Caplan maintains in his book The Dilemma of Canadian Socialism , the CCF was already at 21 percent in popular support in the Gallop poll just prior to the speech . On election day , they received 22 percent of the popular vote , so at best it added an extra percentage point of support . At worst , it didn 't have an effect , which is highly unlikely . 
 Jolliffe 's inflammatory speech became the main issue of the campaign , and dominated coverage in the media for the rest of the election . Drew , and his Attorney @-@ General Leslie Blackwell vehemently denied Jolliffe 's accusations , but the public outcry was too much for them to abate . On May 28 , 1945 they appointed a Royal Commission to investigate these charges . Jolliffe 's CCF and the Ontario Liberal party wanted the election suspended until the Commission tabled its report . Drew ignored these requests and continued to hold the election on its original date , despite it being many months before the Commission 's findings could be made available . 
 = = = Election Day , June 4 , 1945 = = = 
 Jolliffe 's CCF went from 34 seats to 8 , but almost garnering the same number of actual votes cast , though their percentage of the popular vote dropped from 32 to 22 percent . Drew , with his attack campaign , successfully drove the voter turn @-@ out up , thereby driving the CCF 's percentage and seat totals down . 
 Monday , June 4 , 1945 , was one of Ontario 's most important elections in the 20th century according to Caplan and David Lewis . It shaped the province for the next 40 years , as the Conservatives won a massive majority in the Legislature , and would remain in government for the next 40 consecutive years . 
 After going from 34 seats to 8 , as Caplan puts it , " June 4 and June 11 [ federal election ] , 1945 , proved to be black days in CCF annuals : Socialism was effectively removed from the Canadian political agenda . " The CCF would never fully recover from this defeat and would eventually cease as a party and morph into the Ontario New Democratic Party . Only then , and in the 1970s , did a social democratic party attain the popularity it had under Jolliffe in 1943 . 
 For Ted Jolliffe , another election consequence was his tenure as the MPP from York South ended , at least for the time being . He lost the election but did better than any other CCF candidate in Toronto or in the outlying Yorks . 
 = = = LeBel Royal Commission = = = 
 Drew appointed Justice A.M. LeBel as the Royal Commissioner . His terms of reference were restricted to the question of whether Drew was personally responsible for the establishment of " a secret political police organization , for the purpose of collecting , by secret spying , material to be used in attempt to keep him in power . " Wider questions like why the OPP , Ontario Civil Servants , were keeping files on MPPs were not allowed . 
 Jolliffe would act as his own counsel throughout the commission , but was assisted by fellow CCF lawyer , Andrew <unk> . Both he and <unk> were able to establish , from several eyewitnesses , that agent D @-@ 208 , Dempster , was spying on the CCF . What they could not prove , because they did not have access to the information in 1945 , were the letters that Drew wrote to his supporter M.A. ( Bugsy ) Sanderson suggesting that he would finance any lawsuits or other charges stemming from the information provided by Dempster in his advertisements . Sanderson was , in late 1943 to 1945 , along with Gladstone Murray , leading the libelous advertisement campaigns against the CCF in newspapers and bill @-@ boards , with information gleaned from Dempster 's briefings . Jolliffe presented several witnesses that claimed to have seen these documents . But Jolliffe could not produce the actual letter , and Drew would deny ever writing it . 
 On October 11 , 1945 Justice LeBel issued his report that essentially exonerated Drew and Blackwell . Due to Jolliffe presenting only circumstantial evidence that linked Drew to Dempster , Murray and Sanderson , the Commissioner found the information unconvincing , even though LeBel believed Dempster 's interaction with Sanderson and Murray was inappropriate . 
 Jolliffe 's motives regarding his accusations , as well as his choice of words , would be questioned for many years afterwards . That would change . In the late 1970s , when David Lewis was doing research for his Memoirs he came across archival evidence proving the charge . Due to Lewis 's discovery , Drew 's son Edward , placed extremely restrictive conditions on his father 's papers housed in the Public Archives of Canada that continue as of 2010 . 
 As Lewis pointed out in his memoirs , " We found that Premier Drew and Gladstone Murray did not disclose all information to the Lebel Commission ; indeed , they deliberately prevaricated throughout . The head of the Government of Ontario had given false witness under testimony .... The perpetrator of Ontario 's Watergate got away with it . " 
 Jolliffe faced a leadership challenge in 1946 , but was re @-@ elected CCF leader . 
 = = 1948 re @-@ elected MPP = = 
 As a result of the 1948 Ontario election , the CCF recovered , winning 21 seats . Jolliffe again became Leader of the Opposition in Ontario and Member of Provincial Parliament ( MPP ) for York South . In 1951 , however , as a result of the Cold War and the " red scare " , the CCF and labour movement acted to purge individuals ( including CCF MPP Robert Carlin ) suspected of being under Communist influence . Among the general public , support for socialism suffered : the CCF was reduced to only two seats in the 1951 election . Jolliffe lost his own seat and resigned as party leader in August 1953 in order to focus on his law practice . 
 = = Post MPP career = = 
 He returned to his previous career as a labour lawyer , founding the firm Jolliffe , Lewis and Osler with fellow CCF activist and future New Democratic Party leader , David Lewis in 1945 . In the 1950s and 1960s , the firm assisted the United Steelworkers union in their fight with the Mine , Mill & Smelter Workers union in Sudbury , Ontario . In 1968 , he was appointed Chief <unk> under the ( federal ) Public Service Staff Relations Act , a position he held until 1978 . He then became active as a labour arbitrator until his retirement . In 1972 , an historical novel he wrote , entitled The First Hundred , was published by McClelland and Stewart Limited . 
 Ted Jolliffe was the first social democratic leader of the opposition in Ontario 's Legislature in 1943 . He lived long enough to see Bob Rae and the NDP form the Ontario government in September 1990 . He died on March 18 , 1998 in Salt Spring Island , British Columbia . 
 = Arthur William Murphy = 
 Air Commodore Arthur William Murphy , DFC , AFC , <unk> ( 17 November 1891 – 21 April 1963 ) was a senior engineer and aviator in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He accompanied Captain Henry Wrigley on the first trans @-@ Australia flight from Melbourne to Darwin in 1919 , a feat that earned both men the Air Force Cross . Murphy later played a leading role in military aircraft maintenance and production . A veteran of World War I , he served first as a mechanic and then as a pilot with the Australian Flying Corps . Based in the Middle East , he flew with No. 1 Squadron and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Murphy was the first airman on the RAAF 's strength when it formed in 1921 , and rose to the rank of temporary air commodore during World War II , commanding No. 1 Aircraft Depot and No. 4 Maintenance Group . He was also the RAAF 's first Inspector of Air Accidents . A fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society , Murphy retired from the military in 1946 , and died in 1963 at the age of seventy @-@ one . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Murphy was born 17 November 1891 in Kew , a suburb of Melbourne , to joiner and engineer Charles Hubert Murphy and his wife Mary . Educated at Melbourne High School and Footscray Technical School , he spent five years with Austral Otis Engineering as an apprentice . Having been employed at various engineering firms , Murphy joined the Australian Army 's Aviation Instructional Staff at Central Flying School Point Cook in 1914 to train as an air mechanic . By February 1916 , he had risen to the rank of sergeant and volunteered for the Australian Imperial Force to serve overseas . Transferring to the Australian Flying Corps , Murphy was allocated to No. 1 Squadron — also known until 1918 as No. 67 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) — as a warrant officer . He departed Melbourne aboard HMAT A67 Orsova on 16 March , bound for Egypt . 
 Based in the Sinai Desert and Palestine , Murphy was initially responsible for No. 1 Squadron aircraft maintenance ; his achievements saw him mentioned in dispatches in 1917 . He then trained as a pilot with the RFC in Egypt , where he obtained a temporary commission as a second lieutenant on 24 October . He flew with the RFC before returning to No. 1 Squadron in Palestine . During 1918 , Murphy saw combat over Jordan , operating Bristol Fighters . On 12 August , he and his observer were selected to join Colonel T. E. Lawrence and his irregular Arab army in the Hejaz near Daraa , providing air cover and reconnaissance . Credited with bringing down two enemy aircraft while supporting Lawrence 's troops , Murphy was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his " keenness , reliability and boldness " . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Murphy 's temporary commission was terminated after the war and he reverted to the rank of sergeant to remain in the Army , returning to Australia on 5 March 1919 . Later that year he took part in the first transcontinental flight across Australia , from Melbourne to Darwin , Northern Territory , accompanying pilot and former schoolmate , Captain Henry Wrigley . The pair departed Point Cook on 16 November and arrived in Darwin on 12 December , having travelled 4 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 800 mi ) in forty @-@ seven flying hours . They flew in a single @-@ engined Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 with no radio , over unmapped and often hazardous terrain , and surveyed seventeen potential landing grounds along the journey . Murphy and Wrigley were each awarded the Air Force Cross in recognition of their achievement . Such was the perceived danger of the expedition that while making preparations for the return flight they received a telegram from the Defence Department ordering them to desist , arrange for the B.E.2 to be dismantled and shipped back , and themselves to travel southwards by steamer . 
 Following disbandment of the wartime AFC , Murphy transferred to its successor , the Australian Air Corps , on 1 January 1920 . On 31 March 1921 , he joined the newly established Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as its first airman , literally " Airman No. 1 " according to his papers . Nicknamed " Spud " , and described as " immensely capable and popular " , he was commissioned as a flying officer in September that year . Murphy married Alicia <unk> at Erskine Presbyterian Church in South Carlton , Melbourne , on 17 October 1922 ; the couple had two sons and a daughter . In July 1925 , he was one of the founding pilots of the newly reformed No. 3 Squadron under Flight Lieutenant Frank Lukis , when it became the first flying unit to be based at the recently opened RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales . Promoted to flight lieutenant , Murphy was posted to the RAAF Experimental Section under Wing Commander ( later Sir ) Lawrence Wackett in November 1926 . The following year he took part in a round @-@ Australia survey flight under the command of the Chief of the Air Staff , Wing Commander ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Richard Williams . 
 Raised to squadron leader , Murphy was given temporary command of No. 1 Aircraft Depot at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , in the opening months of 1933 . He subsequently took charge of the unit 's workshops . Towards the end of 1935 , he was responsible for specially modifying a Westland Wapiti and a de Havilland Gipsy Moth for Antarctic conditions , to enable an Air Force team led by Flight Lieutenant ( later Group Captain ) Eric Douglas and Flying Officer ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Alister Murdoch to rescue explorer Lincoln Ellsworth , who was presumed lost on a journey across the continent . In 1936 , Murphy was selected to join Wackett on a mission to investigate aircraft production overseas with a view to setting up local construction plants . The team determined that the North American NA @-@ 16 was most suitable for Australian conditions and manufacture ; following testing of a prototype , designated the NA @-@ 33 , the design went into production in January 1939 as the CAC Wirraway . Murphy was promoted to wing commander in November 1936 and appointed commanding officer of No. 1 Aircraft Depot in January 1938 . 
 = = World War II and retirement = = 
 Murphy continued to play a leading role in aircraft maintenance and production during World War II . In 1939 he helped set up the Government Aircraft Factory and local manufacture of the Bristol Beaufort torpedo bomber . Completing his tour as CO of No. 1 Aircraft Depot , he was promoted to group captain and appointed Inspector of Air Accidents in June 1940 . The newly created position reported directly to the Chief of the Air Staff . Murphy 's deputy was Flying Officer ( later Sir ) Henry Winneke , who found his boss 's companionship " exhilarating " — Murphy was " a product of the old school of airmen who could not only fly a plane but also pull it apart and put it together again " , generally " amiable " but who " could act gruffly when the occasion demanded " . The inspectorate was small but succeeded in reducing the number of accidents even as training expanded rapidly with Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme . Murphy led the investigation into the Canberra air disaster of August 1940 , and the Brocklesby mid @-@ air collision that occurred the following month . 
 The RAAF formed No. 4 Maintenance Group in September 1942 to co @-@ ordinate the efforts of maintenance units in Victoria , South Australia and Tasmania . Murphy was appointed its commander , and held the post until the end of the war . He was promoted to temporary air commodore in July 1943 . By 1945 , he had passed the statutory retirement age for his substantive rank of wing commander , and was summarily retired from the RAAF along with a number of other senior staff and veterans of World War I including Wrigley and Williams , to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . Discharged from the Air Force on 10 January 1946 , Murphy was later elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society . He died of heart disease in Essendon , Melbourne , on 21 April 1963 at the age of seventy @-@ one . Survived by his children , " Spud " Murphy was cremated at Fawkner , Victoria . 
 = Ocean sunfish = 
 The ocean sunfish or common mola ( Mola mola ) is the heaviest known bony fish in the world . It has an average adult weight between 247 and 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 545 – 2 @,@ 205 lb ) . The species is native to tropical and temperate waters around the globe . It resembles a fish head with a tail , and its main body is flattened laterally . Sunfish can be as tall as they are long when their dorsal and ventral fins are extended . 
 Sunfish live on a diet consisting mainly of jellyfish , but because this diet is nutritionally poor , they consume large amounts to develop and maintain their great bulk . Females of the species can produce more eggs than any other known vertebrate , up to 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 at a time . Sunfish fry resemble miniature pufferfish , with large pectoral fins , a tail fin , and body spines uncharacteristic of adult sunfish . 
 Adult sunfish are vulnerable to few natural predators , but sea lions , killer whales , and sharks will consume them . Among humans , sunfish are considered a delicacy in some parts of the world , including Japan , Korea , and Taiwan . In the EU , regulations ban the sale of fish and fishery products derived from the family Molidae . Sunfish are frequently caught in gillnets . 
 A member of the order Tetraodontiformes , which also includes pufferfish , porcupinefish , and filefish , the sunfish shares many traits common to members of this order . The ocean sunfish , Mola mola , is the type species of the genus . 
 = = Naming and taxonomy = = 
 Many of the sunfish 's various names allude to its flattened shape . Its specific name , mola , is Latin for " millstone " , which the fish resembles because of its gray color , rough texture , and rounded body . Its common English name , sunfish , refers to the animal 's habit of sunbathing at the surface of the water . The Dutch- , <unk> , French- , <unk> , Spanish- , <unk> , <unk> , Greek- and German @-@ language names , respectively <unk> , <unk> lua , <unk> lune , <unk> <unk> , <unk> luna , <unk> luna , <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , mean " moon fish " , in reference to its rounded shape . In German , the fish is also known as <unk> Kopf , or " swimming head " . In Polish , it is named <unk> , meaning " head alone " , because it has no true tail . The Chinese translation of its academic name is fan @-@ che yu <unk> , meaning " toppled wheel fish " . The ocean sunfish has various superseded binomial synonyms , and was originally classified in the pufferfish genus , as <unk> mola . It is now placed in its own genus , Mola , with two species : Mola mola and Mola <unk> . The ocean sunfish , Mola mola , is the type species of the genus . 
 The genus Mola belongs to the family Molidae . This family comprises three genera : <unk> , Mola and <unk> . The common name " sunfish " without qualifier is used to describe the marine family Molidae as well as the freshwater sunfishes in the family <unk> which are unrelated to Molidae . On the other hand , the name " ocean sunfish " and " mola " refer only to the family Molidae . 
 The family Molidae belongs to the order Tetraodontiformes , which includes pufferfish , porcupinefish , and filefish . It shares many traits common to members of this order , including the four fused teeth that form the characteristic beak and give the order its name ( tetra = four , odous = tooth , and forma = shape ) . Indeed , sunfish fry resemble spiky pufferfish more than they resemble adult <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caudal fin of the ocean sunfish is replaced by a rounded clavus , creating the body 's distinct truncated shape . The body is flattened laterally , giving it a long oval shape when seen head @-@ on . The pectoral fins are small and fan @-@ shaped , while the dorsal fin and the anal fin are lengthened , often making the fish as tall as it is long . Specimens up to 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 @.@ 5 ft ) in height have been recorded . 
 The mature ocean sunfish has an average length of 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and a fin @-@ to @-@ fin length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) . The average weight of mature specimens can range from 247 to 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 545 to 2 @,@ 205 lb ) , but even larger individuals are not unheard of . The maximum size is up to 3 @.@ 3 m ( 10 @.@ 8 ft ) in length 4 @.@ 2 m ( 14 ft ) across the fins and up to 2 @,@ 300 kg ( 5 @,@ 100 lb ) in mass . 
 The spinal column of M. mola contains fewer vertebrae and is shorter in relation to the body than that of any other fish . Although the sunfish descended from bony ancestors , its skeleton contains largely cartilaginous tissues , which are lighter than bone , allowing it to grow to sizes impractical for other bony fishes . Its teeth are fused into a beak @-@ like structure , and pharyngeal teeth located in the throat . 
 The sunfish lacks a swim bladder . Some sources indicate the internal organs contain a concentrated neurotoxin , tetrodotoxin , like the organs of other poisonous <unk> , while others dispute this claim . 
 = = = Fins = = = 
 In the course of its evolution , the caudal fin ( tail ) of the sunfish disappeared , to be replaced by a lumpy <unk> , the clavus . This structure is formed by the convergence of the dorsal and anal fins , and is used by the fish as a rudder . The smooth @-@ <unk> clavus retains 12 fin rays , and terminates in a number of rounded ossicles . 
 Ocean sunfish often swim near the surface , and their protruding dorsal fins are sometimes mistaken for those of sharks . However , the two can be distinguished by the motion of the fin . Sharks , like most fish , swim by moving the tail sideways while keeping the dorsal fin stationary . The sunfish , though , swings its dorsal fin and anal fin in a characteristic sculling motion . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 Adult sunfish range from brown to silvery @-@ grey or white , with a variety of mottled skin patterns ; some of these patterns may be region @-@ specific . Coloration is often darker on the dorsal surface , fading to a lighter shade ventrally as a form of countershading camouflage . M. mola also exhibits the ability to vary skin coloration from light to dark , especially when under attack . The skin , which contains large amounts of reticulated collagen , can be up to 7 @.@ 3 cm ( 2 @.@ 9 in ) thick on the ventral surface , and is covered by denticles and a layer of mucus instead of scales . The skin on the clavus is smoother than that on the body , where it can be as rough as sandpaper . 
 More than 40 species of parasites may reside on the skin and internally , motivating the fish to seek relief in a number of ways . One of the most frequent ocean sunfish parasites is the flatworm , <unk> <unk> . 
 In temperate regions , drifting kelp fields harbor cleaner wrasses and other fish which remove parasites from the skin of visiting sunfish . In the tropics , M. mola solicits cleaning help from reef fishes . By basking on its side at the surface , the sunfish also allows seabirds to feed on parasites from its skin . Sunfish have been reported to breach , clearing the surface by approximately 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , in an effort to dislodge embedded parasites . 
 = = Range and behavior = = 
 Ocean sunfish are native to the temperate and tropical waters of every ocean in the world . Mola genotypes appear to vary widely between the Atlantic and Pacific , but genetic differences between individuals in the Northern and Southern hemispheres are minimal . 
 Although early research suggested sunfish moved around mainly by drifting with ocean currents , individuals have been recorded swimming 26 km in a day , at a top speed of 3 @.@ 2 km / h . Sunfish are pelagic and swim at depths to 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . Contrary to the perception that sunfish spend much of their time basking at the surface , M. mola adults actually spend a large portion of their lives submerged at depths greater than 200 m ( 660 ft ) , occupying both the epipelagic and mesopelagic zones . 
 Sunfish are most often found in water warmer than 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) ; prolonged periods spent in water at temperatures of 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) or lower can lead to disorientation and eventual death . Surface basking behavior , in which a sunfish swims on its side , presenting its largest profile to the sun , may be a method of " thermally recharging " following dives into deeper , colder water . Sightings of the fish in colder waters outside of its usual habitat , such as those southwest of England , may be evidence of increasing marine temperatures . 
 Sunfish are usually found alone , but occasionally in pairs or in large groups while being cleaned . They swim primarily in open waters , but are sometimes seen near kelp beds , taking advantage of resident populations of smaller fish which remove ectoparasites from their skin . Because sunfish must consume a large volume of prey , their presence in a given area may be used as an indicator of nutrient @-@ rich waters where endangered species may be found . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The diet of the ocean sunfish consists primarily of various jellyfish . It also consumes salps , squid , crustaceans , small fish , fish larvae , and eel grass . This range of food items indicates that the sunfish feeds at many levels , from the surface to deep water , and occasionally down to the seafloor in some areas . The diet is nutritionally poor , forcing the sunfish to consume a large amount of food to maintain its size . 
 = = = Lifecycle = = = 
 Ocean sunfish may live up to ten years in captivity , but their lifespan in a natural habitat has not yet been determined . Their growth rate is also undetermined . However , a young specimen at the Monterey Bay Aquarium increased in weight from 26 to 399 kg ( 57 to 880 lb ) and reached a height of nearly 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in 15 months . 
 The sheer size and thick skin of an adult of the species deters many smaller predators , but younger fish are vulnerable to predation by bluefin tuna and mahi mahi . Adults are consumed by sea lions , Orca , and sharks . Sea lions appear to hunt sunfish for sport , tearing the fins off , tossing the body around , and then simply abandoning the still @-@ living but helpless fish to die on the seafloor . 
 The mating practices of the ocean sunfish are poorly understood , but spawning areas have been suggested in the North Atlantic , South Atlantic , North Pacific , South Pacific , and Indian oceans . Females can produce as many as 300 million eggs at a time , more than any other known vertebrate . Sunfish eggs are released into the water and externally fertilized by sperm . 
 Newly hatched sunfish larvae are only 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 098 in ) long and weigh a fraction of a gram . They grow to become fry , and those which survive grow many millions of times their original size before reaching adult proportions . Sunfish fry , with large pectoral fins , a tail fin , and body spines uncharacteristic of adult sunfish , resemble miniature pufferfish , their close relatives . Young sunfish school for protection , but this behavior is abandoned as they grow . By adulthood , they have the potential to grow more than 60 million times their birth size , arguably the most extreme size growth of any vertebrate animal . 
 = = Human interaction = = 
 Despite their size , ocean sunfish are docile , and pose no threat to human divers . Injuries from sunfish are rare , although a slight danger exists from large sunfish leaping out of the water onto boats ; in one instance , a sunfish landed on a 4 @-@ year @-@ old boy when the fish leaped onto the boy 's family 's boat . Areas where they are commonly found are popular destinations for sport dives , and sunfish at some locations have reportedly become familiar with divers . The fish is more of a problem to boaters than to swimmers , as its immense size and weight can cause significant damage to a boat striking one of these fish . Collisions with sunfish are very common in some parts of the world and have caused damage to the hull of a boat , and their bodies can become lodged in the propellers of larger ships . 
 The flesh of the ocean sunfish is considered a delicacy in some regions , the largest markets being Taiwan and Japan . All parts of the sunfish are used in cuisine , from the fins to the internal organs . Some parts of the fish are used in some areas of traditional medicine . If the body does contain toxins , then the marketing and sale of ocean sunfish is forbidden in the European Union according to Regulation ( EC ) No 853 / 2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council . 
 Sunfish are accidentally but frequently caught in drift gillnet fisheries , making up nearly 30 % of the total catch of the swordfish fishery employing drift gillnets in California . The bycatch rate is even higher for the Mediterranean swordfish industry , with 71 % to 90 % of the total catch being sunfish . 
 The fishery bycatch and destruction of ocean sunfish are unregulated worldwide . In some areas , the fish are " finned " by fishermen who regard them as worthless bait thieves ; this process , in which the fins are cut off , results in the eventual death of the fish , because it can no longer propel itself without its dorsal and anal fins . The species is also threatened by floating litter such as plastic bags which resemble jellyfish , its main food . Bags can choke and suffocate a fish or fill its stomach to the extent that it starves . 
 Many areas of sunfish biology remain poorly understood , and various research efforts are underway , including aerial surveys of populations , satellite surveillance using pop @-@ off satellite tags , genetic analysis of tissue samples , and collection of amateur sighting data . A decrease in sunfish populations may be caused by more frequent bycatch and the increasing popularity of sunfish in human diet . 
 In 2015 , a video went viral of a Boston man <unk> expressing his amazement when encountering a sunfish for the first time . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Sunfish are not widely held in aquarium exhibits , due to the unique and demanding requirements of their care . Some Asian aquaria display them , particularly in Japan . The <unk> Aquarium in Osaka is one of few aquariums with M. mola on display , where it is reportedly as popular an attraction as the larger whale sharks . The Lisbon Oceanarium in Portugal has sunfish showcased in the main tank , and in Spain , the Valencia <unk> has specimens of sunfish . The <unk> Oceanarium in the northern town of Hirtshals in Denmark is also famous for its sunfish . 
 While the first ocean sunfish to be held in an aquarium in the United States is claimed to have arrived at the Monterey Bay Aquarium in August 1986 , other specimens have previously been held at other locations . Marineland of the Pacific , closed since 1998 and located on the Palos Verdes Peninsula in Los Angeles County , California , held an ocean sunfish in its warm @-@ water tank as early as 1957 , and in 1964 held a 650 @-@ pound ( 290 kg ) specimen , claimed as the largest ever captured at that time . However , another 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) specimen was brought alive to Marineland Studios Aquarium , near St. Augustine , Florida , in 1941 . 
 Because sunfish had not been kept in captivity on a large scale before , the staff at Monterey Bay was forced to innovate and create their own methods for capture , feeding , and parasite control . By 1998 , these issues were overcome , and the aquarium was able to hold a specimen for more than a year , later releasing it after its weight increased by more than 14 times . Mola mola has since become a permanent feature of the Open Sea exhibit . Monterey Bay Aquarium 's largest sunfish specimen was euthanized on February 14 , 2008 , after an extended period of poor health . 
 A major concern to curators is preventive measures taken to keep specimens in captivity from injuring themselves by rubbing against the walls of a tank , since ocean sunfish cannot easily maneuver their bodies . In a smaller tank , hanging a vinyl curtain has been used as a stopgap measure to convert a cuboid tank to a rounded shape and prevent the fish from scraping against the sides . A more effective solution is simply to provide enough room for the sunfish to swim in wide circles . The tank must also be sufficiently deep to accommodate the vertical height of the sunfish , which may reach 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 ft ) . 
 Feeding captive sunfish in a tank with other faster @-@ moving , more aggressive fish can also present a challenge . Eventually , the fish can be taught to respond to a floating target to be fed , and to take food from the end of a pole or from human hands . 
 = = = Research and info = = = 
 <unk> reference 
 Australian Museum 
 <unk> 
 = = = Images and videos = = = 
 Mike Johnson Natural History Photography 
 Phillip Colla Photography / <unk> 
 Video lecture ( 16 : 53 ) : Swim with giant sunfish in the open ocean - Tierney Thys 
 <unk> Mola mola photos 
 Giant sunfish filmed off Malta 
 Sunfish filmed off the coast of Massachusetts in 2015 
 = <unk> = 
 <unk> is the addition of a poly ( A ) tail to a messenger RNA . The poly ( A ) tail consists of multiple adenosine monophosphates ; in other words , it is a stretch of RNA that has only adenine bases . In eukaryotes , polyadenylation is part of the process that produces mature messenger RNA ( mRNA ) for translation . It , therefore , forms part of the larger process of gene expression . 
 The process of polyadenylation begins as the transcription of a gene terminates . The 3 ' -most segment of the newly made pre @-@ mRNA is first cleaved off by a set of proteins ; these proteins then synthesize the poly ( A ) tail at the RNA 's 3 ' end . In some genes these proteins add a poly ( A ) tail at one of several possible sites . Therefore , polyadenylation can produce more than one transcript from a single gene ( alternative polyadenylation ) , similar to alternative splicing . 
 The poly ( A ) tail is important for the nuclear export , translation , and stability of mRNA . The tail is shortened over time , and , when it is short enough , the mRNA is enzymatically degraded . However , in a few cell types , mRNAs with short poly ( A ) tails are stored for later activation by re @-@ polyadenylation in the cytosol . In contrast , when polyadenylation occurs in bacteria , it promotes RNA degradation . This is also sometimes the case for eukaryotic non @-@ coding RNAs . 
 mRNA molecules in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have polyadenylated 3 ' <unk> , with the prokaryotic poly ( A ) tails generally shorter and less mRNA molecules polyadenylated . 
 = = Background on RNA = = 
 For further information , see RNA and Messenger RNA 
 RNAs are a type of large biological molecules , whose individual building blocks are called nucleotides . The name poly ( A ) tail ( for <unk> acid tail ) reflects the way RNA nucleotides are abbreviated , with a letter for the base the nucleotide contains ( A for adenine , C for cytosine , G for guanine and U for uracil ) . RNAs are produced ( transcribed ) from a DNA template . By convention , RNA sequences are written in a 5 ' to 3 ' direction . The 5 ' end is the part of the RNA molecule that is transcribed first , and the 3 ' end is transcribed last . The 3 ' end is also where the poly ( A ) tail is found on polyadenylated RNAs . 
 Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) is RNA that has a coding region that acts as a template for protein synthesis ( translation ) . The rest of the mRNA , the untranslated regions , tune how active the mRNA is . There are also many RNAs that are not translated , called non @-@ coding RNAs . Like the untranslated regions , many of these non @-@ coding RNAs have regulatory roles . 
 = = Nuclear polyadenylation = = 
 = = = Function = = = 
 In nuclear polyadenylation , a poly ( A ) tail is added to an RNA at the end of transcription . On mRNAs , the poly ( A ) tail protects the mRNA molecule from enzymatic degradation in the cytoplasm and aids in transcription termination , export of the mRNA from the nucleus , and translation . Almost all eukaryotic mRNAs are polyadenylated , with the exception of animal replication @-@ dependent histone mRNAs . These are the only mRNAs in eukaryotes that lack a poly ( A ) tail , ending instead in a stem @-@ loop structure followed by a purine @-@ rich sequence , termed histone downstream element , that directs where the RNA is cut so that the 3 ' end of the histone mRNA is formed . 
 Many eukaryotic non @-@ coding RNAs are always polyadenylated at the end of transcription . There are small RNAs where the poly ( A ) tail is seen only in intermediary forms and not in the mature RNA as the ends are removed during processing , the notable ones being microRNAs . But , for many long noncoding RNAs – a seemingly large group of regulatory RNAs that , for example , includes the RNA Xist , which mediates X chromosome inactivation – a poly ( A ) tail is part of the mature RNA . 
 = = = Mechanism = = = 
 The processive polyadenylation complex in the nucleus of eukaryotes works on products of RNA polymerase II , such as precursor mRNA . Here , a multi @-@ protein complex ( see components on the right ) cleaves the 3 ' -most part of a newly produced RNA and <unk> the end produced by this cleavage . The cleavage is catalysed by the enzyme CPSF and occurs 10 – 30 nucleotides downstream of its binding site . This site often has the polyadenylation signal sequence AAUAAA on the RNA , but variants of it that bind more weakly to CPSF exist . Two other proteins add specificity to the binding to an RNA : CstF and CFI . CstF binds to a GU @-@ rich region further downstream of CPSF 's site . CFI recognises a third site on the RNA ( a set of <unk> sequences in mammals ) and can recruit CPSF even if the AAUAAA sequence is missing . The polyadenylation signal – the sequence motif recognised by the RNA cleavage complex – varies between groups of eukaryotes . Most human polyadenylation sites contain the AAUAAA sequence , but this sequence is less common in plants and fungi . 
 The RNA is typically cleaved before transcription termination , as CstF also binds to RNA polymerase II . Through a poorly understood mechanism ( as of 2002 ) , it signals for RNA polymerase II to slip off of the transcript . Cleavage also involves the protein <unk> , though it is unknown how . The cleavage site associated with a polyadenylation signal can vary up to some 50 nucleotides . 
 When the RNA is cleaved , polyadenylation starts , catalysed by polyadenylate polymerase . <unk> polymerase builds the poly ( A ) tail by adding adenosine monophosphate units from adenosine triphosphate to the RNA , cleaving off pyrophosphate . Another protein , <unk> , binds to the new , short poly ( A ) tail and increases the affinity of polyadenylate polymerase for the RNA . When the poly ( A ) tail is approximately 250 nucleotides long the enzyme can no longer bind to CPSF and polyadenylation stops , thus determining the length of the poly ( A ) tail . CPSF is in contact with RNA polymerase II , allowing it to signal the polymerase to terminate transcription . When RNA polymerase II reaches a " termination sequence " ( <unk> on the DNA template and AAUAAA on the primary transcript ) , the end of transcription is signaled . The polyadenylation machinery is also physically linked to the spliceosome , a complex that removes introns from RNAs . 
 = = = Downstream effects = = = 
 The poly ( A ) tail acts as the binding site for poly ( A ) -binding protein . Poly ( A ) -binding protein promotes export from the nucleus and translation , and inhibits degradation . This protein binds to the poly ( A ) tail prior to mRNA export from the nucleus and in yeast also recruits poly ( A ) nuclease , an enzyme that shortens the poly ( A ) tail and allows the export of the mRNA . Poly ( A ) -binding protein is exported to the cytoplasm with the <unk> mRNAs that are not exported are degraded by the exosome . Poly ( A ) -binding protein also can bind to , and thus recruit , several proteins that affect translation , one of these is initiation factor @-@ 4G , which in turn recruits the 40S ribosomal subunit . However , a poly ( A ) tail is not required for the translation of all mRNAs . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In eukaryotic somatic cells , the poly ( A ) tail of most mRNAs in the cytoplasm gradually get shorter , and mRNAs with shorter poly ( A ) tail are translated less and degraded sooner . However , it can take many hours before an mRNA is degraded . This deadenylation and degradation process can be accelerated by microRNAs complementary to the 3 ' untranslated region of an mRNA . In immature egg cells , mRNAs with shortened poly ( A ) tails are not degraded , but are instead stored without being translated . They are then activated by cytoplasmic polyadenylation after fertilisation , during egg activation . 
 In animals , poly ( A ) ribonuclease ( <unk> ) can bind to the 5 ' cap and remove nucleotides from the poly ( A ) tail . The level of access to the 5 ' cap and poly ( A ) tail is important in controlling how soon the mRNA is degraded . <unk> <unk> less if the RNA is bound by the initiation factors 4E ( at the 5 ' cap ) and 4G ( at the poly ( A ) tail ) , which is why translation reduces deadenylation . The rate of deadenylation may also be regulated by RNA @-@ binding proteins . Once the poly ( A ) tail is removed , the <unk> complex removes the 5 ' cap , leading to a degradation of the RNA . Several other enzymes that seem to be involved in deadenylation have been identified in yeast . 
 = = = Alternative polyadenylation = = = 
 Many protein @-@ coding genes have more than one polyadenylation site , so a gene can code for several mRNAs that differ in their 3 ' end . Since alternative polyadenylation changes the length of the 3 ' untranslated region , it can change which binding sites for microRNAs the 3 ' untranslated region contains . MicroRNAs tend to repress translation and promote degradation of the mRNAs they bind to , although there are examples of microRNAs that stabilise transcripts . Alternative polyadenylation can also shorten the coding region , thus making the mRNA code for a different protein , but this is much less common than just shortening the 3 ' untranslated region . 
 The choice of poly ( A ) site can be influenced by extracellular stimuli and depends on the expression of the proteins that take part in polyadenylation . For example , the expression of CstF @-@ 64 , a subunit of cleavage stimulatory factor ( CstF ) , increases in macrophages in response to lipopolysaccharides ( a group of bacterial compounds that trigger an immune response ) . This results in the selection of weak poly ( A ) sites and thus shorter transcripts . This removes regulatory elements in the 3 ' untranslated regions of mRNAs for defense @-@ related products like lysozyme and TNF @-@ α . These mRNAs then have longer half @-@ lives and produce more of these proteins . RNA @-@ binding proteins other than those in the polyadenylation machinery can also affect whether a <unk> site is used , as can DNA methylation near the polyadenylation signal . 
 = = <unk> polyadenylation = = 
 There is polyadenylation in the cytosol of some animal cell types , namely in the germ line , during early embryogenesis and in post @-@ synaptic sites of nerve cells . This lengthens the poly ( A ) tail of an mRNA with a shortened poly ( A ) tail , so that the mRNA will be translated . These shortened poly ( A ) tails are often less than 20 nucleotides , and are lengthened to around 80 – 150 nucleotides . 
 In the early mouse embryo , cytoplasmic polyadenylation of maternal RNAs from the egg cell allows the cell to survive and grow even though transcription does not start until the middle of the 2 @-@ cell stage ( 4 @-@ cell stage in human ) . In the brain , cytoplasmic polyadenylation is active during learning and could play a role in long @-@ term potentiation , which is the strengthening of the signal transmission from a nerve cell to another in response to nerve impulses and is important for learning and memory formation . 
 <unk> polyadenylation requires the RNA @-@ binding proteins CPSF and <unk> , and can involve other RNA @-@ binding proteins like <unk> . Depending on the cell type , the polymerase can be the same type of polyadenylate polymerase ( PAP ) that is used in the nuclear process , or the cytoplasmic polymerase <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = = Tagging for degradation in eukaryotes = = 
 For many non @-@ coding RNAs , including tRNA , rRNA , snRNA , and snoRNA , polyadenylation is a way of marking the RNA for degradation , at least in yeast . This polyadenylation is done in the nucleus by the <unk> complex , which maintains a tail that is around 4 nucleotides long to the 3 ' end . The RNA is then degraded by the exosome . Poly ( A ) tails have also been found on human rRNA fragments , both the form of <unk> ( A only ) and <unk> ( mostly A ) tails . 
 = = In prokaryotes and organelles = = 
 In many bacteria , both mRNAs and non @-@ coding RNAs can be polyadenylated . This poly ( A ) tail promotes degradation by the degradosome , which contains two RNA @-@ degrading enzymes : polynucleotide phosphorylase and RNase E. <unk> phosphorylase binds to the 3 ' end of RNAs and the 3 ' extension provided by the poly ( A ) tail allows it to bind to the RNAs whose secondary structure would otherwise block the 3 ' end . Successive rounds of polyadenylation and degradation of the 3 ' end by polynucleotide phosphorylase allows the degradosome to overcome these secondary structures . The poly ( A ) tail can also recruit RNases that cut the RNA in two . These bacterial poly ( A ) tails are about 30 nucleotides long . 
 In as different groups as animals and trypanosomes , the mitochondria contain both stabilising and destabilising poly ( A ) tails . <unk> polyadenylation targets both mRNA and noncoding RNAs . The poly ( A ) tails are 43 nucleotides long on average . The stabilising ones start at the stop codon , and without them the stop codon ( UAA ) is not complete as the genome only encodes the U or UA part . Plant mitochondria have only destabilising polyadenylation , and yeast mitochondria have no polyadenylation at all . 
 While many bacteria and mitochondria have polyadenylate polymerases , they also have another type of polyadenylation , performed by polynucleotide phosphorylase itself . This enzyme is found in bacteria , mitochondria , plastids and as a constituent of the archaeal exosome ( in those archaea that have an exosome ) . It can synthesise a 3 ' extension where the vast majority of the bases are <unk> . Like in bacteria , polyadenylation by polynucleotide phosphorylase promotes degradation of the RNA in plastids and likely also archaea . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Although polyadenylation is seen in almost all organisms , it is not universal . However , the wide distribution of this modification and the fact that it is present in organisms from all three domains of life implies that the last universal common ancestor of all living organisms , it is presumed , had some form of polyadenylation system . A few organisms do not polyadenylate mRNA , which implies that they have lost their polyadenylation machineries during evolution . Although no examples of eukaryotes that lack polyadenylation are known , mRNAs from the bacterium Mycoplasma <unk> and the salt @-@ tolerant archaean <unk> <unk> lack this modification . 
 The most ancient <unk> enzyme is polynucleotide phosphorylase . This enzyme is part of both the bacterial degradosome and the archaeal exosome , two closely related complexes that recycle RNA into nucleotides . This enzyme degrades RNA by attacking the bond between the 3 ' -most nucleotides with a phosphate , breaking off a diphosphate nucleotide . This reaction is reversible , and so the enzyme can also extend RNA with more nucleotides . The <unk> tail added by polynucleotide phosphorylase is very rich in adenine . The choice of adenine is most likely the result of higher ADP concentrations than other nucleotides as a result of using ATP as an energy currency , making it more likely to be incorporated in this tail in early lifeforms . It has been suggested that the involvement of adenine @-@ rich tails in RNA degradation prompted the later evolution of polyadenylate polymerases ( the enzymes that produce poly ( A ) tails with no other nucleotides in them ) . 
 <unk> polymerases are not as ancient . They have separately evolved in both bacteria and eukaryotes from CCA @-@ adding enzyme , which is the enzyme that completes the 3 ' ends of tRNAs . Its catalytic domain is homologous to that of other polymerases . It is presumed that the horizontal transfer of bacterial CCA @-@ adding enzyme to eukaryotes allowed the archaeal @-@ like CCA @-@ adding enzyme to switch function to a poly ( A ) polymerase . Some lineages , like archaea and cyanobacteria , never evolved a polyadenylate polymerase . 
 = = History = = 
 Poly ( A ) polymerase was first identified in 1960 as an enzymatic activity in extracts made from cell nuclei that could <unk> ATP , but not ADP , into <unk> . Although identified in many types of cells , this activity had no known function until 1971 , when poly ( A ) sequences were found in mRNAs . The only function of these sequences was thought at first to be protection of the 3 ' end of the RNA from nucleases , but later the specific roles of polyadenylation in nuclear export and translation were identified . The polymerases responsible for polyadenylation were first purified and characterized in the 1960s and 1970s , but the large number of accessory proteins that control this process were discovered only in the early 1990s . 
 = Government Hooker = 
 " Government Hooker " is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . It was composed and produced by Gaga , Fernando Garibay , and DJ White Shadow . " Government Hooker " was previously an unused track that Shadow created with DJ Snake . Recording sessions took place in 2010 at the Studio at the Palms in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 The song is a synthpop track incorporating influences from many electronic subgenres including techno , trance , post @-@ disco , and industrial . Its themes relate to female sexual empowerment , expressed as a metaphor for the supposed relationship between actress Marilyn Monroe and United States president John F. Kennedy . Critics appreciated the song 's risqué and dark nature , as well as its music . Although never released as a single , " Government Hooker " charted in South Korea and the United States , where it peaked at number sixteen on the Hot Dance / Electronic Digital Songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Government Hooker " is a collaborative effort between Gaga , Fernando Garibay and DJ White Shadow . Recording sessions took place in 2010 at the Studio at the Palms in Las Vegas , Nevada . " Government Hooker " began as an old recording by DJ White Shadow and DJ Snake . Shadow increased the tempo of the beat after conversing with Vince Herbert " about faster songs " . Herbert particularly enjoyed the prototype of " Government Hooker " , more so than the other beats that he heard during the session . Gaga wrote the lyrics of " Government Hooker " shortly after first hearing the beat . During writing , security guard Peter van der Veen was recruited to sing in lieu of computerized vocals . Shadow noticed van der Veen 's thick , distinctive Dutch accent while he was browsing through the lyrics . Alongside " Scheiße " and a remix of " Born This Way " , " Government Hooker " was first publicly played at a Thierry Mugler fashion show in Paris , France on March 2 , 2011 , as Gaga made her runway debut . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Government Hooker " is an uptempo synthpop song with elements of trance , techno , post @-@ disco , and industrial . Los Angeles Times columnist Randall Roberts heard it as an homage to the German electronic group Kraftwerk , and noted " weird Casio @-@ tone circuit @-@ bending " . To Evan Sawdey of PopMatters , the song contained amalgamated elements of Britney Spears ' " Gimme More " ( 2007 ) and the New Order song " Blue Monday " ( 1983 ) . According to the music sheet published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing on Musicnotes.com , " Government Hooker " is written in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of F ♯ minor . Gaga 's voice spans the tonal nodes of F ♯ 3 to C ♯ 5 . The song has a basic sequence of D – F ♯ m – D – F ♯ m during the verses , B – D – A – E during the bridge and Bm – F ♯ m – Bm – F ♯ m during the chorus , as its chord progression . The song primarily explores themes of female sexual empowerment . 
 " Government Hooker " begins as Gaga sings in an operatic fashion — backed by industrial synthesizers — and transcends into an electro @-@ pop Gregorian chant . The song then progresses into the chorus : " I can be good / I can be sex / I can be anything / I can be everything / I can be mom . " A male vocalist accompanies the singer 's lyrics , " Unless you want to be man / Unless you want to hold hands / Unless you want to be dad " . After Gaga sings " I 'm gonna drink my tears and cry / ' cos I know you love me baby " during the techno @-@ inspired bridge , she alludes to the alleged affair between Marilyn Monroe and John F. Kennedy with the lyrics " Put your hands on me / John F. Kennedy / I 'll make you squeal baby " , singing in an impassive and monotonous manner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Government Hooker " garnered acclaim from music critics . Roberts asserted that the song 's dynamic was a quirky exception to the contravening nature of Born This Way . Chris Richards of The Washington Post chose the song as a highlight on the album commenting that " ' The Edge of Glory ' makes a song like ' Government Hooker ' seem much more daring than it actually is " . Caryn Ganz of Spin said that Lady Gaga 's eccentric and outlandish persona — the so @-@ called " nutty come @-@ ons " — were apparent in the " grimy doom disco " of " Government Hooker " . Christian Blauvelt of Entertainment Weekly described the song 's chorus as " an infectious raver with a killer hook [ and it ] is pretty irresistible . " 
 Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described it as " filthy @-@ fabulous " , while Jocelyn Vena of MTV called the song a " massive club track " . Rolling Stone journalist Jody Rosen felt that the production of the " requisite kinky song " was captivating , including its " shape @-@ shifting assemblage of buzzes , beeps and clattering beats " . Dan Martin of NME wrote that " Government Hooker " is inimical to the campy nature of the album , and felt that as the track starts , Born This Way effectively transcends into " claustrophobic " techno beats . " This is freeform and industrial and quite mad " , Martin noted . Billboard writer Kerri Mason said that the track has " opera vocalizing , minimal techno bleeps , a JFK reference , and conflicting definitions of self as seductive product " . To Ian Wade of BBC Music , the eerie operatic entrance of " Government Hooker " gives way to a " Casiotone throb " . Sawdey commended the sexual lyrics of the song , and insisted that the " gender @-@ bending " chorus was the best since The Killers ' " Somebody Told Me " . 
 Despite not being released as a single , " Government Hooker " entered the charts in two countries : In South Korea , the song debuted at number fifteen on the Gaon Digital Chart selling 13 @,@ 976 copies , while in the United States , " Government Hooker " debuted at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot Dance / Electronic Digital Songs . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Government Hooker " at the Clinton Foundation 's Decade of Difference celebration at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles , California . The song was featured in a promotional video for the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards on August 18 , 2011 . " Government Hooker " was included on the setlist of the Born This Way Ball , Gaga 's third headlining tour . The song was performed as the second song in the setlist , after " Highway Unicorn ( Road to Love ) " which opened the show . After a brief interlude Gaga appeared from one of the doors in the castle and walked down the castle steps . She preceded to take part in a sexual routine with one of her dancers . During the breakdown , Gaga pulled a gun out of a draw and shot the dancer and then sung the chorus one more time and telling the crowd , ' Welcome to the Born This Way Ball ' and shot the castle gates open . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Born This Way . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Nani = 
 Luís Carlos Almeida da Cunha , <unk> ( born 17 November 1986 ) , commonly known as Nani ( Portuguese pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) or Luís Nani , is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays as a winger for Spanish club Valencia CF and the Portugal national team . Although predominantly right @-@ footed , he has been utilised on the left wing on many occasions . 
 Nani was born in Cape Verde and emigrated to Europe with his family at an early age . He was raised in Portugal and began his football career playing for local side Real Massamá . At the age of nine , he began training with Sporting Clube de Portugal and S.L. Benfica on alternate days , eventually joining Sporting 's youth squad after they offered him pre @-@ season training . In 2005 , he made his professional debut with the club and won the Portuguese Cup during his second season with them . Nani was named the SJPF Young Player of the Month for May 2007 and his performances with Sporting culminated into a move to English club Manchester United in July 2007 for a fee of € 25 million . 
 Nani won the Community Shield on his competitive debut at Manchester United and added a number of trophies , including the Premier League and Champions League during his debut season at the club . He established himself as first @-@ choice winger at United and won a further three Premier League titles , the Football League Cup , one FIFA Club World Cup , and three Community Shield titles . Individually , Nani was included in the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) Premier League Team of the Year on one occasion and was a nominee for the PFA Young Player of the Year in 2011 . Following a loan back to Sporting , in which he won the Taça de Portugal , he was signed for £ 4 @.@ 25 million by Fenerbahçe in July 2015 , and a year later he signed for Valencia . 
 Nani is also a Portugal international . Prior to playing at senior level , he played at under @-@ 21 level . He made his senior international debut in September 2006 in a friendly match against Denmark and scored his first international goal during the 4 – 2 defeat in Copenhagen . Nani has represented his country at four major tournaments , including three European Championships : he took part at the 2008 , 2012 and 2016 European Championships , reaching the semi @-@ finals of Euro 2012 , and winning Euro 2016 ; he also participated at the 2014 FIFA World Cup with Portugal . Since his debut , he has made over 100 appearances and scored 20 goals for the Portugal national team , making him their fourth @-@ most capped player of all time . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nani was born on 17 November 1986 in Praia , the capital of Cape Verde , off the West African coast . Nani emigrated with his family to Portugal at an early age . Nani was raised by his aunt <unk> in the Santa Filomena estate in the Amadora district of Lisbon after being abandoned by his parents . At the age of five , his father left for a holiday in Cape Verde but never returned and when he was 12 years old , his mother left Portugal to start a new life in the Netherlands . Nani has nine siblings from his mother , of which he is the youngest , and five from his father . Nani gained his nickname from an elder sister at a young age . 
 Nani 's older brother taught him how to play football and he played with his childhood friend , midfielder Manuel Fernandes . Around the age of 14 , Nani 's older brother took him to train with Real Massamá . They were Nani 's first club and gave him money , food , and helped him obtain an ID card and a passport . At the age of 16 , Nani was training on alternate days with Sporting Clube de Portugal and Benfica . Nani sometimes walked miles to and from practice before Sporting offered him pre @-@ season training . Despite growing up in Lisbon , Nani and his brother supported FC Porto as a boy and his footballing hero was Luís Figo . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Sporting CP = = = 
 Nani joined Sporting Clube de Portugal from his first club , Real Massamá . After two seasons in the youth team , where he won the National Junior Championship in 2004 – 05 , Nani was promoted to the first team early in the 2005 – 06 season . On 10 August 2005 , Nani made his Sporting debut , coming on as a substitute for <unk> in the 73rd minute in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Udinese in their third @-@ round qualifier in the UEFA Champions League . Nani made his Portuguese Liga debut on 28 August , replacing <unk> in the 76th minute of a 1 – 2 victory over Marítimo at the Estádio dos Barreiros . Nani scored his first Sporting goal on 30 October , opening the scoring in a 2 – 2 draw away to Boavista . Nani ended the first season of his career with 36 appearances and five goals in all competitions . 
 Nani first came into the spotlight after scoring in the Champions League against Spartak Moscow , netting Sporting 's goal in a 1 – 1 Group Stage tie on 27 September 2006 . Nani helped Sporting win the 2006 – 07 Portuguese Cup , lifting the trophy after a 1 – 0 win over Belenenses on 27 May 2007 in the final . Nani was then named as the SJPF Young Player of the Month for May 2007 . Nani 's second season with Sporting ended with similar league statistics , with 40 appearances and six goals in all competitions . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 = = = = Early years = = = = 
 Nani was sold to Manchester United for € 25 @.@ 5 million , five percent of which was paid to Real Massamá , his first professional club . He passed his medical on 6 June 2007 , and signed a five @-@ year contract a month later , joining Portuguese compatriot Cristiano Ronaldo — with whom he lived for a time at the start of his Manchester United career – at the club . 
 Nani scored on his debut in a pre @-@ season friendly against Shenzhen , netting the third in a 6 – 0 win . He also scored in the following game against Guangzhou Pharmaceutical with a chip off the right post from the left side of the penalty area in a 3 – 0 win . On 5 August 2007 , Nani made his competitive debut for United , coming on as a substitute in the Community Shield against Chelsea . He marked his debut with a trophy after they won 3 – 0 on penalties , following a 1 – 1 draw during normal time . This was followed up by Nani 's third goal for the club three days later , when he scored against Glentoran in another 3 – 0 pre @-@ season win . 
 Nani 's Premier League debut came in United 's opening match at home to Reading on 12 August as a substitute for Wayne Rooney , who had suffered a foot injury . Two weeks later , on 26 August , Nani scored his first competitive goal for United , netting a 30 @-@ yard goal in the 69th minute against Tottenham Hotspur . Nani also set up crucial goals for Louis Saha and Nemanja Vidić , allowing United to beat both Sunderland and Everton 1 – 0 , respectively . He returned to face his previous club , Sporting CP , in a Champions League tie in September , though it was teammate and fellow former Sporting player Cristiano Ronaldo who scored the winner in a 0 – 1 victory . Nani opened the scoring in a 4 – 1 home victory over Middlesbrough on 27 October . 
 On 16 February 2008 , Nani put in a man of the match performance against Arsenal in the FA Cup Fourth Round , his goal and two assists helping United to a 4 – 0 win over their rivals . During the match , Nani was involved in an altercation with Arsenal captain William Gallas , who felt that the Portuguese was " showboating . " After the match , Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger was equally displeased , while Gilberto Silva said that Nani had a " big head . " 
 On 23 March , Nani set up the second and scored the final goal in a 3 – 0 victory over rivals Liverpool , in the 79th and 81st minutes respectively , after coming onto the pitch as a substitute . On 3 May , towards the end of a 4 – 1 home win over West Ham United , Nani was sent off for the first time in his United career for a headbutt on West Ham defender Lucas Neill . On 21 May , Nani came on as a substitute for Wayne Rooney in the 2008 UEFA Champions League Final as United defeated Chelsea 6 – 5 on penalties following a 1 – 1 draw after extra time . Nani took and scored Manchester United 's crucial fifth penalty in the shootout . 
 Nani scored his first goal of the 2008 – 09 season on 23 September 2008 , scoring United 's third goal in a 3 – 1 win over Middlesbrough in the last minute to secure passage to the Fourth Round of the League Cup . On 18 October , he scored from a Wayne Rooney assist to complete the 4 – 0 rout of West Bromwich Albion at Old Trafford . On 20 January 2009 , he opened the scoring for United in their 4 – 2 win at home to Derby County in the second leg of their League Cup semi @-@ final . 
 = = = = Breakthrough = = = = 
 After Cristiano Ronaldo 's transfer to Real Madrid in the 2009 close season , the weight of expectation was on Nani to step up from bit part player and replace his compatriot . Nani 's first contribution to United 's new season was opening the scoring in the 10th minute of the 2009 FA Community Shield , but United eventually lost the match on penalties after a 2 – 2 draw . Nani suffered a dislocated shoulder during the match , which was originally expected to keep him out of the start of the season . He recovered in time to play 17 minutes for Portugal against Liechtenstein on 12 August , however , and started the match against Birmingham City on 16 August . Although he provided the assist for Wayne Rooney 's winning goal in the 34th minute , Nani was replaced by Ryan Giggs at half @-@ time . On 22 August , Nani scored his first league goal of the 2009 – 10 season , netting a free @-@ kick against Wigan Athletic in a 0 – 5 away win . 
 Following several poor performances , Nani criticised Sir Alex Ferguson for his lack of confidence in him . Despite this outburst Nani was given a chance to shine and provided an assist for Wayne Rooney in the 4 – 0 league win over Hull City . Soon after this positive display , he put in another good performance in their League Cup semi @-@ final victory over derby rivals Manchester City , revealing a heart @-@ to @-@ heart with Sir Alex Ferguson had resulted in a better display of form . On 31 January 2010 , Nani scored the first goal and set up Rooney 's 100th career Premier League strike in a 1 – 3 league victory over Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium . Nani 's goal was first thought of as a Manuel Almunia own goal by many sources , but was confirmed as belonging to Nani on 26 March by the Dubious Goals Panel . Following this performance , Nani then set up the second of a 5 – 0 home win over Portsmouth . 
 Just four days later , however , he was sent off for a lunge at Stiliyan Petrov against Aston Villa , which resulted in a three @-@ match ban and ruled him out of the League Cup final . On 10 March , Nani set up Rooney 's second in a 4 – 0 win over Milan , before providing another assist for Rooney four days later , in the 3 – 0 league victory over Fulham . 
 On 26 March , Nani signed a new four @-@ year contract with United , committing himself until 2014 . A day later , Nani took his assist tally in the league for the season to nine as he set up two goals in a 0 – 4 win over Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium , providing goals for Dimitar Berbatov and Darron Gibson . On 7 April , Nani scored his first ever European goals for United , netting two strikes in a 3 – 2 victory over Bayern Munich . Despite United winning the game , they were eliminated from the competition due to the away goals rule when the aggregate score was 4 – 4 . On 24 April , Nani scored his first league goal at Old Trafford in 18 months , netting United 's second in a 3 – 1 home victory over Tottenham Hotspur . On 2 May , Nani scored for the second game in a row , netting the only goal in a 0 – 1 away victory over Sunderland . Nani 's third season with Manchester United ended with 34 appearances and seven goals in all competitions . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 On 22 August 2010 , Nani missed a penalty in the 87th minute away to Fulham , and they then equalised two minutes later through Brede <unk> to end the game 2 – 2 . Six days later , in a 3 – 0 home victory over West Ham United , Nani netted his first goal of the season and assisted Dimitar Berbatov in a Man of the Match display . Nani scored and assisted Michael Owen in a 2 – 2 away draw away to Bolton Wanderers on 26 September . On 16 October , Nani scored United 's second in a 2 – 2 home draw against West Bromwich Albion . Four days later , Nani scored his first Champions League goal of the season , netting the solitary strike in a 1 – 0 home victory over Bursaspor . 
 On 30 October , Nani scored a controversial second goal as United beat Tottenham Hotspur 2 – 0 at home . He scored into an empty net after Tottenham goalkeeper Heurelho Gomes rolled the ball out to take a free @-@ kick that he thought had been given for handball , however , play was allowed to go on as referee Mark <unk> did not blow his whistle . On 27 November , Nani scored United 's fifth goal in a 7 – 1 home win over Blackburn Rovers . Nani netted his first goal of 2011 as he scored the winning strike in a 2 – 1 home victory over Stoke City on 4 January . 
 On 22 January , Nani scored the final goal of a 5 – 0 home victory over Birmingham City . Nani netted United 's only goal in their first league loss of the season , a 2 – 1 defeat at Wolves on 5 February . Seven days later Nani scored his first Manchester derby goal , opening the scoring in a 2 – 1 home victory over Manchester City . 
 On 6 March , during United 's 3 – 1 loss against Liverpool at Anfield , Nani was injured following a challenge from Jamie Carragher just before half @-@ time . Nani shed tears after the challenge and he was subsequently taken off the pitch in a stretcher . Following post @-@ match comments to the press from Manchester United it was believed Nani had suffered a broken leg . However this was not the case as he started training the following week . It was thought that Nani would miss up to three weeks as a result of this tackle and would return in April , however , he recovered in time to play 61 minutes of a 2 – 1 victory over Marseille on 15 March . 
 Nani was revealed as a contender for the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) Young Player of the Year award alongside teammate Javier Hernández on 8 April . However , many people , including Nani , expressed their surprise that he was not nominated for the main award . Following this nomination , he assisted both goals in a 2 – 0 home win over Fulham on 9 April . Nani lost out to Jack Wilshere for the PFA Young Player of the Year award on 18 April but he was however included into the PFA Premier League Team of the Year for the first time . He was awarded for his outstanding season as he was voted Players ' Player of the Year at the club 's awards night on 18 May . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 Nani began the new season by putting in a man of the match performance and scoring twice against derby rivals Manchester City in the 2011 Community Shield , including a 94th @-@ minute winner , as United came from two goals down to win 3 – 2 on 7 August 2011 . He scored his first league goal of the 2011 – 12 season by netting United 's fifth goal in an 8 – 2 victory over Arsenal on 28 August . Nani made his 100th Premier League appearance on 18 September as he scored in a 3 – 1 home win over Chelsea . He scored with a long range strike after cutting inside from the right wing . He was also awarded with the man of the match . In United 's following league game at the Britannia Stadium , Nani scored his third goal of the season in a 1 – 1 draw with Stoke City . He played a neat one @-@ two with Darren Fletcher before making his way through Stoke 's defence and firing a low shot inside the left post . Nani started the match against Manchester city where they fell victim to a 1 – 6 beating at home to their neighbours . On 1 November , Nani was shortlisted for the prestigious FIFA Ballon d 'Or . 
 On 10 December , the first match after United 's elimination from the UEFA Champions League , Nani scored a brace in a home game against Wolves . He opened the scoring in the 17th minute to put them 1 – 0 up with a shot into the bottom left corner . He scored his second goal in the 56th minute , tapping in from Antonio Valencia 's drilled cross across the six @-@ yard box to extend the lead to 3 – 1 . He was later replaced by another winger Ashley Young as the game finished 4 – 1 to the home side . Nani scored his sixth league goal of the season and provided two assists in a 5 – 0 away win at Fulham on 21 December . He first advanced on a run down the left flank before crossing for Danny Welbeck to slot home . He then met a Ryan Giggs cross with his head , to glance United into a 2 – 0 lead . He then returned the compliment , squaring for Giggs to put United 3 – 0 up before half time . 
 During United 's 2 – 1 win against Arsenal on 22 January , Nani sustained a foot injury from a tackle by Arsenal defender Laurent Koscielny in the 75th minute and was replaced by fellow winger Ashley Young . After a scan on Nani 's foot , he was feared to have suffered a metatarsal injury , thus not being able to play for 2 months . Nani returned to football on 15 April at United 's match against Aston Villa as a substitute , replacing Ashley Young on the left wing . He scored a goal in stoppage time ( 93rd minute ) with a low shot pass Villa keeper Shay Given from Evans 's assist with a through pass , resulting in a 4 – 0 win over Villa . Nani then followed this up with another goal when chipping Tim Howard at his near post the final score resulted in a 4 – 4 draw at Old Trafford against Everton . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 On 5 September 2013 , Nani renewed his contract with Manchester United , which was to keep him at the club until 2018 . He started his first game of 2013 – 14 season against Liverpool in the League Cup . Despite this , Nani spent most of the season struggling against injury and trying to find form . 
 = = = = Loan return to Sporting CP = = = = 
 On 19 August 2014 , Sporting CP announced the return of Nani to the club on a season @-@ long loan from Manchester United , as part of a deal that brought in Marcos Rojo to Manchester United . He was given the number 77 shirt . 
 Nani made his comeback at José Alvalade in a league match against <unk> , four days after signing . He missed a penalty , received a yellow card and was substituted in the 77th minute , as the match ended in a 1 – 0 win for Sporting . He scored his first goal of this loan on 17 September , opening a 1 – 1 draw at NK Maribor in the first match of the Champions League group stage . He was also voted Man of the Match . Nani scored his first league goal for the club four days later in a 4 – 0 win against Gil Vicente F.C. On 3 January 2015 , Nani was sent off for two bookings in a 3 – 0 win over Estoril . Nani scored in Sporting 's penalty shootout victory over S.C. Braga in the 2015 Taça de Portugal Final , which earned the club their first trophy since 2008 . 
 = = = Fenerbahçe = = = 
 On 6 July 2015 , Nani joined Turkish club Fenerbahçe , signing a three @-@ year deal for a fee of £ 4 @.@ 25 million . He and his former United teammate Robin van Persie debuted 22 days later in a goalless home draw against Shakhtar Donetsk in the third qualifying round of the season 's Champions League , with Nani starting . He scored two goals including the winner , a free kick in second @-@ half stoppage time , against Antalyaspor on 30 August . 
 = = = Valencia = = = 
 In July 2016 , Nani signed for Spanish club Valencia on a three @-@ year contract , with Valencia paying an undisclosed fee to complete the transfer . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Portugal under – 21 = = = 
 Nani was the youngest member of the Portugal squad at the 2006 UEFA Under @-@ 21 Championship , making his debut on 23 May 2006 in a 0 – 1 defeat to France U21 . He appeared in all three games , scoring no goals , before Portugal bowed out in group stages . During the 2007 European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship , he made four appearances , scoring one goal in a 4 – 0 victory against Israel U21 in a group stage match on 16 June 2007 , and had to be taken off during the match after a right ankle injury . 
 = = = Portugal senior team = = = 
 Nani made his first appearance for the senior Portuguese team on 1 September 2006 , and marked his debut with a goal in Portugal 's 4 – 2 friendly defeat to Denmark . Nani was omitted from Portugal 's 1 – 1 draw with Armenia , but was recalled for Euro 2008 qualifiers against Poland and Serbia in September . He also provided the assist for Ricardo Quaresma 's goal in a friendly against Italy on 6 February 2008 . Nani was ruled out of Portugal 's friendly with Greece in March 2008 due to injury . 
 = = = = Euro 2008 = = = = 
 Nani was a regular member of the Portuguese squad in Euro 2008 qualification , and scored one of the goals in the 2 – 1 away win over Belgium on 2 June 2007 . Nani received a call @-@ up to Luiz Felipe Scolari 's 23 @-@ man squad for Euro 2008 alongside Manchester United teammate Cristiano Ronaldo . During the campaign Nani played three games and started just one , but did provide the assist for Hélder <unk> 's goal during a substitute appearance in the 3 – 2 quarter @-@ final defeat to Germany on 19 June . 
 = = = = Post @-@ Euro 2008 = = = = 
 Nani 's fourth international goal came in Portugal 's final friendly game before their World Cup qualifying campaign started , a 5 – 0 victory over the Faroe Islands on 20 August 2008 . Nani scored the final goal of a 4 – 0 victory over Malta as Portugal started qualification for the 2010 World Cup on 6 September . He opened the scoring in the 3 – 2 home loss against Denmark four days later . Nani helped Portugal book a play @-@ off place for the World Cup as he netted in the 4 – 0 home win over Malta on 14 October 2009 . Nani was influential in the play @-@ off against Bosnia and Herzegovina , setting up Bruno Alves for the only goal in the first leg . Raul Meireles ' goal in the second @-@ leg sealed Portugal 's place at the World Cup in South Africa . 
 On 1 June 2010 , Nani netted Portugal 's third in a 3 – 1 victory over Cameroon . Following that game Nani was named in Carlos Queiroz 23 @-@ man squad for the tournament , However , on 8 June , Nani was ruled out of the tournament through a shoulder injury and was replaced by Benfica midfielder <unk> Amorim . 
 Nani scored twice and assisted once in Paulo Bento 's first game in charge of Portugal in a 3 – 1 Euro 2012 qualifying win over Denmark on 8 October 2010 . Nani scored twice and set up another again in a 5 – 3 win over Iceland on 7 October 2011 . 
 = = = = 2014 FIFA World Cup = = = = 
 Nani started in the opening match of the 2014 FIFA World Cup for Portugal against Germany . After the match he stated how the team played well despite the loss and how " the referee has discriminated against us , but that 's normal , Portugal against big teams never get help ... " . In the team 's second fixture , Nani scored the opening goal for Portugal in a 2 – 2 draw with the United States . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2016 = = = = 
 Nani scored Portugal 's first goal in the last match of the group stage , a 3 – 3 draw against Hungary on 22 June , to help the team qualify for the knockout round . He subsequently contributed to the only goal of the match in a 1 – 0 extra @-@ time victory in the last 16 against Croatia on 25 June . During their quarter @-@ final match on 30 June against Poland , Nani set up Renato Sanches 's goal in regulation time , and later scored Portugal 's fourth penalty in an eventual 5 – 3 shoot @-@ out victory , following a 1 – 1 draw after extra @-@ time . In the semi @-@ finals against Wales on 6 July , he scored the second goal in a 2 – 0 victory . In the final against host @-@ nation France on 10 July , Nani was awarded the captain 's armband after Ronaldo was forced off in the opening 25 minutes of the match following a challenge from Dimitri Payet . During extra @-@ time , substitute <unk> scored in the 109th minute to earn Portugal a 1 – 0 victory . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 In the early stages of his career at Manchester United , Nani often invited comparison in playing style and ability with club and international colleague Cristiano Ronaldo , for whom he often deputised at club level . 
 In Ronaldo 's absence , however , Nani 's style has developed into a more classical winger 's style , able to play on both wings though more comfortable on the right , utilising pace , ball control and trickery to create space . While capable of cutting off both wings to strike at goal from distance , Nani has substantially fewer goals , yet a substantially higher proportion of assists than his former colleague . He can also play in the more attacking position of forward or wing forward . 
 = = Celebration = = 
 Nani celebrates with a " mortal " ( " Leap of death " ) , similar to that of Obafemi Martins and <unk> <unk> . The celebration derives from Nani 's background in capoeira , which he used to practice as a child . For a while , it was reported that United manager Sir Alex Ferguson had banned Nani 's celebration due to fear for his safety . Nani denounced the reports in August 2007 , stating that it was " not true " and that " Ferguson has never spoken to me about this subject and I am going to continue to celebrate goals in this way . The conversations he has had with me are normal conversations , like he has with all players . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 28 June 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 13 July 2016 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 As of match played 6 July 2016 . Portugal score listed first , score column indicates score after each Nani goal . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Sporting CP 
 Taça de Portugal : 2006 – 07 , 2014 – 15 
 Manchester United 
 Premier League : 2007 – 08 , 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 Football League Cup : 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 FA Community Shield : 2007 , 2008 , 2010 , 2011 
 UEFA Champions League : 2007 – 08 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2008 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Portugal 
 UEFA European Championship : 2016 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 SJPF Young Player of the Month : May 2007 
 PFA Premier League Team of the Year : 2010 – 11 
 Premier League Assist Leader : 2000 – 11 
 Manchester United Players ' Player of the Year : 2010 – 11 
 SJPF Player of the Month : October 2014 , November 2014 
 = Boeing B @-@ 52 Stratofortress = 
 The Boeing B @-@ 52 Stratofortress is a long @-@ range , subsonic , jet @-@ powered strategic bomber . The B @-@ 52 was designed and built by Boeing , which has continued to provide support and upgrades . It has been operated by the United States Air Force ( USAF ) since the 1950s . The bomber is capable of carrying up to 70 @,@ 000 pounds ( 32 @,@ 000 kg ) of weapons , and has a typical combat range of more than 8 @,@ 800 miles ( 14 @,@ 080 km ) without aerial refueling . 
 Beginning with the successful contract bid in June 1946 , the B @-@ 52 design evolved from a straight wing aircraft powered by six turboprop engines to the final prototype YB @-@ 52 with eight turbojet engines and swept wings . The B @-@ 52 took its maiden flight in April 1952 . Built to carry nuclear weapons for Cold War @-@ era deterrence missions , the B @-@ 52 Stratofortress replaced the Convair B @-@ 36 . A veteran of several wars , the B @-@ 52 has dropped only conventional munitions in combat . The B @-@ 52 's official name Stratofortress is rarely used ; informally , the aircraft has become commonly referred to as the <unk> ( Big Ugly Fat Fucker ) . 
 The B @-@ 52 has been in active service with the USAF since 1955 . As of 2012 , 85 were in active service with nine in reserve . The bombers flew under the Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) until it was inactivated in 1992 and its aircraft absorbed into the Air Combat Command ( ACC ) ; in 2010 all B @-@ 52 Stratofortresses were transferred from the ACC to the newly created Air Force Global Strike Command ( <unk> ) . Superior performance at high subsonic speeds and relatively low operating costs have kept the B @-@ 52 in service despite the advent of later , more advanced aircraft , including the canceled Mach 3 B @-@ 70 Valkyrie , the variable @-@ geometry B @-@ 1 Lancer , and the stealth B @-@ 2 Spirit . The B @-@ 52 completed sixty years of continuous service with its original operator in 2015 . After being upgraded between 2013 and 2015 , it is expected to serve into the 2040s . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 On 23 November 1945 , Air Materiel Command ( AMC ) issued desired performance characteristics for a new strategic bomber " capable of carrying out the strategic mission without dependence upon advanced and intermediate bases controlled by other countries " . The aircraft was to have a crew of five or more turret gunners , and a six @-@ man relief crew . It was required to cruise at 300 mph ( 260 knots , 480 km / h ) at 34 @,@ 000 feet ( 10 @,@ 400 m ) with a combat radius of 5 @,@ 000 miles ( 4 @,@ 300 nautical miles , 8 @,@ 000 km ) . The armament was to consist of an unspecified number of 20 mm cannon and 10 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) of bombs . On 13 February 1946 , the Air Force issued bid invitations for these specifications , with Boeing , Consolidated Aircraft , and Glenn L. Martin Company submitting proposals . 
 On 5 June 1946 , Boeing 's Model 462 , a straight @-@ wing aircraft powered by six Wright T35 turboprops with a gross weight of 360 @,@ 000 pounds ( 160 @,@ 000 kg ) and a combat radius of 3 @,@ 110 miles ( 2 @,@ 700 nmi , 5 @,@ 010 km ) , was declared the winner . On 28 June 1946 , Boeing was issued a letter of contract for US $ 1 @.@ 7 million to build a full @-@ scale mock @-@ up of the new XB @-@ 52 and do preliminary engineering and testing . However , by October 1946 , the air force began to express concern about the sheer size of the new aircraft and its inability to meet the specified design requirements . In response , Boeing produced Model 464 , a smaller four @-@ engine version with a 230 @,@ 000 pound ( 105 @,@ 000 kg ) gross weight , which was briefly deemed acceptable . 
 Subsequently , in November 1946 , the Deputy Chief of Air Staff for Research and Development , General Curtis LeMay , expressed the desire for a cruise speed of 400 miles per hour ( 345 kn , 645 km / h ) , to which Boeing responded with a 300 @,@ 000 lb ( 136 @,@ 000 kg ) aircraft . In December 1946 , Boeing was asked to change their design to a four @-@ engine bomber with a top speed of 400 miles per hour , range of 12 @,@ 000 miles ( 10 @,@ 000 nmi , 19 @,@ 300 km ) , and the ability to carry a nuclear weapon ; in total , the aircraft could weigh up to 480 @,@ 000 pounds ( 220 @,@ 000 kg ) . Boeing responded with two models powered by the T @-@ 35 turboprops . The Model 464 @-@ 16 was a " nuclear only " bomber with a 10 @,@ 000 pound ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) payload , while the Model 464 @-@ 17 was a general purpose bomber with a 9 @,@ 000 pound ( 4 @,@ 000 kg ) payload . Due to the cost associated with purchasing two specialized aircraft , the air force selected Model 464 @-@ 17 with the understanding that it could be adapted for nuclear strikes . 
 In June 1947 , the military requirements were updated and the Model 464 @-@ 17 met all of them except for the range . It was becoming obvious to the Air Force that , even with the updated performance , the XB @-@ 52 would be obsolete by the time it entered production and would offer little improvement over the Convair B @-@ 36 ; as a result , the entire project was postponed for six months . During this time , Boeing continued to perfect the design , which resulted in the Model 464 @-@ 29 with a top speed of 455 miles per hour ( 395 kn , 730 km / h ) and a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ mile range . In September 1947 , the Heavy Bombardment Committee was convened to ascertain performance requirements for a nuclear bomber . <unk> on 8 December 1947 , these requirements called for a top speed of 500 miles per hour ( 440 kn , 800 km / h ) and an 8 @,@ 000 mile ( 7 @,@ 000 nmi , 13 @,@ 000 km ) range , far beyond the capabilities of 464 @-@ 29 . 
 The outright cancellation of the Boeing contract on 11 December 1947 was staved off by a plea from its president William McPherson Allen to the Secretary of the Air Force Stuart Symington . Allen reasoned that the design was capable of being adapted to new aviation technology and more stringent requirements . In January 1948 Boeing was instructed to thoroughly explore recent technological innovations , including aerial refueling and the flying wing . Noting stability and control problems Northrop was experiencing with their YB @-@ 35 and YB @-@ 49 flying wing bombers , Boeing insisted on a conventional aircraft , and in April 1948 presented a US $ 30 million ( US $ 295 million today ) proposal for design , construction , and testing of two Model 464 @-@ 35 prototypes . The Model 464 @-@ 35 design had a configuration similar to a later Tupolev design that was built for the Soviet Union , the Tupolev Tu @-@ 95 Bear strategic bomber . Further revisions during 1948 resulted in an aircraft with a top speed of 513 miles per hour ( 445 kn , 825 km / h ) at 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 10 @,@ 700 m ) , a range of 6 @,@ 909 miles ( 6 @,@ 005 nmi , 11 @,@ 125 km ) , and a 280 @,@ 000 pounds ( 125 @,@ 000 kg ) gross weight , which included 10 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) of bombs and 19 @,@ 875 US gallons ( 75 @,@ 225 L ) of fuel . 
 = = = Design effort = = = 
 In May 1948 , AMC asked Boeing to incorporate the previously discarded , but now more fuel @-@ efficient , jet engine into the design . That resulted in the development of yet another revision — in July 1948 , Model 464 @-@ 40 substituted Westinghouse <unk> turbojets for the turboprops . The Air Force project officer who reviewed the Model 464 @-@ 40 was favorably impressed , especially since he had already been thinking along similar lines . Nevertheless , the government was concerned about the high fuel consumption rate of the jet engines of the day , and directed that Boeing still use the turboprop @-@ powered Model 464 @-@ 35 as the basis for the XB @-@ 52 . Although he agreed that turbojet propulsion was the future , General Howard A. Craig , Deputy Chief of Staff for Material , was not very keen on a jet @-@ powered B @-@ 52 , since he felt that the jet engine had not yet progressed sufficiently to permit skipping an intermediate turboprop stage . However , Boeing was encouraged to continue turbojet studies even without any expected commitment to jet propulsion . 
 On Thursday , 21 October 1948 , Boeing engineers George S. Schairer , Art Carlsen and Vaughn Blumenthal presented the design of a four @-@ engine turboprop bomber to the chief of bomber development , Colonel Pete Warden . Warden was disappointed by the projected aircraft and asked if the Boeing team could come up with a proposal for a four @-@ engine turbojet bomber . Joined by Ed Wells , Boeing vice president of engineering , the engineers worked that night in the Hotel Van Cleve in Dayton , Ohio , redesigning Boeing 's proposal as a four @-@ engine turbojet bomber . On Friday , Colonel Warden looked over the information and asked for a better design . Returning to the hotel , the Boeing team was joined by Bob Withington and Maynard Pennell , two top Boeing engineers who were in town on other business . 
 By late Friday night , they had laid out what was essentially a new airplane . The new design ( 464 @-@ 49 ) built upon the basic layout of the B @-@ 47 Stratojet with 35 degree swept wings , eight engines paired in four underwing pods , and bicycle landing gear with wingtip outrigger wheels . A notable feature of the landing gear was the ability to pivot the main landing gear up to 20 ° from the aircraft centerline to increase safety during crosswind landings . After a trip to a hobby shop for supplies , Schairer set to work building a model . The rest of the team focused on weight and performance data . Wells , who was also a skilled artist , completed the aircraft drawings . On Sunday , a stenographer was hired to type a clean copy of the proposal . On Monday , Schairer presented Colonel Warden with a neatly bound 33 @-@ page proposal and a 14 @-@ inch scale model . The aircraft was projected to exceed all design specifications . 
 Although the full @-@ size mock @-@ up inspection in April 1949 was generally favorable , range again became a concern since the <unk> and early model <unk> had excessive fuel consumption . Despite talk of another revision of specifications or even a full design competition among aircraft manufacturers , General LeMay , now in charge of Strategic Air Command , insisted that performance should not be compromised due to delays in engine development . In a final attempt to increase range , Boeing created the larger 464 @-@ 67 , stating that once in production , the range could be further increased in subsequent modifications . Following several direct interventions by LeMay , Boeing was awarded a production contract for thirteen B @-@ <unk> and seventeen detachable reconnaissance pods on 14 February 1951 . The last major design change — also at General LeMay 's insistence — was a switch from the B @-@ 47 style tandem seating to a more conventional side @-@ by @-@ side cockpit , which increased the effectiveness of the copilot and reduced crew fatigue . Both XB @-@ 52 prototypes featured the original tandem seating arrangement with a framed bubble @-@ type canopy . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production and production = = = 
 The YB @-@ 52 , the second XB @-@ 52 modified with more operational equipment , first flew on 15 April 1952 with " Tex " Johnston as pilot . During ground testing on 29 November 1951 , the XB @-@ 52 's pneumatic system failed during a full @-@ pressure test ; the resulting explosion severely damaged the trailing edge of the wing , necessitating considerable repairs . A two @-@ hour , 21 @-@ minute proving flight from Boeing Field , King County , in Seattle , Washington to Larson AFB was undertaken with Boeing test pilot Johnston and air force Lieutenant Colonel Guy M. Townsend . The XB @-@ 52 followed on 2 October 1952 . The thorough development , including 670 days in the wind tunnel and 130 days of aerodynamic and aeroelastic testing , paid off with smooth flight testing . Encouraged , the air force increased its order to 282 B @-@ 52s . 
 Only three of the 13 B @-@ <unk> ordered were built . All were returned to Boeing , and used in their test program . On 9 June 1952 , the February 1951 contract was updated to order the aircraft under new specifications . The final 10 , the first aircraft to enter active service , were completed as B @-@ 52Bs . At the roll out ceremony on 18 March 1954 , Air Force Chief of Staff General Nathan Twining said : 
 The long rifle was the great weapon of its day . ... today this B @-@ 52 is the long rifle of the air age . 
 The B @-@ 52B was followed by progressively improved bomber and reconnaissance variants , culminating in the B @-@ 52G and turbofan B @-@ 52H . To allow rapid delivery , production lines were set up both at its main Seattle factory and at Boeing 's Wichita facility . More than 5 @,@ 000 companies were involved in the massive production effort , with 41 % of the airframe being built by subcontractors . The prototypes and all B @-@ 52A , B and C models ( 90 aircraft ) were built at Seattle . Testing of aircraft built at Seattle caused problems due to jet noise , which led to the establishment of curfews for engine tests . Aircraft were ferried 150 miles ( 240 km ) east on their maiden flights to Larson Air Force Base near Moses Lake , where they were fully tested . 
 As production of the B @-@ 47 came to an end , the Wichita factory was phased in for B @-@ 52D production , with Seattle responsible for 101 D @-@ models and Wichita 69 . Both plants continued to build the B @-@ 52E , with 42 built at Seattle and 58 at Wichita , and the B @-@ 52F ( 44 from Seattle and 45 from Wichita ) . For the B @-@ 52G , it was decided in 1957 to transfer all production to Wichita , which freed up Seattle for other tasks ( in particular the production of airliners ) . Production ended in 1962 with the B @-@ 52H , with 742 aircraft built , plus the original two prototypes . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 A proposed variant of the B @-@ 52H was the EB @-@ 52H , which would have consisted of 16 modified and augmented B @-@ 52H airframes with additional electronic jamming capabilities . This variant would have restored USAF airborne jamming capability that it lost on retiring the EF @-@ 111 Raven . The program was canceled in 2005 following the removal of funds for the stand @-@ off jammer . The program was revived in 2007 , and cut again in early 2009 . 
 In July 2013 , the Air Force began a fleet @-@ wide technological upgrade of its B @-@ 52 bombers called Combat Network Communications Technology ( CONECT ) to modernize electronics , communications technology , computing , and avionics on the flight deck . CONECT upgrades include software and hardware such as new computer servers , modems , radios , data @-@ links , receivers , and digital workstations for the crew . One update is the ARC @-@ 210 Warrior beyond @-@ line @-@ of @-@ sight software programmable radio able to transmit voice , data , and information in @-@ flight between B @-@ 52s and ground command and control centers , allowing the transmission and reception of data with updated intelligence , mapping , and targeting information ; previous in @-@ flight target changes required copying down coordinates . The ARC @-@ 210 allows machine @-@ to @-@ machine transfer of data , useful on long @-@ endurance missions where targets may have moved before the arrival of the B @-@ 52 . The aircraft will be able to receive information through Link @-@ 16 . CONECT upgrades will cost $ 1 @.@ 1 billion overall and take several years . Funding has been secured for 30 B @-@ 52s ; the Air Force hopes for 10 CONECT upgrades per year , but the rate has yet to be decided . 
 Weapons upgrades include the 1760 Internal Weapons Bay Upgrade ( IWBU ) , which gives a 66 percent increase in weapons payload using a digital interface and rotary launcher . IWBU is expected to cost roughly $ 313 million . The 1760 IWBU will allow the B @-@ 52 to carry the AGM @-@ <unk> JASSM @-@ ER and the ADM @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ J. All 1760 <unk> should be operational by October 2017 . Two bombers will have the ability to carry 40 weapons in place of the 36 that three B @-@ 52s can carry . The 1760 IWBU allows precision @-@ guided missiles or bombs to be deployed from inside the weapons bay ; previous aircraft carried these munitions externally on wing hardpoints . This increases the number of guided weapons a B @-@ 52 can carry and reduces the need for guided bombs to be carried . The first phase will allow a B @-@ 52 to carry twenty @-@ four 500 @-@ pound guided JDAM bombs or twenty 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound JDAMs , with later phases accommodating the JASSM and <unk> family of missiles . In addition to carrying more smart bombs , moving them internally from the wings reduces drag and achieves a 15 percent reduction in fuel consumption . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The B @-@ 52 shared many technological similarities with the preceding Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet strategic bomber . The two aircraft used the same basic design , such as swept wings and podded jet engines , and the cabin included the crew ejection systems . On the B @-@ 52D , the pilots and electronic countermeasures ( EDM ) operator ejected upwards , while the lower deck crew ejected downwards ; until the B @-@ 52G , the gunner had to jettison the tail gun to bail @-@ out . 
 Structural fatigue was accelerated by at least a factor of eight in a low @-@ altitude flight profile over that of high @-@ altitude flying , requiring costly repairs to extend service life . In the early 1960s , the three @-@ phase High Stress program was launched to counter structural fatigue , enrolling aircraft at 2 @,@ 000 flying hours . Follow @-@ up programs were conducted , such as a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ hour service life extension to select airframes in 1966 – 1968 , and the extensive Pacer Plank <unk> , completed in 1977 . The wet wing introduced on G and H models was even more susceptible to fatigue , experiencing 60 % more stress during flight than the old wing . The wings were modified by 1964 under ECP 1050 . This was followed by a fuselage skin and <unk> replacement ( ECP 1185 ) in 1966 , and the B @-@ 52 Stability Augmentation and Flight Control program ( ECP 1195 ) in 1967 . Fuel leaks due to deteriorating <unk> clamps continued to plague all variants of the B @-@ 52 . To this end , the aircraft were subjected to Blue Band ( 1957 ) , Hard Shell ( 1958 ) , and finally <unk> ( 1958 ) programs . The latter fitted safety straps that prevented catastrophic loss of fuel in case of clamp failure . 
 In September 2006 , the B @-@ 52 became one of the first US military aircraft to fly using alternative fuel . It took off from Edwards Air Force Base with a 50 / 50 blend of Fischer @-@ Tropsch process ( FT ) synthetic fuel and conventional JP @-@ 8 jet fuel , which burned in two of the eight engines . On 15 December 2006 , a B @-@ 52 took off from Edwards with the synthetic fuel powering all eight engines , the first time an air force aircraft was entirely powered by the blend . The seven @-@ hour flight was considered a success . This program is part of the Department of Defense Assured Fuel Initiative , which aims to reduce crude oil usage and obtain half of its aviation fuel from alternative sources by 2016 . On 8 August 2007 , Air Force Secretary Michael Wynne certified the B @-@ 52H as fully approved to use the FT blend . 
 = = = Flight controls = = = 
 Because of the B @-@ 52 's mission parameters , only modest maneuvers would be required with no need for spin recovery . The aircraft has a relatively small , narrow chord rudder , giving it limited yaw control authority . Originally an all @-@ moving vertical stabilizer was to be used , but was abandoned because of doubts about hydraulic actuator reliability . Because the aircraft has eight engines , asymmetrical thrust due to the loss of an engine in flight would be minimal and correctable with the narrow rudder . To assist with crosswind takeoffs and landings the main landing gear can be pivoted 20 degrees to either side from neutral . This yaw adjustable crosswind landing gear would be preset by the crew according to wind observations made on the ground . 
 The elevator is also very narrow in chord like the rudder , and the B @-@ 52 suffers from limited elevator control authority . For long term pitch trim and airspeed changes the aircraft uses an all @-@ moving tail with the elevator used for small adjustments within a stabilizer setting . The stabilizer is adjustable through 13 degrees of movement ( nine up , four down ) and is crucial to operations during take off and landing due to large pitch changes induced by flap application . 
 B @-@ 52s prior to the G models had very small ailerons with a short span that was approximately equal to their chord . These " feeler ailerons " were used to provide feedback forces to the pilot 's control yoke and to fine tune the roll axes during delicate maneuvers such as aerial refueling . Due to twisting of the thin main wing , conventional outboard flap type ailerons would lose authority and therefore could not be used . In other words , aileron activation would cause the wing to twist , undermining roll control . Six <unk> on each wing are responsible for the majority of roll control . The late B @-@ 52G models eliminated the ailerons altogether and added an extra <unk> to each wing . Partly because of the lack of ailerons , the B @-@ 52G and H models were more susceptible to dutch roll . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 Ongoing problems with avionics systems were addressed in the Jolly Well program , completed in 1964 , which improved components of the AN / ASQ @-@ 38 bombing navigational computer and the terrain computer . The <unk> ( <unk> Detection and Recording ) upgrade fitted to most aircraft by 1965 could detect failures in avionics and weapons computer systems , and was essential in monitoring the Hound Dog missiles . The electronic countermeasures capability of the B @-@ 52 was expanded with Rivet Rambler ( 1971 ) and Rivet Ace ( 1973 ) . 
 To improve operations at low altitude , the AN / ASQ @-@ 151 Electro @-@ Optical Viewing System ( EVS ) , which consisted of a Low Light Level Television ( LLLTV ) and a Forward looking infrared ( FLIR ) system mounted in blisters under the noses of B @-@ 52Gs and Hs between 1972 and 1976 . The navigational capabilities of the B @-@ 52 were later augmented with the addition of GPS in the 1980s . The IBM AP @-@ 101 , also used on the Rockwell B @-@ 1 Lancer bomber and the Space Shuttle , was the B @-@ 52 's main computer . 
 In 2007 the LITENING targeting pod was fitted , which increased the effectiveness of the aircraft in the attack of ground targets with a variety of standoff weapons , using laser guidance , a high @-@ resolution forward @-@ looking infrared sensor ( FLIR ) , and a CCD camera used to obtain target imagery . LITENING pods have been fitted to a wide variety of other US aircraft , such as the McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , the General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon and the McDonnell Douglas AV @-@ 8B Harrier II . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ability to carry up to 20 AGM @-@ 69 SRAM nuclear missiles was added to G and H models , starting in 1971 . To further improve its offensive ability , air @-@ launched cruise missiles ( ALCMs ) were fitted . After testing of both the Air Force @-@ backed Boeing AGM @-@ 86 and the Navy @-@ backed General Dynamics AGM @-@ 109 Tomahawk , the AGM @-@ <unk> was selected for operation by the B @-@ 52 ( and ultimately by the B @-@ 1 Lancer ) . A total of 194 B @-@ 52Gs and Hs were modified to carry AGM @-@ 86s , carrying 12 missiles on underwing pylons , with 82 B @-@ 52Hs further modified to carry another eight missiles on a rotary launcher fitted in the bomb @-@ bay . To conform with SALT II Treaty requirements that cruise missile @-@ capable aircraft be readily identifiable by reconnaissance satellites , the cruise missile armed B @-@ 52Gs were modified with a distinctive wing root fairing . As all B @-@ 52Hs were assumed modified , no visual modification of these aircraft was required . In 1990 , the stealthy AGM @-@ 129 ACM cruise missile entered service ; although intended to replace the AGM @-@ 86 , a high cost and the Cold War 's end led to only 450 being produced ; unlike the AGM @-@ 86 , no conventional ( non @-@ nuclear ) version was built . The B @-@ 52 was to have been modified to utilize Northrop Grumman 's AGM @-@ 137 <unk> weapon ; however , the missile was canceled due to development costs . 
 Those B @-@ 52Gs not converted as cruise missile carriers underwent a series of modifications to improve conventional bombing . They were fitted with a new Integrated Conventional Stores Management System ( <unk> ) and new underwing pylons that could hold larger bombs or other stores than could the external pylons . Thirty B @-@ 52Gs were further modified to carry up to 12 AGM @-@ 84 Harpoon anti @-@ ship missiles each , while 12 B @-@ 52Gs were fitted to carry the AGM @-@ 142 Have Nap stand @-@ off air @-@ to @-@ ground missile . When the B @-@ 52G was retired in 1994 , an urgent scheme was launched to restore an interim Harpoon and Have Nap capability , the four aircraft being modified to carry Harpoon and four to carry Have Nap under the Rapid Eight program . 
 The Conventional Enhancement Modification ( CEM ) program gave the B @-@ 52H a more comprehensive conventional weapons capability , adding the modified underwing weapon pylons used by conventional @-@ armed B @-@ 52Gs , Harpoon and Have Nap , and the capability to carry new @-@ generation weapons including the Joint Direct Attack Munition and Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser guided bombs , the AGM @-@ 154 glide bomb and the AGM @-@ 158 JASSM missile . The CEM program also introduced new radios , integrated Global Positioning System into the aircraft 's navigation system and replaced the under @-@ nose FLIR with a more modern unit . Forty @-@ seven B @-@ 52Hs were modified under the CEM program by 1996 , with 19 more by the end of 1999 . 
 Starting in 2016 , Boeing is to upgrade the internal rotary launchers to the MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1760 interface to enable the internal carriage of smart bombs , which can currently only be carried on the wings . 
 = = = Engines = = = 
 The eight engines of the B @-@ 52 are paired in pods and suspended by four pylons beneath and forward of the wings ' leading edge . The careful arrangement of the pylons also allowed them to work as wing fences and delay the onset of stall . The first two prototypes , XB @-@ 52 and YB @-@ 52 , were both powered by experimental Pratt & Whitney <unk> @-@ P @-@ 3 turbojet engines of 8 @,@ 700 lbf ( 38 @.@ 70 kN ) of static thrust each . 
 The B @-@ 52A models were equipped with Pratt & Whitney J57 @-@ P @-@ 1W turbojets , providing a dry thrust of 10 @,@ 000 lbf ( 44 @.@ 48 kN ) which could be increased for short periods to 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 48 @.@ 93 kN ) with water injection . The water was carried in a 360 @-@ gallon tank in the rear fuselage . 
 B @-@ 52B , C , D and E models were equipped with Pratt & Whitney J57 @-@ P @-@ <unk> , J57 @-@ P @-@ <unk> , or J57 @-@ P @-@ 19W series engines all rated at 10 @,@ 500 lbf ( 46 @.@ 71 kN ) . The B @-@ 52F and G models were powered by Pratt & Whitney J57 @-@ P @-@ <unk> turbojets , each rated at 13 @,@ 750 lbf ( 61 @.@ 16 kN ) static thrust with water injection . 
 On May 9 , 1961 , B @-@ 52H started being delivered to the Air Force with cleaner burning and quieter Pratt & Whitney TF33 @-@ P @-@ 3 turbofans with a maximum thrust of 17 @,@ 100 lbf ( 76 @.@ 06 kN ) . 
 = = = = Re @-@ engining = = = = 
 For a study for the U.S. Air Force in the mid @-@ 1970s , Boeing investigated replacing the engines , changing to a new wing , and other improvements to upgrade B @-@ 52G / H aircraft as an alternative to the B @-@ 1A , then in development . 
 In 1982 , Pratt & Whitney studied <unk> B @-@ 52s with four PW2000 ( <unk> ) engines but this was not done since all B @-@ 52s were to be replaced by B @-@ 1s and B @-@ 2s by the late 1990s . In 1996 Rolls @-@ Royce and Boeing jointly proposed to fit B @-@ 52s with four leased RB211 @-@ <unk> , but this plan failed because of a flawed economic assessment by the Air Force and resistance to leasing combat assets . 
 This would involve replacing the eight Pratt & Whitney <unk> ( total thrust 8 × 17 @,@ 000 lb ) with four <unk> ( total thrust 4 × 37 @,@ 400 lb ) — which would increase range and reduce fuel consumption , at a cost of approximately US $ 2 @.@ 56 billion for the whole fleet ( 71 aircraft at $ 36 million each ) . A Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) study concluded that Boeing 's estimated savings of US $ 4 @.@ 7 billion would not be realized and that it would cost US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion over keeping the existing engines , citing significant up @-@ front procurement and re @-@ tooling expenditure , as well as the RB211 's higher maintenance cost . The GAO report was subsequently disputed in a Defense Science Board ( DSB ) report in 2003 ; the Air Force was urged to re @-@ engine the aircraft without delay . 
 Further , the DSB report stated the program would have significant savings , reduce greenhouse gas emissions , and increase aircraft range and endurance , in line with the conclusions of a separate Congress @-@ funded study conducted in 2003 . 
 The DSB in 2002 found the Air Force failed to account for the cost of aerial refueling , fuel costing 17 times more in air than on the ground . As the TF33 overhaul cost tripled in a decade , a joint Boeing / USAF study recommended a $ 4 – 4 @.@ 7 billion re @-@ engining allowing $ 11 – 15 billion cost savings while increasing B @-@ 52H combat range by 22 % and tripling loiter time on station , proposing a competition between the RB211 , PW2000 , and eight CFM56 financed by an Energy Savings Performance Contract 
 In 2014 , the U.S. Air Force was reviewing industry studies of engine replacement . The re @-@ engining has not been approved as of 2014 . In late 2014 , it was reported that the DOD and unnamed private companies were exploring a leasing program where private lease companies would purchase new engines and lease them to the USAF . DOD costs would be determined by depreciation and actual usage with no up @-@ front lump payments . 
 Because the last PW2000 have been delivered with the final C @-@ 17 and the RB211 has been out of production since the <unk> stop in 2004 current possibilities are eight GE <unk> @-@ 10 ( 17 @,@ 640 @-@ 20 @,@ 360 @-@ lb. thrust ) or four Pratt & Whitney <unk> @-@ JM ( 35 @,@ 000 @-@ lb. thrust ) 
 = = = Costs = = = 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 Although the B @-@ 52A was the first production variant , these aircraft were used only in testing . The first operational version was the B @-@ 52B that had been developed in parallel with the prototypes since 1951 . First flying in December 1954 , B @-@ 52B , AF Serial Number 52 @-@ <unk> , entered operational service with 93rd Heavy Bombardment Wing ( 93rd BW ) at Castle Air Force Base , California , on 29 June 1955 . The wing became operational on 12 March 1956 . The training for B @-@ 52 crews consisted of five weeks of ground school and four weeks of flying , accumulating 35 to 50 hours in the air . The new B @-@ 52Bs replaced operational B @-@ 36s on a one @-@ to @-@ one basis . 
 Early operations were problematic ; in addition to supply problems , technical issues also struck . Ramps and taxiways deteriorated under the aircraft 's weight , the fuel system was prone to leaks and icing , and bombing and fire control computers were unreliable . The split level cockpit presented a temperature control problem – the pilots ' cockpit was heated by sunlight while the observer and the navigator on the bottom deck sat on the ice @-@ cold floor . Thus , a comfortable temperature setting for the pilots caused the other crew members to freeze , while a comfortable temperature for the bottom crew caused the pilots to overheat . The J57 engines proved unreliable . <unk> failure caused the first fatal B @-@ 52 crash in February 1956 ; as a result the fleet was briefly grounded . In July , fuel and hydraulic issues grounded the B @-@ 52s again . In response to maintenance issues , the air force set up " Sky Speed " teams of 50 contractors at each B @-@ 52 base to perform maintenance and routine checkups , taking an average of one week per aircraft . 
 On 21 May 1956 , a B @-@ 52B ( 52 @-@ 0013 ) dropped a Mk @-@ 15 nuclear bomb over the Bikini Atoll in a test code @-@ named Cherokee . It was the first air @-@ dropped thermonuclear weapon . From 24 to 25 November 1956 , four B @-@ 52Bs of the 93rd BW and four B @-@ 52Cs of the 42nd BW flew nonstop around the perimeter of North America in Operation Quick Kick , which covered 15 @,@ 530 miles ( 13 @,@ 500 nmi , 25 @,@ 000 km ) in 31 hours , 30 minutes . SAC noted the flight time could have been reduced by 5 to 6 hours if the four inflight refuelings were done by fast jet @-@ powered tanker aircraft rather than propeller @-@ driven Boeing KC @-@ 97 <unk> . In a demonstration of the B @-@ 52 's global reach , from 16 to 18 January 1957 , three B @-@ 52Bs made a non @-@ stop flight around the world during Operation Power <unk> , during which 24 @,@ 325 miles ( 21 @,@ 145 nmi , 39 @,@ 165 km ) was covered in 45 hours 19 minutes ( 536 @.@ 8 <unk> ) with several in @-@ flight refuelings by KC @-@ 97s . 
 The B @-@ 52 set many records over the next few years . On 26 September 1958 , a B @-@ 52D set a world speed record of 560 @.@ 705 miles per hour ( 487 kn , 902 km / h ) over a 10 @,@ 000 kilometers ( 5 @,@ 400 nmi , 6 @,@ 210 mi ) closed circuit without a payload . The same day , another B @-@ 52D established a world speed record of 597 @.@ 675 miles per hour ( 519 kn , 962 km / h ) over a 5 @,@ 000 kilometer ( 2 @,@ 700 nmi , 3 @,@ 105 mi ) closed circuit without a payload . On 14 December 1960 , a B @-@ 52G set a world distance record by flying unrefueled for 10 @,@ 078 @.@ 84 miles ( 8 @,@ 762 nmi , 16 @,@ 227 km ) ; the flight lasted 19 hours 44 minutes ( 510 @.@ 75 mph ) . From 10 to 11 January 1962 , a B @-@ 52H set a world distance record by flying unrefueled , surpassing the prior B @-@ 52 record set two years earlier , from Kadena Air Base , Okinawa , Japan , to <unk> Air Base , Spain , which covered 12 @,@ 532 @.@ 28 miles ( 10 @,@ 895 nmi , 20 @,@ 177 km ) . The flight passed over Seattle , Fort Worth and the Azores . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 When the B @-@ 52 entered into service , the Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) intended to use it to deter and counteract the vast and modernizing Soviet military . As the Soviet Union increased its nuclear capabilities , destroying or " countering " the forces that would deliver nuclear strikes ( bombers , missiles , etc . ) became of great strategic importance . The Eisenhower administration endorsed this switch in focus ; the President in 1954 expressing a preference for military targets over civilian ones , a principle reinforced in the Single Integrated Operation Plan ( SIOP ) , a plan of action in the case of nuclear war breaking out . 
 Throughout the Cold War , B @-@ 52s and other US strategic bombers performed airborne alert patrols under code names such as Head Start , Chrome Dome , Hard Head , Round Robin , and Giant Lance . Bombers loitered at high altitude near the borders of the Soviet Union to provide rapid first strike or retaliation capability in case of nuclear war . These airborne patrols formed one component of the US 's nuclear deterrent , which would act to prevent the breakout of a large @-@ scale war between the US and the Soviet Union under the concept of Mutually Assured Destruction . 
 Due to the late 1950s @-@ era threat of surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles ( SAMs ) that could threaten high @-@ altitude aircraft , seen in practice in the 1960 U @-@ 2 incident , the intended use of B @-@ 52 was changed to serve as a low @-@ level penetration bomber during a foreseen attack upon the Soviet Union , as terrain masking provided an effective method of avoiding radar and thus the threat of the SAMs . Although never intended for the low level role , the B @-@ 52 's flexibility allowed it to outlast several intended successors as the nature of aerial warfare changed . The B @-@ 52 's large airframe enabled the addition of multiple design improvements , new equipment , and other adaptations over its service life . 
 In November 1959 , to improve the aircraft 's combat capabilities in the changing strategic environment , SAC initiated the Big Four modification program ( also known as Modification 1000 ) for all operational B @-@ 52s except early B models . The program was completed by 1963 . The four modifications were the ability to launch AGM @-@ 28 Hound Dog standoff nuclear missiles and ADM @-@ 20 Quail decoys , an advanced electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) suite , and upgrades to perform the all @-@ weather , low @-@ altitude ( below 500 feet or 150 m ) interdiction mission in the face of advancing Soviet missile @-@ based air defenses . 
 In the 1960s , there were concerns over the fleet 's capable lifespan . Several projects beyond the B @-@ 52 , the Convair B @-@ 58 Hustler and North American XB @-@ 70 Valkyrie , had either been aborted or proved disappointing in light of changing requirements , which left the older B @-@ 52 as the main bomber as opposed to the planned successive aircraft models . On 19 February 1965 , General Curtis E. LeMay testified to Congress that the lack of a follow @-@ up bomber project to the B @-@ 52 raised the danger that , " The B @-@ 52 is going to fall apart on us before we can get a replacement for it . " Other aircraft , such as the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 Aardvark , later complemented the B @-@ 52 in roles the aircraft was not as capable in , such as missions involving high @-@ speed , low @-@ level penetration dashes . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 With the escalating situation in Southeast Asia , 28 B @-@ 52Fs were fitted with external racks for <unk> 750 pound ( 340 kg ) bombs under project South Bay in June 1964 ; an additional 46 aircraft received similar modifications under project Sun Bath . In March 1965 , the United States commenced Operation Rolling Thunder . The first combat mission , Operation Arc Light , was flown by B @-@ 52Fs on 18 June 1965 , when 30 bombers of the 9th and 441st Bombardment Squadrons struck a communist stronghold near the Bến Cát District in South Vietnam . The first wave of bombers arrived too early at a designated rendezvous point , and while maneuvering to maintain station , two B @-@ 52s collided , which resulted in the loss of both bombers and eight crewmen . The remaining bombers , minus one more that turned back due to mechanical problems , continued toward the target . Twenty @-@ seven Stratofortresses dropped on a one @-@ mile by two @-@ mile target box from between 19 @,@ 000 and 22 @,@ 000 feet , a little more than 50 % of the bombs falling within the target zone . The force returned to Andersen AFB except for one bomber with electrical problems that recovered to Clark AFB , the mission having lasted 13 hours . Post @-@ strike assessment by teams of South Vietnamese troops with American advisors found evidence that the VC had departed the area before the raid , and it was suspected that infiltration of the south 's forces may have tipped off the north because of the South Vietnamese Army troops involved in the post @-@ strike inspection . 
 Beginning in late 1965 , a number of B @-@ 52Ds underwent Big Belly modifications to increase bomb capacity for carpet bombings . While the external payload remained at 24 500 @-@ pound ( 227 kg ) or 750 pound ( 340 kg ) bombs , the internal capacity increased from 27 to 84 500 pound bombs or from 27 to 42 750 @-@ pound bombs . The modification created enough capacity for a total of 60 @,@ 000 pounds ( 27 @,@ 215 kg ) in 108 bombs . Thus modified , B @-@ 52Ds could carry 22 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @,@ 980 kg ) more than B @-@ 52Fs . Designed to replace B @-@ 52Fs , modified B @-@ 52Ds entered combat in April 1966 flying from Andersen Air Force Base , Guam . Each bombing mission lasted 10 to 12 hours with an aerial refueling by KC @-@ 135 Stratotankers . In spring 1967 , the aircraft began flying from U Tapao Airfield in Thailand giving the aircraft the advantage of not requiring in @-@ flight refueling . 
 On 22 November 1972 , a B @-@ 52D ( 55 @-@ <unk> ) from U @-@ Tapao was hit by a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) while on a raid over Vinh . The crew was forced to abandon the damaged aircraft over Thailand . This was the first B @-@ 52 destroyed by hostile fire . In total , 31 B @-@ 52s were lost during the war , which included 10 B @-@ 52s shot down over North Vietnam . 
 The zenith of B @-@ 52 attacks in Vietnam was Operation Linebacker II ( sometimes referred to as the Christmas Bombing ) which consisted of waves of B @-@ 52s ( mostly D models , but some Gs without jamming equipment and with a smaller bomb load ) . Over 12 days , B @-@ 52s flew 729 sorties and dropped 15 @,@ 237 tons of bombs on Hanoi , Haiphong , and other targets . Originally 42 B @-@ 52s were committed to the war ; however , numbers were frequently twice this figure . During Operation Linebacker II , fifteen B @-@ 52s were shot down , five were heavily damaged ( one crashed in Laos ) , and five suffered medium damage . A total of 25 crew men were killed in these losses . North Vietnam claimed 34 B @-@ 52s were shot down . 
 = = = = Air @-@ to @-@ air combat = = = = 
 During the Vietnam War , B @-@ 52D tail gunners were credited with shooting down two MiG @-@ 21 " <unk> " . On 18 December 1972 tail gunner Staff Sergeant Samuel O. Turner 's B @-@ 52 had just completed a bomb run for Operation Linebacker II and was turning away , when a North Vietnamese Air Force MiG @-@ 21 approached . The MiG and the B @-@ 52 locked onto one another . When the fighter drew within range , Turner fired his quad ( four guns on one mounting ) .50 caliber machine guns . The MiG exploded aft of the bomber , as confirmed by Master Sergeant Louis E. Le Blanc , the tail gunner in a nearby Stratofortress . Turner received a Silver Star for his actions . His B @-@ 52 , tail number 55 @-@ <unk> , is preserved on display with air @-@ to @-@ air kill markings at Fairchild AFB in Spokane , Washington . 
 On 24 December 1972 , during the same bombing campaign , the B @-@ 52 Diamond Lil was headed to bomb the Thái Nguyên railroad yards when tail gunner Airman First Class Albert E. Moore spotted a fast @-@ approaching MiG @-@ 21 . Moore opened fire with his quad .50 caliber guns at 4 @,@ 000 yd ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) , and kept shooting until the fighter disappeared from his scope . Technical Sergeant Clarence W. Chute , a tail gunner aboard another Stratofortress , watched the MiG catch fire and fall away ; this was not confirmed by the VPAF . Diamond Lil is preserved on display at the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado . Moore was the last bomber gunner believed to have shot down an enemy aircraft with machine guns in aerial combat . 
 Vietnamese sources have attributed a third air @-@ to @-@ air victory to a B @-@ 52 , a MiG @-@ 21 shot down on 16 April 1972 . These victories make the B @-@ 52 the largest aircraft credited with air @-@ to @-@ air kills . The last Arc Light mission without fighter escort took place on 15 August 1973 , as U.S. military action in Southeast Asia was wound down . 
 = = = Post Vietnam service = = = 
 B @-@ 52Bs reached the end of their structural service life by the mid @-@ 1960s and all were retired by June 1966 , followed by the last of the B @-@ 52Cs on 29 September 1971 ; except for NASA 's B @-@ 52B " 008 " which was eventually retired in 2004 at Edwards AFB , California . Another of the remaining B Models , " 005 " is on display at the Wings Over the Rockies Air and Space Museum in Denver , Colorado . 
 A few time @-@ expired E models were retired in 1967 and 1968 , but the bulk ( 82 ) were retired between May 1969 and March 1970 . Most F models were also retired between 1967 and 1973 , but 23 survived as trainers until late 1978 . The fleet of D models served much longer ; 80 D models were extensively overhauled under the Pacer Plank program during the mid @-@ 1970s . <unk> on the lower wing and fuselage was replaced , and various structural components were renewed . The fleet of D models stayed largely intact until late 1978 , when 37 not already upgraded Ds were retired . The remainder were retired between 1982 and 1983 . 
 The remaining G and H models were used for nuclear standby ( " alert " ) duty as part of the United States ' nuclear triad . This triad was the combination of nuclear @-@ armed land @-@ based missiles , submarine @-@ based missiles and manned bombers . The B @-@ 1 , intended to supplant the B @-@ 52 , replaced only the older models and the supersonic FB @-@ 111 . In 1991 , B @-@ 52s ceased continuous 24 @-@ hour SAC alert duty . 
 After Vietnam the experience of operations in a hostile air defense environment was taken into account . Due to this B @-@ 52s were modernized with new weapons , equipment and both offensive and defensive avionics . This and the use of low @-@ level tactics marked a major shift in the B @-@ 52 's utility . The upgrades were : 
 Supersonic short @-@ range nuclear missiles : G and H models were modified to carry up to 20 SRAM missiles replacing existing gravity bombs . Eight <unk> were carried internally on a special rotary launcher and 12 <unk> were mounted on two wing pylons . With SRAM , the B @-@ 52s could strike heavily defended targets without entering the terminal defenses . 
 New countermeasures : Phase VI ECM modification was the sixth major ECM program for the B @-@ 52 . It improved the aircraft 's self @-@ protection capability in the dense Soviet air defense environment . The new equipment expanded signal coverage , improved threat warning , provided new countermeasures techniques and increased the quantity of expendables . The power requirements of Phase VI ECM also consumed most of the excess electrical capacity on the B @-@ 52G . 
 B @-@ 52G and Hs were also modified with electro @-@ optical viewing system ( EVS ) that made low @-@ level operations and terrain avoidance much easier and safer . EVS system contained a low light level television ( LLTV ) camera and a forward looking infrared ( FLIR ) camera to display information needed for penetration at lower altitude . 
 Subsonic @-@ cruise unarmed decoy : SCUD resembled the B @-@ 52 on radar . As an active decoy , it carried ECM and other devices , and it had a range of several hundred miles . Although SCUD was never deployed operationally , the concept was developed , becoming known as the air launched cruise missile ( ALCM @-@ A ) . 
 These modifications increased weight by nearly 24 @,@ 000 pounds , and decreased operational range by 8 @-@ 11 % . This was considered acceptable for the increase in capabilities . 
 After the fall of the Soviet Union , all B @-@ 52Gs remaining in service were destroyed in accordance with the terms of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty ( START ) . The Aerospace Maintenance and <unk> Center ( <unk> ) cut the 365 B @-@ 52G bombers into pieces . Completion of the destruction task was verified by Russia via satellite and first @-@ person inspection at the <unk> facility . 
 = = = Gulf War and later = = = 
 B @-@ 52 strikes were an important part of Operation Desert Storm . Starting on 16 January 1991 , a flight of B @-@ 52Gs flew from Barksdale AFB , Louisiana , refueled in the air en route , struck targets in Iraq , and returned home – a journey of 35 hours and 14 @,@ 000 miles ( 23 @,@ 000 km ) round trip . It set a record for longest @-@ distance combat mission , breaking the record previously held by an RAF Vulcan bomber in 1982 ; however , this was achieved using forward refueling . Those seven B @-@ 52s flew the first combat sorties of Operation Desert Storm , firing 35 AGM @-@ 86C <unk> and successfully destroying 85 @-@ 95 percent of their targets . B @-@ 52Gs operating from the King Abdullah Air Base at Jeddah , Saudi Arabia ; RAF Fairford in the United Kingdom ; Morón Air Base , Spain ; and the island of Diego Garcia in the British Indian Ocean Territory flew bombing missions over Iraq , initially at low altitude . After the first three nights , the B @-@ 52s moved to high @-@ altitude missions instead , which reduced their effectiveness and psychological impact compared to the low altitude role initially played . 
 The conventional strikes were carried out by three bombers , which dropped up to 153 750 @-@ pound bombs over an area of 1 @.@ 5 by 1 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 by 1 @.@ 6 km ) . The bombings demoralized the defending Iraqi troops , many of whom surrendered in the wake of the strikes . In 1999 , the science and technology magazine Popular Mechanics described the B @-@ 52 's role in the conflict : " The Buff 's value was made clear during the Gulf War and Desert Fox . The B @-@ 52 turned out the lights in Baghdad . " During Operation Desert Storm , B @-@ 52s flew about 1 @,@ 620 sorties , and delivered 40 % of the weapons dropped by coalition forces . 
 During the conflict , several claims of Iraqi air @-@ to @-@ air successes were made , including an Iraqi pilot , Khudai <unk> , who allegedly fired a Vympel R @-@ 27R missile from his MIG @-@ 29 and damaged a B @-@ 52G on the opening night of the Gulf War . However , the U.S. Air Force disputes this claim , stating the bomber was actually hit by friendly fire , an AGM @-@ 88 High @-@ speed , Anti @-@ Radiation Missile ( HARM ) that homed on the fire @-@ control radar of the B @-@ 52 's tail gun ; the jet was subsequently renamed In HARM 's Way . Shortly following this incident , General George Lee Butler announced that the gunner position on B @-@ 52 crews would be eliminated , and the gun turrets permanently deactivated , commencing on 1 October 1991 . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s , the B @-@ 52H has been the only variant remaining in military service ; it is currently stationed at : 
 Minot Air Force Base , ND – 5th Bomb Wing 
 Barksdale Air Force Base , LA – 2nd Bomb Wing ( active Air Force ) and 307th Bomb Wing ( Air Force Reserve Command ) 
 One B @-@ 52H is assigned to Edwards Air Force Base and is used by Air Force Material Command at the Air Force Flight Test Center . 
 One additional B @-@ 52H is used by NASA at Dryden Flight Research Center , California as part of the Heavy @-@ lift Airborne Launch program . 
 From 2 to 3 September 1996 , two B @-@ 52H bombers conducted a mission as part of Operation Desert Strike . The B @-@ 52s struck Baghdad power stations and communications facilities with 13 AGM @-@ 86C conventional air @-@ launched cruise missiles ( <unk> ) during a 34 @-@ hour , 16 @,@ 000 @-@ mile round trip mission from Andersen AFB , Guam – the longest distance ever flown for a combat mission . 
 On 24 March 1999 , when Operation Allied Force began , B @-@ 52 bombers bombarded Serb targets throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , including during the Battle of <unk> . 
 The B @-@ 52 contributed to Operation Enduring Freedom in 2001 ( Afghanistan / Southwest Asia ) , providing the ability to loiter high above the battlefield and provide Close Air Support ( CAS ) through the use of precision guided munitions , a mission which previously would have been restricted to fighter and ground attack aircraft . In late 2001 , ten B @-@ 52s dropped a third of the bomb tonnage in Afghanistan . B @-@ 52s also played a role in Operation Iraqi Freedom , which commenced on 20 March 2003 ( Iraq / Southwest Asia ) . On the night of 21 March 2003 , B @-@ 52Hs launched at least one hundred AGM @-@ 86C <unk> at targets within Iraq . 
 = = = Recent service = = = 
 In August 2007 , a B @-@ 52H ferrying AGM @-@ 129 ACM cruise missiles from Minot Air Force Base to Barksdale Air Force Base for dismantling was mistakenly loaded with six missiles with their nuclear warheads . The weapons did not leave USAF custody and were secured at Barksdale . 
 As of January 2013 , 78 of the original 744 B @-@ 52 aircraft were operational in the U.S. Air Force . Four of 18 B @-@ 52Hs from Barksdale AFB being retired are in the " boneyard " of 309th <unk> at Davis @-@ Monthan AFB as of 8 September 2008 . 
 B @-@ 52s are periodically refurbished at USAF maintenance depots such as Tinker Air Force Base , Oklahoma . Even while the air force works on its Next @-@ Generation Bomber and 2037 Bomber projects , it intends to keep the B @-@ 52H in service until 2045 , nearly 90 years after the B @-@ 52 first entered service , an unprecedented length of service for any aircraft , civilian or military . 
 The USAF continues to rely on the B @-@ 52 because it remains an effective and economical heavy bomber in the absence of sophisticated air defense , particularly in the type of missions that have been conducted since the end of the Cold War against nations with limited defensive capabilities . The B @-@ 52 has also continued in service because there has been no reliable replacement . The B @-@ 52 has the capacity to " loiter " for extended periods , and can deliver precision standoff and direct fire munitions from a distance , in addition to direct bombing . It has been a valuable asset in supporting ground operations during conflicts such as Operation Iraqi Freedom . The B @-@ 52 had the highest mission capable rate of the three types of heavy bombers operated by the USAF in the 2000 – 2001 period . The B @-@ 1 averaged a 53 @.@ 7 % ready rate , the Northrop Grumman B @-@ 2 Spirit achieved 30 @.@ 3 % , while the B @-@ 52 averaged 80 @.@ 5 % . The B @-@ 52 's $ 72 @,@ 000 cost per hour of flight is more than the B @-@ 1B 's $ 63 @,@ 000 cost per hour , but less than the B @-@ 2 's $ 135 @,@ 000 per hour . 
 The Long Range Strike Bomber program is intended to yield a stealthy successor for the B @-@ 52 and B @-@ 1 that would begin service in the 2020s ; it is intended to produce 80 to 100 aircraft . Two competitors , Northrop Grumman and a joint team of Boeing and Lockheed Martin , submitted proposals in 2014 ; Northrop Grumman was awarded a contract in October 2015 . 
 On 12 November 2015 , the B @-@ 52 began freedom of navigation operations in the South China Sea in response to Chinese man @-@ made islands in the region . Chinese forces , claiming jurisdiction within a 12 @-@ mile exclusion zone of the islands , ordered the bombers to leave the area , but they refused , not recognizing jurisdiction . On 10 January 2016 , a B @-@ 52 overflew parts of South Korea escorted by South Korean F @-@ <unk> and U.S. F @-@ 16s in response to the supposed test of a hydrogen bomb by North Korea . 
 On 9 April 2016 , an undisclosed number of B @-@ 52s arrived at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar as part of Operation Inherent Resolve , part of the Military intervention against ISIL . The B @-@ 52s took over heavy bombing after B @-@ 1 Lancers that had been conducting airstrikes rotated out of the region in January 2016 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The B @-@ 52 went through several design changes and variants over its 10 years of production . 
 XB @-@ 52 
 Two prototype aircraft with limited operational equipment , used for aerodynamic and handling tests 
 YB @-@ 52 
 One XB @-@ 52 modified with some operational equipment and re @-@ designated 
 B @-@ 52A 
 Only three of the first production version , the B @-@ 52A , were built , all loaned to Boeing for flight testing . The first production B @-@ 52A differed from prototypes in having a redesigned forward fuselage . The bubble canopy and tandem seating was replaced by a side @-@ by @-@ side arrangement and a 21 in ( 53 cm ) nose extension accommodated more avionics and a new sixth crew member . In the rear fuselage , a tail turret with four 0 @.@ 50 inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns with a fire @-@ control system , and a water injection system to augment engine power with a 360 US gallon ( 1 @,@ 363 L ) water tank were added . The aircraft also carried a 1 @,@ 000 US gallon ( 3 @,@ 785 L ) external fuel tank under each wing . The tanks damped wing flutter and also kept wingtips close to the ground for ease of maintenance . 
 NB @-@ 52A 
 The last B @-@ 52A ( serial 52 @-@ 0003 ) was modified and redesignated NB @-@ 52A in 1959 to carry the North American X @-@ 15 . A pylon was fitted under the right wing between the fuselage and the inboard engines with a 6 feet x 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m x 2 @.@ 4 m ) section removed from the right wing flap to fit the X @-@ 15 tail . Liquid oxygen and hydrogen peroxide tanks were installed in the bomb bays to fuel the X @-@ 15 before launch . Its first flight with the X @-@ 15 was on 19 March 1959 , with the first launch on 8 June 1959 . The NB @-@ 52A , named " The High and Mighty One " carried the X @-@ 15 on 93 of the program 's 199 flights . 
 B @-@ 52B / RB @-@ 52B 
 The B @-@ 52B was the first version to enter service with the USAF on 29 June 1955 with the 93rd Bombardment Wing at Castle AFB , California . This version included minor changes to engines and avionics , enabling an extra 12 @,@ 000 pounds of thrust using water injection . Temporary grounding of the aircraft after a crash in February 1956 and again the following July caused training delays , and at mid @-@ year there were still no combat @-@ ready B @-@ 52 crews . 
 Of the 50 B @-@ 52Bs built , 27 were capable of carrying a reconnaissance pod as RB @-@ 52Bs ( the crew was increased to eight in these aircraft ) . The 300 pound ( 136 kg ) pod contained radio receivers , a combination of K @-@ 36 , K @-@ 38 , and T @-@ 11 cameras , and two operators on downward @-@ firing ejection seats . The pod required only four hours to install . 
 Seven B @-@ 52Bs were brought to B @-@ 52C standard under Project Sunflower . 
 NB @-@ 52B 
 The NB @-@ 52B was B @-@ 52B number 52 @-@ 0008 converted to an X @-@ 15 launch platform . It subsequently flew as the " Balls 8 " in support of NASA research until 17 December 2004 , making it the oldest flying B @-@ 52B . It was replaced by a modified B @-@ 52H . 
 B @-@ 52C 
 The B @-@ 52C 's fuel capacity ( and range ) was increased to 41 @,@ 700 US gallons by adding larger 3000 US gallon underwing fuel tanks . The gross weight was increased by 30 @,@ 000 pounds ( 13 @,@ 605 kg ) to 450 @,@ 000 pounds . A new fire control system , the MD @-@ 9 , was introduced on this model . The belly of the aircraft was painted with antiflash white paint , which was intended to reflect thermal radiation away after a nuclear detonation . 
 RB @-@ 52C 
 The RB @-@ 52C was the designation initially given to B @-@ 52Cs fitted for reconnaissance duties in a similar manner to RB @-@ 52Bs . As all 35 B @-@ 52Cs could be fitted with the reconnaissance pod , the RB @-@ 52C designation was little used and was quickly abandoned . 
 B @-@ 52D 
 The B @-@ 52D was a dedicated long @-@ range bomber without a reconnaissance option . The Big Belly modifications allowed the B @-@ 52D to carry heavy loads of conventional bombs for carpet bombing over Vietnam , while the Rivet Rambler modification added the Phase V ECM systems , which was better than the systems used on most later B @-@ 52s . Because of these upgrades and its long range capabilities , the D model was used more extensively in Vietnam than any other model . Aircraft assigned to Vietnam were painted in a camouflage colour scheme with black bellies to defeat searchlights . 
 B @-@ 52E 
 The B @-@ 52E received an updated avionics and bombing navigational system , which was eventually debugged and included on following models . 
 One E aircraft ( AF Serial No. 56 @-@ <unk> ) was modified as a testbed for various B @-@ 52 systems . Redesignated NB @-@ 52E , the aircraft was fitted with canards and a Load Alleviation and Mode Stabilization system ( <unk> ) which reduced airframe fatigue from wind gusts during low level flight . In one test , the aircraft flew 10 knots ( 11 @.@ 5 mph , 18 @.@ 5 km / h ) faster than the never exceed speed without damage because the canards eliminated 30 % of vertical and 50 % of horizontal vibrations caused by wind gusts . 
 B @-@ 52F 
 This aircraft was given J57 @-@ P @-@ <unk> engines with a larger capacity water injection system to provide greater thrust than previous models . This model had problems with fuel leaks which were eventually solved by several service modifications : Blue Band , Hard Shell , and <unk> . 
 B @-@ 52G 
 The B @-@ 52G was proposed to extend the B @-@ 52 's service life during delays in the B @-@ 58 Hustler program . At first , a radical redesign was envisioned with a completely new wing and Pratt & Whitney J75 engines . This was rejected to avoid slowdowns in production , although a large number of changes were implemented . The most significant of these was the brand @-@ new " wet " wing with integral fuel tanks which considerably increased the fuel capacity ; gross aircraft weight went up by 38 @,@ 000 pounds ( 17 @,@ 235 kg ) compared with prior variants . In addition , a pair of 700 US gallon ( 2 @,@ 650 L ) external fuel tanks was fitted under the wings . In this model , the traditional ailerons were eliminated . Instead , spoilers provided roll control . The tail fin was shortened by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , water injection system capacity was increased to 1 @,@ 200 US gallons ( 4 @,@ 540 L ) , and the nose radome was enlarged . The tail gunner manning the 4 .50 caliber machine guns ( quad mounted in a remote controlled tail turret on the G @-@ model ( ASG @-@ 15 ) , the guns were later removed from all operational aircraft ) was relocated to the main cockpit and was provided with an ejection seat . Dubbed the " Battle Station " concept , the offensive crew ( pilot and copilot on the upper deck and the two bombing navigation system operators on the lower deck ) faced forward , while the defensive crew ( tail gunner and ECM operator ) on the upper deck faced aft . The B @-@ 52G entered service on 13 February 1959 ( a day earlier , the last B @-@ 36 was retired , making SAC an all @-@ jet bomber force ) . 193 B @-@ 52Gs were produced , making this the most produced B @-@ 52 variant . Most B @-@ 52Gs were destroyed in compliance with the 1992 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty ; the last B @-@ 52G , number 58 @-@ <unk> , was dismantled under New START treaty requirements in December 2013 . A few examples remain on display for museums . 
 B @-@ 52H 
 The B @-@ 52H had the same crew and structural changes as the B @-@ 52G . The most significant upgrade was the switch to TF33 @-@ P @-@ 3 turbofan engines which , despite the initial reliability problems ( corrected by 1964 under the Hot Fan program ) , offered considerably better performance and fuel economy than the J57 turbojets . The ECM and avionics were updated , a new fire control system was fitted , and the rear defensive armament was changed from machine guns to a 20 mm M61 Vulcan cannon ( later removed in 1991 – 94 ) . The final 18 aircraft were manufactured with provision for the ADR @-@ 8 countermeasures rocket , which was later retrofitted to the remainder of the B @-@ 52G and B @-@ 52H fleet . A provision was made for four GAM @-@ 87 Skybolt ballistic missiles . The aircraft 's first flight occurred on 10 July 1960 , and it entered service on 9 May 1961 . This is the only variant still in use by the USAF . A total of 102 B @-@ 52Hs were built . The last production aircraft , B @-@ 52H AF Serial No. 61 @-@ 0040 , left the factory on 26 October 1962 . 
 XR @-@ 16A 
 Allocated to the reconnaissance variant of the B @-@ 52B but not used and the aircraft were designated RB @-@ 52B instead . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 NASA 
 United States Air Force 76 aircraft in service as of February , 2015 
 Air Combat Command 
 57th Wing – Nellis AFB , Nevada 
 340th Weapons Squadron ( Barksdale ) 
 Air Force Global Strike Command 
 2d Bomb Wing – Barksdale AFB , Louisiana 
 11th Bomb Squadron 
 20th Bomb Squadron 
 96th Bomb Squadron 
 5th Bomb Wing – Minot AFB , North Dakota 
 23d Bomb Squadron 
 69th Bomb Squadron 
 Air Force Materiel Command 
 412th Test Wing – Edwards AFB , California 
 419th Flight Test Squadron 
 Air Force Reserve Command 
 307th Bomb Wing – Barksdale AFB , LA 
 93d Bomb Squadron 
 343d Bomb Squadron 
 = = Notable accidents = = 
 On 10 January 1957 , a B @-@ 52 returning to Loring Air Force Base from a routine instrument training mission broke apart in midair and crashed near Morrell , New Brunswick , killing eight of the nine crew on board . Co @-@ pilot Captain Joseph L. Church parachuted to safety . The crash was believed to have been caused by overstressing the wings and / or airframe during an exercise designed to test the pilot 's reflexes . This was the fourth crash involving a B @-@ 52 in 11 months . 
 On 11 February 1958 , a B @-@ 52D crashed in South Dakota because of ice blocking the fuel system , leading to an uncommanded reduction in power to all eight engines . Three crew members were killed . 
 On 8 September 1958 , two B @-@ 52s collided in midair near Fairchild Air Force Base , Washington ; all 13 crew members on the 2 aircraft were killed 
 On 15 October 1959 , a B @-@ 52 from the <unk> Bomb Squadron at Columbus AFB , Mississippi carrying 2 nuclear weapons collided in midair with a KC @-@ 135 tanker near <unk> , Kentucky ; 4 of the 8 crew members on the bomber and all 4 crew on the tanker were killed . One of the nuclear bombs was damaged by fire but both weapons were recovered . 
 On 10 August 1959 , a B @-@ 52 crashed in the Spruce Swamp at Fremont , New Hampshire . The bomber was on a routine training mission from Chicopee , Massachusetts , when its air speed indicator and altimeter failed , which led to more serious malfunctions . The B @-@ 52 was attempting to make an emergency landing at Goose Bay , Labrador the only landing option not affected by foggy weather conditions . However , it crashed before making the landing . The U.S. Air Force reported that it was the first B @-@ 52 crash where the entire crew survived ; the crew parachuted to safety . Debris from the crash covered a quarter @-@ mile of densely wooded swampland . 
 On 24 January 1961 , a B @-@ 52G broke up in midair and crashed after suffering a severe fuel loss , near Goldsboro , North Carolina , dropping two nuclear bombs in the process without detonation . 
 On 14 March 1961 , a B @-@ 52F from Mather AFB , California carrying two nuclear weapons experienced an uncontrolled decompression , necessitating a descent to 10 @,@ 000 feet to lower the cabin altitude . Due to increased fuel consumption at the lower altitude and unable to rendezvous with a tanker in time , the aircraft ran out of fuel . The crew ejected safely , while the unmanned bomber crashed 15 miles ( 24 km ) west of Yuba City , California . 
 On 7 April 1961 , B @-@ 52B AF Serial No. 53 @-@ <unk> was accidentally shot down by a New Mexico Air National Guard F @-@ 100 on an intercept training mission . The F @-@ 100 was carrying live missiles whose launch capability was supposed to be disabled , but a wiring fault caused one of them to fire and strike the bomber 's left wing . The aircraft crashed near Mount Taylor , killing three of the eight crew members on board . 
 On 24 January 1963 , a B @-@ 52C on a training mission out of Westover Air Force Base , Massachusetts , lost its vertical stabilizer due to buffeting during low @-@ level flight , and crashed on the west side of Elephant Mountain near Greenville , Maine . Of the nine crewmen aboard , two survived the crash . 
 On 30 January 1963 , a B @-@ 52E of the 6th Bomb Wing from Walker Air Force Base , New Mexico , crashed in snow @-@ covered mountains in northern New Mexico after turbulence tore off the vertical fin . The ECM operator and tail gunner were killed but at least three crew ( pilot , radio operator and one other crew member ) survived . Three Lockheed T @-@ 33 Shooting Stars and , later , three Douglas C @-@ 54 Skymaster transports , circled the area trying to locate survivors ; the pilots reported that they saw two other survivors after the first man walked to safety . 
 On 10 January 1964 , a B @-@ 52H flown by Boeing test pilots lost its vertical stabilizer to turbulence near East Spanish Peak . It was able to land at <unk> Air Force Base , Arkansas . 
 On 13 January 1964 , a B @-@ 52D carrying two nuclear bombs suffered a structural failure in flight that caused the tail section to shear off . Four crewmen ejected successfully before the aircraft crashed near Cumberland , Maryland . Two crewmen subsequently perished on the ground because of hypothermia , while another , who was unable to eject , died in the aircraft ; both weapons were recovered . This was one of several incidents caused by failure of the vertical stabilizer . 
 On 17 January 1966 , a fatal collision occurred between a B @-@ 52G and a KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker over Palomares , Spain . The two unexploded B @-@ 28 FI 1 @.@ 45 @-@ megaton @-@ range nuclear bombs on the B @-@ 52 were eventually recovered ; the conventional explosives of two more bombs detonated on impact , with serious dispersion of both plutonium and uranium , but without triggering a nuclear explosion . After the crash , 1 @,@ 400 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 lb ) of contaminated soil was sent to the United States . In 2006 , an agreement was made between the U.S. and Spain to investigate and clean the pollution still remaining as a result of the accident . 
 On 18 November 1966 , a B @-@ 52G AF Ser . No. 58 @-@ <unk> deployed from Barksdale Air Force Base crashed and was destroyed when it flew into the ground in swampland south of Stone Lake , Sawyer County , Wisconsin . The crew was on a low level terrain avoidance night mission , before SAC stopped such flights , and had just entered low altitude and were calibrating their terrain avoidance radar , when they flew too low , clipped the tops of the forest and crashed . 
 On 8 July 1967 , B @-@ 52D AF Ser . No. 56 @-@ <unk> , overran the runway due to loss of brakes during an emergency landing at Da Nang Air Base , Vietnam with the loss of five of her six crew . The aircraft had suffered an electrical malfunction that led to the flameout of two engines . 
 On 21 January 1968 , a B @-@ 52G , with four nuclear bombs aboard as part of Operation Chrome Dome , crashed on the ice of the North Star Bay while attempting an emergency landing at Thule Air Base , Greenland . The resulting fire caused extensive radioactive contamination , the cleanup ( Project Crested Ice ) lasting until September of that year . Following closely on the Palomares incident , the cleanup costs and political consequences proved too high to risk again , so SAC ended the airborne alert program the following day . 
 On 3 April 1970 , a B @-@ 52D assigned to the 28th Bomb Wing caught fire and crashed while landing at Ellsworth Air Force Base , South Dakota ; sliding to a halt and burning atop a 25 @,@ 000 gallon fuel storage tank . Efforts by fire department personnel saved the 9 man crew and prevented a catastrophic explosion of the fuel tank . 
 On 31 March 1972 , B @-@ 52D AF Ser . No. 56 @-@ <unk> , departed McCoy Air Force Base , Florida on a routine training mission . Assigned to the 306th Bombardment Wing , the unarmed aircraft sustained multiple engine failures and engine fires on engines No.7 and No.8 shortly after takeoff . The aircraft immediately attempted to return to the base , but crashed just short of Runway 18R in a residential area of Orlando , Florida , approximately 1 mile north of McCoy AFB , destroying or damaging eight homes . The flight crew of 7 airmen and 1 civilian on the ground were killed . 
 On 30 July 1972 , B @-@ 52D 56 @-@ <unk> , assigned to the 307th Strategic Bomb Wing , operating out of U @-@ Tapao Royal Thai Navy Airfield on a combat mission as part of Operation Linebacker was hit by lightning . The strike knocked out the plane 's instruments and started a fire on the port wing . Five of the six crewmen were killed in the crash 
 On 30 October 1981 , B @-@ 52D , AF Serial No. 55 @-@ 078 , assigned to the 22d Bomb Wing , March Air Force Base , California , impacted the ground nine miles east of La Junta , CO during a night low @-@ level training mission . All eight crew members on board were killed ( six crew and two maintainers ) . Sortie departed March AFB with a planned recovering at Carswell Air Force Base , Texas . 
 On 16 December 1982 , B @-@ 52G 57 @-@ <unk> , assigned to 328th BS , 93rd BW , Castle AFB , California , was participating in a Minimum Interval Take @-@ Off ( <unk> ; 12 seconds between each aircraft on takeoff ) from Mather AFB , CA . The incident aircraft was in the number two position of a three @-@ ship cell . The B @-@ 52G was equipped with water injection to give additional thrust for take @-@ off , but the lead aircraft was not equipped with this system . The incident aircraft used the thrust augmentation system . During the take @-@ off , the incident aircraft rapidly started to overtake the lead aircraft . The incident aircraft pilot retarded the throttles rapidly causing flameout of four engines . The aircraft then stalled leading to impact with the ground . Nine crew members were killed . There were no fatalities on the ground . 
 On 16 October 1984 , B @-@ 52G 57 @-@ <unk> , assigned to the 92d Bomb Wing , Fairchild AFB , Washington , clipped its wing on Hunts Mesa , an outcropping in Monument Valley , Arizona , and crashed , sending a fireball high into the air . Two of the seven crew perished in the crash , including Col. William Ivy , the wing 's deputy commander for operations . 
 On 2 February 1991 , B @-@ 52G Hulk 46 , assigned to the <unk> Bomb Wing ( Provisional ) , Diego Garcia , British Indian Ocean Territory ( BIOT ) crashed while returning from a bombing mission in Iraq during the Persian Gulf War . The crash was eventually blamed on a catastrophic failure of the aircraft 's electrical system . Three of the six crew members on board were killed . 
 On 24 June 1994 , B @-@ 52H Czar 52 , 61 @-@ 0026 crashed at Fairchild AFB , Washington , during practice for an airshow . All four crew members died in the accident . 
 On 21 July 2008 , a B @-@ 52H , <unk> 21 , 60 @-@ 0053 , deployed from Barksdale Air Force Base , Louisiana to Andersen Air Force Base , Guam crashed approximately 25 miles ( 40 km ) off the coast of Guam . All six crew members were killed ( five standard crew members and a flight surgeon ) . 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 = = Specifications ( B @-@ 52H ) = = 
 Data from <unk> , USAF fact sheet , Quest for Performance 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 5 ( Pilot , Copilot , Weapon Systems Officer , Navigator , Electronic Warfare Officer , and Tail gunner until the removal of the tail gun in 1991 ) 
 Length : 159 ft 4 in ( 48 @.@ 5 m ) 
 Wingspan : 185 ft 0 in ( 56 @.@ 4 m ) 
 Height : 40 ft 8 in ( 12 @.@ 4 m ) 
 Wing area : 4 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 370 m ² ) 
 Airfoil : NACA <unk> mod root , NACA <unk> tip 
 Empty weight : 185 @,@ 000 lb ( 83 @,@ 250 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 265 @,@ 000 lb ( 120 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 488 @,@ 000 lb ( 220 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 8 × Pratt & Whitney TF33 @-@ P @-@ 3 / 103 turbofans , 17 @,@ 000 lbf ( 76 kN ) each 
 Fuel capacity : 47 @,@ 975 U.S. gal ( 39 @,@ 948 imp gal ; 181 @,@ 610 L ) 
 Zero @-@ lift drag coefficient : 0 @.@ <unk> ( estimated ) 
 Drag area : 47 @.@ 60 sq ft ( 4 @.@ 42 m ² ) 
 Aspect ratio : 8 @.@ 56 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 560 kn ( 650 mph , 1 @,@ 047 km / h ) 
 Cruise speed : 442 kn ( 525 mph , 844 km / h ) 
 Combat radius : 4 @,@ 480 mi ( 3 @,@ 890 nmi , 7 @,@ 210 km ) 
 Ferry range : 10 @,@ 145 mi ( 8 @,@ 764 nmi , 16 @,@ 232 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 6 @,@ 270 ft / min ( 31 @.@ 85 m / s ) 
 Wing loading : 120 lb / ft ² ( 586 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 31 
 Lift @-@ to @-@ drag ratio : 21 @.@ 5 ( estimated ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) M61 Vulcan cannon originally mounted in a remote controlled tail turret on the H @-@ model , removed from all current operational aircraft in 1991 
 Bombs : Approximately 70 @,@ 000 lb ( 31 @,@ 500 kg ) mixed ordnance ; bombs , mines , missiles , in various configurations . 
 Avionics 
 Electro @-@ optical viewing system that uses platinum silicide forward looking infrared and high resolution low @-@ light @-@ level television sensors 
 ADR @-@ 8 chaff rocket ( 1965 @-@ 1970 ) 
 LITENING Advanced Targeting System 
 Sniper Advanced Targeting Pod 
 IBM AP @-@ 101 computer 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 The B @-@ 52 has been featured in a number of major films , most notably : Bombers B @-@ 52 ( 1957 ) , A Gathering of Eagles ( 1963 ) , Dr. Strangelove or : How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb ( 1964 ) , and By Dawn 's Early Light ( 1990 ) . It has also been featured in numerous novels , such as most of the early Patrick McLanahan novels by Dale Brown , which feature one or more heavily modified B @-@ 52 bombers , nicknamed the " EB @-@ 52 <unk> " . A 1960s hairstyle , the beehive , is also called a B @-@ 52 for its resemblance to the aircraft 's distinct nose . The popular band The B @-@ 52 's was subsequently named after this hairstyle . 
 = Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 ( Japanese : ファイナルファンタジー零式 , Hepburn : Fainaru Fantajī Reishiki ) is an action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) . Released in Japan on October 27 , 2011 , Type @-@ 0 is part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries , a set of games sharing a common mythos which includes Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy XV . The gameplay , similar to Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , has the player taking control of characters in real @-@ time combat during missions across Orience . The player also engages in large @-@ scale strategy @-@ based battles on the world map , and has access to a multiplayer option during story missions and side quests . 
 The story focuses on Class Zero , a group of fourteen students from the Vermillion Peristylium , a magical academy in the Dominion of Rubrum . When the Militesi Empire launches an assault on the other Crystal States of Orience , seeking to control their respective crystals , Class Zero is mobilized for the defense of Rubrum . Eventually , the group becomes entangled in the secrets behind both the war and the reason for their existence . The setting and presentation were inspired by historical documentaries , and the story itself was written to be darker than other Final Fantasy titles . 
 The game was originally announced as a title for mobile phones and the PSP called Final Fantasy Agito XIII . It was directed by Hajime Tabata , who took up the project after completing Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII . Initially designed to provide players with easy access to the Fabula Nova Crystallis universe , the mobile version was eventually cancelled and the game 's title was changed to distance it from the subseries ' flagship title Final Fantasy XIII . Releasing to strong sales , it received praise for its story and gameplay , but was criticized for its camera control and artificial intelligence . Despite plans to do so , Type @-@ 0 has never been released outside Japan . Further games related to Type @-@ 0 have also been developed , including a high definition remaster that released internationally in March 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 is an action role @-@ playing video game in which the player controls the 14 members of Class Zero , who are sent on missions across Orience . Outside environments such as the Vermillion Peristylium ( Class Zero 's home base ) and dedicated missions , the game world of Orience is navigated via a scaled @-@ down world map . Class Zero are sent on missions across Orience during the course of the game . The player initially travels to preset destinations in the world on an airship supplied by the Peristylium , but gains their own airship to freely navigate the world map with after defeating a powerful enemy guarding it . The main gameplay is presented in a mission @-@ based structure . The two types of missions encountered are story @-@ based missions , and " Practice " missions , which act as side @-@ quests . During missions , optional orders are issued which can be obeyed or ignored as the player chooses . Should they be accepted , the characters receive a temporary power boost , and completing the objectives yields rewards . Players can also engage in real @-@ time strategy battles on the world map , with the player taking control of allied military divisions . Missions involve liberating cities and towns from enemy forces . Timed aerial missions are also available where the characters shoot down attacking dragons using their airship 's weapons . 
 While outside combat , players can breed chocobos , recurring galliform birds in the Final Fantasy series . Players must capture two chocobos on the world map and take them to a special ranch within the Peristylium : by pairing certain chocobos and adding specific items , a special chocobo can be bred for use . Players can visit the Peristylium Crystarium to review defeated enemies , character information , in @-@ game lore and special video clips . Moogles , another recurring creature in the series , hand out missions to the player : the objectives of missions can change during gameplay . Items and new equipment can be bought from shops managed by non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) both within the Peristylium and across Orience . Towns liberated during missions give access to a wider range of shops . After completing the game once , players unlock a " New Game + " option : in this mode , players keep their stats and weapons from the previous playthrough , while also unlocking story scenes and character @-@ specific missions . Type @-@ 0 features three difficulty levels ; " normal " , " hard " , and " impossible " . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Type @-@ 0 uses a real @-@ time , action @-@ based battle system similar to the system used in Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . The player is allowed access to three characters , which they can swap between at any time . The two not being controlled are managed by the game 's artificial intelligence . Each character has a specific weapon , and special attacks unique to a character are unlocked as they gain experience levels . During combat , characters lock onto targets while attacking and can switch targets . Characters are able to perform precisely timed attacks during the period when an enemy unit is attacking : the " Break Sight " , which deals high damage , and the " Kill Sight " , which kills a standard enemy with a single hit . Three characters can also be commanded to use a Triad Maneuver , combining their attacks to deal higher damage to a target . Aside from human enemies , the game features multiple recurring Final Fantasy monsters . In addition to enemies encountered in missions , there are special enemies that can be encountered while exploring the world map . 
 Defeated enemy units drop a substance called Phantoma . The color of Phantoma indicates what aspect of the character it will replenish , though in general they automatically replenish a set amount of magic points . Phantoma are used in the game 's leveling system , the <unk> , to strengthen a character 's magic skills . The game 's magic skills are divided into five basic groups named after types of guns : for example , " Rifle " fires the spell in a straight line , while " Missile " homes in on and chases targeted enemies . Holding down the assigned action button increases the power of the attack . Many combat situations involve timed challenges . Success rewards the character , while failure drains their health . If a character is defeated in battle , the player can instantly select another to replace it , and the defeated character must be revived outside the mission . The game features an arena where practice fights take place . While these fights are not against real foes , the characters continue to level up and gain Phantoma after the battle , and twenty battles can be arranged at any one time . Each character has access to summoned monsters called Eidolons , which act as temporary playable characters and have their own set of skills . Summoning them empties the selected character 's health gauge , removing them from battle until they are revived . Summons are also affected by the current environment : as an example , Shiva 's powers are stronger in snowy weather . After a limited time in battle , the Eidolons are dismissed . Those available to players are series staples Shiva , Ifrit , Golem , Odin , Diablos and Bahamut . Each Eidolon has variants of its original form , many of which are unlocked as the game progresses . 
 Characters can continue to level up through activities within the Peristylium while the PSP is in sleep mode , the game 's UMD is running , and the PSP is charging . The multiplayer function , activated through the game 's configuration screen , allows two other players to jump into another host player 's game via an online connection . The allotted time for multiplayer is limited to a few minutes , with transitions between zones triggering the end of a multiplayer section . The time limit can be extended by players helping their current host . The first and last segments of the game are not open to multiplayer . There is also a function called Magical Academy Assist , in which NPCs named after members of the game 's production team are summoned into battle to assist the cadets . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Note : The plot of Type @-@ 0 is the same in its original version and the high @-@ definition remaster Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD , so the terms and quotes used in the text are from the localization of the high @-@ definition remaster rather than unofficial translations . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 is set within Orience , a land divided between four nations or " Crystal States " . Each nation has crystals of power based on the Four Symbols , which are in turn their national emblems . The Dominion of Rubrum uses the Vermillion Bird Crystal , which controls magic ; the Militesi Empire controls the White Tiger Crystal , containing the power of science and weapons ; the Kingdom of Concordia uses the Azure Dragon Crystal , containing the power of Dragons ; and the Lorican Alliance is home to the Black Tortoise Crystal , containing the power of shielding . Each nation has an academy , or Peristylium , to research and protect the country 's respective crystal . The crystals have the ability to mark humans as their countries ' servants . These servants , called l 'Cie , are branded with a symbol and are given a " Focus " , a task to complete . While blessed with long life and the ability to transform into crystal , l 'Cie are cursed to lose their memories over time . The people of Orience also lose their memories of the dead so they will not be held back by any past regrets and continue strengthening their souls through conflict , a mechanism put in place by the crystals for the convenience of the deities who crafted them . The main aim of many characters is to become Agito , a legendary figure who will appear and save the world from Tempus Finis , an apocalyptic event that will destroy Orience . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The main characters of Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 are Class Zero , an elite group of 14 students from the Vermillion Peristylium . The first 12 are card wielder Ace , flute wielder Deuce , the archer Trey , magic @-@ gun wielder Cater , the mace @-@ wielding Cinque , scythe wielder Sice , whip wielder Seven , martial artist Eight , spearman Nine , katana wielding Jack , swordswoman Queen and dual pistol wielding King . The last two , Machina Kunagiri and Rem Tokimiya , double as narrators and the focus for the game 's main subplot . Supporting Class Zero are their mentor Kurasame Susaya , and Arecia Al @-@ Rashia , Class Zero 's former mentor and the overseer for magical development at the Vermillion Peristylium . Other important characters from Rubrum are Khalia Chival VI , the current leader of Rubrum and headmaster of the Vermillion Peristyrium , and the l 'Cie Caetuna . Multiple Militesi figures , led by Marshal Cid Aulstyne , act as the game 's main antagonists . Other important characters include the Concordian queen Andoria , Gala , leader of the Rursus Army and the instigator of Tempus Finis , and Joker and Tiz , two mysterious figures who observe the events of the game . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Marshal Cid Aulstyne leads the army of Milites against the other nations of Orience , launching a devastating attack against the Vermillion Peristylium and neutralising the Vermillion Bird Crystal using a crystal jammer . Class Zero , immune to the effects of the jammer , repel the invasion . During the conflict Izana Kunagiri , Machina 's older brother , is killed while on a mission for Class Zero . This event later creates a rift between Machina and Class Zero . Coordinated by Kurasame and Arecia Al @-@ Rashia , Class Zero plays a key role in freeing Rubrum 's territories and launching counterattacks in alliance with Concordia , while Lorica 's capital is destroyed by a Militesi bomb . Concordia 's queen then forces a ceasefire between the remaining nations . During peace talks in the Militesi capital , Class Zero is framed for Andoria 's murder , resulting in Concordia 's puppet government and Milites launching a united assault on Rubrum . During their flight , Machina storms off after clashing with Class Zero , and becomes a White Tiger l 'Cie to protect Rem from his brother 's fate before returning to them . The White Tiger Crystal 's will eventually forces him to leave . 
 With help from its l 'Cie soldiers and Class Zero , Rubrum destroys the forces of Concordia and Milites , uniting Orience under its flag . This triggers the arrival of Tempus Finis , with the Rursus Army emerging from the magical fortress Pandaemonium to wipe out Orience 's population . Cid and Class Zero each travel to Pandaemonium : Cid attempts to become Agito and is transformed into the Rursus Arbiter by Gala , while Class Zero resolve to halt Tempus Finis . As Class Zero face the trials of the Arbiter , the Vermillion Bird Crystals offers them the chance to become l 'Cie . Class Zero refuse the Crystal 's offer and Rem is made a l 'Cie in their place . Machina and Rem end up fighting each other in Pandaemonium : Rem is mortally wounded , and she and Machina turn to crystal . Severely weakened by the trials and demoralized at seeing Machina and Rem 's condition , Class Zero are initially unable to defeat the Arbiter . Machina and Rem 's spirits give them the strength they need to defeat the Arbiter and halt Tempus Finis . Fatally injured , Class Zero spend their final minutes imagining their possible post @-@ war lives . They are found by Machina and Rem , who have returned to human form and , along with the rest of Orience , are allowed to remember the dead . In a post @-@ credits sequence , it is said that the Crystal States fall into turmoil as the Crystals lose their powers . Machina and Rem unite Orience and rebuild the world , and Machina records Class Zero 's history before dying with Rem at his side . A second playthrough reveals that Orience is trapped in a stable <unk> created by Arecia and Gala , the respective servants of the deities Pulse and Lindzei , as part of an experiment to find the gateway to the Unseen Realm . Competing with each other to open the gateway using a different method , both failed and reset the world for another attempt . By the events of Type @-@ 0 , the experiment had been performed over six hundred million times . 
 The game features multiple endings . During the original playthrough , if Class Zero accept the Vermillion Bird Crystal 's offer for them to become l 'Cie , they go into battle against the Rursus and die , dooming Orience to be destroyed in Tempus Finis and reborn in another spiral of history . In a sequence unlocked during the second playthrough , it is revealed that Cid wanted to free Orience from the Crystals ' control , and killed himself in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent Gala from using him . After the Arbiter 's defeat , Joker and Tiz speak with Arecia and show her the memories of Class Zero and the people of Orience to make her reconsider restarting the experiment . After speaking with Machina and Rem , Arecia decides to abandon the experiment and returns the two to human form . In an alternate ending , Arecia chooses to remove the crystals from Orience 's history , creating a new timeline where the war never occurred and the world 's population can live happily . 
 = = Development = = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 was originally titled Final Fantasy Agito XIII , envisioned as a game for mobile devices . It was conceived in 2005 as part of Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy , a subseries of Final Fantasy games linked by a common mythos . Agito XIII was the final original Fabula Nova Crystallis game to be created . The decision to make it a mobile game was based on the popularity of Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII . Hajime Tabata , who contributed to the Fabula Nova Crystallis mythos , was searching for a new project after finishing Before Crisis and became the game 's director . Before Crisis producer Kosei Ito acted as producer before his move to Capcom prior to 2009 . Beginning development in 2006 , it was first announced at that year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) . It was said to offer on @-@ the @-@ go access to the Fabula Nova Crystallis universe , using gameplay functions exclusive to mobile phones of the time . The concept was to deliver a game for mobile platforms equivalent to a console game from the main Final Fantasy series , and to make it available in its entirety upon release rather than in episodic format . 
 Developers had been planning a release on the next generation of mobile phones , as those available at the time could not offer all the capabilities they would need . While it was originally claimed to be a mobile exclusive , versions for both mobiles and the PlayStation Portable were being developed , with the latter to be revealed when the former was sufficiently advanced . The original staff members were Tabata , Yusuke Naora and Tetsuya Nomura . Nomura acted as a character designer and creative producer . Between 2006 and 2008 , development wavered between inactivity and sluggishness since most of the team was devoted to Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . In 2008 , it was said to be facing serious problems due to the scale of the project . An issue developers had grappled with was whether or not to make the command buttons used in the game visible on the mobile screen . Agito XIII was described as an online RPG using fully rendered 3D graphics similar to console games , as well as having gameplay elements from multiple genres such as MMORPGs , smaller @-@ scale multiplayer @-@ focused games , and standard role @-@ playing games . Other unfinished concepts being developed were a day @-@ night cycle , a calendar system linked to real @-@ world time and dates , and a story influenced by player votes . 
 In 2008 , it was decided to make Type @-@ 0 a PSP exclusive , cancelling the mobile version of the game as the developers did not want to wait for mobile technology to reach a level which could handle their full vision for the game . Full development began that year by the same team who developed Crisis Core , but was again slowed as most of them were completing work on The 3rd Birthday . Because of these conflicting projects , Type @-@ 0 came close to being cancelled outright . Between 2009 and 2011 , the title was changed to distance it from Final Fantasy XIII , since after the platform change the two games had little in common other than their shared mythos . One of the titles considered and rejected was Final Fantasy Live , referring to the game 's multiplayer element . The new title , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , was intended to indicate the game 's separation from the main series . It was also the beginning of an alternative numbering system parallel to the main series . The game made its first official public appearance under the new title at the Square Enix 1st Production Department Premier in Tokyo , along with a new trailer that was released to the public on January 27 , 2011 . 
 = = = Scenario and design = = = 
 Type @-@ 0 's scenario was conceived by Tabata and written by Hiroki Chiba and Sarah Obake . While the game was still titled Agito XIII , Tabata described it as " a major title [ ... ] formed from a variety of concepts " which included the collision of four fantasies ( the game 's view of Orience ) , a battle between magic and weapons , and the two sides of reality . The early story concept drew heavily from popular manga and anime , but little survived after the platform change . Tabata instead chose a new style similar to historical films and documentaries . The new story 's concept started with the idea of a war story told by young people caught up in the event , with its story themes revolving around death and its impact on others . A major inspiration was the Japanese documentary series Centuries of Picture . The final story was darker than many other Final Fantasy games . Despite its title change , the game was kept within the Fabula Nova Crystallis mythos . The approach taken with the mythos was to portray the roles of its deities from a historical standpoint , while telling a story focused on the human side of events . The cyclic nature of the game 's universe was created to help incorporate aspects of the mythos . The roles and backgrounds for each character in the game were conceived and put into place after the setting and main story had been finalized . After the game 's release , Tabata commented that when he was writing the story he would have liked to have been more thorough , and to have made the story easier for players to understand . 
 The game 's logo artwork was drawn by regular series artist Yoshitaka Amano . The kanji symbol used in the logo was drawn by Naora , who had designed the Shinra logo in Final Fantasy VII and its companion media . Naora specifically requested that he draw the logo due to this previous experience . To achieve the grittier atmosphere , Naora took a research trip to a Japanese military camp to learn what being a military cadet was like . The island of the Vermillion <unk> was based on an offshore Japanese island he had visited prior to his involvement with the game , adding elements in @-@ game such as an offshore ship wreck to symbolize his fear of the sea . He was also influenced by an incident where he saw a dead cat surrounded by other cats to portray the bond between members of Class Zero , and the game 's themes , in promotional artwork . 
 The gameplay was inspired by the multi @-@ character system of Before Crisis , while the naming of magic styles after weapons of war made reference to first @-@ person shooters . The combat was designed to be filled with tension and portray each playable character 's personality on the battlefield . The Eidolons were originally not controlled in realtime , but during the development of Ifrit , Tabata did some testing with real @-@ time commands . The results impressed him enough that he decided to overcome the technical difficulties involved and make the Eidolons controllable . Due to technical restrictions and the presence of the Academy Assist function , the game 's artificial intelligence for playable characters needed to be limited to healing , survival and other minor actions . The game 's multiplayer was deliberately designed around restricted segments . Its development was still ongoing during the summer of 2011 , with a temporary stoppage of PlayStation Network that year negatively affecting its development . Because of the size of the project , debugging the game took far longer than anticipated . Between the release of the demo and the full game , adjustments were made to gameplay mechanics and the in @-@ game camera . In a post @-@ release interview , Tabata commented that he would have liked to expand the multiplayer functions to include an ad @-@ hoc function and expanded cooperative gameplay , and create a more forgiving learning curve for players . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Type @-@ 0 was composed by Takeharu Ishimoto . He had previously composed the music for Before Crisis , Crisis Core and The World Ends with You . Ishimoto gave the music a dark and heavy feel , describing the themes as " war , life , and death " . He used less rock elements than in his previous games to promote a feeling of immersion . One of his primary instruments was the guitar , which Ishimoto played himself during recording sessions . Although the title was for the PSP , the team did not want to hold back despite hardware limitations , recording a quantity of tracks unusual for a spin @-@ off Final Fantasy title . Wherever possible , the recording was done live . The orchestral and choral elements were performed by the Sydney Symphony Orchestra and the <unk> chamber choir , and the recording and mixing of these tracks was done at the Sydney Opera House . Recording for other tracks was done at Ishimoto 's studio in Japan . After recording , Ishimoto combined the orchestral and choral elements , and rearranged the main leitmotifs to create more variety in the score . Arrangements for the orchestral tunes were done by Kentaro Sato , while arrangements for other tracks were done by Rieko <unk> . 
 The game 's theme song , " Zero " , was composed and performed by Japanese rock band Bump of Chicken . The band , which was a big fan of the Final Fantasy series , was contacted by Square Enix to compose and perform the song and agreed readily . It was brought in after the platform move onto the PSP , but while the game was still titled Agito XIII . While looking for inspiration , the band was able to see in @-@ development screenshots of the game , samples of the script , and character illustrations . The band was mostly given a free hand while composing the song . Its one guideline was provided by Tabata , who suggested the theme song for Centuries of Picture , " Is Paris Burning ? " by Takeshi Kako , as a source of inspiration . Multiple versions of " Zero " were composed for use in different areas of the game . At the request of band leader Motoo Fujiwara , Amano 's logo artwork was used for the cover of the single 's limited edition . 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Original Soundtrack was released on October 26 , 2011 . The soundtrack was released in a standard edition , as well as a limited edition that could be purchased both separately and with the collector 's edition of the game . A promotional album featuring five tracks was sold by Square Enix at their booth at the Odaiba Expo 2011 . The album stayed on the Oricon charts for seven weeks , reaching a high of # 25 . The soundtrack has received positive reviews in the west from dedicated music outlets Original Sound Version and Game @-@ OST , with the sites giving both individual tracks and the work in general high praise . " Zero " was released on October 19 , 2011 . It was released as a single instead of being part of the main soundtrack , receiving both a limited and standard edition . The single remained in the Oricon charts for thirty @-@ two weeks , peaking at # 2 . 
 Tracklist 
 Literal translation of the original titles appear in ( brackets ) if different 
 = = Release = = 
 Type @-@ 0 was released on October 27 , 2011 , receiving both physical and digital releases . It was initially announced for release in summer of that year , but unspecified difficulties with development including the stoppage of PlayStation Network caused a delay . It was then announced for released on October 13 , but was delayed by two weeks . While Square Enix stated it wanted to improve its quality , no other information was given . It was speculated to be due to complaints surrounding the camera control and other gameplay elements . The releases of the soundtrack and the theme song were also delayed . Type @-@ 0 was one of a few releases for the PSP to be released on two UMDs , as Tabata wanted to cut as little content as possible , which would have been impossible if they had settled for using one UMD . A demo for the original game was released in August 2011 , featuring seven playable characters and four missions at locked difficulty levels . Sava data could be transferred to the full game , unlocking special costumes and items and keeping experience points . A second demo was released on November 22 , a month after the full game 's release . It replaced the original demo and gave players access to exclusive items and costumes . A collector 's edition was released exclusively through Square Enix 's online store , containing artwork , a limited edition version of the soundtrack , postcards and a booklet of character introductions . The title was later added to their Ultimate Hits budget title collection . 
 Type @-@ 0 has never received an official localization in its original form . During development , while it was still titled Agito XIII , Tabata said he was trying to make the game appealing to North American players . Despite a localization being confirmed as in development in an official guidebook interview , the original version of Type @-@ 0 was not released in the west . In the wake of the game 's release in Japan , 1UP.com and Joystiq speculated that the game could be successfully brought west as a port to the PlayStation Vita . Tabata later commented that the main reasons for the game not being localized were the flagging Western PSP market and uncertainties surrounding the Vita 's commercial success . 
 An unofficial fan translation patch was announced in mid @-@ 2012 . Work on the fan translation took place over the following two years , during which time Square Enix was noncommittal concerning an official Western release . The patch was initially announced for an August 2014 release , but was instead was released on June 9 , 2014 . According to the translation team leader , the patch was downloaded 100 @,@ 000 times in the first four days . It was taken down in July of the same year after Square Enix allegedly threatened unspecified legal action , originally thought to be a cease @-@ and @-@ desist order . Later statements revealed that the patch was released earlier than originally announced due to the lead translator on the project wanting fans to see their achievements , which ended up causing a rift between him and the rest of the team . Before the release , Square Enix and the translation team had been in friendly communication concerning the translation . The formal requests to take the patch down were made in the weeks following its release , shortly before the announcement of Type @-@ 0 HD . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Multiple pieces of merchandise were created for the game . An Ultimania , part of a series of dedicated guidebooks , was released in the same month as the original game . It contained story and character breakdowns , concept art , and interviews with developers . A different book , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 World Preview , was also released in October . It featured character biographies , details on the world of Orience , and interviews with the voice actors for Class Zero . The following year , a dedicated art book was released containing artwork of the game 's characters and monsters , and an interview with Tabata . Characters from the game , including Ace , Machina and other members of Class Zero , appeared in the fourth series of releases for the Final Fantasy Trading Card Game . In November 2011 , a manga adaptation of Type @-@ 0 , illustrated by Takatoshi Shiozawa , began serialization in Young Gangan magazine . The manga has been collected into a tankōbon volume and was released on April 21 , 2012 . Another manga titled Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Side Story : Reaper of the Icy Blade , also illustrated by Shiozawa , began publication in Young Gangan in April 2012 . It ended in January 2014 , with a bonus chapter being published in February of that year , and was later released in five compiled volumes . Yen Press began distribution of the manga in the west in July 2015 . Square Enix released two novel adaptations , in April and June 2012 , depicting an alternate version of Type @-@ 0 's story : Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 : Change the World -The Answer- and Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 : Change the World Volume 2 -The Penultimate <unk> . The novels were written by <unk> Tsukishima . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the first week on sale , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 sold 472 @,@ 253 units , topping Japanese sales charts and selling through 79 @.@ 08 % of its initial shipments . As of January 16 , 2012 , the game had sold 746 @,@ 203 copies in Japan . It was the best @-@ selling game of 2011 for Japanese media retail shop Tsutaya , beating Monster Hunter Portable 3rd ( PlayStation Portable ) and Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 ( PlayStation 3 ) . It was also the store 's best @-@ selling PSP title of the year , followed by Monster Hunter Portable 3rd and Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy . 
 Famitsu and Dengeki PlayStation both praised the story , with Famitsu saying it " vividly portrays the fact that this is a deep , intense Final Fantasy experience , something beyond just a side story " . Gaming website PlayStation LifeStyle 's Heath Hindman was impressed by the darker presentation , calling it " powerful and well done throughout " , and was impressed with the characters despite some awkward introductory scenes . Erren Van Duine , writing for RPG Site , said that fans would appreciate the scale of the narrative , and praised the handling of the Fabula Nova Crystallis mythos . She did note that some plot points seemed only included for the sake of convenience , and that the ending forced a second playthrough to see the whole story . 
 Famitsu called the original version 's gameplay a " <unk> experience " , praising the game 's size and saying the action @-@ oriented battle system made it " a very different Final Fantasy " . Dengeki PlayStation similarly praised its size and the tense combat , though the review found aspects of the navigation less appealing . Hindman was generally positive about most aspects of gameplay and the high replay value , but found faults with the scripted opening of the overworld and the real @-@ time strategy segments . Van Duine said the gameplay encouraged immersion and was harsh on novices ; she praised several aspects of gameplay , but described the leveling system as " tricky " . The multiplayer functions were universally praised in Japan . Opinions were divided on the original camera , with Famitsu praising its movement , while Van Duine and Dengeki PlayStation found issues with it getting stuck in the environment or impeding visibility . The character AI also received criticism for being unresponsive or wayward . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Type @-@ 0 affected several other works in multiple ways . During its development , several staff members and voice actors who had worked on Final Fantasy X reunited . Their meeting triggered the development of Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster . In the September 2013 issue of Famitsu Weekly , Square Enix revealed Final Fantasy Agito , an online companion game to Type @-@ 0 for iOS and Android mobile devices . The game was released in May 2014 , and a localization was announced alongside that of Type @-@ 0 . Its servers were closed down in November 2015 , with its localization being cancelled as a result . A new online game set in the Type @-@ 0 universe , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Online , is set for release in 2016 . 
 While working on Final Fantasy XV , Tabata decided to make a high @-@ definition remaster of Type @-@ 0 for eighth @-@ generation consoles . Developed by Square Enix and HexaDrive , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD was originally announced at E3 2014 , and released worldwide in March 2015 . After Type @-@ 0 's release , Tabata stated in an interview that he wished to explore the distant history of Orience after the events of the game . Trademarks for Type @-@ 1 , Type @-@ 2 and Type @-@ 3 were registered shortly after the Type @-@ 0 trademark , but it was suggested that they were simply a protective measure . During interviews given in 2014 , Tabata commented that he wished to work on Type @-@ 1 after completing XV , and later explained the conceptual Type series as a means of publishing Final Fantasy games too experimental for the main series . He hoped to continue with the Type series if Type @-@ 0 HD was commercially successful . 
 = = Translations = = 
 = The Mansion of Happiness = 
 The Mansion of Happiness : An Instructive Moral and Entertaining Amusement is a children 's board game inspired by Christian morality . Players race about a sixty @-@ six space spiral track depicting virtues and vices with their goal being The Mansion of Happiness at track 's end . Instructions upon virtue spaces advance players toward the goal while those upon vice spaces force them to retreat . 
 The Mansion Of Happiness was designed by George Fox , a children 's author and game designer in England . The first edition , printed in gold ink " containing real gold " using one copper plate engraving and black ink using a second copper plate engraving , produced a few hundred copies . Water coloring was used to complete the game board , making a brilliant , colorful , and expensive product fit for the nobility . Later in 1800 , a second edition was printed , probably for rich but common folk . Only one copper plate was used to print black ink and no water coloring was used . The game must have become quite popular in England as a third edition was printed using two copper plates , one for black , and the second for green lines to indicate blank spaces . Water colors were added to make a beautiful product . Laurie and Whittle published all three editions in 1800 . On all three editions George Fox was listed as the inventor and the game honored the Duchess of York . In the first edition , gold not only added color and price but homage to royalty . In all three editions , the paper was glued to linen so it could fold up and be inserted into a heavy attractively labeled cardboard case . 
 W. & S. B. Ives published the game in the United States in Salem , Massachusetts on November 24 , 1843 . It was republished by Parker Brothers in 1894 after George S. Parker & Co. bought the rights to the Ives games . The republication claimed The Mansion of Happiness was the first board game published in the United States of America ; today , however , the distinction is awarded to Lockwood 's Traveller 's Tour games of 1822 . The popularity of The Mansion of Happiness and similar moralistic board games was challenged in the last decades of the 19th century when the focus of games became materialistic and competitive capitalistic behavior . 
 = = Context = = 
 With the industrialization and urbanization of the United States in the early 19th century , the American middle class experienced an increase in leisure time . The home gradually lost its traditional role as the center of economic production and became the locus of leisure activities and education under the supervision of mothers . As a result , the demand increased for children 's board games emphasizing literacy and Christian principles , morals , and values . Advances in papermaking and printing technology during the era made the publication of inexpensive board games possible , and the technological invention of chromolithography made colorful board games a welcome addition to the parlor tabletop . 
 One of the earliest children 's board games published in America was The Mansion of Happiness ( 1843 ) , " the progenitor of American board games " . Like other children 's games that followed in its wake , The Mansion of Happiness was based on the Puritan world view that Christian virtue and deeds were assurances of happiness and success in life . Even game mechanics were influenced by the Puritan view . A spinner or a top @-@ like teetotum , for instance , was utilized in children 's board games rather than dice , which were then associated with Satan and gambling . While the Puritan view forbade game playing on the Sabbath , The Mansion of Happiness and similar games with high moral content would have been permitted for children in more liberal households . 
 In 1860 , Milton Bradley developed a radically different concept of success in The Checkered Game of Life , the first American board game rewarding players for worldly ventures such as attending college , being elected to Congress , and getting rich . Virtue became a means to an end rather than an end in itself . Daily life was the focus of the game with secular virtues such as thrift , ambition , and neatness receiving more emphasis than religious virtues . Indeed , the only suggestion of religion in Bradley 's game was the marriage altar . The Checkered Game of Life was wildly popular , selling 40 @,@ 000 copies in its first year . 
 Protestant America gradually began viewing the accumulation of material goods and the cultivation of wealth as signs of God 's blessing , and , with the decade of economic expansion and optimism in the 1880s , wealth became the defining characteristic of American success . Protestant values shifted from virtuous Christian living to values based on materialism and competitive , capitalist behavior . Being a good Christian and a successful capitalist were not incompatible . Dice lost their taint during the period , and replaced <unk> in games . 
 In a twist on The Mansion of Happiness , McLoughlin Brothers and Parker Brothers released several games in the late 1880s based on the then @-@ popular <unk> rags to riches theme . Games such as Game of the District Messenger Boy , or Merit Rewarded , Messenger Boy , Game of the Telegraph Boy , and The Office Boy allowed players to emulate the successful capitalist . Players began these games as company underlings , newbies , or <unk> , and , with luck , won the game with a seat in the President 's Office ( rather than a seat in Heaven , as in The Mansion of Happiness ) or as Head of the Firm . In Parker Brothers ' The Office Boy , spaces designating carelessness , inattentiveness , and dishonesty sent the player back on the track while spaces designating capability , earnestness , and honesty advanced him toward the goal . Such games reflected the belief that the enterprising American – regardless of his background , humble or privileged – would be rewarded under the American capitalist system , and insinuated that success was equated with increased social status via the accumulation of wealth . 
 Wealth and goods became game rewards during the last decades of the 19th century with the winner of McLoughlin Brothers ' The Game of Playing Department Store , for instance , being the player who carefully spent his money accumulating the most goods in a department store . Bulls and Bears : The Great Wall St. Game promised players they would feel like " speculators , bankers , and brokers " , and the 1885 catalog advertisement for McLoughlin Brothers Monopolist informed the interested , " On this board the great struggle between Capital and Labor can be fought out to the satisfaction of all parties , and , if the players are successful , they can break the Monopolist and become <unk> themselves " . 
 = = Game play = = 
 The Mansion of Happiness is a roll @-@ and @-@ move track board game , and , typical of such games , the object is to be the first player to reach the goal at the end of the board 's track , here called The Mansion of Happiness ( Heaven ) . Centrally located on the board , the goal pictures happy men and women making music and dancing before a house and garden . To reach The Mansion of Happiness , the player spins a teetotum and races around a sixty @-@ six space spiral track depicting various virtues and vices . 
 Instructions upon spaces depicting virtues move the player closer to The Mansion of Happiness while spaces depicting vices send the player back to the pillory , the House of Correction , or prison , and thus , further from The Mansion of Happiness . Sabbath @-@ breakers are sent to the whipping post . The vice of Pride sends a player back to Humility , and the vice of Idleness to Poverty . The game 's rules noted : 
 " WHOEVER possesses <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ... is entitled to Advance six numbers toward the Mansion of Happiness . WHOEVER gets into a <unk> must be taken to the water and have a ducking to cool him ... WHOEVER <unk> [ ses ] <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> , must return to his former situation till his turn comes to spin again , and not even think of <unk> , much less partake of it . " 
 = = Design and publication = = 
 The Mansion of Happiness was published in many forms , first in England , then in the United States . It was designed by George Fox and published as a linen game board that folded into a hard cover booklet . Laurie and Whittles published three editions of the game in 1800 , and a Laurie relative published it in England again in 1851 . 
 It was first published in the United States by W. & S.B. Ives in Salem , Massachusetts on November 25 , 1843 . Their game was a folding game board with a cloth and cardboard pocket attached to the bottom of the game board along its edge . In the pocket were the rules , implements , and teetotum . Its teetotum was an ivory dowel sharpened to a point at the bottom end inserted in an octagonal ivory plate . This type of teetotum was referred to as a pin and plate teetotum . 
 When board games were published in 1843 , morality was the most important aspect of the game . Since dice were called " the bones of the Devil " because they were used to determine which Roman soldier would keep Christ 's loin cloth , <unk> were used instead . There were many different printings of Ives ' The Mansion of Happiness . 
 FIRST EDITION : The first two print runs used Thayer and Company <unk> , with one litho stone for the color and the other for printing black on the white paper stock . Because the paper of 1840 's through 1890 's included a lavish amount of fiber , often taken from mummy wrappings , it would not fade or decompose like the wood pulp paper used today . The first print run copied the Laurie and Whittles game . Laurie and Whittles used gold ink . Thayer mixed his ink to look gold but it really was a <unk> brown . Like Laurie and Whittles game , Thayer used an octagonal end space . 
 SECOND EDITION : In Thayer 's second print run , in 1844 , he used the same litho stones as used in the first edition . Green was used instead of <unk> brown and the endspace remained an octagon . By September 24 , 1844 , between 3000 and 4000 of the Thayer printed games were sold by its publishers , W. & . S.B. Ives . 
 <unk> EDITION : By the fall of 1844 , Thayer left the lithography business and was replaced by John Bufford , a lithographer who worked for Thayer in Boston from 1939 through 1844 . Previously , from 1835 through 1839 , Bufford owned his own firm in New York under the title Bufford Lithographer . By the end of 1844 through 1851 , the Boston company name was changed to J. H. Bufford & Co . The next , third edition , listed Bufford Lithographer so the third edition must have been printed after the beginning of the fall of 1844 but before the end of 1844 . J. H. Bufford & Co. printed other Ives ' games but this third edition of Ives ' The Mansion Of Happiness is the only Ives ' game to list Bufford Lithographer . Green was again used on one of the litho stones but the end space was a green circle . The other litho stone printed black . 
 <unk> EDITION : Thayer then returned to his business in 1847 . Ives needed another print run of The Mansion Of Happiness that year . So Thayer needed two new litho stones , resulting in the fourth edition . Thayer again printed one color in black and one color in green and changed the endspace back to a green octagon . The entire game board looked different from his first two print runs . Thayer 's first and second edition litho stones were either no longer usable or ground down and redrawn for other lithographs . On the new " black printing " litho stone the position of " Thayer and Company <unk> " was moved . The new " green printing " litho stone not only included green printing for unnamed spaces but also for corner decorations and to highlight the beginning of the banner . 
 FIFTH EDITION : Another Thayer edition was needed between 1847 and 1853 , so splitting the difference results in 1850 . We know this because the lithography is different from the 1847 edition . The " green printing " litho stone had apparently been damaged or over used so the green printing at the beginning of the banner was removed . 
 <unk> EDITION : Yet another Thayer <unk> was needed in early 1853 . Thayer was about to leave his Boston business for the final time , but finished the job for the Ives firm . This sixth edition resulted from another need to redraw the green printing litho stone . Green was removed from the banner and corners , and , only the blank spaces were printed in green . 
 <unk> EDITION : When Thayer left , his brother @-@ in @-@ law , S. W. Chandler took over the business in late 1853 @.@ so a seventh edition was needed by the beginning of 1854 . Two new litho stones were made . Chandler printed black using one stone and green with the other . The endspace was changed back to a green circle . There are at least two known copies of the Chandler edition , one was owned by deceased game historian Lee Dennis . Another is owned by a charter member of The American Game Collectors Association . 
 <unk> EDITION : William and Stephen Bradshaw Ives dissolved their partnership on April 24 , 1854 . William then put most of his time managing his newspaper , The Salem Observer . Stephen Bradshaw held the copyrights for the games and started a fancy goods importing business in Boston while overseeing the Salem business owned by a partnership of his youngest son , Henry P. Ives , and Henry 's partner , Augustus Smith at the same business location . A new Mansion Of Happiness print run was needed but Chandler was no longer in business , With control of the copyright , the Ives family chose <unk> F.F. <unk> . Consequently Ives and Smith could sell The Mansion Of Happiness in Salem but had no right to the copyright . F. F. <unk> needed to two new litho stones so the eighth edition was created . One stone was used to print black and the other to print green . The circle endspace was retained . In addition to continue publishing The Mansion of Happiness , H. P. Ives and A. A. Weeks published at least two new games : Experts and Tournament & Knighthood . 
 <unk> EDITION : By December 21 , 1860 , Henry P. Ives bought out A. A. Smith to obtain the business . A. A. Smith then partnered with G. M. Whipple to form another bookstore and publishing business where they published The Game of Authors . Henry P. Ives continued to publish The Mansion of Happiness using other lithographers , including Taylor & Adams of Boston in 1864 , Henry P. Ives was free to publish The Mansion Of Happiness and other Ives ' games under his name , his brother 's name , and his father 's name . 
 <unk> EDITION : In 1886 , Henry P. Ives sold his remaining inventory to George S. Parker . George S. Parker reprinted the green cover label to read H. P. Ives , Geo . S. Parker & Co. and affixed this label to the back of the gameboard over the original H. P. Ives label . By 1888 , Henry P. Ives sold all the game rights of the Ives family to Geo . S. Parker & Co . , part of them in 1887 and the rest of them in 1888 . The green printing and circle end space remained through different lithographers until 1886 . 
 <unk> EDITION : Parker Brothers published the eleventh edition in 1894 . They continued to print this 1894 edition well into the early 1900s . 
 <unk> EDITION : McLoughlin Brothers of New York published their own edition in 1895 , using different lithographs from the 1894 Parker Brothers edition , both on the game box cover and game board . 
 <unk> EDITION : In 1926 , Parker Brothers Inc. republished The Mansion of Happiness in its original form , with minor modification to game spaces . The game included the circular end space introduced by J. Bufford in the third edition . This sixth edition used a folding game board with a fabric and cardboard pocket on the back edge of the game board . The teetotum was made using a wood dowel and cardboard hexagon . 
 = = Misconceptions = = 
 Anne Wales Abbot was believed to be the designer of the Ives ' game , The Mansion of <unk> for over 145 years , from 1843 to 1989 . She , however , did not design Ives The Mansion of Happiness but did design two other Ives ' games : Dr. Busby and Master Rodbury and His Pupils . 
 As further proof , Anne Wales Abbot was busy designing The Game Of Racers for Crosby and Nichols of Boston , an Ives 's competitor . According to The Salem Observer , The Game Of Racers went on sale in Salem , Massachusetts through J. P. Jewett on January 13 , 1844 . It went on sale in Boston even earlier . Abbot would have been working with Crosby and Nichols in Boston while the Ives firm published The Mansion Of Happiness . 
 The Mansion of Happiness was considered the first mass @-@ produced board game in the United States for almost 100 years . In 1886 , George S. Parker purchased some of Ives ' inventory from Henry P. Ives , who had taken over the Ives ' business . George had his own oversized green label printed and proceeded to glue it over the Ives label . When the last of the Ives brothers died in 1888 , board game titans Charles and George Parker purchased the rights to The Mansion of Happiness . In 1894 , Parker Brothers republished The Mansion of Happiness in their new patented box . The game came with a cover on top of a box . The game board was attached to the top of the box and a drawer was added to the box for the implements and spinner . A teetotum was no longer needed as a metal pointer could be attached to a lithographed card using a pop rivet . The pointer could then spin around to produce a random number . The game board and box top were printed using lithography , making the game look like a work of art . Some of the vice spaces were removed ( those depicting women engaged in immoral acts and behaviors ) , and men were substituted for women in the House of Correction . The game remained in the Parker Brothers catalog for thirty years , displaying the line , " The first board game ever published in America " on its box cover . 
