 In 1895 , the New York game firm of McLoughlin Brothers printed and published another version of The Mansion of Happiness . The McLoughlin version used even better artwork than the Parker Brothers version which makes it more valuable to collectors . The McLoughlin version used a game box with the game board attached to the inside bottom of the box . <unk> and spinner were simply placed in the box . 
 The distinction of " the first published American board game " however is awarded today to Traveller 's Tour of the United States published by New York book sellers F. & R. Lockwood in 1822 . Because printing of game boards was more difficult in 1822 than 1843 , the term mass market is a gray area . In 1822 reversed etched copper plates were used to print game boards . After the first 2 @,@ 000 impressions , breaks quickly appeared in lines . Games were so expensive , the people who could afford them did not want game boards they could not read . By 1843 , lithography with water color painting was popular . <unk> could easily produce 40 @,@ 000 perfect impressions . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With The Mansion Of Happiness published from 1800 in England to 1926 in The United States , it is the longest continuously published board game with a known designer , George Fox . That totals 126 years of continuous publication . Obviously Chess , <unk> ( Checkers ) , Go , and many other board games have been continuously published for a longer time , but no one knows the designer of these games . 
 = Louis Lambert ( novel ) = 
 Louis Lambert is an 1832 novel by French novelist and playwright Honoré de Balzac ( 1799 – 1850 ) , included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine . Set mostly in a school at Vendôme , it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg ( 1688 – 1772 ) . 
 Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché , and published three editions with three different titles . The novel contains a minimal plot , focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy @-@ genius protagonist and his only friend ( eventually revealed to be Balzac himself ) . Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous , the novel provides insight into the author 's own childhood . Specific details and events from the author 's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography . 
 While he was a student at Vendôme , Balzac wrote an essay called Traité de la Volonté ( " Treatise on the Will " ) ; it is described in the novel as being written by Louis Lambert . The essay discusses the philosophy of Swedenborg and others , although Balzac did not explore many of the metaphysical concepts until much later in his life . Ideas analyzed in the essay and elsewhere in the novel include the split between inward and outward existence ; the presence of angels and spiritual enlightenment ; and the interplay between genius and madness . 
 Although critics panned the novel , Balzac remained steadfast in his belief that it provided an important look at philosophy , especially metaphysics . As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine , he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section , and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta , about an androgynous angelic creature . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1832 , Honoré de Balzac had begun to make a name for himself as a writer . The second of five children , Balzac was sent to the Oratorian College de Vendôme at the age of eight . He returned from the school six years later , sickly and weak . He was taught by tutors and private schools for two and a half years , then attended the Sorbonne in Paris . After training as a law clerk for three years , he moved into a tiny garret in 1819 and began writing . 
 His first efforts , published under a variety of pseudonyms , were cheaply printed potboiler novels . In 1829 he finally released a novel under his own name , titled Les Chouans ; it was a minor success , though it did not earn the author enough money to relieve his considerable debt . He found fame soon afterwards with a series of novels including La Physiologie du mariage ( 1829 ) , Sarrasine ( 1830 ) , and La Peau de chagrin ( 1831 ) . 
 In 1831 Balzac published a short story called " Les Proscrits " ( " The Exiles " ) , about two poets named Dante and Godefroid de Gand who attend the Sorbonne at the start of the fourteenth century . It explores questions of metaphysics and mysticism , particularly the spiritual quest for <unk> and enlightenment . Balzac had been influenced greatly as a young man by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg , whose theories permeate " Les Proscrits " . The story was published – alongside La Peau de chagrin , which also delves into metaphysics – as part of an 1831 collection entitled Romans et contes philosophiques ( " Philosophical novels and stories " ) . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 In May 1832 , Balzac suffered a head injury when his <unk> carriage crashed in a Parisian street . Although he was not hurt badly , he wrote to a friend about his worry that " some of the cogs in the mechanism of my brain may have got out of adjustment " . His doctor ordered him to rest and refrain from writing and other mental activity . When he had recuperated , he spent the summer at the Château de Saché , just outside the city of Tours , with a family friend , Jean de <unk> . 
 While in Saché , he wrote a short novel called Notice <unk> sur Louis Lambert about a misfit boy genius interested in metaphysics . Like " Les Proscrits " , Louis Lambert was a vehicle for Balzac to explore the ideas that had fascinated him , particularly those of Swedenborg and Louis Claude de Saint @-@ Martin . He hoped the work would " produce an effect of incontestable superiority " . and provide " a glorious rebuttal " to critics who ridiculed his interest in metaphysics . 
 The novel was first published as part of the Nouveaux contes philosophiques in late 1832 , but by the start of the following year he declared it to be " a wretched miscarriage " and began rewriting it . During the process , Balzac was aided by a grammarian working as a proofreader , who found " a thousand errors " in the text . Once he had returned home , the author " cried with despair and with that rage that takes hold of you when you recognize your faults after working so hard " . 
 A vastly expanded and revised novel , Histoire <unk> de L.L. , was published as a single volume in 1833 . Balzac , still unsatisfied , continued reworking the text – as he often did between editions – and included a series of letters written by the boy genius , as well as a detailed description of his metaphysical theories . This final edition was released as Louis Lambert , included with " Les Proscrits " and a later work , Séraphîta , in a volume entitled Le Livre mystique ( " The Mystical Book " ) . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel begins with an overview of the main character 's background . Louis Lambert , the only child of a tanner and his wife , is born in 1797 and begins reading at an early age . In 1811 he meets the real @-@ life Swiss author Madame de Staël ( 1766 – 1817 ) , who – struck by his intellect – pays for him to enroll in the Collège de Vendôme . There he meets the narrator , a classmate named " the Poet " who later identifies himself in the text as Balzac ; they quickly become friends . Shunned by the other students and berated by teachers for not paying attention , the boys bond through discussions of philosophy and mysticism . 
 After completing an essay entitled Traité de la Volonté ( " Treatise on the Will " ) , Lambert is horrified when a teacher confiscates it , calls it " rubbish " , and – the narrator speculates – sells it to a local grocer . Soon afterwards , a serious illness forces the narrator to leave the school . In 1815 , Lambert graduates at the age of eighteen and lives for three years in Paris . After returning to his uncle 's home in Blois , he meets a woman named Pauline de <unk> and falls passionately in love with her . On the day before their wedding , however , he suffers a mental breakdown and attempts to castrate himself . 
 Declared " incurable " by doctors , Lambert is ordered into solitude and rest . Pauline takes him to her family 's château , where he lives in a near coma . The narrator , ignorant of these events , meets Lambert 's uncle by chance , and is given a series of letters . Written by Lambert while in Paris and Blois , they continue his philosophical musings and describe his love for Pauline . The narrator visits his old friend at the <unk> château , where the decrepit Lambert says only : " The angels are white . " Pauline shares a series of statements her lover had dictated , and Lambert dies on 25 September 1824 at the age of twenty @-@ eight . 
 = = Style = = 
 The actual events of Louis Lambert are secondary to extended discussions of philosophy ( especially metaphysics ) and human emotion . Because the novel does not employ the same sort of realism for which Balzac became famous , it has been called one of " the most diffuse and least valuable of his works " . Whereas many Balzac stories focus on the external world , Louis Lambert examines many aspects of the thought process and the life of the mind . Many critics , however , condemn the author 's disorganized style and his placement of his own mature philosophies into the mind of a teenage boy . 
 Still , shades of Balzac 's realism are found in the book , particularly in the first @-@ hand descriptions of the Collège de Vendôme . The first part of the novel is replete with details about the school , describing how quarters were inspected and the complex social rules for exchanging dishes at dinnertime . Punishments are also described at length , including the assignment of tedious writing tasks and the painful application of the strap : 
 Of all the physical torments to which we were exposed , certainly the most acute was that inflicted by this <unk> instrument , about two fingers wide , applied to our poor little hands with all the strength and all the fury of the administrator . To endure this classical form of correction , the victim knelt in the middle of the room . He had to leave his form and go to kneel down near the master 's desk under the curious and generally merciless eyes of his fellows .... Some boys cried out and shed bitter tears before or after the application of the strap ; others accepted the infliction with stoic calm ... but few could control an expression of anguish in anticipation . 
 Further signs of Balzac 's realism appear when Lambert describes his ability to vicariously experience events through thought alone . In one extended passage , he describes reading about the Battle of Austerlitz and seeing " every incident " . In another he imagines the physical pain of a knife cutting his skin . As Balzac 's biographer André Maurois notes , these reflections provide insight into the author 's perspective toward the world and its written representations . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Biographers and critics agree that Louis Lambert is a thinly veiled version of the author , evidenced by numerous similarities between them . As a student at the Collège de Vendôme , Balzac was friends with a boy named Louis @-@ Lambert <unk> . Like the title character , Balzac 's faith was shaken at the time of his first communion . Balzac read voraciously while in school , and – like Lambert – was often punished for misbehaving in class . The precise details of the school also reflect Balzac 's time there : as described in the novel , students were allowed to keep pigeons and tend gardens , and holidays were spent in the dormitories . 
 Lambert 's essay about metaphysics , Traité de la Volonté ( " Treatise on the Will " ) , is another autobiographical reference . Balzac wrote the essay himself as a boy , and – as in the novel – it was confiscated by an angry teacher . Lambert 's genius and philosophical erudition are reflections of Balzac 's self @-@ conception . Similarly , some critics and biographers have suggested that Lambert 's madness reflects ( consciously or not ) Balzac 's own unsteady mental state . His plans to run for parliament and other non @-@ literary ambitions led observers at the time to suspect his sanity . 
 The many letters in the novel written by Lambert are also based on Balzac 's life . After finishing the first version of the book , Balzac tried to win the heart of the Marquise de Castries by sending her a fragmented love letter from the book . Lambert 's letters to his uncle about life in Paris from 1817 to 1820 , meanwhile , mirror Balzac 's own sentiments while attending the Sorbonne at the same time . 
 = = = Swedenborg and metaphysics = = = 
 The ideas of Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg ( and his disciple Louis Claude de Saint @-@ Martin ) are central to Louis Lambert . Madame de Staël is impressed by Lambert when she finds him in a park reading Swedenborg 's metaphysical treatise Heaven and Hell ( 1758 ) ; the Swedish writer 's ideas are later reproduced in Lambert 's own comments about mind , soul , and will . Primary among these is the division of the human into an " inward " and " outward " being . The outward being , subject to the forces of nature and studied by science , manifests itself in Lambert as the frail , frequently sick boy . The inward being , meanwhile , contains what Lambert calls " the material substance of thought " , and serves as the true life into which he gradually moves throughout the novel . 
 Swedenborg 's concepts are explored with relation to language , pain , memory , and dreams . When the students take a trip to the nearby Château de Rochambeau , for example , Lambert , who has never visited the château , nevertheless recalls vivid memories of the place from a dream . Believing his spirit visited the place while his body slept , he ascribes the experience to " a complete severance of my body and my inner being " and " some inscrutable locomotive faculty in the spirit with effects resembling those of locomotion in the body " . 
 Like his heroes Swedenborg and Saint @-@ Martin , Balzac attempts in Louis Lambert to construct a viable theory to unify spirit and matter . Young Lambert attempts this goal in his Traité de la Volonté , which – having been confiscated by a teacher – is described by the narrator : 
 The word Will he used to connote ... the mass of power by which man can reproduce , outside himself , the actions constituting his external life .... The word Mind , or Thought , which he regarded as the quintessential product of the Will , also represented the medium in which the ideas originate to which thought gives substance .... Thus the Will and the Mind were the two generating forces ; the Volition and the Idea were the two products . Volition , he thought , was the Idea evolved from the abstract state to a concrete state , from its generative fluid to a solid expression .... According to him , the Mind and Ideas are the motion and the outcome of our inner organization , just as the Will and Volition are of our external activity . He gave the Will precedence over the Mind . 
 The exploration of human will and thought is linked to Balzac 's interest in Franz Mesmer , who postulated the theory of animal magnetism , a force flowing among humans . The narrator invokes Mesmer twice in the text , and describes a section of the Traité de la Volonté which reflects the animal @-@ magnetic theory . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Balzac 's spiritual crisis at the time of his first communion led him to explore the first Christian thinkers and the question of evil . As the French critic Philippe <unk> points out , much of the mysticism in Louis Lambert is related to that of early Christianity . In his letters , Lambert describes exploring the philosophies of Christianity , Hinduism , Buddhism , Islam , and Confucianism , among others . Tracing the similarities among these traditions , he declares that Swedenborg " undoubtedly epitomizes all of the religions — or rather the one religion — of humanity " . The same theory informs Balzac 's efforts , in Louis Lambert and elsewhere , to complement his Christian beliefs with occult mysticism and secular realism . 
 The church itself is a subject of Lambert 's meditations , particularly with regard to the early Christian martyrs . The split between inward and outward realities , he suggests , serves to explain the ability of those being tortured and maimed to escape physical suffering through the will of the spirit . As Lambert says : " Do not the phenomena observed in almost every instance of the torments so heroically endured by the early Christians for the establishment of the faith , amply prove that Material force will never prevail against the force of Ideas or the Will of man ? " This inward – outward split also serves to explain the Miracles attributed to Jesus , whom Lambert considers a " perfect " representation of unity between the two beings . 
 The religious theme later appears in passages relating to angels . Discussing the contents of Swedenborg 's Heaven and Hell , Lambert tries to convince the narrator of the existence of angels , described as " an individual in whom the inner being conquers the outer being " . The boy genius himself is seen as an example of this process : his physical body withers and sickens , while his spiritual enlightenment expands , reaching its apex with his comment to the narrator : " The angels are white . " Pauline , meanwhile , is described as " the angel " and " Angel @-@ woman " . Their parallel angelic states merge into what critic Charles <unk> calls " a kind of perfect marriage , a spiritual bond that traverses this world and the next " . Balzac later returned to the question of angels in other works of the Études philosophiques , particularly Séraphîta . 
 = = = Genius and madness = = = 
 Convinced that he was himself a genius , Balzac used Louis Lambert to explore the difficulty of geniuses in society , as well as their frequent progression into madness . He had been troubled greatly when , at Vendôme , he watched a schoolmate 's mental condition deteriorate severely . Lambert 's madness is represented most vividly in his attempt at self @-@ castration , followed by years spent in a catatonic state . This transformation is in many ways a byproduct of his genius ; because his brilliance is condemned by teachers and incompatible with the society of the other children , Lambert finds himself rejected by the world . He finds no more success in Paris , where he is led to " eat my heart out in misery " . He becomes a vegetable , removed from the physical world entirely . 
 As a reflection of Balzac himself , Lambert also embodies the author 's self @-@ image as a brilliant writer , but one who acknowledges suspicions about his mental health . Some of his stories and public statements – as well as his fall prior to writing the novel – had led some observers to question Balzac 's sanity . The protagonist 's madness in Louis Lambert only added weight to these claims . As biographer Graham Robb writes : " It was typical of Balzac to douse a fire with petrol . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Balzac was fiercely proud of Louis Lambert and believed that it elegantly represented his diverse interests in philosophy , mysticism , religion , and occultism . When he sent an early draft to his lover at the time , however , she predicted the negative reception it would receive . " Let the whole world see you for themselves , my dearest , " she wrote , " but do not cry out to them to admire you , because then the most powerful magnifying glasses will be directed at you , and what becomes of the most exquisite object when it is put under a microscope ? " Critical reaction was overwhelmingly negative , due mostly to the book 's lack of sustaining narrative . Conservative commentator Eugène Poitou , on the other hand , accused Balzac of lacking true faith and portraying the French family as a vile institution . 
 Balzac was undeterred by the negative reactions ; referring to Louis Lambert and the other works in Le Livre mystique , he wrote : " Those are books that I create for myself and for a few others . " Although he was often critical of Balzac 's work , French author Gustave Flaubert was influenced – perhaps unconsciously – by the book . His own story " La <unk> " , written in the 1850s , bears a strong plot resemblance to Balzac 's 1832 novel . 
 While the three editions of Louis Lambert were being revised and published , Balzac was developing a scheme to organize all of his novels – written and unwritten . He called the scheme La Comédie humaine ( " The Human Comedy " ) , and envisioned it as a panoramic look at every part of French life at the time . He placed Louis Lambert in the section named Études philosophiques ( " Philosophical Studies " ) , where it remained throughout his fifteen @-@ year refinement of the project . He returned to the themes of the novel in his later work Séraphîta , which follows the travails of an androgynous angelic creature . Balzac also inserted Lambert and his lover Pauline into later works – as he often did with characters from earlier novels – most notably in the story " Un Drame au bord de la mer " ( " A Drama at the Sea 's Edge " ) . 
 = Tamar of Georgia = 
 Tamar the Great ( Georgian : <unk> ) ( c . 1160 – 18 January 1213 ) reigned as Queen regnant of Georgia from 1184 to 1213 , presiding over the apex of the Georgian Golden Age . A member of the Bagrationi dynasty , her position as the first woman to rule Georgia in her own right was emphasized by the title mep 'e ( " king " ) , commonly afforded to Tamar in the medieval Georgian sources . 
 Tamar was proclaimed heir and co @-@ ruler by her reigning father George III in 1178 , but she faced significant opposition from the aristocracy upon her ascension to full ruling powers after George 's death . Tamar was successful in neutralizing this opposition and embarked on an energetic foreign policy aided by the decline of the hostile Seljuq Turks . Relying on a powerful military élite , Tamar was able to build on the successes of her predecessors to consolidate an empire which dominated the Caucasus until its collapse under the Mongol attacks within two decades after Tamar 's death . 
 Tamar was married twice , her first union being , from 1185 to 1187 , to the Rus ' prince Yuri , whom she divorced and expelled from the country , defeating his subsequent coup attempts . For her second consort Tamar chose , in 1191 , the Alan prince David Soslan , by whom she had two children , George and Rusudan , the two successive monarchs on the throne of Georgia . 
 Tamar 's association with the period of political and military successes and cultural achievements , combined with her role as a female ruler , has led to her idealization and romanticization in Georgian arts and historical memory . She remains an important symbol in Georgian popular culture and has been canonized by the Georgian Orthodox Church as the Holy Righteous King Tamar ( Georgian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ts <unk> k <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , with her feast day commemorated on 14 May ( O.S. 1 May ) . 
 = = Early life and ascent to the throne = = 
 Tamar was born in circa 1160 to George III , King of Georgia , and his consort <unk> , a daughter of the king of <unk> . While it is possible that Tamar had a younger sister , Rusudan , she is only mentioned once in all contemporary accounts of Tamar 's reign . The name Tamar is of Hebrew origin and , like other biblical names , was favored by the Georgian Bagrationi dynasty because of their claim to be descended from David , the second king of Israel . 
 Tamar 's youth coincided with a major upheaval in Georgia ; in 1177 , her father , George III , was confronted by a rebellious faction of nobles . The rebels intended to dethrone George in favor of the king 's fraternal nephew , Demna , who was considered by many to be a legitimate royal heir of his murdered father , David V. Demna 's cause was little but a pretext for the nobles , led by the pretender 's father @-@ in @-@ law , the <unk> ( " constable " ) Ivane Orbeli , to weaken the crown . George III was able to crush the revolt and embarked on a crackdown campaign on the defiant aristocratic clans ; Ivane Orbeli was put to death and the surviving members of his family were driven out of Georgia . Prince Demna , castrated and blinded on his uncle 's order , did not survive the mutilation and soon died in prison . Once the rebellion was suppressed and the pretender eliminated , George went ahead to co @-@ opt Tamar into government with him and crowned her as co @-@ ruler in 1178 . By doing so , the king attempted to preempt any dispute after his death and legitimize his line on the throne of Georgia . At the same time , he raised men from the gentry and unranked classes to keep the dynastic aristocracy away from the center of power . 
 = = Early reign and the first marriage = = 
 For six years , Tamar was a co @-@ ruler with her father upon whose death , in 1184 , Tamar continued as the sole monarch and was crowned a second time at the Gelati cathedral near Kutaisi , western Georgia . She inherited a relatively strong kingdom , but the centrifugal tendencies fostered by the great nobles were far from being quelled . There was considerable opposition to Tamar 's succession ; this was sparked by a reaction against the repressive policies of her father and encouraged by the new sovereign 's other perceived weakness , her sex . As Georgia had never previously had a female ruler , a part of the aristocracy questioned Tamar 's legitimacy , while others tried to exploit her youth and supposed weakness to assert greater autonomy for themselves . The energetic involvement of Tamar 's influential aunt Rusudan and the Georgian Catholicos @-@ Patriarch Michael IV <unk> was crucial for legitimizing Tamar 's succession to the throne . However , the young queen was forced into making significant concessions to the aristocracy . She had to reward the Catholicos @-@ Patriarch Michael 's support by making him a chancellor , thus placing him at the top of both the clerical and secular hierarchies . 
 Tamar was also pressured into dismissing her father 's appointees , among them the constable <unk> ( <unk> ) , a Georgian Kipchak of ignoble birth , who had helped George III in his crackdown on the defiant nobility . One of the few untitled servitors of George III to escape this fate was the treasurer <unk> Arslan who now led a group of nobles and wealthy citizens in a struggle to limit the royal authority by creating a new council , <unk> , whose members would alone deliberate and decide policy . This attempt at " feudal constitutionalism " was rendered abortive when Tamar had <unk> Arslan arrested and his supporters were inveigled into submission . Yet , Tamar 's first moves to reduce the power of the aristocratic élite were unsuccessful . She failed in her attempt to use a church synod to dismiss the Catholicos @-@ Patriarch Michael , and the noble council , <unk> , asserted the right to approve royal decrees . Even the queen 's first husband , the Rus ' prince Yuri , was forced on her by the nobles . 
 Pursuant to dynastic imperatives and the ethos of the time , the nobles required Tamar to marry in order to have a leader for the army and to provide an heir to the throne . Their choice fell on Yuri , son of the murdered prince Andrei I Bogolyubsky of Vladimir @-@ Suzdal , who then lived as a refugee among the <unk> of the North Caucasus . The choice was approved by Tamar 's aunt Rusudan and the prince was brought to Georgia to marry the queen in 1185 . Yuri proved to be an able soldier , but a difficult person and he soon ran afoul of his wife . The strained spousal relations paralleled a factional struggle at the royal court in which Tamar was becoming more and more assertive of her rights as a queen regnant . The turning point in Tamar 's fortunes came with the death of the powerful Catholicos @-@ Patriarch Michael whom the queen replaced , as a chancellor , with her supporter , Anton <unk> . Tamar gradually expanded her own power @-@ base and elevated her loyal nobles to high positions at the court , most notably the Zakarids @-@ Mkhargrzeli . 
 = = Second marriage = = 
 In 1187 , Tamar persuaded the noble council to approve her to divorce Yuri , who was accused of addiction to drunkenness and " sodomy " and was sent off to Constantinople . Assisted by several Georgian aristocrats anxious to check Tamar 's growing power , Yuri made two coup attempts , but failed and went off to obscurity after 1191 . The queen chose her second husband herself . He was David Soslan , an Alan prince , to whom the 18th @-@ century Georgian scholar Prince <unk> ascribes descent from the early 11th @-@ century Georgian king George I. David , a capable military commander , became Tamar 's major supporter and was instrumental in defeating the rebellious nobles who rallied behind Yuri . 
 Tamar and David had two children . In 1192 or 1194 , the queen gave birth to a son , George @-@ Lasha , the future king George IV . The daughter , Rusudan , was born c . 1195 and would succeed her brother as a sovereign of Georgia . 
 David Soslan 's status of a king consort , as well as his presence in art , on charters , and on coins , was dictated by the necessity of male aspects of kingship , but he remained a subordinate ruler who shared the throne with and derived his power from Tamar . Tamar continued to be styled as mep ’ et ’ a mep ’ e – " king of kings " . In Georgian , a language with no grammatical genders , mep 'e ( " king " ) does not necessarily imply a masculine connotation and can be rendered as a " sovereign " . The female equivalent of mep 'e is <unk> 'ali ( " queen " ) , which was applied to queens consort or the king 's closest , senior female relatives . Tamar is occasionally called <unk> 'ali in the Georgian chronicles and on some charters . Thus , the title of mep 'e might have been applied to Tamar to mark out her unique position among women . 
 = = Foreign policy and military campaigns = = 
 = = = Muslim neighbors = = = 
 Once Tamar succeeded in consolidating her power and found a reliable support in David Soslan , the Zakarids @-@ Mkhargrzeli , <unk> , and other noble families , she revived the expansionist foreign policy of her predecessors . Repeated occasions of dynastic strife in Georgia combined with the efforts of regional successors of the Great Seljuq Empire , such as the <unk> <unk> of Azerbaijan , Shirvanshahs , and the <unk> , had slowed down the dynamic of the Georgians achieved during the reigns of Tamar 's great @-@ grandfather , David IV , and her father , George III . However , the Georgians became again active under Tamar , more prominently in the second decade of her rule . 
 Early in the 1190s , the Georgian government began to interfere in the affairs of the <unk> and of the Shirvanshahs , aiding rivaling local princes and reducing Shirvan to a tributary state . The <unk> atabeg Abu Bakr attempted to stem the Georgian advance , but suffered a defeat at the hands of David Soslan at the Battle of <unk> and lost his capital to a Georgian protégé in 1195 . Although Abu Bakr was able to resume his reign a year later , the <unk> were only barely able to contain further Georgian forays . 
 In 1199 , Tamar 's armies led by two Christianised Kurdish generals , Zak 'are and Ivane Zakarid @-@ Mkhargrzeli , dislodged the Shaddadid dynasty from Ani , the erstwhile capital of the Armenian kingdom , and received it from the queen as their fief . From their base at Ani , the brothers surged ahead into the central Armenian lands , reclaiming one after another fortresses and districts from local Muslim rulers : <unk> was taken in 1201 and Dvin fell in 1203 . 
 Alarmed by the Georgian successes , <unk> II , the resurgent <unk> sultan of Rûm , rallied his vassal emirs and marched against Georgia , but his camp was attacked and destroyed by David Soslan at the Battle of <unk> in 1203 or 1204 . The chronicler of Tamar describes how the army was assembled at the rock @-@ hewn town of <unk> before marching on to <unk> and how the queen addressed the troops from the balcony of the church . 
 The Zakarids @-@ Mkhargrzeli captured Kars on behalf of the Georgian crown in 1206 , but were repelled from the walls of Akhlat in 1209 . This brought the struggle for the Armenian lands to a stall , leaving the Lake Van region in a relatively secure possession of its new masters – the Ayyubids of Damascus . In 1209 , the brothers Zakarids @-@ Mkhargrzeli laid waste to Ardabil – according to the Georgian and Armenian annals – as a revenge for the local Muslim ruler 's attack on Ani and his massacre of the city 's Christian population . In a great final burst , the brothers led an army marshaled throughout Tamar 's possessions and vassal territories in a march , through Nakhchivan and Julfa , to <unk> , Tabriz , and Qazvin in northwest Iran , pillaging several settlements on their way . 
 = = = Trebizond and the Middle East = = = 
 Among the remarkable events of Tamar 's reign was the foundation of the Empire of Trebizond on the Black Sea coast in 1204 . This state was established by Alexios I Megas Komnenos ( r . 1204 – 1222 ) and his brother , David , in the northeastern Pontic provinces of the crumbling Byzantine Empire with the aid of Georgian troops . Alexios and David , Tamar 's relatives , were fugitive Byzantine princes raised at the Georgian court . According to Tamar 's historian , the aim of the Georgian expedition to Trebizond was to punish the Byzantine emperor Alexios IV Angelos ( r . 1203 – 1204 ) for his confiscation of a shipment of money from the Georgian queen to the monasteries of Antioch and Mount Athos . However , Tamar 's Pontic endeavor can better be explained by her desire to take advantage of the Western European Fourth Crusade against Constantinople to set up a friendly state in Georgia 's immediate southwestern neighborhood , as well as by the dynastic solidarity to the dispossessed Komnenoi . 
 Tamar sought to make use of the weakness of the Byzantine Empire and the Crusaders ' defeat at the hands of the Ayyubid sultan Saladin in order to gain Georgia 's position on the international stage and to assume the traditional role of the Byzantine crown as a protector of the Christians of the Middle East . Christian Georgian missionaries were active in the North Caucasus and the expatriate monastic communities were scattered throughout the Eastern Mediterranean . Tamar 's chronicle praises her universal protection of Christianity and her support of churches and monasteries from Egypt to Bulgaria and Cyprus . 
 The Georgian court was primarily concerned with the protection of the Georgian monastic centers in the Holy Land . By the 12th century , eight Georgian monasteries were listed in Jerusalem . Saladin 's biographer , <unk> ' ad @-@ Dīn ibn <unk> , reports that after the Ayyubid conquest of Jerusalem in 1187 , Tamar sent envoys to the sultan to request that the confiscated possessions of the Georgian monasteries in Jerusalem be returned . Saladin 's response is not recorded , but the queen 's efforts seem to have been successful : Jacques de Vitry , who attained to the bishopric of Acre shortly after Tamar 's death , gives further evidence of the Georgians ’ presence in Jerusalem . He writes that the Georgians were – in contrast to the other Christian pilgrims – allowed a free passage into the city , with their banners unfurled . Ibn <unk> furthermore claims that Tamar outbid the Byzantine emperor in her efforts to obtain the relics of the True Cross , offering 200 @,@ 000 gold pieces to Saladin who had taken the relics as booty at the Battle of Hattin – to no avail , however . 
 = = Golden age = = 
 = = = Feudal monarchy = = = 
 Georgia 's political and cultural exploits of Tamar 's epoch were rooted in a long and complex past . Tamar owed her accomplishments most immediately to the reforms of her great @-@ grandfather David IV ( r . 1089 – 1125 ) and , more remotely , to the unifying efforts of David III and Bagrat III who became architects of a political unity of Georgian kingdoms and principalities in the opening decade of the 11th century . Tamar was able to build upon their successes . By the last years of Tamar 's reign , the Georgian state had reached the zenith of its power and prestige in the Middle Ages . Tamar 's realm stretched from the Greater Caucasus crest in the north to Erzurum in the south , and from the <unk> in the northwest to the vicinity of Ganja in the southeast , forming a pan @-@ Caucasian empire , with the loyal <unk> regime in northern and central Armenia , Shirvan as a vassal and Trebizond as an ally . A contemporary Georgian historian extols Tamar as the master of the lands " from the Sea of Pontus [ i.e. , the Black Sea ] to the Sea of <unk> [ i.e. , the Caspian Sea ] , from <unk> to <unk> , and all the Hither and the Thither Caucasus up to Khazaria and Scythia . " 
 The royal title was correspondingly <unk> . It now reflected not only Tamar 's sway over the traditional subdivisions of the Georgian realm , but also included new components , emphasizing the Georgian crown 's hegemony over the neighboring lands . Thus , on the coins and charters issued in her name , Tamar is identified as : 
 The queen never achieved autocratic powers and the noble council continued to function . However , Tamar 's own prestige and the expansion of <unk> <unk> – a Georgian version of feudalism – kept the more powerful dynastic princes from fragmenting the kingdom . This was a classical period in the history of Georgian feudalism . Attempts at transplanting feudal practices in the areas where they had previously been almost unknown did not pass without resistance . Thus , there was a revolt among the mountaineers of <unk> and Dido on Georgia 's northeastern frontier in 1212 , which was put down by Ivane Zakarid @-@ Mkhargrzeli after three months of heavy fighting . 
 With flourishing commercial centers now under Georgia 's control , industry and commerce brought new wealth to the country and the court . Tribute extracted from the neighbors and war booty added to the royal treasury , giving rise to the saying that " the peasants were like nobles , the nobles like princes , and the princes like kings . " 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 With this prosperity came an outburst of the distinct Georgian culture , emerging from the amalgam of Christianity , secularism , as well as western and eastern influences . Despite this , the Georgians continued to identify with the Byzantine West , rather than Islamic East , with the Georgian monarchy seeking to underscore its association with Christianity and present its position as God @-@ given . It was in that period that the canon of Georgian Orthodox architecture was redesigned and a series of large @-@ scale domed cathedrals were built . The Byzantine @-@ derived expression of royal power was modified in various ways to bolster Tamar 's unprecedented position as a woman ruling in her own right . The five extant monumental church portraits of the queen are clearly modeled on Byzantine imagery , but also highlight specifically Georgian themes and Persian @-@ type ideals of female beauty . Despite Georgia 's Byzantine @-@ leaning culture , the country 's intimate trade connections with the Middle East is evidenced on contemporary Georgian coinage , whose legends were composed in Georgian and Arabic . A series of coins minted in circa 1200 in the name of Queen Tamar depicted a local variant of the Byzantine obverse and an Arabic inscription on the reverse proclaiming Tamar as the " Champion of the Messiah " . 
 The contemporary Georgian chronicles enshrined Christian morality and patristic literature continued to flourish , but it had , by that time , lost its earlier dominant position to secular literature , which was highly original , even though it developed close contact with neighboring cultures . The trend culminated in Shota Rustaveli 's epic poem The Knight in the Panther 's Skin ( <unk> <unk> ) , which celebrates the ideals of an " Age of Chivalry " and is revered in Georgia as the greatest achievement of native literature . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 Tamar outlived her consort , David Soslan , and died of a " devastating disease " not far from her capital Tbilisi , having previously crowned her son , Giorgi @-@ Lasha , coregent . Tamar 's historian relates that the queen suddenly fell ill when discussing state affairs with her ministers at the <unk> castle near the town of Gori . She was transported to Tbilisi and then to the nearby castle of <unk> where Tamar died and was mourned by her subjects . Her remains were transferred to the cathedral of Mtskheta and then to the Gelati monastery , a family burial ground of the Georgian royal dynasty . The traditional scholarly opinion is that Tamar died in 1213 , although there are several indications that she might have died earlier , in 1207 or 1210 . 
 In later times , a number of legends emerged about Tamar 's place of burial . One of them has it that Tamar was buried in a secret niche at the Gelati monastery so as to prevent the grave from being profaned by her enemies . Another version suggests that Tamar 's remains were reburied in a remote location , possibly in the Holy Land . The French knight Guillaume de Bois , in a letter dated from the early 13th century , written in Palestine and addressed to the bishop of Besançon , claimed that he had heard that the king of the Georgians was heading towards Jerusalem with a huge army and had already conquered many cities of the Saracens . He was carrying , the report said , the remains of his mother , the " powerful queen Tamar " ( regina <unk> <unk> ) , who had been unable to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in her lifetime and had bequeathed her body to be buried near the Holy Sepulchre . 
 In the 20th century , the quest for Tamar 's grave became a subject of scholarly research , as well as the focus of broader public interest . The Georgian writer <unk> <unk> wrote in his 1918 essay on Tamar : " Thus far , nobody knows where Tamar 's grave is . She belongs to everyone and to no one : her grave is in the heart of the Georgian . And in the Georgians ' perception , this is not a grave , but a beautiful vase in which an unfading flower , the great Tamar , flourishes . " An orthodox academic view still places Tamar 's grave at Gelati , but a series of archaeological studies , beginning with <unk> in 1920 , has failed to locate it at the monastery . 
 = = Legacy and popular culture = = 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 Over the centuries , Queen Tamar has emerged as a dominant figure in the Georgian historical pantheon . The construction of her reign as a " Golden age " began in the reign itself and Tamar became the focus of the era . Several medieval Georgian poets , including Shota Rustaveli , claimed Tamar as the inspiration for their works . A legend has it that Rustaveli was even consumed with love for the queen and ended his days in a monastery . A dramatic scene from Rustaveli 's poem where the seasoned King <unk> crowns his daughter <unk> is an allegory to George III 's co @-@ option of Tamar . Rustaveli comments on this : " A lion cub is just as good , be it female or male " . 
 The queen became a subject of several contemporary panegyrics , such as <unk> 's <unk> and <unk> <unk> 's Abdul @-@ <unk> . She was eulogized in the chronicles , most notably in the two accounts centered on her reign – The Life of Tamar , Queen of Queens and The Histories and Eulogies of the Sovereigns – which became the primary sources of Tamar 's sanctification in Georgian literature . The chroniclers exalt her as a " protector of the widowed " and " the thrice blessed " , and place a particular emphasis on Tamar 's virtues as a woman : beauty , humility , love of mercy , fidelity , and purity . Although Tamar was canonized by the Georgian church much later , she was even named as a saint in her lifetime in a bilingual Greco @-@ Georgian colophon attached to the manuscript of the Vani Gospels . 
 The idealization of Tamar was further accentuated by the events that took place under her immediate successors ; within two decades of Tamar 's death , the Khwarezmian and Mongol invasions brought Georgian ascendancy to an abrupt end . Later periods of national revival were too ephemeral to match the achievements of Tamar 's reign . All of these contributed to the cult of Tamar which blurred the distinction between the idealized queen and the real personality . 
 In popular memory , Tamar 's image has acquired a legendary and romantic façade . A diverse set of folk songs , poems and tales illustrate her as an ideal ruler , a holy woman onto whom certain attributes of pagan deities and Christian saints were sometimes projected . For example , in an old Ossetian legend , Queen Tamar conceives her son of a sunbeam which shines through the window . Another myth , from the Georgian mountains , equates Tamar with the pagan deity of weather , <unk> , who controls winter . Similarly , in the highland district of <unk> , Tamar 's image fused with a pagan goddess of healing and female fertility . 
 While Tamar occasionally accompanied her army and is described as planning some campaigns , she was never directly involved in the fighting . Yet , the memory of the military victories of her reign contributed to Tamar 's other popular image , that of a model warrior @-@ queen . It also echoed in the Tale of Queen Dinara , a popular 16th @-@ century Russian story about a fictional Georgian queen fighting against the Persians . Tsar of All the Russias Ivan the Terrible before the seizure of Kazan encouraged his army by the examples of Tamar 's battles by describing her as : 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Much of the modern perception of Queen Tamar was shaped under the influence of 19th @-@ century Romanticism and growing nationalism among Georgian intellectuals of that time . In the Russian and Western literatures of the 19th century , the image of Queen Tamar reflected the European conceptions of the Orient – of which Georgia was perceived as a part – and the position and characteristics of women in it . The Tyrolean writer Jakob Philipp <unk> described Tamar as a " Caucasian Semiramis " . Fascinated by the " exotic " Caucasus , the Russian poet Mikhail Lermontov wrote the romantic poem Tamara ( Russian : <unk> ; 1841 ) in which he utilized the old Georgian legend about a siren @-@ like mountainous princess whom the poet gave the name of Queen Tamar . Although Lermontov 's depiction of the Georgian queen as a destructive seductress had no apparent historical background , it has been influential enough to raise the issue of Tamar 's sexuality , a question that was given some prominence by the 19th @-@ century European authors . Knut Hamsun 's 1903 play Dronning Tamara ( " Queen Tamara " ) was less successful ; the theatre critics saw in it " a modern woman dressed in a medieval costume " and read the play as " a commentary on the new woman of the 1890s . " Russian conductor Mily Balakirev composed a symphony named " Tamara " . 
 In Georgian literature , Tamar was also romanticized , but very differently from the Russian and Western European view . The Georgian romanticists followed a medieval tradition in Tamar 's portrayal as a gentle , saintly woman who ruled a country permanently at war . This sentiment was further inspired by the rediscovery of a contemporary , 13th @-@ century wall painting of Tamar in the then @-@ ruined <unk> monastery , which was uncovered and restored by Prince Grigory Gagarin in the 1840s . The fresco became a source of numerous engravings circulating in Georgia at that time and inspired the poet <unk> <unk> to dedicate a romantic poem to it . Furthermore , the Georgian literati , reacting to Russian rule in Georgia and the suppression of national institutions , contrasted Tamar 's era to their contemporary situation , lamenting the irretrievably lost past in their writings . Hence , Tamar became a personification of the heyday of Georgia , a perception that has persisted down to the present time . 
 Tamar 's marriage to the Rus ' prince Yuri has become a subject of two resonant prose works in modern Georgia . <unk> Dadiani 's play , originally entitled The Unfortunate Russian ( <unk> <unk> ; 1916 – 1926 ) , was attacked by Soviet critics for distorting the " centuries @-@ long friendship of the Russian and Georgian peoples . " Under Communist Party pressure , Dadiani had to revise both the title and plot in accordance with the official ideology of the Soviet state . In 2002 , a satirical short @-@ story The First Russian ( <unk> <unk> ) penned by the young Georgian writer Lasha <unk> and focused on a frustrated wedding night of Tamar and Yuri outraged many conservatives and triggered a nationwide controversy , including heated discussions in the media , the Parliament of Georgia and the Patriarchate of the Georgian Orthodox Church . 
 = = Genealogy = = 
 The chart below shows the abbreviated genealogy of Tamar and her family , tracing it from Tamar 's grandfather to her grandchildren . 
 = Richard Lloyd Racing = 
 Richard Lloyd Racing ( <unk> ) , originally named GTi Engineering , was a British auto racing team created in 1977 by driver Richard Lloyd . Originally named for the Volkswagen Golf <unk> that Lloyd raced in the British Saloon Car Championship ( BSCC ) , they went on to become a successful Porsche privateer in the World Sportscar Championship ( WSC ) . Richard Lloyd Racing eventually folded at the end of the 1990 season due to the increased cost of the World Championship . 
 The team was also known for their extensively modified Porsche 956s and <unk> , developed to overcome some problems in the original Porsche design and construction . The cars , all named GTi after the team , were able to outperform their standard counterparts . The <unk> made some of the first uses of exotic materials and innovative design elements that would later be adopted by Porsche and other manufacturers . 
 Even after the racing team had moved on to running Porsches , GTi Engineering remained a division of Richard Lloyd Racing and continued to offer car tuning for Volkswagen and Audi products . Parts and full conversions were constructed in their shared race shop at Silverstone Circuit . The tuning company was eventually sold off , but it remains in existence today . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 = = = 1977 – 1980 = = = 
 GTi Engineering was created by Richard Lloyd in 1977 as his personal team in the British Saloon Car Championship , in which he had been competing for several years . The team was the primary entrant of the new GTi version of the Volkswagen Golf , which had been launched in 1976 , and primary backing came from Volkswagen Great Britain . Lloyd not only managed the team , but also continued to drive . He earned a best result in the BSCC in 1978 when he finished second in the championship , and he earned several wins over the three @-@ year period of the GTi program . 
 In 1980 , GTi Engineering moved from Volkswagen to partner brand Audi , entering the new Audi 80 in the BSCC . Lloyd was able to sign British drivers Stirling Moss and Martin Brundle to the team for that season . Following the 1980 campaign , GTi Engineering was approached by Porsche about becoming the primary European entrant of the company 's new 924 Carrera GTR in endurance racing . To help with the project , GTi Engineering was able to sign Japanese camera firm Canon as the primary sponsor , leading to the team being known as Canon Racing . 
 = = = 1981 – 1982 = = = 
 The team made their international debut at the 1981 1000 km Monza , where drivers Richard Lloyd and Tony Dron finished in eighth place and second in their class . Victory quickly followed as Lloyd and driver Andy Rouse won their class in their home event , the 1000 km Brands Hatch . 
 For 1982 , the team 's 924 Carrera GTRs were adapted to comply with the International Motor Sports Association 's GTO class regulations . Although this made the car ineligible for class victories in most European events , it was still able to compete with cars of similar classes . The team struggled for results that year , but a best result of fifth overall was achieved at the 1000 km Nürburgring . The team outlasted several Group C and Group 6 sports prototypes to finish high in the results . 
 = = = 1983 – 1985 = = = 
 Following the 1982 season , Porsche ended their 924 Carrera GTR development program and the team moved on to Porsche 's newest motorsport offering , the Group C 956 . This promoted GTi Engineering to the top class in the World Championship , which allowed them to compete for overall wins . In the team 's second race with the 956 , their home event at Silverstone , Jan Lammers and Thierry <unk> secured a podium finish , which was followed by another at the Nürburgring . A final appearance on the podium was earned in the final European race of the year at Mugello Circuit . Lammers finished seventh in the Drivers Championship . 
 For 1984 , GTi continued their success in the World Championship . As part of an agreement with sponsor Canon , GTi Engineering entered a second car in select rounds of the championship for the purpose of carrying an on @-@ board video camera within the cockpit to record the entire event . Although the added weight of the camera systems hampered the performance of the 956 , the car was still driven as normal by Richard Lloyd and team mate , Pink Floyd drummer Nick Mason , and it made its debut at the 24 Hours of Le Mans . GTi 's main 956 entry , however , remained a front runner in the hands of Lammers and John Fitzpatrick . Jonathan Palmer substituted for Fitzpatrick and , along with Lammers , took the team 's first World Championship victory at Brands Hatch , two laps ahead of a Joest Racing Porsche . Soon after the victory , the team debuted its new car , the custom @-@ built 956 GTi . The GTi was quickly able to usurp its predecessor , taking second at Imola . The team ended the year with Lammers and Fitzpatrick tied for fifth in the Drivers Championship . 
 During 1985 , the team officially changed its title to Richard Lloyd Racing , although the GTi Engineering name was retained as part of the company . The team continued on with their 956s , even though some competitors were now using the improved 962C . The season began with Lammers and Palmer earning good results , and the team managed to earn a second @-@ place finish at the 24 Hours of Le Mans with Jonathan Palmer , James Weaver , and Lloyd himself completing the race only three laps behind the winning Joest Porsche but ahead of the factory Rothmans Porsche . Trouble occurred during practice for the 1000 km Spa when a tyre let go , sending the car into the barrier at 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) , injuring Palmer and badly damaging the car , forcing it to undergo a lengthy rebuild . The team returned to the championship at Fuji but was unable to finish the event . Richard Lloyd Racing ended the year fifth in the Teams Championship , although Palmer was only twelfth in the Drivers Championship . 
 = = = 1986 – 1990 = = = 
 Canon chose to end their sponsorship of Richard Lloyd Racing in 1986 , leaving the team to sign <unk> Moly as a replacement . The team pressed on with the 956 GTi , using a variety of rotating drivers without much success early in the season . Their results improved , however , as Brands Hatch once again saw success for the squad when they earned their second World Championship victory by four laps over Joest Racing , with factory Porsche drivers Mauro Baldi and Bob Wollek in the car . A second @-@ place finish at the Nürburgring was the only other podium showing of the year , and the team finished the season sixth in the Teams Championship . Outside of the World Championship , the 956 GTi also made an appearance at an <unk> event at Richard Lloyd Racing 's home track of <unk> , winning one heat and finishing second overall in the combined results . 
 Richard Lloyd Racing replaced their aging 956 GTi prior to the 1987 season . A new 962C @-@ based car was obtained , although it was once again built to a unique GTi specification . Jonathan Palmer and Mauro Baldi became full @-@ season drivers for the squad . The team repeated their lack of early success from the previous year , once again earning a victory in the second half of the season . However , unlike the previous Brands Hatch successes , this one was earned at the Norisring sprint event . Brands Hatch remained lucky for the team though , as they earned a second place that year . Richard Lloyd Racing closed off the season with a third at Fuji , earning them fifth in the Teams Championship and helping Baldi tie for eighth in the Drivers Championship . The team also won the post @-@ season exhibition event at Kyalami , South Africa , with Jochen Mass driving . 
 A limited schedule of races were run in 1988 , as <unk> Moly ended their sponsoring of the team . New backing instead came from Porsche Great Britain . A fourth @-@ place finish at the opening sprint event was followed by a string of accidents and disqualifications , leading to the team missing several races for repairs . A seventh @-@ place finish at the Nürburgring was the only other finish to earn points for the team , leaving them ninth in the Teams Championship as they ended their season early . Rather than participate in the Fuji event , the team went to North America for an exhibition event in Tampa , Florida , participating against Camel GT Championship teams . American driver Price Cobb joined James Weaver , and the duo earned third place behind the American <unk> Nissan and the European Brun Porsche . 
 An evolution of the World Championship in 1989 , with a schedule consisting entirely of shorter sprint events , helped reduce the cost for the teams and allowed Richard Lloyd Racing to restructure and add a second car to their line @-@ up . Drivers included Derek Bell , Tiff Needell , and Steven <unk> . A fifth @-@ place finish at Dijon @-@ <unk> and fourth @-@ place finish in the finale at Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez were once again the only points earned by Richard Lloyd Racing , leaving them ninth in the Teams Championship . A home success outside the World Championship was achieved when Needell took second in a Supercup event at Silverstone . 
 For 1990 , Richard Lloyd Racing signed Japanese firm <unk> as the primary sponsor for the team . The team was reduced to a single entry , primarily driven by Manuel Reuter , James Weaver , and Steven <unk> . A sixth place at Spa and third at a shortened Montreal event were the highlights of the year , and Richard Lloyd Racing was once again ninth in the championship with three points . The team also ran a standard 962C at Le Mans for Nick Mason . The Mason @-@ owned car finished eleventh while the team 's 962C GTi withdrew after a pit fire . After the season ended , Richard Lloyd Racing was closed due to a lack of funding necessary to continue on into 1991 . 
 = = GTi Porsches = = 
 = = = 956 GTi = = = 
 Following a successful debut season with the 956 in 1983 , Richard Lloyd commissioned designer Nigel Stroud to develop a replacement monocoque and base chassis for the team 's car in an attempt to increase structural rigidity over that of the factory Porsche unit . Aluminium composite honeycomb was used in place of aluminium sheet metal in constructing the new monocoque . This car , originally 956 chassis # 106 , was replaced by the Stroud @-@ designed chassis designated # 106B , leading to the car being renamed a 956 GTi . 
 Further modifications were made to the car once the monocoque had been completed , which included replacing the entire Porsche front suspension setup with a custom design . <unk> modifications were also carried out by automotive designer Peter Stevens in an attempt to increase the overall downforce of the car on smaller circuits ; a narrow wing devised by Lloyd and team manager Greene at the 1984 1000 km of Brands Hatch was placed on two vertical struts , attached to the nose of the car between the headlights and fenders . In addition , the standard rear wing was replaced with a two element design at different angles of attack , with a narrow gap between the two . The wings were also constructed from carbon fibre , lighter than the standard material used on 956s . 
 The # 106B GTi chassis was badly damaged in an accident at the 1000 km Spa in 1985 , requiring the team to build another monocoque known as # <unk> . This chassis also adapted several newer 962 elements , including moving the cockpit farther back from the front axle . This chassis served with the team until the end of 1986 , when it was replaced by the new 962C GTi . Following its retirement , 956 GTi was refurbished in 1990 and is now used in historic motorsport events . The car 's initial Canon paint scheme is used once again . 
 = = = 962C GTi = = = 
 In an attempt to catch the improving capabilities of the factory <unk> , Lloyd commissioned the construction of a new car for the 1987 season . As before , the monocoque was designed by Nigel Stroud , while standard 962 parts were adapted to fit alongside custom @-@ built pieces . The first chassis , intentionally retaining the identification # 106B but not the same chassis as used on the 956 GTi , once again featured noticeable differences from its factory brethren . The rear of the car was completely redesigned , with the rear wing no longer part of the long tail bodywork . Instead , the wing hung off the rear of the car , attached only by struts at the center . 
 As the 1987 season continued on , modifications were made to the front of the car as well . The fenders and nose were rounded off , while the front brake cooling ducts and smaller headlights featured an all @-@ new design . These front end improvements were continued into 1988 with the construction of another car , chassis # 200 . The central gap on the bottom of the nose was filled in , allowing for the relocation of the brake cooling ducts towards the center of the car , while an extended splitter was added to aid front downforce . At the rear , Nigel Stroud adapted a design element which had been used by Jaguar : bodywork covered the sides of the rear wheels of the car , allowing for better airflow . 
 Chassis # 201 joined the team in 1989 , identical to the other team car . The new car initially retained the rear wheel covers that # 200 had used for improved aerodynamic performance , but they were later removed in 1990 . The brake cooling ducts were also moved into larger openings higher on the nose . 
 Two further 962C GTi chassis were constructed by GTi Engineering . Dyson Racing purchased chassis # 202 , which they further modified for the Camel GT Championship , becoming known as # <unk> . Dyson 's 962C GTi won a single event in San Antonio , Texas . ADA Engineering received # 203 for the 1992 24 Hours of Le Mans before using it again in 1994 with Team Nippon . Chassis # 106B was sold after Richard Lloyd had replaced it , and it ended up in the All Japan Sports Prototype Championship in the hands of Trust Racing Team from 1988 to 1990 , then the <unk> Racing Team in 1991 . Chassis # 200 also ran in Japan under the Alpha Cubic banner in 1990 . 
 = Pearl Corkhill = 
 Pearl Elizabeth Corkhill MM ( 11 March 1887 – 4 December 1985 ) was an Australian military nurse of the First World War . Trained as a nurse in Sydney , Corkhill enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force on 4 June 1915 . After serving in France at the 1st and 3rd Australian General Hospitals , Corkhill was assigned to the 38th British Casualty Clearing Station near Abbeville on 21 August 1918 . On 23 August , while the camp was being heavily bombed by enemy aircraft , Corkhill remained calm and continued to tend to her patients , despite the danger . For her bravery , she was awarded the Military Medal , one of only seven Australian nurses to be so decorated in the First World War . Following the Armistice , she went on to work as a nurse at various public hospitals , and donated a large collection of her father 's photographs to the National Library of Australia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 <unk> was born on 11 March 1887 , the second child of William Corkhill , a grazier and photographer , and Francis Hawtrey née Bate . Growing up on the family ranch , " Marengo " , near Tilba Tilba in southern New South Wales , Corkhill and her sister Edith 's lives where extensively recorded by their father , who by 1890 had become a professional photographer . She was first educated by a governess before attending the public school in town . She undertook nursing training at a private hospital in Summer Hill , Sydney and qualified as a general nurse in 1914 . 
 = = Military years = = 
 On 4 June 1915 , Corkhill enrolled as a staff nurse in the Australian Imperial Force . She left Fremantle aboard the A62 <unk> on 25 June 1915 , and arrived in Egypt in July that year . She was assigned to the 1st Australian General Hospital , and assisted in the treatment of soldiers involved with the Gallipoli Campaign . On 24 March 1916 , Corkhill was among a group of nurses sent to Marseille aboard the Braemar Castle , a hospital ship . Arriving in early April , she was then sent aboard a train destined for the 2nd British General Hospital in Le Havre . The train was poorly equipped and was missing many amenities , such as toilets or water , so the women were forced to improvise by washing with cologne . In her time at the British hospital , Corkhill looked forward to returning to an Australian hospital and being " amongst our boys " ; the Australian soldiers often found their compatriots to be friendlier than the British nurses . On Anzac Day 1916 , a year after the Landing at Gallipoli , Corkhill and two other Australian nurses commemorated the occasion . They wore gum tree leaves on their capes , and gave small packets of cigarettes and matches to the Australians who were interned at the hospital as gifts . 
 Corkhill went back to serve at the 1st Australian General Hospital in Rouen on 16 June 1916 for the remainder of the year . On 23 January 1917 , she went to England on leave until 9 February . She then served at the Australian Hospital until July 1918 , with the exception of her two leaves ; to England in October 1917 and to Paris in February 1918 . On 15 May 1918 , Corkhill was sent to Abbeville to join the 3rd Australian General Hospital , and was briefly posted to the 38th British Casualty Clearing Station on 2 June . After serving in with the 3rd Australian General Hospital for a further two months , she was again posted to the Casualty Clearing Station on 21 August 1918 . 
 = = = Military Medal = = = 
 Casualty Clearing Stations were deliberately sited as close to the front line as possible , since many injuries caused during battle required more urgent attention than the time to travel to a field hospital allowed . Often within seven miles of the front line , they were considered extremely dangerous , and the appropriateness of having nurses attend such stations was hotly debated within the military . As a result of its proximity to the front , the station would often come under enemy attack , as was the case of the 38th British Casualty Station on 23 August . The Casualty Station suffered a heavy air raid by German forces , with the sterilisation room being destroyed and the camp being hit by numerous bombs . Despite the heavy attack , Corkhill , who was attending to the wounded at the time , remained calm and continued to aid the patients . For her actions , she was recommended for and later awarded the Military Medal . 
 War Office , 23rd August , 1918 
 His Majesty the KING has been pleased to approve of the award of the Military Medal to the undermentioned Lady for distinguished service in the Field , as recorded : — 
 Staff Nurse Pearl Elizabeth Corkhill , Aust . <unk> 
 For courage and devotion on the occasion of an enemy air @-@ raid . She continued to attend to the wounded without any regard to her own safety , though enemy aircraft were overhead . Her example was of the greatest value in allaying the alarm of the patients . 
 Corkhill was initially unconvinced that she deserved the award , being more concerned about having to purchase a new dress to wear while meeting the King . The award was more heavily celebrated by the men than by Corkhill herself , as she described in a letter to her mother : 
 Today word came that I had been awarded the <unk> Well the C.O. sent over a bottle of champagne and they all drank my health and now the medical officers are giving me a dinner in honour of the event . I can 't see what I 've done to deserve it but the part I don 't like is having to face old George and Mary to get the medal . It will cost me a new mess dress , but I suppose I should not grumble at that — I 'm still wearing the one I left Australia in . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 The day following the action , 24 August , Corkhill was posted to the 1st Australian General Hospital , and went on leave in the United Kingdom . She was retained for service at the 1st Australian Auxiliary Hospital in Harefield , London on 27 August 1918 . She was promoted to the rank of Sister on 1 October , and continued to serve at the hospital until She returned to Australia on 24 January 1919 . She was discharged on 22 June 1919 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 A memorial commemorating Corkhill 's efforts in the war was erected in Tilba , and she was presented with the medal by Governor @-@ General Lord Foster . Following the war , Corkhill went on to pursue a nursing career . After serving as a nurse in various hospitals both in Australia and overseas , Corkhill became the senior sister at the District Hospital in Bega , New South Wales in 1951 . In 1975 , she donated a large collection of her father 's photographs to National Library of Australia . Amongst the one thousand piece collection were personal photographs along with pictures the Tilba area , which were later used to create a book , Taken at Tilba and an engagement calendar . Corkhill was a skilled horsewoman , and was the lead in the centenary Cooma Show . A supper cloth made by Corkhill while on duty has been used as an example of decorative crafts of the era , and a number of photographs she had taken while on duty were donated to the Australian War Memorial . Corkhill died on 4 December 1985 in Dalmeny , New South Wales . She was unmarried . 
 = Beecher 's Handmade Cheese = 
 Beecher 's Handmade Cheese is an artisan cheesemaker and retail shop with locations in the Pike Place Market , Seattle , Washington and New York City 's Flatiron District . The company was founded by Kurt Beecher Dammeier in 2003 and opened in the Pike Place Market after Dammeier obtained a difficult to obtain storefront lease in the Market . Because Dammeier had never been a cheesemaker , he sought out the assistance of Brad Sinko , who helped run a family cheese @-@ making business in Oregon . A second location was opened in 2011 in the Flatiron neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City . 
 Unlike most artisan cheese makers , Beecher 's mainly uses pasteurized milk and operates a high @-@ volume modern production facility , with multiple farms supplying milk . When Beecher 's encountered problems in guaranteeing the standard flavor of the milks they were using to make cheese , the company bought their own herds of dairy cattle and farms to ensure control of the cheese products from beginning to end . Beecher 's uses various cheese cultures when mixing cheeses , so a cheddar cheese produced by Beecher 's may use cultures not normally intended for cheddar cheese production . 
 Beecher 's Pike Place Market cheese @-@ making facility includes a café , which serves grilled cheese and other items , and a retail shop , which sells both Beecher 's cheeses and others brands from local Pacific Northwest cheesemakers . The New York location is a much larger space . In addition to the production facility , café , and retail space , it also has a full @-@ service restaurant downstairs referred to as The Cellar . Beecher 's also manufactures and sells macaroni and cheese dishes ( and other frozen sides ) , which have received praise in reviews from the national news media . Dammeier and his firm 's cheeses have been featured on national television , including twice on The Martha Stewart Show and once on Oprah , with the " World 's Best " Macaroni and Cheese featured as one of Oprah 's " Favorite Things . " A cookbook by Dammeier , Pure Flavor : 125 Fresh All @-@ American Recipes From The Pacific Northwest , has been published , and incorporates recipes used to make various Beecher 's products and dishes . In addition to their various business endeavors , Beecher 's sponsors the Flagship foundation and Pure Food Kids project , an educational program to teach children in the Seattle public schools system about healthful diets . 
 = = Founding and history = = 
 Before founding Beecher 's , Dammeier had never made cheese , and had little direct knowledge of the cheese making business . His self @-@ described " passion " for cheese began during his childhood in Tacoma , Washington , where his family always kept a cheese board piled high with local cheeses . Raised in a family business involving printing and food manufacturing , he decided to open a cheese business after his family sold the printing company . He named it for his great @-@ grandfather , Beecher McKenzie . Dammeier also owns the Seattle @-@ based specialty grocer Pasta & Co. and is a major investor in Pyramid Breweries , Inc . ; other members of his family have stakes in Pyramid as well . Dammeier also founded Bennett 's Pure Food Bistro on nearby Mercer Island , and the food truck Maximus / <unk> , both of which carry many dishes prepared with Beecher 's products . In 2003 , Dammeier opened Beecher 's in Seattle 's Pike Place Market when a rare large retail location became available in the market after the nursery <unk> 's closed its Market location and moved to its current Woodinville , Washington property . 
 After taking a cheese making course at Washington State University , Dammeier decided he needed to hire someone to work with him as chief cheesemaker . He hired Brad Sinko , a microbiologist , who previously had managed his family cheese business of Bandon Cheese in Oregon , before it was acquired by the Tillamook County Creamery Association . According to Dammeier , the artisanal cheese market was underrepresented in Seattle and Washington , and he opened his business in part to encourage more cheese business to grow in the region . In 2000 , Washington had nine licensed cheesemakers ; this expanded to twenty @-@ eight by 2007 . Dammeier compared the growth he expects in artisan cheese to the United States ' recent growth in sales of specialty beers : 
 " If you said the word ' Porter ' 20 years ago , no one in the U.S. would have had any idea you were talking about beer . Twenty years from now , people will know what a washed rind is . " 
 Thanks to financing from Dammeier 's other business ventures , Beecher 's had the ability to build up their operations slowly , absorbing the costs of capitalization of the business while experimenting with their cheeses , including the time to age them . " The first vat , " remarked Dammeier , " we threw away . The second vat was really good . " As their work progressed Sinko would adjust the formulas of their cheese processing , the cultures , and the enzymes involved , and increased the average aging time for their Flagship brand to 18 months . However , they only publicly claim 12 months of aging . In their first year of operation , Beecher 's had no aged product of their own to sell , instead building up an inventory of 80 @,@ 000 pounds ( 36 @,@ 000 kg ) of cheese . During that same time , their primary sales were of fresh cheese curds . 
 = = Milk supplies = = 
 After their initial founding with one milk supplier , Beecher 's production system has had to expand several times to include more suppliers . As of 2006 , Beecher 's was in the process of purchasing their own farms in Eastern Washington for additional milk production , which will also give them full control over their entire product 's creation . The principal milk supplier is Green Acres Farm in Duvall , Washington , using only hormone @-@ free and antibiotic @-@ free milk . When consistent milk production first became a problem , Beecher 's purchased a herd of 200 cows . The entire dairy herd at Green Acres Farm is owned by Beecher 's , who leases them back to the farm . For the New York production , all Holstein and Jersey milk come directly from Dutch Hollow Farms in upstate New York . 
 To ensure a standardized flavor for the finished cheeses , and due to there being insufficient space in their facilities for milk separating systems , Sinko said he " went and standardized the herd . " Their initial milk from Holstein cows was sweet , but lacked the fatty content and <unk> of Jersey cow milk that was part of the product they wanted to create . They were able to eventually balance the two to their satisfaction . Dammeier has described the blend of Holstein and Jersey milk as a " 50 – 50 mix " . From each farm , all the milk supplied to Beecher 's is from the same herd , to ensure that the flavor of each batch of milk they receive is consistent ( based on the herd 's diet and environment ) . 
 At times , Beecher 's has encountered challenges in maintaining this uniform standard . For example , when flooding affected one farm , the cows there produced enzymes in their milk that helped their calves to fight off bacteria , but changed the flavor of the milk . 
 = = Cheese and food manufacturing = = 
 The cheese factory is housed in a small , glass @-@ walled facility in Seattle 's Pike Place Market , on Pike Place between Stewart Street and Pine Street . The location includes a retail shop and a café that features cheese @-@ based meals . Passers @-@ by in the heavily <unk> market can watch the cheese making process . Beecher 's produces over 500 @,@ 000 pounds ( 230 @,@ 000 kg ) of cheese annually . Their manufacturing facility now operates twenty @-@ four hours a day to keep up with their demand . The New York facility is significantly larger than Seattle 's and can produce over three tons of cheese a day . 
 Sinko admits that the modern facility with large vats of cheese and milk processing would seem to contradict the word " Handmade " in the company name . According to him , all of the cheese is monitored , processed , and prepared by hand , but simply on a larger scale than most artisanal cheesemakers . Unlike most artisan cheeses , Beecher 's is made largely with pasteurized milk . Dammeier believes that many people feel raw milk cheeses taste better due to renowned French cheeses , which were historically made of raw milk because the farms were unable to afford pasteurization . " I 've probably tasted 150 different cheeses this year , and I 'm convinced that raw milk doesn 't create more flavor , " he said , adding that his cheeses have a more consistent taste from not using raw milk . Nevertheless , Beecher 's offers a raw milk version of their Flagship cheese . The cheeses they produce use no artificial ingredients or preservatives . Beecher 's typically manufactures up to nine different varieties of cheeses each year , including a combination of their staple brands and various seasonal varieties . 
 At the Beecher 's facility , their process for cheese manufacturing is multi @-@ staged . Thousands of gallons of milk are hose @-@ fed from delivery trucks into the manufacturing area , where it is heated to complete the pasteurization of the milk . The heated milk is processed into a stainless steel trough , and the temperature further increased , while the first live cheese cultures and rennet , a coagulant , are added to the developing mixture . According to Amir Rosenblatt , a cheesemaker at Beecher 's , the heating and cheese temperatures used in their cooking process are tightly controlled through the sustainable technology of steam power . " A variation of half a degree [ in the pasteurization process ] can change the flavor of the cheese , " he said . Cheesemakers use stainless steel " rakes " to then gather the milk mixture , before allowing it to settle briefly , at which point the cheese is cut repeatedly by hand until it achieves a yogurt @-@ like texture and substance . This process is repeated often , until a desired consistency is reached . The mixture is then drawn away to a new trough where most of the remaining water and whey is drained from the cheese . While the whey is continually pulled from the cheese , cheesemakers constantly separate the cheese by hand into smaller and small stacks of cheese curds , which form as the whey is removed . To complete the <unk> , a large amount of salt is added to cure the cheese and draw still more whey from it . The curds are finally cut into portions , filled into cheese molds , stacked on top of each other , and the remaining excess moisture is forced from the cheese with a constant 60 pounds ( 27 kg ) of pressure for at least 24 hours , before the finished cheese is stored to age . For every 10 pounds ( 10 kilograms ) of milk and whey , Beecher 's will typically create 1 pound ( 1 kilogram ) of finished cheese . 
 Beecher 's cheeses differ from similar cheeses in that they mix cheese growth cultures in unusual ways . For example , their signature " Flagship " cheese includes cultures typically used for non @-@ cheddar cheeses , such as <unk> and Emmental , changing the nature , flavor , and texture of their cheddar . Flagship cheese is produced using a <unk> process , but owing to a different taste , Beecher 's does not call this cheese cheddar . The cheese has been described as having a " sweet finish and creamy texture " unlike the <unk> <unk> , owing to this being one of the cheeses they create with a mixture of different cheese cultures . After being prepared in 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) blocks and aged for approximately one year , the Flagship — unlike <unk> — lacks a rind , is moister , resembles butter visually , and carries a milky aroma due to being aged in plastic bags . A variant called " Flagship Reserve " is aged in cheese cloth in 18 pounds ( 8 @.@ 2 kg ) sizes on racks in open air , and is rubbed with butter while being turned daily . This preparation method causes the Reserve to lose up to 12 % of its initial weight by the time it is completed . The Reserve is aged for a shorter amount of time , leading to a sharper , nuttier taste and texture , according to Food & Wine Magazine . Of the 500 @,@ 000 pounds ( 230 @,@ 000 kg ) of cheese they produce annually , approximately 200 @,@ 000 pounds ( 91 @,@ 000 kg ) will be Flagship , and only 15 @,@ 000 pounds ( 6 @,@ 800 kg ) will be Flagship Reserve . 
 Additionally , Beecher 's is in the process of developing new types of crackers , designed to not overpower the taste of the cheese with which they are paired . 
 = = Retail sales and cheese shop = = 
 Beecher 's features a gourmet cheese shop and café in both their Pike Place Market and Flatiron facility . It is considered an anchor of the Pike Place Market , and has become a tourist attraction in its own right . During the day , crowds typically gather in the store , watching through windows as the cheesemakers prepare batches of cheese . 
 A portion of the cheese curds used in the manufacturing process is set aside to sell directly to visitors at the retail store . The principal cheeses created and sold by Beecher 's are their Flagship and Flagship Reserve varieties ; " Just Jack " , a form of Monterey Jack cheese ; " Blank Slate " , a type of cream cheese ; unpasteurized , raw @-@ milk versions of their Flagship cheeses , and different cheeses seasoned and flavored with spices and herbs . Some of their seasonal varieties have included cheeses similar to Brie . 
 The Pike Place Market store now sells roughly thirty @-@ five other local artisan cheese brands , in addition to the various Beecher 's products . The Pike Place Market location also offers classes to the public about cheese making , cheese history , and the pairing of wine with cheese . The collection of Pacific Northwest cheeses on sale at the retail store has been described as the best in the entire region by Will O 'Donnell in Northwest Magazine . In keeping with Dammeier 's idea that his cheese business should encourage the growth of the artisan cheese businesses in the area , the Beecher 's retail store makes special efforts to feature and sell cheeses from new and small Northwest cheesemakers . The Flatiron location incorporates the Northwest influence its <unk> , but carries a significant number of Northeast artisanal cheeses . 
 Beecher 's products are sold in retail stores throughout the country at well @-@ known artisanal cheese vendors such as the shops of Murray Klein and the international <unk> Cheese retail company . Beecher 's also uses the services of <unk> to ensure their products arrive to customers across the United States . 
 = = Macaroni and cheese = = 
 Beecher 's retail shop in the Pike Place Market sells over 17 @,@ 000 orders of Dammeier 's macaroni and cheese dish annually . The recipe is featured in a 2007 cookbook , Pure Flavor : 125 Fresh All @-@ American Recipes From The Pacific Northwest , which Dammeier wrote with Laura Holmes Haddad . Both The New York Times and The Washington Post gave it reviews described as " rave " , according to MSNBC news . Dammeier says the key to the success of their macaroni and cheese is to <unk> the pasta by half , so that it softens from cheese sauces in baking with a béchamel sauce . The recipe , named simply " World 's Best Mac & Cheese " , has been prepared by Dammeier during guest appearances on several television programs . On August 19 , 2008 , Beecher 's facility and cheese was featured on The Martha Stewart Show , and Dammeier prepared his macaroni and cheese dish with Stewart on the program . The " World 's Best Mac & Cheese " was also featured as one of Oprah 's " Favorite Things , " and a second time on " The Martha Stewart Show . " 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 In 2007 , Beecher 's was the winner of the American Cheese Society awards for their cheddar cheese . At the World Cheese Awards in 2007 , Beecher 's " Marco Polo " cheese won a gold medal , and at the American <unk> Awards in Newport Beach , California , they took first place , also in 2007 . Beecher 's also came in as the runner up for Best In Show at the 2007 World Cheese Society competition , in a field of 1 @,@ 207 competitors . Beecher 's again won a top award from the American Cheese Society for their Marco Polo cheese in 2008 . According to Laura <unk> , author of The New American Cheese : Profiles of America 's Great Cheesemakers , their Flagship cheese is " everything a cheddar should be - and more . " 
 = = Pure Food Kids = = 
 Beecher 's and Dammeier also fund and develop " Pure Food Kids : A Recipe for Healthy Eating " , an outreach and educational program , run by the Pure Food Kids Foundation , for elementary and middle @-@ school children in the Seattle Public Schools , with the goal of teaching children about healthful foods and eating habits . The program was initially developed by Dammeier and his wife Leslie , after they learned about and were unhappy with the state of school cafeteria meals in Seattle , where their three children attended public school . Established in 2005 , 1 % of the total sales for Beecher 's and Dammeier 's other business , Bennet 's Pure Food , Maximus / <unk> , and Pasta & Co . , are used to fund the Pure Food Kids program . The Pure Food Kids program is staffed by trained volunteers , including Dammeier himself . 
 Fourth through sixth grade elementary school children are educated on the effects of food additives , eating healthful foods , reading food labels , and about marketing of food aimed at children . According to Chip Wood , co @-@ founder of the Northeast Foundation for Children , fourth through sixth grade children will typically be between the ages of 9 and 12 years old . The program is provided at no cost to the children and their families . To date , over 15 @,@ 000 children have participated in the educational program . Pure Food Kids is taught in classrooms , after @-@ school events , and at Parent @-@ Teacher Association events , with all supplies and materials provided by Beecher 's , although there is explicitly no promotion or use of any products from any of Dammeier 's businesses . 
 = Music of the Sun = 
 Music of the Sun is the debut studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna . It was released by Def Jam Recordings on August 30 , 2005 . Prior to signing with Def Jam , Rihanna was discovered by record producer Evan Rogers in Barbados , who helped Rihanna record demo tapes to send out to several record labels . Jay @-@ Z , the former chief executive officer ( CEO ) and president of Def Jam , was given Rihanna 's demo by Jay Brown , his A & R at Def Jam , and invited her to audition for the label after hearing what turned out to be her first single , " Pon de Replay " . She auditioned for Jay @-@ Z and L.A. Reid , the former CEO and president of record label group The Island Def Jam Music Group , and was signed on the spot to prevent her from signing with another record label . 
 After Rihanna was signed by Jay @-@ Z , she continued to work with Rogers and his production partner Carl Sturken , as well as other music producers such as , Poke & Tone , D. " Supa Dups " Chin @-@ quee , and StarGate . Music of the Sun features vocals from Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall , music group J @-@ Status , and Jamaican singer Vybz Kartel . Its music incorporates Caribbean music such as dancehall and reggae , as well as dance @-@ pop and R & B ballads . 
 Music of the Sun received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who complimented its dancehall and Caribbean @-@ inspired songs , while others criticized some of the production . The album debuted at number 10 on the United States Billboard 200 and number six on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . The album peaked in the top @-@ 40 of album charts in Germany , New Zealand , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . It produced two singles : " Pon de Replay " and " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " , the former of which peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and number one on the US Dance Club Songs chart . Music of the Sun was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before signing to Def Jam Recordings , Rihanna was discovered in her home country Barbados by American record producer Evan Rogers . The two met in December 2003 through mutual friends of Rihanna 's and Rogers ' wife , while the couple was on vacation in Barbados , because of how Rihanna 's friend had told Rogers ' wife how the aspiring singer was always singing and performing . After meeting for the first time , Rogers ' asked Rihanna to come to his hotel room , where she performed renditions of Destiny 's Child 's " Emotion " and Mariah Carey 's " Hero " . Rihanna 's renditions impressed Rogers , who then took her to New York , where she was accompanied by her mother to record some demo tapes which could be sent to record labels . She recorded the demo over the next year intermittently , due to Rihanna only being able to record during school holidays . 
 At the age of 16 , Rihanna was signed to Rogers ' and Carl Sturken 's production company , Syndicated Rhythm Productions , who assigned her a lawyer and manager , before the completed demo tape were distributed to various record labels around the world in late 2004 . The first to respond to the demo tape was Jay @-@ Z , who had recently been appointed as president and CEO of Def Jam Recordings . Rihanna auditioned for him and music mogul L.A. Reid , in his office . Looking back on the audition and meeting Jay @-@ Z , Rihanna explained in an interview how she felt before walking into the room , saying : " That 's when I really got nervous ..... I was like : ' Oh God , he 's right there , I can 't look , I can 't look , I can 't look ! ' I remember being extremely quiet . I was very shy . I was cold the entire time . I had butterflies . I 'm sitting across from Jay @-@ Z. Like , Jay @-@ Zee . I was star @-@ struck . " During the audition , Rihanna performed Whitney Houston 's cover of " For the Love of You " , as well as " Pon de Replay " and " The Last Time " , which were written and produced by Rogers and Sturken and would be included on her debut album Music of the Sun . 
 Jay @-@ Z was initially skeptical about signing Rihanna after he felt " Pon de Replay " was too big for her , saying " when a song is that big , it 's hard [ for a new artist ] to come back from . I don 't sign songs , I sign artists " . The audition resulted in Rihanna signing a six @-@ album record deal with Def Jam Recordings in February 2005 , on the same day of the audition , with Jay @-@ Z saying " There 's only two ways out . Out the door after you sign this deal . Or through this window ... " , meaning that he was not going to let her leave without signing a record deal . After signing to Def Jam Recordings , Rihanna cancelled other meetings with record labels and relocated from Barbados to New York to live with Rogers ' and his wife . Rihanna explained the concept behind the title of the album to Kidzworld , saying that the sun is representative of the her native Caribbean culture as well as herself and that the album consists of music from her heritage . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Rihanna worked with various producers for Music of the Sun and continued to work with Rogers and Sturken , who had previously written and produced " Pon de Replay " and " The Last Time " for Rihanna 's demo tape . Although Rihanna stated that when she first heard " Pon de Replay " , she did not want to record it , expressing that she felt the song was " sing @-@ songy " , but grew to like the song at the end of the recording process . In an interview with Kidzworld , Rihanna explained how the pair helped her develop her song @-@ writing abilities , saying Rogers and Sturken , who had worked with recording artists including Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera and Kelly Clarkson . 
 Music of the Sun is a Caribbean @-@ influenced , urban dance @-@ pop album . Its dance @-@ pop songs are complemented by <unk> R & B ballads . The lead single " Pon de Replay " was written by Rogers , Sturken and Vada Nobles , and was produced by the first two . " Pon de Replay " is a simple dance @-@ pop song with dancehall beats and reggae vocal cadence . Lyrically , the song is about asking the DJ to play the protagonist 's favorite song , as well as the fulfillment of dancing in a club . " The Last Time " , written and produced by Rogers and Sturken is an acoustic guitar driven ballad , while " Now That I Know " is a stripped down string driven song . In addition to working with Rogers and Sturken for the majority of the album , Rihanna worked with production teams Poke & Tone of Trackmasters and StarGate . The former wrote and produced the second single released from the album , " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " , which Rihanna described as a " fun song " . An R & B song , " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " is a song about a girl telling a boy that he should make her his girl , because she has what the boy wants . A remix of the song entitled " If It 's Lovin ' That You Want – Part 2 " , which features rap vocals by Cory Gunz , was included as a bonus track on Rihanna 's sophomore album , A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . Alongside Rogers and Sturken , StarGate co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced " Let Me " , which appears as the ninth song on the album . Music of the Sun contains a remake of Jamaican singer Dawn Penn 's " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " , and features dancehall recording artist Vybz Kartel . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Music of the Sun received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times viewed that the album 's combination of dancehall and pop resulted in " [ Pon de Replay being ] one [ of ] the summer 's biggest and most seductive club tracks " , but felt that Rihanna sounds " stranded " without a beat to sing along to . Barry Walters of Rolling Stone found it lacking in replay value , ingenuity , and rhythm of the single with " generic vocal hiccups and frills " of US R & B inflecting upon her " Caribbean charm " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called the album a " glut of teen R & B <unk> " and described the lead single " Pon de Replay " as " a dancehall @-@ pop mixture that owes plenty of its sweat and shimmy to Beyoncé Knowles ' " Baby Boy " . Evan Serpick of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Rihanna 's " vibrant vocals lift tracks like ' That La La La ' and ' Let Me , ' but this bland dancehall / R & B debut is filled with chintzy production and maudlin arrangements that block out the Music of the Sun . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice rated the album a " dud " , indicating " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought . " 
 In a positive review , Jason Birchmeier of AllMusic commented that the album presents Rihanna as " winsome rather than [ a ] wannabe , " as well as how she managed to set herself apart from other urban dance @-@ pop artists such as Ashanti , Beyoncé , and Ciara . Birchmeier further stated that " Music of the Sun descends into faceless slow jams after a while , overall consistency not being among its attributes , but thankfully it picks up the pace toward the end ..... the result is one of the more engaging urban dance @-@ pop albums of the year . " Chantal <unk> of The Jamaica Observer complimented the dancehall and hip hop composition on several of the songs , including " Pon de Replay " , " Rush " , " Let Me " , " Music of the Sun " and " That La La La " , writing that they make the listener feel " happy " and " carefree " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Music of the Sun sold 69 @,@ 000 and debuted at number 10 on the Billboard 200 album chart in the chart issue dated September 17 , 2005 . The album spent a total of 35 weeks on the chart . Music of the Sun debuted on the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart at number six in the same chart issue , and spent a total of 44 weeks on the chart . After five months of release , the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 1 , 2006 , denoting shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . As of November 2013 , the album had sold 609 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In Canada , Music of the Sun debuted and peaked at number seven on the Canadian Albums Chart in the chart issue September 17 , 2005 , but dropped out of the top ten the following week . After four months of release , the album was certified platinum by Music Canada for shipments of over 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Outside of the United States and Canada , Music of the Sun failed to achieve a comparable level of chart success . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted and peaked at number 35 on the UK Albums Chart in the chart issue October 10 , 2005 . In its second week charting , Music of the Sun fell by three positions to number 38 , and dropped out of the Official UK Top 40 the following week . On May 12 , 2006 , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) denoting shipments of over 100 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere in Europe , the album debuted on the Swiss Albums Chart at number 46 in the chart issue September 11 , 2005 , and peaked at number 38 four weeks later . In Austria , Music of the Sun debuted on the Austrian Albums Chart at number 61 in the chart issue September 18 , 2005 , and peaked at number 45 the following week . The album debuted and peaked at number 93 on the French Albums Chart in the chart issue September 24 , 2005 . In The Netherlands , Music of the Sun debuted and peaked at number 98 on the Dutch Albums Chart in the chart issue April 29 , 2006 , and spent one week on the chart . In New Zealand , the album debuted on the New Zealand Albums Chart at number 40 in the chart issue September 26 , 2005 . Between September 29 and October 10 , 2005 , Music of the Sun dropped out of the top @-@ 40 albums chart , but made a re @-@ entry at number 40 on October 10 , 2005 . In its fourth week charting , the album peaked at number 26 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Pon de Replay " was released as the album 's lead single on May 24 , 2005 . The song peaked at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart and number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and UK Singles Chart . An accompanying music video was directed by Little X and features Rihanna in a club environment . " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " was released as the second and final single from Music of the Sun on December 2 , 2005 . The song failed to replicate the chart success which " Pon de Replay " experienced , peaking at number 36 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and inside the top forty of multiple other charts . An accompanying music video was directed by Marcus Raboy and features Rihanna in a beach setting . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b denotes a vocal producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Music of the Sun are adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Johnny <unk> Mixed by 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Italian cruiser Goito = 
 Goito was a torpedo cruiser built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was the lead ship of the Goito class , which included three other vessels . Goito was built by the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard between September 1885 and February 1888 . She was armed with a variety of light guns and five 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , and was capable of a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The ship served the duration of her career in the main Italian fleet . Her early service was primarily occupied with training exercises ; front @-@ line duties ended in 1897 when she was converted into a minelayer , though she continued to participate in fleet exercises . During World War I , Goito laid defensive minefields in the Adriatic Sea . She was eventually sold for scrap in 1920 and broken up . 
 = = Design = = 
 Goito was 73 @.@ 4 meters ( 241 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 7 @.@ 88 m ( 25 @.@ 9 ft ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) . She displaced 829 metric tons ( 816 long tons ; 914 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of three double @-@ expansion steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Exact figures for the ship 's performance have not survived , but the members of the Goito class could steam at a speed of about 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) from 2 @,@ 500 to 3 @,@ 180 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 860 to 2 @,@ 370 kW ) . Goito had a cruising radius of 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 105 and 121 . 
 The primary armament for Goito was five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . She was also equipped with five 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ cal. guns , and three 37 mm revolving Hotchkiss guns , all mounted singly . The ship was protected with an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Goito was built by the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard ; her keel was laid down in September 1885 and her completed hull was launched on 6 July 1887 . She was completed on 16 February 1888 and commissioned into the fleet , the first member of her class to enter service . That year , she took part in the annual fleet maneuvers , along with five ironclads , a protected cruiser , the torpedo cruisers Tripoli , Saetta , and Folgore , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . 
 The ship served in the 3rd Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Affondatore and Enrico Dandolo and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . The following year , the ship took part in the annual fleet maneuvers in the 1st Division of the Active Squadron , along with the ironclad battleship Re Umberto and the protected cruiser Stromboli . That year , Goito had her coal @-@ fired boilers replaced with oil @-@ fired models , and her center engine and propeller shaft were removed . Her engines now produced 2 @,@ 521 ihp ( 1 @,@ 880 kW ) for a top speed of 17 @.@ 2 knots ( 31 @.@ 9 km / h ; 19 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 In 1895 , Goito was stationed in the 2nd Maritime Department , split between Taranto and Naples , along with most of the torpedo cruisers in the Italian fleet . These included her sister ships Monzambano , Montebello , and Confienza , the eight Partenope @-@ class cruisers , and Tripoli . Goito was converted into a minelayer in 1897 . Her torpedo tubes were removed and equipment to handle sixty naval mines was installed . In 1898 , Goito was assigned to the Reserve Squadron , which included the ironclads Lepanto , Francesco Morosini , and Ruggiero di Lauria , and three protected cruisers . The following year , she returned to the Active Squadron , where she served with six ironclads , the armored cruiser Vettor Pisani , the protected cruiser Lombardia , and Calatafimi . During the 1907 fleet maneuvers , Goito was attached to the main fleet to lay mines at a simulated advance base that would be created during the exercises . 
 At the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Goito was stationed in Venice along with Tripoli and Montebello . None of the vessels saw action during the war . Italy had declared neutrality at the start of World War I , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that the threat from Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and naval mines in the narrow waters of the Adriatic was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the main fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Goito was initially used to lay a series of defensive minefields , along with the torpedo cruisers Partenope and Minerva , in support of this strategy . The ship remained in service until early 1920 ; she was stricken from the naval register on 15 March 1920 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Reflections of signals on conducting lines = 
 A signal travelling along an electrical transmission line will be partly , or wholly , reflected back in the opposite direction when the travelling signal encounters a discontinuity in the characteristic impedance of the line , or if the far end of the line is not terminated in its characteristic impedance . This can happen , for instance , if two lengths of dissimilar transmission lines are joined together . 
 This article is about signal reflections on electrically conducting lines . Such lines are loosely referred to as copper lines , and indeed , in telecommunications are generally made from copper , but other metals are used , notably aluminium in power lines . Although this article is limited to describing reflections on conducting lines , this is essentially the same phenomenon as optical reflections in fibre @-@ optic lines and microwave reflections in waveguides . 
 Reflections cause several undesirable effects , including modifying frequency responses , causing overload power in transmitters and overvoltages on power lines . However , the reflection phenomenon can also be made use of in such devices as stubs and impedance transformers . The special cases of open circuit and short circuit lines are of particular relevance to stubs . 
 Reflections cause standing waves to be set up on the line . Conversely , standing waves are an indication that reflections are present . There is a relationship between the measures of reflection coefficient and standing wave ratio . 
 = = Specific cases = = 
 There are several approaches to understanding reflections , but the relationship of reflections to the conservation laws is particularly enlightening . A simple example is a step voltage , <formula> ( where <formula> is the height of the step and <formula> is the unit step function with time <formula> ) , applied to one end of a lossless line , and consider what happens when the line is terminated in various ways . The step will be propagated down the line according to the telegrapher 's equation at some velocity <formula> and the incident voltage , <formula> , at some point <formula> on the line is given by 
 <formula> 
 The incident current , <formula> , can be found by dividing the characteristic impedance , <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = = Open circuit line = = = 
 The incident wave travelling down the line is not affected in any way by the open circuit at the end of the line . It cannot have any effect until the step actually reaches that point . The signal cannot have any foreknowledge of what is at the end of the line and is only affected by the local characteristics of the line . However , if the line is of length <formula> the step will arrive at the open circuit at time <formula> , at which point the current in the line is zero ( by the definition of an open circuit ) . Since charge continues to arrive at the end of the line through the incident current , but no current is leaving the line , then conservation of electric charge requires that there must be an equal and opposite current into the end of the line . Essentially , this is Kirchhoff 's current law in operation . This equal and opposite current is the reflected current , <formula> , and since 
 <formula> 
 there must also be a reflected voltage , <formula> , to drive the reflected current down the line . This reflected voltage must exist by reason of conservation of energy . The source is supplying energy to the line at a rate of <formula> . None of this energy is dissipated in the line or its termination and it must go somewhere . The only available direction is back up the line . Since the reflected current is equal in magnitude to the incident current , it must also be so that 
 <formula> 
 These two voltages will add to each other so that after the step has been reflected , twice the incident voltage appears across the output terminals of the line . As the reflection proceeds back up the line the reflected voltage continues to add to the incident voltage and the reflected current continues to subtract from the incident current . After a further interval of <formula> the reflected step arrives at the generator end and the condition of double voltage and zero current will pertain there also as well as all along the length of the line . If the generator is matched to the line with an impedance of <formula> the step transient will be absorbed in the generator internal impedance and there will be no further reflections . 
 This counter @-@ intuitive doubling of voltage may become clearer if the circuit voltages are considered when the line is so short that it can be ignored for the purposes of analysis . The equivalent circuit of a generator matched to a load <formula> to which it is delivering a voltage <formula> can be represented as in figure 2 . That is , the generator can be represented as an ideal voltage generator of twice the voltage it is to deliver and an internal impedance of <formula> . 
 However , if the generator is left open circuit , a voltage of <formula> appears at the generator output terminals as in figure 3 . The same situation pertains if a very short transmission line is inserted between the generator and the open circuit . If , however , a longer line with a characteristic impedance of <formula> and noticeable end @-@ to @-@ end delay is inserted , the generator – being initially matched to the impedance of the line – will have <formula> at the output . But after an interval , a reflected transient will return from the end of the line with the " information " on what the line is actually terminated with , and the voltage will become <formula> as before . 
 = = = Short circuit line = = = 
 The reflection from a short @-@ circuited line can be described in similar terms to that from an open @-@ circuited line . Just as in the open circuit case the current must be zero at the end of the line , in the short circuit case the voltage must be zero since there can be no volts across a short circuit . Again , all of the energy must be reflected back up the line and the reflected voltage must be equal and opposite to the incident voltage by Kirchhoff 's voltage law : 
 <formula> and , 
 <formula> 
 As the reflection travels back up the line , the two voltages subtract and cancel , while the currents will add ( the reflection is double negative - a negative current travelling in the reverse direction ) , the dual situation to the open circuit case . 
 = = = Arbitrary impedance = = = 
 For the general case of a line terminated in some arbitrary impedance it is usual to describe the signal as a wave travelling down the line and analyse it in the frequency domain . The impedance is consequently represented as a frequency dependant complex function . 
 For a line terminated in its own characteristic impedance there is no reflection . By definition , terminating in the characteristic impedance has the same effect as an infinitely long line . Any other impedance will result in a reflection . The magnitude of the reflection will be smaller than the magnitude of the incident wave if the terminating impedance is wholly or partly resistive since some of the energy of the incident wave will be absorbed in the resistance . The voltage , <formula> , across the terminating impedance , <formula> , may be calculated by replacing the output of the line with an equivalent generator ( figure 4 ) and is given by 
 <formula> 
 The reflection , <formula> must be the exact amount required to make <formula> , 
 <formula> 
 The reflection coefficient , <formula> , is defined as 
 <formula> 
 and substituting in the expression for <formula> , 
 <formula> 
 In general <formula> is a complex function but the above expression shows that the magnitude is limited to 
 <formula> when <formula> 
 The physical interpretation of this is that the reflection cannot be greater than the incident wave when only passive elements are involved ( but see negative resistance amplifier for an example where this condition does not hold ) . For the special cases described above , 
 When both <formula> and <formula> are purely resistive then <formula> must be purely real . In the general case when <formula> is complex , this is to be interpreted as a shift in phase of the reflected wave relative to the incident wave . 
 = = = Reactive termination = = = 
 Another special case occurs when <formula> is purely real ( <formula> ) and <formula> is purely imaginary ( <formula> ) , that is , it is a reactance . In this case , 
 <formula> 
 Since 
 <formula> 
 then 
 <formula> 
 showing that all the incident wave is reflected , and none of it is absorbed in the termination , as is to be expected from a pure reactance . There is , however , a change of phase , <formula> , in the reflection given by 
 <formula> 
 = = = Discontinuity along line = = = 
 A discontinuity , or mismatch , somewhere along the length of the line results in part of the incident wave being reflected and part being transmitted onward in the second section of line as shown in figure 5 . The reflection coefficient in this case is given by 
 <formula> 
 In a similar manner , a transmission coefficient , <formula> , can be defined to describe the portion of the wave , <formula> , that it is transmitted in the forward direction : 
 <formula> 
 Another kind of discontinuity is caused when both sections of line have an identical characteristic impedance but there is a lumped element , <formula> , at the discontinuity . For the example shown ( figure 6 ) of a shunt lumped element , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Similar expressions can be developed for a series element , or any electrical network for that matter . 
 = = = Networks = = = 
 Reflections in more complex scenarios , such as found on a network of cables , can result in very complicated and long lasting waveforms on the cable . Even a simple <unk> pulse entering a cable system as uncomplicated as the power wiring found in a typical private home can result in an oscillatory disturbance as the pulse is reflected to and fro from multiple circuit ends . These ring waves as they are known persist for far longer than the original pulse and their waveforms bears little obvious resemblance to the original disturbance , containing high frequency components in the tens of MHz range . 
 = = Standing waves = = 
 For a transmission line carrying sinusoidal waves , the phase of the reflected wave is continually changing with distance , with respect to the incident wave , as it proceeds back down the line . Because of this continuous change there are certain points on the line that the reflection will be in phase with the incident wave and the amplitude of the two waves will add . There will be other points where the two waves are in anti @-@ phase and will consequently subtract . At these latter points the amplitude is at a minimum and they are known as nodes . If the incident wave has been totally reflected and the line is lossless , there will be complete cancellation at the nodes with zero signal present there despite the ongoing transmission of waves in both directions . The points where the waves are in phase are anti @-@ nodes and represent a peak in amplitude . Nodes and anti @-@ nodes alternate along the line and the combined wave amplitude varies continuously between them . The combined ( incident plus reflected ) wave appears to be standing still on the line and is called a standing wave . 
 The incident wave can be characterised in terms of the line 's propagation constant , <formula> , source voltage , <formula> and distance from the source , <formula> , by 
 <formula> 
 However , it is often more convenient to work in terms of distance from the load ( <formula> ) and the incident voltage that has arrived there ( <formula> ) . 
 <formula> 
 The exponent is positive because <formula> is measured in the reverse direction back up the line and the voltage is increasing closer to the source . Likewise the reflected voltage is given by 
 <formula> 
 The total voltage on the line is given by 
 <formula> 
 It is often convenient to express this in terms of hyperbolic functions 
 <formula> 
 Similarly , the total current on the line is 
 <formula> 
 The voltage nodes ( current nodes are not at the same locations ) and anti @-@ nodes occur when 
 <formula> 
 This does not have an easy analytical solution in the general case , but in the case of lossless lines ( or lines that are short enough to be considered so ) <formula> can be replaced by <formula> where <formula> is the phase change constant . The voltage equation then reduces to trigonometric functions 
 <formula> 
 and the partial differential of the magnitude of this yields the condition , 
 <formula> 
 Expressing <formula> in terms of wavelength , <formula> , allows <formula> to be solved in terms of <formula> : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is purely real when the termination is short circuit or open circuit , or when both <formula> and <formula> are purely resistive . In those cases the nodes and anti @-@ nodes are given by 
 <formula> 
 which solves for <formula> at 
 <formula> 
 For <formula> the first point is a node , for <formula> the first point is an anti @-@ node and thenceforth they will alternate . For terminations that are not purely resistive the spacing and alternation remain the same but the whole pattern is shifted along the line by a constant amount related to the phase of <formula> . 
 = = = Voltage standing wave ratio = = = 
 The ratio of <formula> at anti @-@ nodes and nodes is called the voltage standing wave ratio ( VSWR ) and is related to the reflection coefficient by 
 <formula> 
 for a lossless line . For a lossy line the expression is only valid adjacent to the termination ; VSWR asymptotically approaches unity with distance from the termination or discontinuity . 
 VSWR and the positions of the nodes are parameters that can be directly measured with an instrument called a slotted line . This instrument makes use of the reflection phenomenon to make many different measurements at microwave frequencies . One use is that VSWR and node position can be used to calculate the impedance of a test component terminating the slotted line . This is a useful method because measuring impedances by directly measuring voltages and currents is difficult at these frequencies . 
 VSWR is the conventional means of expressing the match of a radio transmitter to its antenna . It is an important parameter because power reflected back in to a high power transmitter can damage its output circuitry . 
 = = Input impedance = = 
 The input impedance looking into a transmission line which is not terminated with its characteristic impedance at the far end will be something other than <formula> and will be a function of the length of the line . The value of this impedance can be found by dividing the expression for total voltage by the expression for total current given above : 
 <formula> 
 Substituting <formula> , the length of the line and dividing through by <formula> reduces this to 
 <formula> 
 As before , when considering just short pieces of transmission line , <formula> can be replaced by <formula> and the expression reduces to trigonometric functions 
 <formula> 
 = = = Applications = = = 
 There are two structures that are of particular importance which use reflected waves to modify impedance . One is the stub which is a short length of line terminated in a short @-@ circuit ( or it can be an open @-@ circuit ) . This produces a purely imaginary impedance at its input , that is , a reactance 
 <formula> 
 By suitable choice of length , the stub can be used in place of a capacitor , an inductor or a resonant circuit . 
 The other structure is the quarter wave impedance transformer . As its name suggests , this is a line exactly <formula> in length . Since <formula> this will produce the inverse of its terminating impedance 
 <formula> 
 Both of these structures are widely used in distributed element filters and impedance matching networks . 
 = Love , Inc . ( TV series ) = 
 Love , Inc. is an American television sitcom , created by Andrew Secunda , which originally aired on United Paramount Network ( UPN ) from September 22 , 2005 to May 11 , 2006 , lasting one season . With an ensemble cast led by Busy Philipps , Vince Vieluf , Reagan Gomez @-@ Preston , Ion Overman , and Holly Robinson Peete , the show revolves around five matchmakers working in a dating agency . The series was produced by Chase TV , the Littlefield Company , Burg / Koules Television , and Paramount Television , and distributed by UPN in its original run and later by LivingTV and Nelonen in the United Kingdom and Sweden respectively . The executive producers were Adam Chase , Warren <unk> , Mark Burg , and Oren Koules . 
 Originally developed under the working title <unk> , Love , Inc. was intended to be a vehicle for Shannen Doherty . It would have marked her first role in a sitcom . Though picked up by UPN , Doherty was removed from the project at the request of the network due to her poor reception by preview audiences ; Doherty was replaced by Philipps . It was set in New York , but the filming took place at Paramount Studios in Hollywood , Los Angeles and California . UPN heavily promoted the show to attract an " urban " audience , and to that end , paired it with Everybody Hates Chris and included contemporary hip hop music . 
 The series suffered low viewership despite its high ratings among young Hispanic women ; it was cancelled following UPN 's merger with the WB to launch the CW in 2006 . The cancellation of the series , along with that of other black sitcoms , was criticized by media outlets for reducing representation of African American characters and roles for African American actors on television . Critical response to Love , Inc. was mixed : some critics praised its multiethnic cast , while other cited the storylines and characters as unoriginal and Philipps ' portrayal of her character as unsympathetic . It was never made available on Blu @-@ ray or DVD . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Set in New York City , the dating agency Love , Inc. features a staff of single friends desperately looking for love . Newly divorced Clea Lavoy , the creator and owner of the company , seeks out the help of her friend and employee Denise Johnson to reignite her romantic life . She continually struggles to find love despite Denise 's best attempts . The future of the agency is put into jeopardy considering that its success and advertising relied on Clea 's " successful " , nearly decade @-@ long marriage . Love , Inc. also includes the receptionist Viviana , the style expert Francine , and the technician and photographer Barry . 
 Episodes typically depict the inner workings of the agency , such as their first experience with a lesbian client , a consultation with a former priest , and marketing strategies to appeal to geeks and <unk> . Hired as wingmen for their clients , the employees act as " guardian angels for the conversationally challenged " . Each of the five characters have various comedic and romantic adventures outside the agency , like Viviana 's search for an eligible United States citizen to marry in order to secure a green card and Denise 's inability to find true love despite her talent in matching her clients with their " seemingly unattainable soulmates " . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The series features five main characters throughout its run : 
 Busy Philipps as Denise Johnson , a dating consultant and self @-@ described expert at matchmaking , who provides her clients with " come @-@ on lines to use and avoid ; wardrobe and grooming hints , and conversation starters and stoppers " . Despite being characterized as " the Kung Fu master at setting up freaks , " she struggles with finding her own true love . After being contacted by her ex @-@ boyfriend to find the perfect match , she becomes cynical about dating and love , saying " I ’ ve been Wing <unk> my butt off " . Philipps described the character 's love life as a " complete disaster " . 
 Vince Vieluf as Barry , Denise 's roommate and co @-@ worker who serves as the agency 's technician and photographer . Described as an " idiot savant " , he is characterized as a conspiracy theorist who experiences paranoia about everything from dentists to toothpaste companies . He frequently communicates through " head @-@ scratching non sequiturs " , leading to the characters perceiving him as " operat [ ing ] on a whole other level ... and sometimes on a whole other planet " . Vieluf said the character was pitched as " the only guy on the show " and " the luckiest guy in the world " . 
 Reagan Gomez @-@ Preston as Francine , the agency style expert who encourages her clients to use and trust their fashion as a way to find a partner . She is introduced as criticizing Clea 's outfit as belonging to a coach for a women 's basketball team and is characterized as the hip worker at the agency . Francine 's storylines were not fully developed and " remain [ ed ] a bit of a mystery " by the end of the show . According to Vieluf , Francine communicates through a " whole different language " and has a special bond with Barry due to their different approaches to life . 
 Ion Overman as Viviana , an Argentinian receptionist who " solicits personal information in a rather startling way " . She is constantly searching for an eligible American citizen to marry in order to secure a green card . Her heavy accent is written as a source of humor on the show , which led to critics accusing the writers of reducing the character to an ethnic stereotype . 
 Holly Robinson Peete as Clea Lavoy , the founder and owner of the Love , Inc. dating agency . Clea is " thrust into the dating world " following the end of her nearly decade @-@ long marriage , in which her husband has an affair with a younger woman . 
 = = Production = = 
 Love , Inc. was developed under the working title Wing Woman and promoted as a " new ' Hitch ' -esque comedy " . The show 's concept was based on an article from The New York Times that discussed dating services . Production was handled by Chase TV , the Littlefield Company , Burg / Koules Television , and Paramount Television . The Littlefield Company suggested that the show 's creator Andrew Secunda collaborate with executive producer Adam Chase , who had previously worked on Friends . The series was Secunda 's first experience creating a television sitcom . Marta Kauffman , Liz <unk> , and Mark Burg and Oren Koules also contributed to the series as executive producers . On April 12 , 2005 , UPN announced that Doherty was in talks for the lead role while Reagan Gomez @-@ Preston was being considered for the role of the lead character 's " longtime friend , co @-@ worker and roommate " and Ion Overman for an unspecified part . Overman said she was attracted to part since she was searching for a job and viewed the series as a " very cool concept " . On April 18 , Holly Robinson Peete was confirmed to have joined the cast as the boss to Doherty 's character . 
 The series was originally designed as a star vehicle for Doherty , who portrayed Denise Johnson in the unaired pilot . Denise was Doherty 's first role in a television sitcom . Doherty said she immediately loved the script for the pilot , which she described as " hysterical , " but felt intimidated by the role given her inexperience with comedy . The series was initially marketed as featuring Doherty and Peete , before United Paramount Network ( UPN ) announced it would pick it up on the condition Doherty was removed and the character was recast . According to TV Guide , Doherty was poorly received by preview audiences . When queried by an interviewer about the removal of Doherty from the show , executive producer Warren Littlefield said the actress was " fabulous " in the role . According to Littlefield , Doherty actively wanted to change her negative reputation from leaving Beverly Hills , 90210 and Charmed through acting on the show . Peete praised Doherty 's performance on the show , saying " we had so much fun and such a great vibe " . UPN Entertainment president cited the rationale behind Doherty 's departure through the " standard going @-@ in @-@ a @-@ different @-@ direction reason " . Rachel Cericola of TV Fodder listed Love , Inc. as one the " four promising sitcoms for the upcoming TV season " due to the behind the scenes drama involving Doherty 's replacement . 
 UPN announced that Busy Philipps was cast as Denise on July 25 , and later billed as the show 's star . According to Vince Vieluf , the casting change from Doherty to Philipps led to the series being retooled as an ensemble show featuring all the members of the agency rather than focusing on Denise . Vieluf said the alterations in the series ' premise were due to concerns that " people would get tired of a show that was only about the mishaps of one person ’ s love life " . Page Kennedy reported that he was considered for a part on the show , but rejected it for the role of Caleb Applewhite on the second season of the ABC drama Desperate Housewives . Retired Los Angeles Lakers player Rick Fox guest starred in three episodes as David , one of Clea 's love interests . The casting of racially diverse actors was identified with UPN 's position as " the only network to actively program for an African American audience " . Tim Good of the San Francisco Chronicle pointed to the show 's casting as the only way in which it acts as a " positive reference " . Even though the show was set in New York City , filming took place in the Bluhdorn Building at Paramount Studios in Hollywood , Los Angeles , California , and used the multiple @-@ camera format . Transitions between scenes feature images of New York City set to contemporary music , such as The Black Eyed Peas ' single " Don 't Phunk with My Heart " and Kelis ' single " Milkshake " . Todd R. Ramlow of PopMatters described the music as a further attempt to appeal to " an ' urban , ' black @-@ white audience , " and praised the musical choices as a " nice try at crossover for a network whose shows usually target a black demographic " . Aaron Korsh wrote the nineteenth episode as freelance work . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The title for each episode references a popular sitcom . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast history = = = 
 On August 6 , 2005 , UPN officially ordered the series for thirteen episodes . The network later ordered a full season of twenty @-@ two episodes of the show on November 7 , 2005 amid speculation that it would be cancelled . In 2006 , LivingTV broadcast the series in the United Kingdom , and it was broadcast by Nelonen in Sweden in 2008 . UPN paired the series with Everybody Hates Chris , Eve , and Cuts in order to attract an " urban " audience . The network moved WWE SmackDown to Fridays in favor of scheduling Thursdays as focused on sitcoms . This decision was made to establish a " night of scripted programming " and draw more attention from film studios to purchase advertising space for their upcoming releases . Critics questioned the network 's belief that Love , Inc. and Everybody Hates Chris would appeal to the same viewership , and noted the difference in quality between the two , with Love , Inc. frequently cited as the inferior show . While the series initially retained 59 % of the audience from Everybody Hates Chris , the marketing strategy proved unsuccessful when it lost a majority of the viewership in later episodes . 
 Cericola reported that Love , Inc. earned an average of 3 @.@ 6 million viewers per episode and an article in The Hollywood Reporter stated that the series garnered an average of 1 @.@ 0 / 3 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . It ranked 141st among broadcast television networks in the 2005 @-@ 2006 television season . According to the Nielsen Company , the show achieved high ratings among " Latina adolescents Ages 12 @-@ 17 " and earned 3 @.@ 4 million viewers in that demographic for 2005 . It ranked above two other UPN sitcoms : One on One and Half & Half for Latin women in the 12 @-@ 17 age demographic , and in " the top half of all UPN series " for total viewership . The series premiere saw a 6 % increase in the 18 – 49 age range , 53 % in women between 18 and 34 , and 118 % in women between 18 and 49 from the show that aired in the same time period during the last television season . 
 The show , as well as a majority of UPN 's programs , were officially cancelled due to the network 's merger with the WB Television Network ( the WB ) to form the CW in 2006 . Fern Gillespie of The Crisis was critical of UPN 's decision to cancel the series given how the network " in one swoop , wiped out five of its eight African American comedies " for the creation of the CW . Gillespie expressed disappointment at the lack of African American sitcoms on the three major networks by saying : " Without that opportunity for some of the younger artists to hone and develop their skills , it will potentially have a generational impact . " Critic Tim Goodman identified Love , Inc. as one of six shows " geared for an African American audience " and featuring " an African American lead actress " that were cancelled during the merger . He equated these cancellations as a sign of networks " eliminat [ ing ] niche programming " . The series was never made available on Blu @-@ ray or DVD . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Love , Inc. received mixed critical feedback . Ebony 's Zondra Hughes praised the show as one of the shows " the networks promise will keep you spellbound " and identified Peete and Overman as its primary " star appeal " . While reviewing its broadcast on LivingTV , a reviewer from Daily Record listed the show as its " pick of the day " and suggested it for viewers who would " fancy a giggle " . Diane Werts of Newsday found the characters to be " vibrantly well @-@ defined " and the writing " smart , with a light touch " . Peete received a nomination for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Comedy Series in the 37th NAACP Image Awards , but lost to <unk> Arnold who starred in Everybody Hates Chris . 
 The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan praised Vieluf as the standout despite his limited role , but felt the execution of the matchmaking premise was inferior to that done in the 2005 film Hitch . Variety 's Laura Fries wrote that the series had " a quirky vibe , personable cast and snappy writing , " but likened it to the " proverbial old maid " by determining that the storylines and characters required more original material . Jon Bonné and Gael Fashingbauer Cooper of Today commended the series for its multiethnic cast , but wrote that it " struggles to salvage some <unk> bad jokes " . Bonné and Cooper called the show one of the network 's " most vulnerable properties " following the reports of UPN 's closure . 
 Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 28 out of 100 based on 17 reviews , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " . Virginia Heffernan of The New York Times criticized the writing for being " <unk> and sometimes labored " and relying too much on sitcom conventions . Paul Brownfield of the Los Angeles Times criticized the series for being " unintentionally unfunny " , comparing it to the fictional sitcom " Rom and Bored " featured in the HBO comedy @-@ drama The Comeback . The Sun @-@ Sentinel 's Tom Jicha wrote that Love , Inc. was a " lethal combination of a stupid show and a suicidal time slot " . The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan called the series a " grating comedy " that is " destined to be a footnote in history as the show that premiered after ' Everybody Hates Chris , ' and most likely faded shortly thereafter " . Miami Herald 's Glenn Garvin summarized the show as " humdrum " , and Doug Elfman of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times dismissed it as " negligible " . Mike Duffy of the Detroit Free Press found the series to be a " trite little laugh @-@ track factory " . Common Sense Media 's Jill Murphy called the show an " unoriginal look at finding love " filled with " stereotypical clients " , and Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune criticized it for being " neither funny nor particularly youthful " . 
 Critics negatively responded to the character of Denise and Philipps ' performance , and cited both as annoying and unsympathetic . Heffernan described Denise as having a " smug fix @-@ it type " personality similar to Cher Horowitz from the 1995 film Clueless without the charm or charisma . USA Today 's Robert Bianco gave the series a half of a point out of four and called it on the " worst and laziest " comedies of 2005 . Bianco was critical of Philipps ' performance , which was described as " constant motion ; her face contorting , body twitching , voice braying " and transforming the show into something " truly unbearable " . Orlando Sentinel 's Hal Boedeker felt that Phillip 's character was an " overbearing know @-@ it @-@ all " . Matthew <unk> of The Boston Globe called the show a " one @-@ joke affair " and wrote the premise behind Denise had the " same irony that failed to make Alicia Silverstone 's Miss Match very interesting " . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette 's Rob Owen favored Doherty 's portrayal of the character , which he described as " brimming with self @-@ confidence , " and criticized Philipps ' Denise as a " dizzyingly neurotic nutcase " . Ramlow called the series " boringly un @-@ hip " and wrote that the women were " needy and desperate " and " one @-@ shtick ponies " in comparison to those from Sex and the City . 
 = 2009 Football League Two play @-@ off Final = 
 The 2009 Football League Two play @-@ off final was a football match played at Wembley Stadium on 23 May 2009 , at the end of the 2008 – 09 season . The match determined the fourth and final team to gain promotion from Football League Two , the fourth tier of the English football league system , and featured Gillingham , who finished fifth during the league season , and Shrewsbury Town , who finished seventh . 
 The match was Gillingham 's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium and Shrewsbury 's second . The teams reached the final by defeating Rochdale and Bury respectively in the semi @-@ finals . The match remained scoreless until the last minute , when Simeon Jackson headed in Josh Wright 's corner kick to give Gillingham the lead with seconds remaining . The Kent @-@ based club thus won promotion back to Football League One one year after being relegated . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Gillingham had finished the 2008 – 09 season in fifth place in Football League Two with 75 points , two places and six points above Shrewsbury . In the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals , the " Gills " faced Rochdale , who had finished in sixth position . The first leg at Rochdale 's Spotland Stadium on 7 May 2009 finished in a 0 – 0 draw . In the second match at Priestfield Stadium three days later , Simeon Jackson scored from an Andy Barcham cross to give Gillingham the lead in the 13th minute , only for Chris Dagnall to equalise in the 36th minute . Jackson scored a second goal with a penalty kick in the 58th minute after John Nutter had been fouled by Rory McArdle . Gillingham thus won the match 2 – 1 and won their semi @-@ final on aggregate by the same score . 
 Shrewsbury , who had only qualified for the play @-@ offs by defeating Dagenham & Redbridge in the final match of the regular season , played fourth placed Bury in their semi @-@ final . The first match at Shrewsbury 's home ground , New Meadow , was decided by a late own goal from Shrewsbury 's Neil Ashton , who accidentally lobbed the ball over his own goalkeeper Luke Daniels to give Bury a 1 – 0 win . In the second leg at Gigg Lane , Daniels saved Phil Jevons ' penalty kick and Shrewsbury 's Kevin McIntyre scored a goal in the 88th minute to level the tie . With no further score , a penalty shoot @-@ out was required to decide which team would advance to the final . Daniels saved penalty kicks from Andy Bishop and Danny Racchi and Shrewsbury won the shoot @-@ out and thus reached the final . 
 = = Match summary = = 
 The two teams were competing for promotion to Football League One , the third tier of the English football league system . The match was Gillingham 's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium , although the club had played at the original Wembley in 1999 and 2000 . Shrewsbury had previously played at the new Wembley in the 2007 League Two play @-@ off final and at the original in the final of the 1996 Football League Trophy . The attendance of 53 @,@ 706 was significantly higher than the 35 @,@ 715 registered at the previous year 's League Two play @-@ off final . A specific revenue figure for the match was not made public , but half of the gate receipts went to The Football League to distribute amongst its member clubs , with Gillingham and Shrewsbury each receiving twenty @-@ five per cent and no additional television broadcast fee . Gillingham manager Mark Stimson named the same eleven players who had started the second leg of the semi @-@ final against Rochdale , while his opposite number Paul Simpson made two changes from the team which contested the second leg of the semi @-@ final against Bury , replacing David Worrall and Ömer <unk> with Chris Humphrey and Nick Chadwick . 
 Shortly before kick @-@ off , sports betting organisation Sky Bet gave identical odds of 6 / 4 on both teams to win , with 9 / 4 on a draw . The match referee was Clive Oliver , whose son Michael took charge of the League One play @-@ off Final the following day . This was the first time that a father and son had refereed in Football League play @-@ off finals . Pre @-@ match entertainment included teams from <unk> Junior School and <unk> Community Primary School contesting the final of the Football Association Community Cup , a parade by members of the British armed forces , and a performance of the National Anthem led by operatic vocalist Will Martin . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The early part of the game was largely uneventful , with both teams ' defenses looking unsettled . In the first minute Gillingham 's captain Barry Fuller was forced to hack the ball clear of his goal area after confusion among his team @-@ mates . Gillingham began to take control of the game , but the first serious goalscoring opportunity did not come until the 31st minute when John Nutter shot for goal after a corner kick , only to be denied by Shrewsbury goalkeeper Luke Daniels . Josh Wright and Dennis Oli both had goalscoring chances blocked by Shrewsbury 's defenders and Daniels also saved a shot from Wright . Shrewsbury struggled to keep possession of the ball and had few attempts on goal before the half @-@ time break . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 The second half began with Gillingham dominating play , and Andy Barcham had a <unk> shot tipped away by goalkeeper Daniels . Soon afterwards , Gillingham goalkeeper Simon Royce made his first significant save of the match , stopping a shot from Shrewsbury 's Ben Davies , which marked the start of a spell of pressure from the " <unk> " . Kelvin Langmead 's shot was saved by Royce and Kevin McIntyre headed wide of the target when presented with what Sky Sports ' Richard Bailey considered the best opportunity of the game . 
 In the final minute of the game , Barcham tussled with a Shrewsbury defender and the referee awarded a corner kick to Gillingham . Josh Wright took the corner and Simeon Jackson headed the ball into the goal to give Gillingham the lead . Defender Neil Ashton , standing on the goal line , attempted to keep the ball out but was unsuccessful . Shrewsbury launched a last @-@ ditch attack in a bid to equalise , but captain Graham Coughlan 's header went over the crossbar and Gillingham held on to claim victory and gain promotion back to League One one year after being relegated from that division . 
 = = = Post @-@ match = = = 
 Post @-@ match analysis showed that referee Oliver had erroneously awarded the corner kick from which Gillingham 's goal had been scored , as the ball had in fact come off Barcham and therefore a goal kick should instead have been awarded to Shrewsbury . Paul Simpson referred to this in his post @-@ match comments , but said that " if we look at things like that we will be clutching at straws " . Mark Stimson highlighted the financial benefits of his team 's promotion , noting that large crowds would be expected for matches in League One against Leeds United , Norwich City and Southampton . 
 After the match , Gillingham captain Barry Fuller received the winners ' trophy from the presentation party , which consisted of Lord Mawhinney , the chairman of The Football League , and Mark <unk> , Head of Marketing Assets for the League 's sponsors , Coca @-@ Cola . Two days later , the club staged a celebratory open @-@ top bus parade from Rochester Castle to Priestfield Stadium . 
 = = Match details = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Source : Sky Sports 
 = Flu Season ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Flu Season " ( sometimes referred to as " The Flu " ) is the second episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 32nd overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 27 , 2011 . In the episode , a flu outbreak leaves Leslie ill , but she insists on making a public presentation about her proposed harvest festival . Meanwhile , Andy and Ron bond , and a hospital @-@ bound April torments the nurse Ann . 
 The episode was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Wendey Stanzler . The episode included major development of the characters Ann , Ron and Ben , the latter of whom becomes extremely impressed with Leslie , starting a season @-@ long romance subplot between the two characters . Brent Briscoe made a guest appearance as J.J. , owner of J.J. ' s Diner , a restaurant that has appeared in previous Parks episodes . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Flu Season " was seen by 5 @.@ 83 million household viewers , a six percent decline from the previous episode , third season premiere " Go Big or Go Home " . The episode received positive reviews , with many commentators calling it one of the show 's best episodes . Critics also praised the performance of Rob Lowe during the scenes when Chris is stricken by the flu . Reviewers said the relationship between Chris and Ann made her character much more interesting and funny . 
 Amy Poehler submitted this episode for judging for her nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series in 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The flu season has hit Pawnee hard , leaving nurse Ann ( Rashida Jones ) caring for many sick citizens at the hospital . Among them are April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , who constantly mistreats Ann in retaliation for kissing Andy ( Chris Pratt ) . April asks Ron ( Nick Offerman ) not to tell Andy she is in the hospital , and Ron is anxious not to get involved in their personal affairs . Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) also has the flu , but will not admit it because she wants to give an important presentation to the Pawnee Chamber of Commerce about the planned Harvest Festival , which she hopes will restore the dwindling budget of the parks department . Ben ( Adam Scott ) finally takes a reluctant Leslie to the hospital , where she is admitted with a dangerously high fever and dehydration . Ben and Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) decide to do the presentation themselves , much to the chagrin of Leslie , who does not trust anyone but herself to do it . Tom immediately abandons Ben to hang out with a group of older men at the spa . 
 To Ann 's surprise , Chris ( Rob Lowe ) has also been admitted to the hospital with the flu . The two have been dating and , although Ann really likes Chris , she fears he is too perfect . However , because the extremely health @-@ conscious Chris has a poor immune system and nearly no body fat , he suffers a complete physical breakdown , which makes Ann feel less intimidated about dating him . Meanwhile , Leslie escapes the hospital and heads back to city hall to deliver the presentation herself . Tom returns from the spa , revealing his spa friends are the owners of several car dealerships , which have agreed to lend vehicles to the festival . Although delirious with fever and an excess of flu medication , Leslie delivers a flawless presentation , wildly impressing Ben . She is immediately brought back to the hospital , where Ben tells her 110 businesses have agreed to help with the festival , surpassing the minimum 80 needed . 
 At the department , with April absent from work , Ron asks Andy to fill in as an assistant because the anti @-@ government oriented Ron believes Andy will be ineffective . The two bond over the course of the day , and Andy begins to tell Ron about his problems with April , for whom he still harbors romantic feelings . Although initially not wishing to get involved , Ron reluctantly tells Andy she is at the hospital and he should visit her . Meanwhile , Ann remains pleasant throughout her nursing shift despite April 's constant abuse . The second her shift ends , however , Ann immediately loses her temper and curses at April . Ann apologizes for kissing Andy , but insists it was a mistake and that April should stop taking it out on Andy . Later , Andy visits April , who pretends to be asleep but smiles , revealing she is happy he came . 
 At the end of the episode , Chris tells Ben they have been called back to Indianapolis for a new assignment , but both agree to seek an extension to stay in Pawnee longer . Although both claim they want to help organize the Harvest Festival , it is hinted they really want to stay because of Leslie and Ann . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Flu Season " was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Wendey Stanzler . Like all six of the first third season episodes , it was written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . However , although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date , Parks was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011 , many months after production on " Flu Season " was already finished . Although initially titled " The Flu " in original press releases , and referred to as such by several news articles , the episode title was later formally changed to " Flu Season " . " Flu Season " continued the subplot of restoring the parks department budget through a harvest festival , which will continue to be a major story arc throughout the first six episodes of the season . Brent Briscoe makes an appearance in " Flu Season " as J.J. , the owner of J.J. ' s Diner . Although the restaurant appears in the previous episode " The Reporter " , " Summer Catalog " and " The Master Plan " , " Flu Season " marked the first appearance of J.J. himself . 
 Michael Schur , co @-@ creator of Parks and Recreation , said the episode included development of several of the protagonist characters , including Ben Wyatt , Ann Perkins and Ron Swanson . One of the major story arcs of the season entails Ben , who had never had a firm sense of home , gradually falling in love with the town of Pawnee due to the optimism and enthusiasm Leslie Knope shows for the town and her job . Commentators suggested this transition appeared to begin in " Flu Season " , when Ben is visibly , extremely impressed by Leslie 's perfect deliverance of a public presentation despite her illness . Steve Kandell of New York magazine wrote : " This is obviously the moment when Ben ’ s begrudging respect for her becomes something else " , and The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow wrote : " Parks and Recreation has allowed Ben to develop in the background so far , but his affection for Pawnee is clearly growing . " 
 " Flu Season " also demonstrated a departure in the way Ann 's romantic relationships were handled compared to past seasons . The character previously dated Andy Dwyer , and Mark Brendanawicz ( Paul Schneider ) who was written out of the show at the end of the second season . In both cases , Ann was primarily in control of the relationship due to Andy 's immaturity and Mark 's lack of experience in long @-@ term romances . Schur said of Ann 's relationship with Chris , " This is the first time that Ann just completely loses herself and really falls for a guy super hard . And the relationship goes in a lot of funny , unexpected directions . " Intimidated by her inability to find a flaw in the extremely positive and physically perfect Chris , Ann acts more awkwardly and nerdy around him than her character has been in the past . " Flu Season " also demonstrated deeper levels to Ron Swanson , who adamantly insists " I 'm not interested in caring about people " , yet reveals he cares about both Andy and April , and tries to help the two reconcile . Schur said Ron takes on a sort of father figure role , " and he ends up revealing in a tiny , tiny , tiny way that 's still true to the character that he has genuine feelings of caring for the people who work around him in the Parks office " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode , Ben compares Leslie 's delivery of a perfect presentation despite having the flu to basketball player Michael Jordan 's showing during the 1997 NBA Finals . During the fifth game of the series , Jordan lead the Chicago Bulls to victory despite suffering from a serious case of the flu . Ben also compares Leslie 's speech to the famous home run baseball player Kirk Gibson hit off of pitcher Dennis Eckersley during the 1988 World Series , despite Gibson suffering from injuries to both legs at the time . While bonding , Ron and Andy discuss the draft history of the Indianapolis Colts , the NFL football team of Indiana . When Andy suggests Ron eat a burrito called the " Meat Tornado " , Ron says , " You had me at Meat Tornado , " a reference to the line " You had me at hello " from the romantic drama film Jerry Maguire ( 1996 ) . While deluded by the flu , Leslie mistakenly refers to the chamber of commerce as the " Chamber of Secrets " , a reference to the fantasy novel Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets . At one point , while practicing her speech delirious with the flu , Leslie turns to a wall poster and says , " Good evening everyone , I 'm Leslie Monster and this is Nightline , " a reference to the NBC newsmagazine program . Later , while still delirious , Leslie introduces Ben to the presentation audience as " Scott Bakula from Quantum Leap " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Flu Season " was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 83 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with an overall 3 @.@ 0 rating / 8 share , and 3 @.@ 2 rating / 5 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It marked a six percent decline compared to the previous episode , " Go Big or Go Home " , which itself was the highest overall Parks rating for since the premiere episode . The night " Flu Season " was broadcast , almost all of the comedy shows in NBC 's Thursday lineup lost viewership compared to the prior week : while Community remained flat , Perfect Couples was down 19 percent , while The Office and 30 Rock were down 11 percent . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Flu Season " received generally positive reviews , with many commentators praising the performance of Rob Lowe , whose character is usually physically fit to almost superhuman proportions but becomes extremely ill and hallucinatory when infected with the flu . Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter said Lowe 's character now seemed well @-@ integrated into the cast , adding " If you 've never believed Lowe can make you laugh out loud , pay attention to that episode . " Steve Kandell of New York magazine said Lowe stole the show from the usual Parks powerhouses of Offerman and Pratt , and called one scene , when Lowe tries to will away his flu by yelling to himself in the mirror " Stop ... pooping ! " , the " single greatest self @-@ effacingly comic moment of his long , handsome career " . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow , who said after two episodes , the pairing of Chris and Ann was already more interesting that Ann 's entire relationship with Mark Brendanawicz in the second season , and that the new romance subplot allowed the normally " straight ( wo ) man " Rashida Jones to display her comedic talents . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis said Chris " really came into his own " in the episode , and also said that Ann 's relationship with Chris made her character more interesting and gave Jones greater comedic material to work with . 
 HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall declared " Flu Season " the one episode he would suggest to newcomers seeking to become familiar with Parks and Recreation because it spotlights so many different characters , includes both warm and comedic moments and includes commentary on small town government . He praised the performances of Lowe and Poehler , the latter of whom was especially effective because there were real stakes to Leslie making her presentation . Matt Fowler of IGN also said Lowe 's character , which he feared would get old fast , had proven to be a strong asset to the show , and Ann 's character was at her strongest opposite him . But Fowler also said " Flu Season " was a strong ensemble with great character moments for everyone , including Ron and Andy 's bonding and Ben 's admiration of Leslie . The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler said " Flu Season " gave the entire cast the chance to be a bit sillier than usual and demonstrate their wide comedic ranges . Heisler said Ben and Chris felt like they belonged among the other characters , and he praised the performance of Aubrey Plaza , claiming April 's character seemed more fleshed out than in past episodes . 
 Zap2it writer Rick Porter called " Flu Season " one of the best episodes of Parks and Recreation , particularly praising the " outstanding <unk> " of Ron and the " different shades of Ann " displayed in the show . Porter said he simultaneously loved both Lowe 's over @-@ the @-@ top performance while sick , and Poehler 's more subtle performance . Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic said the way Chris has become so well integrated into the show demonstrates how well the writers keep seemingly ridiculous characters grounded . Richenthal said Poehler made her sick scenes seem like strong character moments rather than just slapstick comedy , and praised the scenes with Ron and Andy , as well as Tom 's scenes at the spa . Joel Keller of TV Squad said the episode strongly developed the characters Ben and Chris , and served as a showcase for the comedic talents of Poehler , who he complimented for not going too over the top . Hollywood.com writer Eric Sundermann said the episode showcased Parks and Recreation at its finest , and said both Poehler and Lowe gave some of their best performance to date . Sundermann praised the pairing of Offerman and Pratt , and said although he had reservations about a Ben and Leslie romance , he believed it got off to a charming start in " Flu Season " . 
 = Aitraaz = 
 Aitraaz ( English : Objection ) is a 2004 Indian Hindi romantic thriller film produced by Subhash Ghai for Mukta Arts and directed by Abbas @-@ Mustan . It tells the story of a man accused of sexual harassment by his female superior . The film stars Akshay Kumar , Kareena Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra and was the third film collaboration between Kumar and Kapoor , and Kumar and Chopra . Aitraaz features Amrish Puri , Paresh Rawal and Annu Kapoor in supporting roles . Its score was composed by Himesh Reshammiya , with lyrics by Sameer . 
 The film was released worldwide on 12 November 2004 to positive reviews , and Chopra received critical acclaim for her role as Sonia Roy , an ambitious woman who accuses an employee of sexual harassment , a first in Hindi cinema . The film grossed about ₹ 240 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 6 million ) domestically , and was a commercial success . 
 Aitraaz received a number of nominations , winning several awards ( including an individual one for Chopra ) . At the 50th Filmfare Awards the film received two nominations , including Best Supporting Actress and Best Performance in a Negative Role , becoming the second ( and final ) actress to win the award after Kajol ; the category was discontinued in 2008 . Aitraaz was remade in Kannada as <unk> in 2011 . The film is based on the 1994 Hollywood film Disclosure . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Raj Malhotra ( Akshay Kumar ) is employed by a telecommunications company , Air Voice . Priya Saxena ( Kareena Kapoor ) , who is looking for a full @-@ time job , goes to Raj 's house for an interview , mistaking him for barrister Ram <unk> ( Annu Kapoor ) , a neighbour and Raj 's friend . Raj and Priya fall in love , marry and are expecting their first child . 
 Raj expects to be promoted to CEO when the company 's chairman ( Amrish Puri ) arrives with his new wife , Sonia Roy ( Priyanka Chopra ) to announce the promotions . Sonia Roy is named the company 's new chairman ; after a discussion with her husband , she announces the promotions . The CEO position goes to Raj 's friend Rakesh ( Vivek <unk> ) , and Raj is named as one of the board of directors . At a party , Raj , accompanied by Priya , learns about his new boss , Sonia Roy . Priya is surprised that Sonia is the wife of the former chairman ( and half his age ) . Raj and his colleagues talk about Sonia Roy and the age difference between her and her husband , and Raj jokes that his magnetic personality was responsible for his promotion . 
 A flashback explores Raj 's previous relationship with Sonia . Five years earlier , Raj and Sonia ( then a model ) meet at a beach in Cape Town . They fall in love and move in together ; Sonia becomes pregnant with Raj 's child , which makes him happy . But Sonia refuses Raj 's marriage proposal and says she is going to terminate the pregnancy . She wants wealth , fame , power and status , and a child would be in the way ; their relationship ends . 
 On the next day , Rakesh tells Raj about a defect in the company 's new mobile handset : a call goes to two people simultaneously — the intended recipient and another person on the phone 's contact list . Raj needs Sonia 's permission to halt production , and she invites him to her house to discuss the matter . 
 Sonia aggressively tries to pursue Raj , who resists . Although he repeatedly rejects her advances , Sonia continues trying to seduce him . For a moment it seems that Raj has given in to Sonia 's advances but after looking at his locket which has Priya 's portrait in it , Raj realises what he is doing and tries to leave . As Raj leaves , she threatens to punish him for spurning her . The next day , he learns that Sonia has told her husband that Raj harassed her sexually . Since he has admitted finding Sonia attractive , his claim of innocence is not believed , and the company pressures him into a resignation . 
 Raj asks Ram Chauthrani to take his case ; Chauthrani tells him not to resign , and to keep going to work . The case goes to court ; Sonia and Roy engage a lawyer , Patel ( Paresh Rawal ) . Although the bulk of the evidence is at first against Raj , his bank manager friend returns from Bangkok and gives him a tape which recorded Raj 's encounter at Sonia 's house . After the tape is proven genuine , Chauthrani is struck by a car driven by someone hired by Sonia and the tape is substituted . 
 When Priya asks Raj why he called their bank manager from Sonia 's house , he replies that he had called Rakesh ; the call went through to the bank manager as well . Priya ( also a lawyer ) continues the case after Chauthrani 's injury . She uses Rakesh 's phone in evidence against Sonia , exposing her earlier relationship with Raj . It is revealed that Sonia married Roy for money , power and status ; when he could not satisfy her sexually , she tried to resume her relationship with Raj . Priya wins the case and Roy leaves Sonia . Guilt @-@ stricken and humiliated , Sonia commits suicide by jumping from a building . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Akshay Kumar as Raj Malhotra 
 Kareena Kapoor as Priya Saxena Malhotra 
 Priyanka Chopra as Mrs. Sonia Roy 
 Amrish Puri as Ranjit Roy 
 Anu Kapoor as Barrister Ram Chauthrani 
 Paresh Rawal as Advocate Patel 
 Vivek <unk> as Rakesh Sharma 
 Preeti Puri as Jenny ( Raj 's secretary ) 
 <unk> Singh as <unk> 
 Dinesh Lamba as Chauthrani 's assistant 
 Firoz Irani 
 Sudhir <unk> 
 Anil <unk> 
 Kamal Chopra 
 Suresh <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 According to Abbas @-@ Mustan , Aitraaz was inspired by National Basketball Association player Kobe Bryant ( who was accused of rape by a fan ) ; the film 's development began when they read about his sexual @-@ assault case in the newspapers . According to the directors , they were fascinated by the possibility of the situation in reverse . About the film 's unusual title , they said the word " <unk> " was colloquial and suited the subject . 
 In early 2004 the media reported that Akshay Kumar , Kareena Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra were cast in lead roles , making it the third film collaboration between Kumar and Chopra after highly successful films Andaaz ( 2003 ) and Mujhse Shaadi Karogi ( 2004 ) . Kumar was cast as a working man accused of rape at his workplace ; Kapoor is his supportive wife , who goes to extremes to defend him . According to the directors , Kumar was cast against type ; an action star , they wanted him to underplay his character . Abbas @-@ Mustan , known for stylish thrillers and intriguing antagonists , cast Chopra in her first negative role . She plays a woman , married to a business magnate more than twice her age ( played by Amrish Puri ) , who falsely accuses her ex @-@ lover ( Kumar ) of raping her to seek revenge . Chopra was initially apprehensive about such a bold character , due to the controversial nature of sexual harassment . Abbas @-@ <unk> and Subhash Ghai ( the film 's producer ) convinced her to accept the role , assuring her that the film would not damage her career . 
 According to Kumar , Raj ( accused of rape by his female boss ) is realistic and could be described as a " new @-@ age metrosexual " man . He enjoyed the strengths and weaknesses of his character , who is not afraid to show his feelings and does not feel emasculated by his situation . Kumar stated : " There 's a quiet dignity and heroism associated with my character . He doesn 't fight for applause . He fights for his convictions . " In an interview with Tribune India , Kapoor remarked that " every Indian woman could identify with her character " of Priya . She said her role ( a woman whose husband is accused of rape by his former girlfriend ) is supportive ; she stands by him , as any Indian woman would . 
 Chopra described her character ( Sonia , an ambitious woman who accuses her employee of sexual harassment ) as " charming and focused " , commenting that her " philosophy is that she has to achieve her goals at any cost . She knows one thing : that nothing can come in between her desires and herself . " Chopra did not identify with the character , considering it a " man @-@ eater role " because of her conservative real @-@ life upbringing . Chopra found it challenging to play such an " extremely negative character " , and had to mentally prepare herself for an hour before each scene to get inside her character . She improvised gestures and expressions ; beyond actions and dialogue , her attitude was aggressive and bold . 
 The film was shot in Cape Town , Goa , Pune and Mumbai . During filming of the sexual @-@ harassment scene , Chopra wept ; it took the directors several hours to remind her she was only playing a character , and additional filming was postponed . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Aitraaz 's soundtrack was composed by Himesh Reshammiya , with lyrics by Sameer . The album contains fifteen songs : seven original , and eight remixes . Most were sung by Udit Narayan and Alka Yagnik . It was released on 24 September 2004 by Sony Music , topping charts on a number of platforms in India . The video of the title track with Kumar and Chopra was shot in one take with a steadycam . 
 The soundtrack was generally well received by music critics , who praised its lyrics and vocals . Planet Bollywood gave a rating of 7 out of 10 , calling it a " good album " . Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama rated the album 3 out of 5 , praising " I Want To Make Love To You " ( all three versions ) : " Sunidhi Chauhan is excellent in this wonderfully @-@ composed track that shocks everyone with the intensity of the lyrics and the music " . He concluded , " Except for two or three average songs here and there , the majority of songs in Aitraaz do keep you engaged " . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The first @-@ look poster of the film , with the tagline " In the world of women , you either play by their rules or else ... " , was received positively by critics ; the film 's trailers were also well received . They and the film 's music aided its marketing . 
 Aitraaz was released worldwide on Diwali , 12 November 2004 , to positive reviews and moderate box @-@ office success . It became the eleventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year in India , and a commercial success . The film was released on DVD 6 December 2004 across all regions in a PAL @-@ format single disc . Distributed by Shemaroo Entertainment , it included a making @-@ of @-@ the @-@ film segment and a photo gallery . The VCD version was released at the same time , and Zee Network bought the exclusive broadcast rights . Aitraaz made its Indian television premiere 30 October 2005 on Zee Cinema . The film was remade in Kannada as <unk> , starring Upendra , Priyanka Trivedi and Celina Jaitley . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Aitraaz received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its direction , cinematography , dialogue , music and performances , particularly Chopra 's . The BBC noted the film 's bold theme , good music and performances and remarked that " Abbas @-@ <unk> have done a good job in ' <unk> ' the whole concept " . It also praised other aspects of the film , describing it as " a gripping edge of the seat drama that keeps viewers glued to their seats " . India Today film critic Anupama Chopra gave it a positive review , remarking that " Aitraaz has no pretensions . It 's good <unk> . " 
 Rediff.com praised the film and its originality in Bollywood , noting " the incredible audience response to the film : the public was clapping and whistling throughout the film 's second half ! " However , they considered some of the dialogues to be " extremely cliched " , especially during the court scene . Film critic Subhash K. Jha , on the other hand , was particularly impressed with the court scene which he considered to be " splendid " , and rated the film 3 out of 5 . He considered Chopra 's performance to be a triumph , remarking : " A star is born ! As the predatory social @-@ climbing seductress who can go to any length to satiate her lust for life , Priyanka Chopra rocks the scene like never before . " However , Jha believed that Kareena was miscast and seemed a little awkward in a non @-@ glamorous role , but " comes into her own in the climactic courtroom sequence where she dons the lawyer 's coat to bail her husband out " . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , describing it as " a well @-@ crafted thriller " and complimenting the directors ' opting for " a theme that has been untouched on the Indian screen so far " and the film 's " dramatic moments " . Like Jha , he believed that the film belonged entirely to Priyanka Chopra , and was impressed with her understanding of the character , and the way she drew the hatred of the audience . He also complimented the performances by Kapoor and Kumar . 
 Sudhish Kamath of The Hindu criticised the film 's second half , commenting that " though first half of the movie is well @-@ paced , the second half sags with the songs and twists forced into the plot to buy time " , but stated that it was " passable with its slick production , a few funny lines , glam quotient and star appeal . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Aitraaz received a number of awards and nominations , particularly for Chopra 's performance . At the 50th Filmfare Awards , the actress received two nominations for this role : Best Supporting Actress and Best Performance in a Negative Role . She won the latter , the second ( and final ) actress to win the award after Kajol ; the category was discontinued in 2008 . Chopra also won the Best Actress Award at the Bengal Film Journalists ' Association Awards . The film received two nominations at the 10th Screen Awards : Jodi No. 1 ( Best Pair ) for Kumar and Chopra and Best Villain for Chopra , winning the latter . It received ten nominations at the 6th International Indian Film Academy Awards , winning three technical @-@ category awards : Best Editing , Best Sound Recording and Best Sound Re @-@ Recording . 
 = SMS Saida = 
 SMS Saida was a Novara @-@ class scout cruiser built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the early 1910s . The ship was armed with a main battery of nine 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns , and six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes were added in 1917 . She was built by the Cantiere Navale Triestino shipyard from 1911 to 1914 , entering service days after the outbreak of World War I. She spent the war as a flotilla leader , conducting raids and patrols in the narrow waters of the Adriatic Sea . 
 In May 1917 , Saida took part in the Battle of the Strait of Otranto , the largest naval action in the course of the war in the Adriatic . Saida was tasked with provoking a final fleet confrontation in June 1918 , but the attack was called off after the dreadnought battleship SMS Szent Istvan was sunk by an Italian motor torpedo boat . Saida was ceded to Italy after war and commissioned as Venezia . She served in the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) from 1921 to 1937 , ending her career as a barracks ship after 1930 . The ship was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1937 . The three Novara class cruisers were the largest vessels of the former Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to see service in foreign navies after the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 Saida was 130 @.@ 64 meters ( 428 ft 7 in ) long overall , with a beam of 12 @.@ 79 meters ( 42 ft 0 in ) and a mean draft of 4 @.@ 6 meters ( 15 ft 1 in ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 500 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 400 long tons ) at normal load , and up to 4 @,@ 017 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 954 long tons ) at deep load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Melms @-@ Pfenniger steam turbines driving two propeller shafts . They were designed to provide 25 @,@ 600 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 100 kW ) and were powered by 16 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . Saida carried about 710 metric tons ( 700 long tons ) of coal that gave her a range of approximately 1 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 800 mi ) at 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . The ship had a crew of 340 officers and men . 
 Saida was armed with nine 50 @-@ caliber 10 @-@ centimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns in single pedestal mounts . Three were placed forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were side by side on the quarterdeck . A 50 @-@ caliber 6 @.@ 6 @-@ centimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun and six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in twin mounts were added in 1917 . The navy planned to remove the guns on the forecastle and quarterdeck and replace them with a pair of 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns fore and aft , but nothing was done before the end of the war . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 60 mm thick sides , and the deck was 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Saida was laid down at the Cantiere Navale Triestino shipyard in Monfalcone on 9 September 1911 . Her completed hull was launched on 26 October 1912 , and construction , including fitting @-@ out , was completed by 1 August 1914 , four days after Austria @-@ Hungary declared war on Serbia . Following the outbreak of World War I , Saida was assigned as the flotilla leader for the First Torpedo Flotilla , which included the six Tátra @-@ class destroyers , six <unk> @-@ class destroyers , ten torpedo boats , and a depot ship . Following the Italian declaration of war against Austria @-@ Hungary in May 1915 , most of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet sortied in a surprise attack on various points on the Italian coast . During the operation , Saida , her sister Helgoland , the cruisers Admiral Spaun and Szigetvár , and nine destroyers provided a screen against a possible Italian counterattack , which did not materialize . 
 The ship 's first combat came on 17 August 1915 when she , Helgoland , and four destroyers bombarded Italian forces on the island of Pelagosa which had recently been occupied by the Italians . In late 1915 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy began a series of raids against the merchant ships supplying Allied forces in Serbia and Montenegro . On the night of 22 November 1915 , Saida , Helgoland , and the 1st Torpedo Division raided the Albanian coast and sank a pair of Italian transports carrying flour . Chronic problems with Saida 's turbines prevented her from being used for much of the war , leaving Helgoland and SMS Novara to shoulder most of the burden of the naval war in the Adriatic . 
 = = = Battle of the Strait of Otranto = = = 
 In May 1917 , Admiral Miklós Horthy planned a major raid on the drifters of the Otranto Barrage , using a force composed of the three Novara @-@ class cruisers . The three cruisers were modified to resemble destroyers , and where thoroughly overhauled in preparation for the attack . Their boilers and turbines were cleaned to ensure the highest efficiency , and an anti @-@ aircraft gun was installed on each ship . The ships were to attack separately while two destroyers made a diversionary attack on the drifters near the Albanian coast . On the night of 14 May , the ships departed port and managed to pass through the line of drifters in the darkness without being identified . As the sounds from the diversionary attack were heard , the drifters released their nets and began to head towards the Strait of Otranto . At 03 : 45 , Saida and the other cruisers began their attacks on the drifters , though Saida stopped her engines and drifted toward the patrol vessels for about 30 minutes to conceal her position . Saida opened fire at 4 : 20 , setting three drifters on fire , before stopping to pick up nineteen survivors . 
 The Austrian ships were first contacted during their retreat by a group of three French destroyers led by a small Italian scout cruiser , Carlo Mirabello , but the heavier guns of the Austrian ships dissuaded the Allied commander from pressing an attack . They were intercepted shortly afterward by a stronger group of two British protected cruisers , Bristol and Dartmouth , escorted by four Italian destroyers . Dartmouth opened fire with her 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns at a range of 10 @,@ 600 yards ( 9 @,@ 700 m ) and Horthy ordered his ships to lay a smoke screen several minutes later . Horthy called for reinforcements that came in the form of the armored cruiser Sankt Georg , which sortied with two destroyers and four torpedo boats . The heavy smoke nearly caused the three Austrian cruisers to collide , but it covered them from the fire from the British ships as they closed the range . When they emerged , the Austrian ships were only about 4 @,@ 900 yards ( 4 @,@ 500 m ) from the British , a range much more suitable for the smaller Austrian guns . 
 The three cruisers were gradually drawing away from their pursuers when Novara , leading the Austrian ships , was hit several times . Novara 's boilers were disabled , leaving her dead in the water . Saida was preparing to take Novara under tow when several Italian destroyers attacked in succession . The weight of fire from the three cruisers prevented them from closing to torpedo range and they scored no hits . Sankt Georg arrived and Saida took Novara under tow for the voyage back to port . The four cruisers assembled in line @-@ ahead formation , with Sankt Georg the last vessel in the line , to cover the other three ships . Later in the afternoon , the old coastal defense ship Budapest and three more torpedo boats joined the ships to strengthen the escort . 
 The ship was tasked to participate in a major attack on the Allied ships defending the Strait of Otranto on 11 June 1918 . Saida , Admiral Spaun , and four torpedo boats were to have attacked the seaplane base at Otranto to draw out the Allied fleet . The operation was called off after the dreadnought SMS Szent István was sunk by an Italian motor torpedo boat en route to the rendezvous for the operation . On 3 November 1918 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian government signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti with Italy , ending their participation in the conflict . Following the armistice , the entire Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet was transferred to the newly formed Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Italian service = = = 
 In 1920 , under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , Saida and the rest of the fleet was surrendered to the Allied powers as war prizes . The ship was ceded to Italy , where she was commissioned as Venezia on 5 July 1921 ; she and her sisters were the largest vessels of the former Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to see active service in the navies of their former enemies . Venezia 's 6 @.@ 6 cm anti @-@ aircraft gun was replaced with a 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun of Italian manufacture ; apart from that modification , the ship served in her original configuration . From 1930 , she served as a barracks ship , first at Genoa and then in La Spezia . In September 1935 , Venezia was drydocked at La Spezia in preparation of being laid up before being scrapped . The ship was sold for scrapping 11 March 1937 and was subsequently broken up . 
 = Apollo program = 
 The Apollo program , also known as Project Apollo , was the third United States human spaceflight program carried out by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) , which accomplished landing the first humans on the Moon from 1969 to 1972 . First conceived during Dwight D. Eisenhower 's administration as a three @-@ man spacecraft to follow the one @-@ man Project Mercury which put the first Americans in space , Apollo was later dedicated to President John F. Kennedy 's national goal of " landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth " by the end of the 1960s , which he proposed in an address to Congress on May 25 , 1961 . 
 Kennedy 's goal was accomplished on the Apollo 11 mission when astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed their Lunar Module ( LM ) on July 20 , 1969 , and walked on the lunar surface , while Michael Collins remained in lunar orbit in the Command / Service Module ( CSM ) , and all three landed safely on Earth on July 24 . Five subsequent Apollo missions also landed astronauts on the Moon , the last in December 1972 . In these six spaceflights , twelve men walked on the Moon . 
 Apollo ran from 1961 to 1972 , with the first manned flight in 1968 . It achieved its goal of manned lunar landing , despite the major setback of a 1967 Apollo 1 cabin fire that killed the entire crew during a prelaunch test . After the first landing , sufficient flight hardware remained for nine follow @-@ on landings with a plan for extended lunar geological and astrophysical exploration . Budget cuts forced the cancellation of three of these . Five of the remaining six missions achieved successful landings , but the Apollo 13 landing was prevented by an oxygen tank explosion in transit to the Moon , which damaged the CSM 's propulsion and life support . The crew returned to Earth safely by using the Lunar Module as a " lifeboat " for these functions . It used Saturn family rockets as launch vehicles , which were also used for an Apollo Applications Program , which consisted of Skylab , a space station that supported three manned missions in 1973 – 74 , and the Apollo – Soyuz Test Project , a joint Earth orbit mission with the Soviet Union in 1975 . 
 Apollo set several major human spaceflight milestones . It stands alone in sending manned missions beyond low Earth orbit . Apollo 8 was the first manned spacecraft to orbit another celestial body , while the final Apollo 17 mission marked the sixth Moon landing and the ninth manned mission beyond low Earth orbit . The program returned 842 pounds ( 382 kg ) of lunar rocks and soil to Earth , greatly contributing to the understanding of the Moon 's composition and geological history . The program laid the foundation for NASA 's current human spaceflight capability , and funded construction of its Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center . Apollo also spurred advances in many areas of technology incidental to rocketry and manned spaceflight , including avionics , telecommunications , and computers . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Apollo program was conceived during the Eisenhower administration in early 1960 , as a follow @-@ up to Project Mercury . While the Mercury capsule could only support one astronaut on a limited Earth orbital mission , Apollo would carry three astronauts . Possible missions included ferrying crews to a space station , circumlunar flights , and eventual manned lunar landings . The program was named after the Greek god of light , music , and the sun by NASA manager Abe Silverstein , who later said that " I was naming the spacecraft like I 'd name my baby . " Silverstein chose the name at home one evening , early in 1960 , because he felt " Apollo riding his chariot across the Sun was appropriate to the grand scale of the proposed program . " 
 = = = Spacecraft feasibility studies = = = 
 In July 1960 , NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced the Apollo program to industry representatives at a series of Space Task Group conferences . Preliminary specifications were laid out for a spacecraft with a mission module cabin separate from the command module ( piloting and re @-@ entry cabin ) , and a propulsion and equipment module . On August 30 , a feasibility study competition was announced , and on October 25 , three study contracts were awarded to General Dynamics / Convair , General Electric , and the Glenn L. Martin Company . Meanwhile , NASA performed its own in @-@ house spacecraft design studies led by Maxime Faget , to serve as a gauge to judge and monitor the three industry designs . 
 = = = Political pressure builds = = = 
 In November 1960 , John F. Kennedy was elected president after a campaign that promised American superiority over the Soviet Union in the fields of space exploration and missile defense . Up to the election of 1960 , Kennedy had been speaking out against the " missile gap " that he and many other senators felt had formed between the Soviets and themselves due to the inaction of President Eisenhower . Beyond military power , Kennedy used aerospace technology as a symbol of national prestige , pledging to make the US not " first but , first and , first if , but first period . " Despite Kennedy 's rhetoric , he did not immediately come to a decision on the status of the Apollo program once he became president . He knew little about the technical details of the space program , and was put off by the massive financial commitment required by a manned Moon landing . When Kennedy 's newly appointed NASA Administrator James E. Webb requested a 30 percent budget increase for his agency , Kennedy supported an acceleration of NASA 's large booster program but deferred a decision on the broader issue . 
 On April 12 , 1961 , Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space , reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union . At a meeting of the US House Committee on Science and Astronautics one day after Gagarin 's flight , many congressmen pledged their support for a crash program aimed at ensuring that America would catch up . Kennedy was circumspect in his response to the news , refusing to make a commitment on America 's response to the Soviets . 
 On April 20 , Kennedy sent a memo to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson , asking Johnson to look into the status of America 's space program , and into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up . Johnson responded approximately one week later , concluding that " we are neither making maximum effort nor achieving results necessary if this country is to reach a position of leadership . " His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first . 
 On May 25 , 1961 , twenty days after the first US manned spaceflight Freedom 7 , Kennedy proposed the manned Moon landing in a Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs : 
 " Now it is time to take longer strides - time for a great new American enterprise - time for this nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement , which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth . 
 ... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal , before this decade is out , of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth . No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind , or more important in the long @-@ range exploration of space ; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish . " Full text 
 = = NASA expansion = = 
 At the time of Kennedy 's proposal , only one American had flown in space — less than a month earlier — and NASA had not yet sent an astronaut into orbit . Even some NASA employees doubted whether Kennedy 's ambitious goal could be met . By 1963 , Kennedy even came close to agreeing to a joint US @-@ USSR Moon mission , to eliminate duplication of effort . 
 With the clear goal of a manned landing replacing the more nebulous goals of space stations and cislunar flights , NASA had to hit the ground running , and decided to discard the feasibility study designs of Convair , GE , and Martin , and proceed with Faget 's command / service module design . The mission module was determined to be only useful as an extra room , and therefore deemed unnecessary . They used Faget 's design as the specification for another competition for spacecraft procurement bids in October 1961 . On November 28 , 1961 , it was announced that North American Aviation had won the contract , although its bid was not rated as good as Martin 's . Webb , Dryden and Robert Seamans chose it in preference due to North American 's longer association with NACA . 
 Landing men on the Moon by the end of 1969 required the most sudden burst of technological creativity , and the largest commitment of resources ( $ 24 billion ) ever made by any nation in peacetime . At its peak , the Apollo program employed 400 @,@ 000 people and required the support of over 20 @,@ 000 industrial firms and universities . 
 On July 1 , 1960 , NASA established of the Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) in Huntsville , Alabama . MSFC designed the heavy lift @-@ class Saturn launch vehicles , which would be required for Apollo . 
 = = = Manned Spacecraft Center = = = 
 It became clear that managing the Apollo program would exceed the capabilities of Robert R. Gilruth 's Space Task Group , which had been directing the nation 's manned space program from NASA 's Langley Research Center . So Gilruth was given authority to grow his organization into a new NASA center , the Manned Spacecraft Center ( MSC ) . A site was chosen in Houston , Texas , on land donated by Rice University , and Administrator Webb announced the conversion on September 19 , 1961 . It was also clear NASA would soon outgrow its practice of controlling missions from its Cape Canaveral Air Force Station launch facilities in Florida , so a new Mission Control Center would be included in the MSC . 
 In September 1962 , by which time two Project Mercury astronauts had orbited the Earth , Gilruth had moved his organization to rented space in Houston , and construction of the MSC facility was under way , Kennedy visited Rice to reiterate his challenge in a famous speech : 
 " But why , some say , the Moon ? Why choose this as our goal ? And they may well ask , why climb the highest mountain ? Why , 35 years ago , fly the Atlantic ? ... 
 We choose to go to the Moon . We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things , not because they are easy , but because they are hard ; because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills ; because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept , one we are unwilling to postpone , and one we intend to win ... . Full text 
 The MSC was completed in September 1963 . It was renamed by the US Congress in honor of Lyndon Johnson soon after his death in 1973 . 
 = = = Launch Operations Center = = = 
 It also became clear that Apollo would outgrow the Canaveral launch facilities in Florida . The two newest launch complexes were already being built for the Saturn I and IB rockets at the northernmost end : LC @-@ 34 and LC @-@ 37 . But an even bigger facility would be needed for the mammoth rocket required for the manned lunar mission , so land acquisition was started in July 1961 for a Launch Operations Center ( LOC ) immediately north of Canaveral at Merritt Island . The design , development and construction of the center was conducted by Kurt H. Debus , a member of Dr. Wernher von Braun 's original V @-@ 2 rocket engineering team . Debus was named the LOC 's first Director . Construction began in November 1962 . Upon Kennedy 's death , President Johnson issued an executive order on November 29 , 1963 , to rename the LOC and Cape Canaveral in honor of Kennedy . 
 The LOC included Launch Complex 39 , a Launch Control Center , and a 130 million cubic foot ( 3 @.@ 7 million cubic meter ) Vertical Assembly Building ( VAB ) in which the space vehicle ( launch vehicle and spacecraft ) would be assembled on a Mobile Launcher Platform and then moved by a transporter to one of several launch pads . Although at least three pads were planned , only two , designated A and B , were completed in October 1965 . The LOC also included an Operations and Checkout Building ( <unk> ) to which Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were initially received prior to being mated to their launch vehicles . The Apollo spacecraft could be tested in two vacuum chambers capable of simulating atmospheric pressure at altitudes up to 250 @,@ 000 feet ( 76 km ) , which is nearly a vacuum . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 Administrator Webb realized that in order to keep Apollo costs under control , he had to develop greater project management skills in his organization , so he recruited Dr. George E. Mueller for a high management job . Mueller accepted , on the condition that he have a say in NASA reorganization necessary to effectively administer Apollo . Webb then worked with Associate Administrator ( later Deputy Administrator ) Seamans to reorganize the Office of Manned Space Flight ( OMSF ) . On July 23 , 1963 , Webb announced Mueller 's appointment as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight , to replace then Associate Administrator D. Brainerd Holmes on his retirement effective September 1 . Under Webb 's reorganization , the directors of the Manned Spacecraft Center ( Gilruth ) Marshall Space Flight Center ( von Braun ) and the Launch Operations Center ( Debus ) effectively reported to Mueller . 
 Based on his industry experience on Air Force missile projects , Mueller realized some skilled managers could be found among high @-@ ranking officers in the United States Air Force , so he got Webb 's permission to recruit General Samuel C. Phillips , who gained a reputation for his effective management of the Minuteman program , as OMSF program controller . Phillips ' superior officer Bernard A. Schriever agreed to loan Phillips to NASA , along with a staff of officers under him , on the condition that Phillips be made Apollo Program Director . Mueller agreed , and Phillips managed Apollo from January 1964 , until it achieved the first manned landing in July 1969 , after which he returned to Air Force duty . 
 = = Choosing a mission mode = = 
 Once Kennedy had defined a goal , the Apollo mission planners were faced with the challenge of designing a spacecraft that could meet it while minimizing risk to human life , cost , and demands on technology and astronaut skill . Four possible mission modes were considered : 
 Direct Ascent : The spacecraft would be launched as a unit and travel directly to the Moon and land . It would return , leaving its landing stage on the Moon . This design would have required development of the extremely powerful Nova launch vehicle . 
 Earth Orbit Rendezvous ( EOR ) : Multiple rocket launches ( up to 15 in some plans ) would carry parts of a Direct Ascent spacecraft and propulsion units for translunar injection ( TLI ) . These would be assembled into a single spacecraft in Earth orbit . 
 Lunar Orbit Rendezvous ( LOR ) : A single Saturn V could launch a spacecraft that was composed of a mother ship which would remain in orbit around the Moon , while a smaller , two @-@ stage lander would carry two astronauts to the surface , return to dock with the mother ship , and then be discarded . Landing only a small part of the spacecraft on the Moon and returning an even smaller part to lunar orbit minimized the total mass to be launched from the Earth . 
 Lunar Surface Rendezvous : Two spacecraft would be launched in succession . The first , an automated vehicle carrying propellant for the return to Earth , would land on the Moon , to be followed some time later by the manned vehicle . Propellant would have to be transferred from the automated vehicle to the manned vehicle . 
 In early 1961 , direct ascent was generally the mission mode in favor at NASA . Many engineers feared that a rendezvous — let alone a docking — neither of which had been attempted even in Earth orbit , would be extremely difficult in lunar orbit . Dissenters including John Houbolt at Langley Research Center emphasized the important weight reductions that were offered by the LOR approach . Throughout 1960 and 1961 , Houbolt campaigned for the recognition of LOR as a viable and practical option . Bypassing the NASA hierarchy , he sent a series of memos and reports on the issue to Associate Administrator Robert Seamans ; while acknowledging that he spoke " somewhat as a voice in the wilderness , " Houbolt pleaded that LOR should not be discounted in studies of the question . 
 Seamans ' establishment of an ad @-@ hoc committee headed by his special technical assistant Nicholas E. Golovin in July 1961 , to recommend a launch vehicle to be used in the Apollo program , represented a turning point in NASA 's mission mode decision . This committee recognized that the chosen mode was an important part of the launch vehicle choice , and recommended in favor of a hybrid EOR @-@ LOR mode . Its consideration of LOR — as well as Houbolt 's ceaseless work — played an important role in publicizing the workability of the approach . In late 1961 and early 1962 , members of the Manned Spacecraft Center began to come around to support LOR , including the newly hired deputy director of the Office of Manned Space Flight , Joseph Shea , who became a champion of LOR . The engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) , which had much to lose from the decision , took longer to become convinced of its merits , but their conversion was announced by Wernher von Braun at a briefing on June 7 , 1962 . 
 But even after NASA reached internal agreement , it was far from smooth sailing . Kennedy 's science advisor Jerome Wiesner , who had expressed his opposition to manned spaceflight to Kennedy before the President took office , and had opposed the decision to land men on the Moon , hired Golovin , who had left NASA , to chair his own " Space Vehicle Panel " , ostensibly to monitor , but actually to second @-@ guess NASA 's decisions on the Saturn V launch vehicle and LOR by forcing Shea , Seamans , and even Webb to defend themselves , delaying its formal announcement to the press on July 11 , 1962 , and forcing Webb to still hedge the decision as " tentative " . 
 Wiesner kept up the pressure , even making the disagreement public during a two @-@ day September visit by the President to Marshall Space Flight Center . Wiesner blurted out " No , that 's no good " in front of the press , during a presentation by von Braun . Webb jumped in and defended von Braun , until Kennedy ended the squabble by stating that the matter was " still subject to final review " . Webb held firm , and issued a request for proposal to candidate Lunar Excursion Module ( LEM ) contractors . Wiesner finally relented , unwilling to settle the dispute once and for all in Kennedy 's office , because of the President 's involvement with the October Cuban missile crisis , and fear of Kennedy 's support for Webb . NASA announced the selection of Grumman as the LEM contractor in November 1962 . 
 Space historian James Hansen concludes that : 
 Without NASA 's adoption of this stubbornly held minority opinion in 1962 , the United States may still have reached the Moon , but almost certainly it would not have been accomplished by the end of the 1960s , President Kennedy 's target date . 
 The LOR method had the advantage of allowing the lander spacecraft to be used as a " lifeboat " in the event of a failure of the command ship . Some documents prove this theory was discussed before and after the method was chosen . A 1964 MSC study concluded , " The LM [ as lifeboat ] ... was finally dropped , because no single reasonable CSM failure could be identified that would prohibit use of the SPS . " Ironically , just such a failure happened on Apollo 13 when an oxygen tank explosion left the CSM without electrical power . The Lunar Module provided propulsion , electrical power and life support to get the crew home safely . 
 = = Spacecraft = = 
 Faget 's preliminary Apollo design employed a cone @-@ shaped command module , supported by one of several service modules providing propulsion and electrical power , sized appropriately for the space station , cislunar , and lunar landing missions . Once Kennedy 's Moon landing goal became official , detailed design began of a Command / Service Module ( CSM ) in which the crew would spend the entire direct @-@ ascent mission and lift off from the lunar surface for the return trip , after being soft @-@ landed by a larger landing propulsion module . The final choice of lunar orbit rendezvous changed the CSM 's role to the translunar ferry used to transport the crew , along with a new spacecraft , the Lunar Excursion Module ( LEM , later shortened to Lunar Module , LM ) which would take two men to the lunar surface and return them to the CSM . 
 = = = Command / Service Module = = = 
 The Command Module ( CM ) was the conical crew cabin , designed to carry three astronauts from launch to lunar orbit and back to an Earth ocean landing . It was the only component of the Apollo spacecraft to survive without major configuration changes as the program evolved from the early Apollo study designs . Its exterior was covered with an ablative heat shield , and had its own reaction control system ( RCS ) engines to control its attitude and steer its atmospheric entry path . Parachutes were carried to slow its descent to splashdown . The module was 11 @.@ 42 feet ( 3 @.@ 48 m ) tall , 12 @.@ 83 feet ( 3 @.@ 91 m ) in diameter , and weighed approximately 12 @,@ 250 pounds ( 5 @,@ 560 kg ) . 
 A cylindrical Service Module ( SM ) supported the Command Module , with a service propulsion engine and an RCS with propellants , and a fuel cell power generation system with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen reactants . A high @-@ gain S @-@ band antenna was used for long @-@ distance communications on the lunar flights . On the extended lunar missions , an orbital scientific instrument package was carried . The Service Module was discarded just before re @-@ entry . The module was 24 @.@ 6 feet ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) long and 12 @.@ 83 feet ( 3 @.@ 91 m ) in diameter . The initial lunar flight version weighed approximately 51 @,@ 300 pounds ( 23 @,@ 300 kg ) fully fueled , while a later version designed to carry a lunar orbit scientific instrument package weighed just over 54 @,@ 000 pounds ( 24 @,@ 000 kg ) . 
 North American Aviation won the contract to build the CSM , and also the second stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle for NASA . Because the CSM design was started early before the selection of lunar orbit rendezvous , the service propulsion engine was sized to lift the CSM off of the Moon , and thus was oversized to about twice the thrust required for translunar flight . Also , there was no provision for docking with the Lunar Module . A 1964 program definition study concluded that the initial design should be continued as Block I which would be used for early testing , while Block II , the actual lunar spacecraft , would incorporate the docking equipment and take advantage of the lessons learned in Block I development . 
 = = = Lunar Module = = = 
 The Lunar Module ( LM ) was designed to descend from lunar orbit to land two astronauts on the Moon and take them back to orbit to rendezvous with the Command Module . Not designed to fly through the Earth 's atmosphere or return to Earth , its fuselage was designed totally without aerodynamic considerations , and was of an extremely lightweight construction . It consisted of separate descent and ascent stages , each with its own engine . The descent stage contained storage for the descent propellant , surface stay consumables , and surface exploration equipment . The ascent stage contained the crew cabin , ascent propellant , and a reaction control system . The initial LM model weighed approximately 33 @,@ 300 pounds ( 15 @,@ 100 kg ) , and allowed surface stays up to around 34 hours . An Extended Lunar Module weighed over 36 @,@ 200 pounds ( 16 @,@ 400 kg ) , and allowed surface stays of over 3 days . The contract for design and construction of the Lunar Module was awarded to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation , and the project was overseen by Thomas J. Kelly . 
 = = Launch vehicles = = 
 Before the Apollo program began , Wernher von Braun and his team of rocket engineers had started work on plans for very large launch vehicles , the Saturn series , and the even larger Nova series . In the midst of these plans , von Braun was transferred from the Army to NASA , and made Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center . The initial direct ascent plan to send the three @-@ man Apollo Command / Service Module directly to the lunar surface , on top of a large descent rocket stage , would require a Nova @-@ class launcher , with a lunar payload capability of over 180 @,@ 000 pounds ( 82 @,@ 000 kg ) . The June 11 , 1962 , decision to use lunar orbit rendezvous enabled the Saturn V to replace the Nova , and the MSFC proceeded to develop the Saturn rocket family for Apollo . 
 = = = Little Joe II = = = 
 Since Apollo , like Mercury , would require a launch escape system ( LES ) in case of a launch failure , a relatively small rocket was required for qualification flight testing of this system . A size bigger than the NAA Little Joe would be required , so the Little Joe II was built by General Dynamics / Convair . After an August 1963 qualification test flight , four LES test flights ( A @-@ 001 through 004 ) were made at the White Sands Missile Range between May 1964 and January 1966 . 
 = = = Saturn I = = = 
 Since Apollo , like Mercury , used more than one launch vehicle for space missions , NASA used spacecraft @-@ launch vehicle combination series numbers : AS @-@ 10x for Saturn I , AS @-@ 20x for Saturn IB , and AS @-@ <unk> for Saturn V ( compare Mercury @-@ Redstone 3 , Mercury @-@ Atlas 6 ) to designate and plan all missions , rather than numbering them sequentially as in Project Gemini . This was changed by the time manned flights began . 
 Saturn I , the first US heavy lift launch vehicle , was initially planned to launch partially equipped CSMs in low Earth orbit tests . The S @-@ I first stage burned RP @-@ 1 with liquid oxygen ( LOX ) oxidizer in eight clustered <unk> H @-@ 1 engines , to produce 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 6 @,@ 670 kN ) of thrust . The S @-@ IV second stage used six liquid hydrogen @-@ fueled Pratt & Whitney RL @-@ 10 engines with 90 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 400 kN ) of thrust . A planned Centaur ( S @-@ V ) third stage with two RL @-@ 10 engines , never flew on Saturn I. 
 The first four Saturn I test flights were launched from LC @-@ 34 , with only live first stages , carrying dummy upper stages filled with water . The first flight with a live S @-@ IV was launched from LC @-@ 37 . This was followed by five launches of boilerplate CSMs ( designated AS @-@ 101 through AS @-@ 105 ) into orbit in 1964 and 1965 . The last three of these further supported the Apollo program by also carrying Pegasus satellites , which verified the safety of the translunar environment by measuring the frequency and severity of micrometeorite impacts . 
 In September 1962 , NASA planned to launch four manned CSM flights on the Saturn I from late 1965 through 1966 , concurrent with Project Gemini . The 22 @,@ 500 @-@ pound ( 10 @,@ 200 kg ) payload capacity would have severely limited the systems which could be included , so the decision was made in October 1963 to use the uprated Saturn IB for all manned Earth orbital flights . 
 = = = Saturn IB = = = 
 The Saturn IB was an upgraded version of the Saturn I. The S @-@ IB first stage increased the thrust to 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 7 @,@ 120 kN ) by uprating the H @-@ 1 engine . The second stage replaced the S @-@ IV with the S @-@ IVB @-@ 200 , powered by a single J @-@ 2 engine burning liquid hydrogen fuel with LOX , to produce 200 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 890 kN ) of thrust . A restartable version of the S @-@ IVB was used as the third stage of the Saturn V. The Saturn IB could send over 40 @,@ 000 pounds ( 18 @,@ 100 kg ) into low Earth orbit , sufficient for a partially fueled CSM or the LM . Saturn IB launch vehicles and flights were designated with an AS @-@ 200 series number , " AS " indicating " Apollo Saturn " and the " 2 " indicating the second member of the Saturn rocket family . 
 = = = Saturn V = = = 
 Saturn V launch vehicles and flights were designated with an AS @-@ 500 series number , " AS " indicating " Apollo Saturn " and the " 5 " indicating Saturn V. The three @-@ stage Saturn V was designed to send a fully fueled CSM and LM to the Moon . It was 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter and stood 363 feet ( 110 @.@ 6 m ) tall with its 96 @,@ 800 @-@ pound ( 43 @,@ 900 kg ) lunar payload . Its capability grew to 103 @,@ 600 pounds ( 47 @,@ 000 kg ) for the later advanced lunar landings . The S @-@ IC first stage burned RP @-@ 1 / LOX for a rated thrust of 7 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 33 @,@ 400 kN ) , which was upgraded to 7 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 33 @,@ 900 kN ) . The second and third stages burned liquid hydrogen , and the third stage was a modified version of the S @-@ IVB , with thrust increased to 230 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 1 @,@ 020 kN ) and capability to restart the engine for translunar injection after reaching a parking orbit . 
 = = Astronauts = = 
 NASA 's Director of Flight Crew Operations during the Apollo program was Donald K. " Deke " Slayton , one of the original Mercury Seven astronauts who was medically grounded in September 1962 due to a heart murmur . Slayton was responsible for making all Gemini and Apollo crew assignments . 
 Thirty @-@ two astronauts were assigned to fly missions in the Apollo program . Twenty @-@ four of these left Earth ’ s orbit and flew around the Moon between December 1968 and December 1972 ( three of them twice ) . Half of the 24 walked on its surface , though none of them returned to the Moon after landing once . One of the moonwalkers was a trained geologist . Of the 32 , Gus Grissom , Edward H. White , and Roger Chaffee were killed during a ground test in preparation for their Apollo 1 mission . 
 The Apollo astronauts were chosen from the Project Mercury and Gemini veterans , plus from two later astronaut groups . All missions were commanded by Gemini or Mercury veterans . Crews on all development flights ( except the Earth orbit CSM development flights ) through the first two landings on Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 , included at least two ( sometimes three ) Gemini veterans . Dr. Harrison Schmitt , a geologist , was the first NASA scientist astronaut to fly in space , and landed on the Moon on the last mission , Apollo 17 . Schmitt participated in the lunar geology training of all of the Apollo landing crews . 
 NASA awarded all 32 of these astronauts its highest honor , the Distinguished Service Medal , given for " distinguished service , ability , or courage " , and personal " contribution representing substantial progress to the NASA mission " . The medals were awarded posthumously to Grissom , White , and Chaffee in 1969 , then to the crews of all missions from Apollo 8 onward . The crew that flew the first Earth orbital test mission Apollo 7 , Walter M. Schirra , Donn Eisele , and Walter Cunningham , were awarded the lesser NASA Exceptional Service Medal , because of discipline problems with the Flight Director 's orders during their flight . The NASA Administrator in October , 2008 , decided to award them the Distinguished Service Medals , by this time posthumously to Schirra and Eisele . 
 = = Lunar mission profile = = 
 The nominal planned lunar landing mission proceeded as follows : 
 = = = Profile variations = = = 
 After Apollo 12 placed the second of several seismometers on the Moon , the S @-@ <unk> on subsequent missions were deliberately crashed on the Moon instead of being sent to solar orbit , as an active seismic experiment to induce vibrations in the Moon . 
 The first three lunar missions ( Apollo 8 , Apollo 10 , and Apollo 11 ) used a free return trajectory , keeping a flight path coplanar with the lunar orbit , which would allow a return to Earth in case the SM engine failed to make lunar orbit insertion . Landing site lighting conditions on later missions dictated a lunar orbital plane change , which required a course change maneuver soon after TLI , and eliminated the free @-@ return option . 
 Starting with Apollo 13 , descent orbit insertion was to be performed using the Service Module engine instead of the LM engine , in order to allow a greater fuel reserve for landing . This was actually first done for the first time on Apollo 14 , since the Apollo 13 mission was aborted before landing . 
 On Apollo 12 and later missions , the jettisoned LM ascent stages were deliberately crashed on the Moon at known locations , as another active seismic experiment . The only exceptions to this were the Apollo 13 LM which burned up in the Earth 's atmosphere , and Apollo 16 , where a loss of attitude control after jettison prevented making a targeted impact . 
 = = Development history = = 
 = = = Unmanned flight tests = = = 
 Two Block I CSMs were launched from LC @-@ 34 on suborbital flights in 1966 with the Saturn IB . The first , AS @-@ 201 launched on February 26 , reached an altitude of 265 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 492 @.@ 1 km ) and splashed down 4 @,@ 577 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 477 km ) downrange in the Atlantic Ocean . The second , AS @-@ 202 on August 25 , reached 617 @.@ 1 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 142 @.@ 9 km ) altitude and was recovered 13 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 25 @,@ 700 km ) downrange in the Pacific Ocean . These flights validated the Service Module engine and the Command Module heat shield . 
 A third Saturn IB test , AS @-@ 203 launched from pad 37 , went into orbit to support design of the S @-@ IVB upper stage restart capability needed for the Saturn V. It carried a nosecone instead of the Apollo spacecraft , and its payload was the unburned liquid hydrogen fuel , the behavior of which engineers measured with temperature and pressure sensors , and a TV camera . This flight occurred on July 5 , before AS @-@ 202 , which was delayed because of problems getting the Apollo spacecraft ready for flight . 
 = = = Preparation for manned flight = = = 
 Two manned orbital Block I CSM missions were planned : AS @-@ 204 and AS @-@ 205 . The Block I crew positions were titled Command Pilot , Senior Pilot , and Pilot . The Senior Pilot would assume navigation duties , while the Pilot would function as a systems engineer . The astronauts would wear a modified version of the Gemini spacesuit . 
 After an unmanned LM test flight AS @-@ 206 , a crew would fly the first Block II CSM and LM in a dual mission known as AS @-@ 207 / 208 , or AS @-@ 278 ( each spacecraft would be launched on a separate Saturn IB ) . The Block II crew positions were titled Commander ( CDR ) Command Module Pilot ( CMP ) and Lunar Module Pilot ( LMP ) . The astronauts would begin wearing a new Apollo <unk> spacesuit , designed to accommodate lunar extravehicular activity ( EVA ) . The traditional visor helmet was replaced with a clear " fishbowl " type for greater visibility , and the lunar surface EVA suit would include a water @-@ cooled undergarment . 
 Deke Slayton , the grounded Mercury astronaut who became Director of Flight Crew Operations for the Gemini and Apollo programs , selected the first Apollo crew in January 1966 , with Grissom as Command Pilot , White as Senior Pilot , and rookie Donn F. Eisele as Pilot . But Eisele dislocated his shoulder twice aboard the KC135 weightlessness training aircraft , and had to undergo surgery on January 27 . Slayton replaced him with Chaffee . NASA announced the final crew selection for AS @-@ 204 on March 21 , 1966 , with the backup crew consisting of Gemini veterans James McDivitt and David Scott , with rookie Russell L. " Rusty " Schweickart . Mercury / Gemini veteran Wally Schirra , Eisele , and rookie Walter Cunningham were announced on September 29 as the prime crew for AS @-@ 205 . 
 In December 1966 , the AS @-@ 205 mission was canceled , since the validation of the CSM would be accomplished on the 14 @-@ day first flight , and AS @-@ 205 would have been devoted to space experiments and contribute no new engineering knowledge about the spacecraft . Its Saturn IB was allocated to the dual mission , now redesignated AS @-@ 205 / 208 or AS @-@ 258 , planned for August 1967 . McDivitt , Scott and Schweickart were promoted to the prime AS @-@ 258 crew , and Schirra , Eisele and Cunningham were reassigned as the Apollo 1 backup crew . 
 = = = = Program delays = = = = 
 The spacecraft for the AS @-@ 202 and AS @-@ 204 missions were delivered by North American Aviation to the Kennedy Space Center with long lists of equipment problems which had to be corrected before flight ; these delays caused the launch of AS @-@ 202 to slip behind AS @-@ 203 , and eliminated hopes the first manned mission might be ready to launch as soon as November 1966 , concurrently with the last Gemini mission . Eventually the planned AS @-@ 204 flight date was pushed to February 21 , 1967 . 
 North American Aviation was prime contractor not only for the Apollo CSM , but for the Saturn V S @-@ II second stage as well , and delays in this stage pushed the first unmanned Saturn V flight AS @-@ 501 from late 1966 to November 1967 . ( The initial assembly of AS @-@ 501 had to use a dummy spacer spool in place of the stage . ) 
 The problems with North American were severe enough in late 1965 to cause Manned Space Flight Administrator George Mueller to appoint program director Samuel Phillips to head a " tiger team " to investigate North American 's problems and identify corrections . Phillips documented his findings in a December 19 letter to NAA president Lee Atwood , with a strongly worded letter by Mueller , and also gave a presentation of the results to Mueller and Deputy Administrator Robert Seamans . Meanwhile , Grumman was also encountering problems with the Lunar Module , eliminating hopes it would be ready for manned flight in 1967 , not long after the first manned CSM flights . 
 = = = = Disaster strikes = = = = 
 Grissom , White , and Chaffee decided to name their flight Apollo 1 as a motivational focus on the first manned flight . They trained and conducted tests of their spacecraft at North American , and in the altitude chamber at the Kennedy Space Center . A " plugs @-@ out " test was planned for January , which would simulate a launch countdown on LC @-@ 34 with the spacecraft transferring from pad @-@ supplied to internal power . If successful , this would be followed by a more rigorous countdown simulation test closer to the February 21 launch , with both spacecraft and launch vehicle fueled . 
 The plugs @-@ out test began on the morning of January 27 , 1967 , and immediately was plagued with problems . First the crew noticed a strange odor in their spacesuits , which delayed the sealing of the hatch . Then , communications problems frustrated the astronauts and forced a hold in the simulated countdown . During this hold , an electrical fire began in the cabin , and spread quickly in the high pressure , 100 % oxygen atmosphere . Pressure rose high enough from the fire that the cabin inner wall burst , allowing the fire to erupt onto the pad area and frustrating attempts to rescue the crew . The astronauts were asphyxiated before the hatch could be opened . 
 NASA immediately convened an accident review board , overseen by both houses of Congress . While the determination of responsibility for the accident was complex , the review board concluded that " deficiencies existed in Command Module design , workmanship and quality control . " At the insistence of NASA Administrator Webb , North American removed Harrison Storms as Command Module program manager . Webb also reassigned Apollo Spacecraft Program Office ( ASPO ) Manager Joseph Francis Shea , replacing him with George Low . 
 To remedy the causes of the fire , changes were made in the Block II spacecraft and operational procedures , the most important of which were use of a nitrogen / oxygen mixture instead of pure oxygen before and during launch , and removal of flammable cabin and space suit materials . The Block II design already called for replacement of the Block I plug @-@ type hatch cover with a quick @-@ release , outward opening door . NASA discontinued the manned Block I program , using the Block I spacecraft only for unmanned Saturn V flights . Crew members would also exclusively wear modified , fire @-@ resistant <unk> Block II space suits , and would be designated by the Block II titles , regardless of whether a LM was present on the flight or not . 
 = = = = Unmanned Saturn V and LM tests = = = = 
 On April 24 , 1967 , Mueller published an official Apollo mission numbering scheme , using sequential numbers for all flights , manned or unmanned . The sequence would start with Apollo 4 to cover the first three unmanned flights while retiring the Apollo 1 designation to honor the crew , per their widows ' wishes . 
 In September 1967 , Mueller approved a sequence of mission types which had to be successfully accomplished in order to achieve the manned lunar landing . Each step had to be successfully accomplished before the next ones could be performed , and it was unknown how many tries of each mission would be necessary ; therefore letters were used instead of numbers . The A missions were unmanned Saturn V validation ; B was unmanned LM validation using the Saturn IB ; C was manned CSM Earth orbit validation using the Saturn IB ; D was the first manned CSM / LM flight ( this replaced AS @-@ 258 , using a single Saturn V launch ) ; E would be a higher Earth orbit CSM / LM flight ; F would be the first lunar mission , testing the LM in lunar orbit but without landing ( a " dress rehearsal " ) ; and G would be the first manned landing . The list of types covered follow @-@ on lunar exploration to include H lunar landings , I for lunar orbital survey missions , and J for extended @-@ stay lunar landings . 
 The delay in the CSM caused by the fire enabled NASA to catch up on man @-@ rating the LM and Saturn V. Apollo 4 ( AS @-@ 501 ) was the first unmanned flight of the Saturn V , carrying a Block I CSM on November 9 , 1967 . The capability of the Command Module 's heat shield to survive a trans @-@ lunar reentry was demonstrated by using the Service Module engine to ram it into the atmosphere at higher than the usual Earth @-@ orbital reentry speed . This was followed on April 4 , 1968 , by Apollo 6 ( AS @-@ 502 ) which carried a CSM and a LM Test Article as ballast . The intent of this mission was to achieve trans @-@ lunar injection , followed closely by a simulated direct @-@ return abort , using the Service Module engine to achieve another high @-@ speed reentry . The Saturn V experienced pogo oscillation , a problem caused by non @-@ steady engine combustion , which damaged fuel lines in the second and third stages . Two S @-@ II engines shut down prematurely , but the remaining engines were able to compensate . The damage to the third stage engine was more severe , preventing it from restarting for trans @-@ lunar injection . Mission controllers were able to use the Service Module engine to essentially repeat the flight profile of Apollo 4 . Based on the good performance of Apollo 6 and identification of satisfactory fixes to the Apollo 6 problems , NASA declared the Saturn V ready to fly men , cancelling a third unmanned test . 
 Apollo 5 ( AS @-@ 204 ) was the first unmanned test flight of LM in Earth orbit , launched from pad 37 on January 22 , 1968 , by the Saturn IB that would have been used for Apollo 1 . The LM engines were successfully test @-@ fired and restarted , despite a computer programming error which cut short the first descent stage firing . The ascent engine was fired in abort mode , known as a " fire @-@ in @-@ the @-@ hole " test , where it was lit simultaneously with jettison of the descent stage . Although Grumman wanted a second unmanned test , George Low decided the next LM flight would be manned . 
 = = = Manned development missions = = = 
 Apollo 7 , launched from LC @-@ 34 on October 11 , 1968 , was the C mission , crewed by Schirra , Eisele and Cunningham . It was an 11 @-@ day Earth @-@ orbital flight which tested the CSM systems . 
 Apollo 8 was planned to be the D mission in December 1968 , crewed by McDivitt , Scott and Schweickart , launched on a Saturn V instead of two Saturn IBs . In the summer it had become clear that the LM would not be ready in time . Rather than waste the Saturn V on another simple Earth @-@ orbiting mission , ASPO Manager George Low suggested the bold step of sending Apollo 8 to orbit the Moon instead , deferring the D mission to the next mission in March 1969 , and eliminating the E mission . This would keep the program on track . The Soviet Union had sent animals around the Moon on September 15 , 1968 , aboard Zond 5 , and it was believed they might soon repeat the feat with human cosmonauts . The decision was not announced publicly until successful completion of Apollo 7 . Gemini veterans Frank Borman and Jim Lovell , and rookie William Anders captured the world 's attention by making ten lunar orbits in 20 hours , transmitting television pictures of the lunar surface on Christmas Eve , and returning safely to Earth . 
 The following March , LM flight , rendezvous and docking were successfully demonstrated in Earth orbit on Apollo 9 , and Schweickart tested the full lunar EVA suit with its Portable Life Support System ( PLSS ) outside the LM . The F mission was successfully carried out on Apollo 10 in May 1969 by Gemini veterans Thomas P. Stafford , John Young and Eugene Cernan . Stafford and Cernan took the LM to within 50 @,@ 000 feet ( 15 km ) of the lunar surface . 
 The G mission was achieved on Apollo 11 in July 1969 by an all @-@ Gemini veteran crew consisting of Neil Armstrong , Michael Collins and Buzz Aldrin . Armstrong and Aldrin performed the first landing at the Sea of Tranquility at 20 : 17 : 40 UTC on July 20 , 1969 . They spent a total of 21 hours , 36 minutes on the surface , and spent 2 hours , 31 minutes outside the spacecraft , walking on the surface , taking photographs , collecting material samples , and deploying automated scientific instruments , while continuously sending black @-@ and @-@ white television back to Earth . The astronauts returned safely on July 24 . 
 That 's one small step for [ a ] man , one giant leap for mankind . 
 = = = Production lunar landings = = = 
 In November 1969 , Gemini veteran Charles " Pete " Conrad and rookie Alan L. Bean made a precision landing on Apollo 12 within walking distance of the Surveyor 3 unmanned lunar probe , which had landed in April 1967 on the Ocean of Storms . The Command Module Pilot was Gemini veteran Richard F. Gordon , Jr . Conrad and Bean carried the first lunar surface color television camera , but it was damaged when accidentally pointed into the Sun . They made two EVAs totaling 7 hours and 45 minutes . On one , they walked to the Surveyor , photographed it , and removed some parts which they returned to Earth . 
 The success of the first two landings allowed the remaining missions to be crewed with a single veteran as Commander , with two rookies . Apollo 13 launched Lovell , Jack Swigert , and Fred Haise in April 1970 , headed for the Fra Mauro formation . But two days out , a liquid oxygen tank exploded , disabling the Service Module and forcing the crew to use the LM as a " life boat " to return to Earth . Another NASA review board was convened to determine the cause , which turned out to be a combination of damage of the tank in the factory , and a subcontractor not making a tank component according to updated design specifications . Apollo was grounded again , for the remainder of 1970 while the oxygen tank was redesigned and an extra one was added . 
 The contracted batch of 15 Saturn Vs were enough for lunar landing missions through Apollo 20 . NASA publicized a preliminary list of eight more planned landing sites , with plans to increase the mass of the CSM and LM for the last five missions , along with the payload capacity of the Saturn V. These final missions would combine the I and J types in the 1967 list , allowing the CMP to operate a package of lunar orbital sensors and cameras while his companions were on the surface , and allowing them to stay on the Moon for over three days . These missions would also carry the Lunar Roving Vehicle ( LRV ) increasing the exploration area and allowing televised liftoff of the LM . Also , the Block II spacesuit was revised for the extended missions to allow greater flexibility and visibility for driving the LRV . 
 = = = = Mission cutbacks = = = = 
 About the time of the first landing in 1969 , it was decided to use an existing Saturn V to launch the Skylab orbital laboratory pre @-@ built on the ground , replacing the original plan to construct it in orbit from several Saturn IB launches ; this eliminated Apollo 20 . NASA 's yearly budget also began to shrink in light of the successful landing , and NASA also had to make funds available for the development of the upcoming Space Shuttle . By 1971 , the decision was made to also cancel missions 18 and 19 . The two unused Saturn Vs became museum exhibits at the John F. Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island , Florida , George C. Marshall Space Center in Huntsville , Alabama , Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans , Louisiana , and Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston , Texas . 
 The cutbacks forced mission planners to reassess the original planned landing sites in order to achieve the most effective geological sample and data collection from the remaining four missions . Apollo 15 had been planned to be the last of the H series missions , but since there would be only two subsequent missions left , it was changed to the first of three J missions . 
 Apollo 13 's Fra Mauro mission was reassigned to Apollo 14 , commanded in February 1971 by Mercury veteran Alan Shepard , with Stuart Roosa and Edgar Mitchell . This time the mission was successful . Shepard and Mitchell spent 33 hours and 31 minutes on the surface , and completed two EVAs totalling 9 hours 24 minutes , which was a record for the longest EVA by a lunar crew at the time . 
 In August 1971 , just after conclusion of the Apollo 15 mission , President Richard Nixon proposed canceling the two remaining lunar landing missions , Apollo 16 and 17 . Office of Management and Budget Deputy Director Caspar Weinberger was opposed to this , and persuaded Nixon to keep the remaining missions . 
 = = = = Extended missions = = = = 
 Apollo 15 was launched on July 26 , 1971 , with David Scott , Alfred Worden and James Irwin . Scott and Irwin landed on July 30 near Hadley <unk> , and spent just under 2 days , 19 hours on the surface . In over 18 hours of EVA , they collected about 77 kilograms ( 170 lb ) of lunar material . 
 Apollo 16 landed in the Descartes Highlands on April 20 , 1972 . The crew was commanded by John Young , with Ken Mattingly and Charles Duke . Young and Duke spent just under 3 days on the surface , with a total of over 20 hours EVA . 
 Apollo 17 was the last of the Apollo program , landing in the Taurus @-@ Littrow region in December 1972 . Eugene Cernan commanded Ronald E. Evans and NASA 's first scientist @-@ astronaut , geologist Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt . Schmitt was originally scheduled for Apollo 18 , but the lunar geological community lobbied for his inclusion on the final lunar landing . Cernan and Schmitt stayed on the surface for just over 3 days and spent just over 23 hours of total EVA . 
 = = Mission summary = = 
 Source : Apollo by the Numbers : A Statistical Reference ( Orloff 2004 ) . 
 = = Samples returned = = 
 The Apollo program returned over 838 pounds ( 380 kg ) of lunar rocks and soil to the Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston . Today , 75 % of the samples are stored at the Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility built in 1979 . 
 The rocks collected from the Moon are extremely old compared to rocks found on Earth , as measured by radiometric dating techniques . They range in age from about 3 @.@ 2 billion years for the basaltic samples derived from the lunar maria , to about 4 @.@ 6 billion years for samples derived from the highlands crust . As such , they represent samples from a very early period in the development of the Solar System , that are largely absent on Earth . One important rock found during the Apollo Program is dubbed the Genesis Rock , retrieved by astronauts David Scott and James Irwin during the Apollo 15 mission . This anorthosite rock is composed almost exclusively of the calcium @-@ rich feldspar mineral anorthite , and is believed to be representative of the highland crust . A geochemical component called KREEP was discovered by Apollo 12 , which has no known terrestrial counterpart . KREEP and the anorthositic samples have been used to infer that the outer portion of the Moon was once completely molten ( see lunar magma ocean ) . 
 Almost all the rocks show evidence of impact process effects . Many samples appear to be pitted with micrometeoroid impact craters , which is never seen on Earth rocks , due to the thick atmosphere . Many show signs of being subjected to high pressure shock waves that are generated during impact events . Some of the returned samples are of impact melt ( materials melted near an impact crater . ) All samples returned from the Moon are highly brecciated as a result of being subjected to multiple impact events . 
 Analysis of composition of the lunar samples supports the giant impact hypothesis , that the Moon was created through impact of a large astronomical body with the Earth . 
 = = Costs = = 
 When President Kennedy first chartered the Moon landing program , a preliminary cost estimate of $ 7 billion was generated , but this proved an extremely unrealistic guess of what could not possibly be determined precisely , and James Webb used his judgment as administrator to change the estimate to $ 20 billion before giving it to Vice President Johnson . 
 When Kennedy made his 1962 speech at Rice University , the annual space budget was $ 5 @.@ 4 billion , and he described this cost as 40 cents per person per week , " somewhat less than we pay for cigarettes and cigars every year " , but that the Moon program would soon raise this to " more than 50 cents a week for every man , woman and child in the United States " . 
 Webb 's estimate shocked many at the time ( including the President ) but ultimately proved to be reasonably accurate . In January 1969 , NASA prepared an itemized estimate of the run @-@ out cost of the Apollo program . The total came to $ 23 @.@ 9 billion , itemized as follows : 
 Apollo spacecraft : $ 7 @,@ 945 @.@ 0 million 
 Saturn I launch vehicles : $ 767 @.@ 1 million 
 Saturn IB launch vehicles : $ 1 @,@ 131 @.@ 2 million 
 Saturn V launch vehicles : $ 6 @,@ 871 @.@ 1 million 
 Launch vehicle engine development : $ 854 @.@ 2 million 
 Mission support : $ 1 @,@ 432 @.@ 3 million 
 Tracking and data acquisition : $ 664 @.@ 1 million 
 Ground facilities : $ 1 @,@ 830 @.@ 3 million 
 Operation of installations : $ 2 @,@ 420 @.@ 6 million 
 The final cost of Apollo was reported to Congress as $ 25 @.@ 4 billion in 1973 . It took up the majority of NASA 's budget while it was being developed . For example , in 1966 it accounted for about 60 percent of NASA 's total $ 5 @.@ 2 billion budget . A single Saturn V launch in 1969 cost up to $ 375 million , compared to the National Science Foundation 's fiscal year 1970 budget of $ 440 million . 
 In 2009 , NASA held a symposium on project costs which presented an estimate of the Apollo program costs in 2005 dollars as roughly $ 170 billion . This included all research and development costs ; the procurement of 15 Saturn V rockets , 16 Command / Service Modules , 12 Lunar Modules , plus program support and management costs ; construction expenses for facilities and their upgrading , and costs for flight operations . This was based on a Congressional Budget Office report , A Budgetary Analysis of NASA 's New Vision for Space , September 2004 . The Space Review estimated in 2010 the cost of Apollo from 1959 to 1973 as $ 20 @.@ 4 billion , or $ 109 billion in 2010 dollars . 
 = = Apollo Applications Program = = 
 Looking beyond the manned lunar landings , NASA investigated several post @-@ lunar applications for Apollo hardware . The Apollo Extension Series ( Apollo X , ) proposed up to 30 flights to Earth orbit , using the space in the Spacecraft Lunar Module Adapter ( SLA ) to house a small orbital laboratory ( workshop ) . Astronauts would continue to use the CSM as a ferry to the station . This study was followed by design of a larger orbital workshop to be built in orbit from an empty S @-@ IVB Saturn upper stage , and grew into the Apollo Applications Program ( AAP ) . The workshop was to be supplemented by the Apollo Telescope Mount , which could be attached to the ascent stage of the lunar module via a rack . The most ambitious plan called for using an empty S @-@ IVB as an interplanetary spacecraft for a Venus fly @-@ by mission . 
 The S @-@ IVB orbital workshop was the only one of these plans to make it off the drawing board . Dubbed Skylab , it was constructed complete on the ground rather than in space , and launched in 1973 using the two lower stages of a Saturn V. It was equipped with an Apollo Telescope Mount . Skylab 's last crew departed the station on February 8 , 1974 , and the station itself re @-@ entered the atmosphere in 1979 . 
 The Apollo @-@ Soyuz Test Project also used Apollo hardware for the first joint nation space flight , paving the way for future cooperation with other nations in the Space Shuttle and International Space Station programs . 
 = = Recent observations = = 
 In September 2007 , the X <unk> Foundation and Google announced the Google Lunar X Prize , to be awarded for a robotic lunar landing mission which transmits close @-@ up images of the Apollo Lunar Modules and other artificial objects on the surface . 
 In 2008 , Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency 's SELENE probe observed evidence of the halo surrounding the Apollo 15 Lunar Module blast crater while orbiting above the lunar surface . In 2009 , NASA 's robotic Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter , while orbiting 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) above the Moon , began photographing the remnants of the Apollo program left on the lunar surface , and photographed each site where manned Apollo flights landed . All of the U. S. flags left on the Moon during the Apollo missions were found to still be standing , with the exception of the one left during the Apollo 11 mission , which was blown over during that mission 's lift @-@ off from the lunar surface and return to the mission Command Module in lunar orbit ; the degree to which these flags retain their original colors remains unknown . 
 In a November 16 , 2009 editorial , The New York Times opined : 
 [ T ] here 's something terribly wistful about these photographs of the Apollo landing sites . The detail is such that if Neil Armstrong were walking there now , we could make him out , make out his footsteps even , like the astronaut footpath clearly visible in the photos of the Apollo 14 site . Perhaps the wistfulness is caused by the sense of simple grandeur in those Apollo missions . Perhaps , too , it ’ s a reminder of the risk we all felt after the Eagle had landed – the possibility that it might be unable to lift off again and the astronauts would be stranded on the Moon . But it may also be that a photograph like this one is as close as we ’ re able to come to looking directly back into the human past ... 
 There the [ Apollo 11 ] lunar module sits , parked just where it landed 40 years ago , as if it still really were 40 years ago and all the time since merely imaginary . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Science and engineering = = = 
 The Apollo program has been called the greatest technological achievement in human history . Apollo stimulated many areas of technology , leading to over 1 @,@ 800 spinoff products as of 2015 . The flight computer design used in both the Lunar and Command Modules was , along with the Polaris and Minuteman missile systems , the driving force behind early research into integrated circuits ( IC ) . By 1963 , Apollo was using 60 percent of the United States ' production of ICs . The crucial difference between the requirements of Apollo and the missile programs was Apollo 's much greater need for reliability . While the Navy and Air Force could work around reliability problems by deploying more missiles , the political and financial cost of failure of an Apollo mission was unacceptably high . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 The crew of Apollo 8 sent the first live televised pictures of the Earth and the Moon back to Earth , and read from the creation story in the Book of Genesis , on Christmas Eve , 1968 . An estimated one @-@ quarter of the population of the world saw — either live or delayed — the Christmas Eve transmission during the ninth orbit of the Moon , and an estimated one @-@ fifth of the population of the world watched the live transmission of the Apollo 11 moonwalk . 
 The Apollo program also affected environmental activism in the 1970s due to photos taken by the astronauts . The most famous , taken by the Apollo 17 astronauts , is The Blue Marble . This image , which was released during a surge in environmentalism , became a symbol of the environmental movement , as a depiction of Earth 's frailty , vulnerability , and isolation amid the vast expanse of space . 
 According to The Economist , Apollo succeeded in accomplishing President Kennedy 's goal of taking on the Soviet Union in the Space Race , and beat it by accomplishing a singular and significant achievement , and thereby showcased the superiority of the capitalistic , free @-@ market system as represented by the US . The publication noted the irony that in order to achieve the goal , the program required the organization of tremendous public resources within a vast , centralized government bureaucracy . 
 There are those who , despite evidence to the contrary , deny that the moon landings took place . The Apollo moon landing hoax claims helped propel conspiracy theories into a quasi @-@ political narrative . 
 = = = Apollo 11 broadcast data restoration project = = = 
 As part of Apollo 11 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , NASA spearheaded an effort to digitally restore the existing videotapes of the mission 's live televised moonwalk . After an exhaustive three @-@ year search for missing tapes of the original video of the Apollo 11 moonwalk , NASA concluded the data tapes had more than likely been accidentally erased . 
 We 're all saddened that they 're not there . We all wish we had 20 @-@ 20 hindsight . I don 't think anyone in the NASA organization did anything wrong , I think it slipped through the cracks , and nobody 's happy about it . 
 The Moon landing data was recorded by a special Apollo TV camera which recorded in a format incompatible with broadcast TV . This resulted in lunar footage that had to be converted for the live television broadcast and stored on magnetic telemetry tapes . During the following years , a magnetic tape shortage prompted NASA to remove massive numbers of magnetic tapes from the National Archives and Records Administration to be recorded over with newer satellite data . Stan Lebar , who led the team that designed and built the lunar television camera at Westinghouse Electric Corporation , also worked with Nafzger to try to locate the missing tapes . 
 So I don 't believe that the tapes exist today at all . It was a hard thing to accept . But there was just an overwhelming amount of evidence that led us to believe that they just don 't exist anymore . And you have to accept reality . 
 With a budget of $ 230 @,@ 000 , the surviving original lunar broadcast data from Apollo 11 was compiled by Nafzger and assigned to Lowry Digital for restoration . The video was processed to remove random noise and camera shake without destroying historical legitimacy . The images were from tapes in Australia , the CBS News archive , and kinescope recordings made at Johnson Space Center . The restored video , remaining in black and white , contains conservative digital enhancements and did not include sound quality improvements . 
 = = Depictions on film = = 
 = = = Documentaries = = = 
 Numerous documentary films cover the Apollo program and the Space Race , including : 
 = = = Docudramas = = = 
 The Apollo program , or certain missions , have been dramatized in Apollo 13 ( 1995 ) , Apollo 11 ( 1996 ) , From the Earth to the Moon ( 1998 ) , The Dish ( 2000 ) , Space Race ( 2005 ) , and Moonshot ( 2009 ) . 
 = Rudolf Duala Manga Bell = 
 Rudolf Duala Manga Bell ( 1873 - 8 August 1914 ) was a Duala king and resistance leader in the German colony of Kamerun ( Cameroon ) . After being educated in both Kamerun and Europe , he succeeded his father Manga Ndumbe Bell on 2 September 1908 , styling himself after European rulers , and generally supporting the colonial German authorities . He was quite wealthy and educated , although his father left him a substantial debt . 
 In 1910 the German Reichstag developed a plan by which the <unk> Duala would be moved inland to allow for wholly European riverside settlements . Manga Bell became the leader of pan @-@ Duala resistance to the policy . He and the other chiefs at first pressured the administration through letters , petitions , and legal arguments , but these were ignored or rebutted . Manga Bell turned to other European governments for aid , and he sent representatives to the leaders of other Cameroonian peoples to suggest the overthrow of the German regime . Sultan Ibrahim Njoya of the Bamum people reported his actions to the authorities , and the Duala leader was arrested . After a summary trial , Manga Bell was hanged for high treason on 8 August 1914 . His actions made him a martyr in Cameroonian eyes . Writers such as Mark W. DeLancey , Mark Dike DeLancey , and Helmuth Stoecker view his actions as an early example of Cameroonian nationalism . 
 = = Early life and reign = = 
 Manga Bell was born in 1873 in Douala in the German colony of Kamerun . He was the eldest son of Manga Ndumbe Bell , king of the Bell lineage of the Duala people . Manga Bell was raised to appreciate both African and European ways of life . His Westernized uncle David <unk> Bell had a great impact on him , and as a youth he attended school in both Douala and Germany . During the 1890s he attended the Gymnasium of Ulm , Germany , although no direct record of his time there survives . Manga Bell was made Ein @-@ <unk> , indicating that he held a certificate for education beyond the primary level but below the Abitur earned for completion of secondary studies . When the prince returned to Kamerun , he was one of the most highly educated men in the colony by Western standards . He made other periodic visits to Europe , such as when he travelled to Berlin , Germany , and Manchester , England , with his father in 1902 . In Manchester , he met the mayor at town hall and was mentioned in the October edition of the African Times ( where the editor doubted that he and his father were actual royalty ) . Manga Bell married Emily <unk> <unk> , the daughter of an English trader and a Duala woman . 
 When his father died on 2 September 1908 , Manga Bell succeeded as the king of the Duala Bell lineage . He was traditionally installed on 2 May 1910 by the paramount chief of <unk> . Manga Bell inherited an 8 @,@ 000 mark pension , cocoa and timber interests in the Mungo River valley , property and real estate in Douala , and a lucrative position as head of an appeals court with jurisdiction over the Cameroon littoral . His father and grandfather , Ndumbe Lobe Bell , left him in a strong political position with Bell dominant over the other Duala lineages . However , his father also left him a substantial debt of 7 @,@ 000 marks . Rudolf Duala Manga Bell was forced to rent buildings to European interests and move his own offices inland to the Douala neighbourhood of Bali . He owned 200 hectares of cocoa plantations in 1913 , a large amount by Duala standards ; his debt had been reduced to 3 @,@ 000 marks by 13 July 1912 . 
 Manga Bell 's reign was European in character . His relations with the Germans were largely positive , and he was viewed as a good citizen and collaborator . Nevertheless , at times he ran afoul of the colonial administrators . In 1910 , for example , the German authorities arrested him and accused him ( with no proof ) of collusion with a large bank robbery . 
 = = Duala land problem = = 
 Manga Bell 's real problems with the regime began later in 1910 . The Germans outlined a plan to relocate the Duala people inland from the Wouri River to allow European @-@ only settlement of the area . The expropriations affected all of the Duala lineages except <unk> , so Duala public opinion was strongly against it , and for the first time in their history , the Duala clans presented a united front . Manga Bell 's position as leader of the dominant Bell clan , coupled with his character , education , and finances , made him a natural leader for this opposition . Manga Bell and other Duala rulers sent a letter to the Reichstag in November 1911 to protest the land seizures . The Germans were surprised at Manga Bell 's involvement , but they ignored the complaint . The chiefs sent another letter in March 1912 . Still , the Germans moved forward with their plan on 15 January 1913 . The chiefs warned in writing on 20 February 1913 that this violation " may well prompt the natives to consider whether it might be wiser under the circumstances to revoke the [ German @-@ Duala Treaty of 1884 and enter into a treaty with another power . " Manga Bell argued that the expropriation plan ignored the treaty 's promise " that the land cultivated by us now and the places the towns are built on shall be the property of the present owners and their successors " and contradicted statements by Governor Theodor Seitz that he would leave Bell lands alone as he constructed a railroad in the colony . The Germans countered that the German @-@ Duala treaty gave them the authority to manage Duala lands as they saw fit . That August , they removed Manga Bell from office and from the civil service and stripped him of his annual pension of 3 @,@ 000 marks . In his place , they propped up his brother , Henri Lobe Bell . 
 The Reichstag debated the expropriation for the first half of 1914 . Manga Bell enlisted the aid of Hellmut von Gerlach , a German journalist . Gerlach managed to secure a suspension order from the Reichstag Budget Commission in March , but the order was overturned when Colonial Secretary Wilhelm Solf convinced elements of the press , businessmen in the colony , politicians , and other groups to finally rally behind the expropriation . Manga Bell and the Duala requested permission to send envoys to Germany to plead their case , but the authorities denied them . In secret , Manga Bell sent Adolf Ngoso Din to Germany to hire a lawyer for the Duala and pursue the matter in court . 
 The desperate Manga Bell turned to other European governments and to the leaders of other African ethnic groups for support . The contents of his correspondence with European powers are unknown ; he may have simply sought to spread word of his cause . His envoys to African leaders reached Bali , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Ngaoundéré , <unk> , and Yaoundé . Karl Atangana , leader of the Ewondo and Bane peoples , kept Manga Bell 's plan secret but urged the Duala leader to reconsider . In Bulu lands on the other hand , Martin @-@ Paul Samba agreed to contact the French for military support if Manga Bell petitioned the British . However , there is no evidence that Manga Bell ever did so . In <unk> , Ibrahim Njoya , sultan of the Bamum people , rejected the plan and informed the Basel Mission on 27 April 1914 that Manga Bell was planning a pan @-@ Kamerun rebellion . The missionaries alerted the Germans . 
 Historians are split on the nature of Manga Bell 's actions . Mark W. DeLancey and Mark Dike DeLancey name him " an early nationalist " , and Helmuth Stoecker says that his actions " had begun to organize a resistance movement embracing the whole of Cameroon and cutting across tribal differences " . However , Ralph A. Austen and Jonathan Derrick argue that " it is unlikely that any such radical action against the European regime was intended . " 
 On 6 May 1914 <unk> Herrmann Röhm wrote to the Kuti Agricultural Station ( where Manga Bell 's envoy was being held ) , 
 We are not confronted with any direct danger of some kind of violent action by the Duala . For now the main value of the statements from <unk> [ the envoy to Njoya ] lies in the fact that they contain material for proceeding against those chiefs who are guilty of actual deliberate agitation in refusal of the expropriation and of resistance that reaches all the way over to Germany . 
 On 1 June 1914 Röhm wrote to the administration in <unk> that based on his calculations of Manga Bell 's annual income from cocoa and timber exports , and accounting for his debts to European interests , the Duala merchants would likely not see it in their interests to oppose the expropriation further . At the urging of Solf , the Germans arrested Manga Bell and Ngoso Din and charged them with high treason . Their trial was held on 7 August 1914 . World War I had just begun , and an attack by the Allied West Africa Campaign in Kamerun was imminent ; accordingly , the trial was rushed . No direct record of the proceedings survives . The dossier of evidence used against Manga Bell claimed that he had been raising funds from inland and that his outspoken opposition was causing unrest among the inland peoples . The regime claimed that Manga Bell had admitted to contacting foreign countries for aid against Germany , but a 1927 recollection by the official defense attorney — riddled as it is with inaccuracies and racist statements — claims that Manga Bell maintained his innocence throughout . Requests for the accused men 's lives to be spared came from Heinrich <unk> of the Catholic Pallottine Mission , the Basel Mission , and the Baptist Mission , but Governor Karl <unk> rejected their pleas . On 8 August 1914 , Rudolf Duala Manga Bell and Adolf Ngoso Din were hanged . The Allies captured Douala seven weeks later on 27 September 1914 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Manga Bell 's execution made him a martyr to the people of Cameroon and painted the Duala as an heroic people . His story became legend and came to represent " the myth of extreme colonial oppression , based upon the catastrophic climax of German rule in Douala " . Manga Bell was still popular well into the 1920s . " Tet <unk> " , a hymn to him composed in 1929 , has remained popular . In 1935 his body was exhumed and reburied behind his house in <unk> , Douala . An obelisk was erected there on 8 August 1936 , the 20th anniversary of his execution . 
 The Germans and later colonial powers in Cameroon became wary of the Duala and never again allowed a powerful chieftaincy to take hold among them . After the French became the colonial power in French Cameroun after World War I , Rudolf Duala Manga Bell 's brother Richard Ndumbe Manga Bell continued to fight to regain the lost Duala lands . Manga Bell 's son Alexandre Douala Manga Bell took office under the French in 1951 . His father 's reputation as a Duala martyr lent Alexandre Douala Manga Bell great standing among the Duala . 
 Cameroon faced a long civil war when the outlawed nationalist Union des Populations du Cameroun political party in the 1950s and ' 60s waged its maquis against French and Cameroonian forces . As a result , overt nationalist sentiment was shunned and figures such as Manga Bell were largely forgotten or only briefly treated in history books . However , signs show that Cameroon is coming to grips with its nationalistic past ; for example , in March 1985 the École Militaire Inter @-@ Armes , part of the military of Cameroon named a graduating class of cadet officers after Manga Bell . 
 = German aircraft carrier II = 
 The aircraft carrier II was a proposed conversion project for the incomplete French cruiser De Grasse . The ship was laid down in November 1938 and lay incomplete in the Arsenal de Lorient shipyard when Germany invaded France in May 1940 . In 1942 , Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine decided to convert the cruiser into an auxiliary aircraft carrier with a capacity for twenty @-@ three fighters and dive bombers . Work ceased in February 1943 , however , due to concerns with the ship 's design , a severe shortage of material and labor , and the threat of Allied bombing raids . The ship was eventually completed as an anti @-@ aircraft cruiser in 1956 by the French Navy . 
 = = Design = = 
 The French cruiser De Grasse was laid down at the Arsenal de Lorient shipyard in Lorient in November 1938 . Work on the unfinished ship stopped following the German conquest of France in May 1940 . In 1942 , the Kriegsmarine considered several proposals to convert the cruiser into an auxiliary aircraft carrier . The final proposal was completed by August 1942 , but work on the conversion did not last long . By February 1943 , the project had been abandoned , for several reasons . The shipyard suffered from a shortage of labor and materials , and the design staff had significant concerns over the arrangement of the engine system . The Allies also posed a serious threat , as Lorient was well within the range of Allied bombers . The ship was eventually retaken by the French Navy after the end of the war , and launched in 1946 . She was ultimately completed in 1956 as an anti @-@ aircraft cruiser . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
