 Rocks - 3 : 36 
 <unk> Urbana - 3 : 46 
 <unk> <unk> - 3 : 24 
 <unk> Me <unk> - 4 : 08 
 Musa <unk> - 4 : 21 
 <unk> - 5 : 58 
 Homem - 4 : 46 
 <unk> ? - 3 : 53 
 Um <unk> - 3 : 23 
 O <unk> - 3 : 44 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Caetano Veloso – guitar , vocals 
 Pedro Sá – guitar 
 Ricardo Dias Gomes – keyboards , bass guitar 
 Marcello <unk> – drums 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Masroor Rock Cut Temple = 
 The Masroor Rock Cut Temple or Himalayan Pyramid is a complex of temples located in Masroor ( or Masrur ) in Kangra Valley , which is 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from Kangra city in Kangra district of the Indian state of Himachal Pradesh . It is now known as ' <unk> ' , meaning " Vaishnavite temples " . It is a complex of monolithic rock cut temples , in shikhara ( raising tower ) style of classical Indian architectural style , dated by art historians to 6 – 8th centuries . Such an architectural style is unique to the northern part of India while there are many places in western and southern India where such rock @-@ cut structures exist at number of locations . There is a lake or pond called Masroor lake in front of this edifice which shows partial reflection of the temples . A legend attributes its construction to the Pandavas of Mahabharata fame who resided here during their " incognito " exile from their kingdom . 
 The temple complex is on a rocky ridge over which an array of monolithic ( made of a single block of stone ) temples have been carved which resemble the monolithic temples of Mahabalipuram , Ellora and <unk> caves . The central temple of this complex , called the Thakurdwara , has extensive well crafted carvings . This shrine facing east has idols of Ram , Lakshman and Sita ( made of black @-@ stone ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Masroor Rock Cut Temple , also known as Himalayan Pyramid , is a complex of temples located in the rolling topography of the Kangra Valley in the Dehra <unk> tehsil , in the backdrop of the <unk> Range and Beas River valley with geographical coordinates of 30 @.@ 00 ° N 76 @.@ 16 ° E ﻿ / 30 @.@ 00 ; 76 @.@ 16 . It is located at the highest point of a local hill feature . It is close to <unk> , which is about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) away . The temple complex is approachable now from a new 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) road built from Pir <unk> near <unk> . There is also a lake or pond called Masroor lake in front of this edifice which shows partial reflection of the temples . 
 = = History = = 
 The temple complex was first identified in 1875 CE on the basis of antiquities found in the Punjab and its subordinate units . Temple is in the village of Masrur , Tehsil Dehra . However , the next published information about the existence of this temple complex was about nearly four decades later in the Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) of 1912 – 13 as travel information of H.L. <unk> , a British explorer , when he was exploring the Himalayas in 1913 . Following this there were many other reports on the art and architecture of this temple complex by other historians . The conservation of the temple complex became the responsibility of ASI from 1914 . 
 The exact period of building this complex is not very clear . It is a puzzle as there are no epigraphic records that ascribe any date for its construction . Considering the huge size of the structures it was believed that the temple was built under major rulers of the area and was not the work of any local chieftains . The area around the temple complex was also known to have many caves and relics indicating large settlements . It has been established by reasoning that during the 8th century kings of Jalandhar moved to Masroor from the plains ( plains of present @-@ day Punjab ) and established their capital here . This is substantiated by the fact that the Gaddis of the lower Kangra district still know this place as Jalandhara or <unk> . Further evidence to substantiate this dating is that the Elephant temples ( 600 – 800 ) near Mumbai in Maharashtra depict similar architectural features as the rock @-@ cut temples . The incomplete rock formations seen in the complex indicate that the temples were left unfinished as the capital of Jalandhara was moved to the more secure Kangra fort . The architectural features also suggested the period of " Gupta classicism " thus placing its date to the 8th century . A particular feature of note is the similarity the complex has with the Angkor Wat in Cambodia , a much larger edifice of a later period of the 12th century . This comparison has opened up an issue of further historical research on the aspect of any " regional inter dependencies or cultural exchange as a catalyst in the construction of both the temple complexes " . 
 The opinion of historians is that the temple was built as a dedication to the Shaivite beliefs of Hinduism ( from the large number of <unk> images seen on the lintels of the main temple and in other adjoining temples ) . But at some stage during the Middle Ages , there was a shift in the religious beliefs of the rulers and people adopted Vaishnavite beliefs of Hinduism as witnessed by the images of Rama , Lakshmana and Sita deified in the main sanctum sanctorum of the temple complex . 
 During the earthquake of 1905 , there was large scale damage to the temple complex . Substantial part of the temples were damaged resulting in many broken parts seen lying scattered around the temple . Further , the heterogeneous structural compactness of the sandstone rock mass , from which the temples have been carved out , has contributed to the damage . A particular structural part of the temple which is not part of the main monolithic temple complex suffered severe damage to most of its circular columns which resulted in collapse of the mandapa and the roof ( probably made of local timber ) of the structure . 
 = = Legends = = 
 According to a popular legend , the Pandavas of Mahabharata fame resided here during their " incognito " exile from their kingdom and built this temple . During this time , as their identity and location was exposed , they shifted from here . This is said to be the reason for the unfinished part of the temple complex . 
 The pond in front of the complex has a mythical link to Draupadi , the consort of the Pandavas . It is stated that it was built for her exclusive use for ablutions . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Masroor Rock Cut Temple , now known as <unk> , meaning " Vaishnavite temples " , is the only such monolithic rock structure built in an improvised form of the Nagara style in northern India ; as otherwise normally Nagara temples are built with brick . This architectural style is unique to the northern part of India while there are many places in western and southern India where such rock @-@ cut structures exist at number of locations . 
 The temple complex is situated on a ridge of sandstone rock exposure which runs in a northwest to south west axis . The middle portion of this rocky ridge , which is at the highest elevation and is prominent , is demarcated by " two transverse and more or less parallel cuttings . " In this portion of the rocky ridge an array of monolithic temples have been carved ( facing an East of NE direction ) ; these temples have strong resemblance to the monolithic temples of Mahabalipuram , Ellora and <unk> caves . The central temple in this complex is called the Thakurdwara which has extensive well crafted carvings . This shrine , which faces east , is deified with idols of Rama , Lakshman and Sita ( made of black @-@ stone ) . Overall , the complex consists of 15 shikara ( tower ) temples carved on the rock ridge over a ridge of 159 feet ( 48 m ) length and width of 105 feet ( 32 m ) , with the central of Thakurdwara flanked by seven temples on either side which have carvings only on the outer surfaces . 
 The temple complex , as built , has a well proportioned and complex " cruciform plan " . Overall there are only nine shikharas ( temple towers ) arranged sequentially in an " hierarchical scale " . The central shikhara is the largest and is built above the garbhagriha ( sanctum sanctorum ) , which has nine tiers topped by a decorated amalaka , which at present is seen separated from the shikhara ( following the earthquake of 1905 ) . The Thakurdwara has a huge door which leads to the garbhagriha which has elaborate carvings . The chambers which follow from the entry door are the antarala , mandapa and mukha mandapa ( 28 by 26 @.@ 5 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m × 8 @.@ 1 m ) supported on huge pillars ) . The garbhagriha , in a square plan ( 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) each side ) , has an altar where the deities are deified . The approach to the entrance door of the temple ( prominently decorated ) , is through a steep flight of steps . There is also a stairway on either side of the main temple which leads to the highest part of the shikhara ( rises to a height of 80 feet ( 24 m ) above the floor of the inset ) of the temple complex which provides scenic views all round , particularly of the <unk> Range . The intricate sculptural detailing on the doors , jambs , lintels , walls , shikharas , and column capitals on the main shrine and other smaller temples consist of figurines of gods and goddesses such as Shiva , Parvati , <unk> and Saraswati , and floral designs . In particular , the temple was conceptualized as a tribute to Shiva . There are many lintels which depict scenes of festivals to celebrate the crowning of Shiva , not seen anywhere else in the country . The lintel on the <unk> of the main shrine shows Shiva 's coronation in a " benign posture " with eyes closed like Buddha . The same type of carving is also seen in the medallion on the shikhara . The lintel carvings also show many divinities including Shiva in the central portion flanked by his sons Ganesha and Kartikeya . 
 The pond in front of the temple facing east , reflects parts of the temple . The construction of the lake is dated to the early 8th century . Its rectangular dimensions are about 25 by 50 metres ( 82 ft × 164 ft ) . The pond has a perennial source of supply as it does not go dry even during the summer season . 
 Many of the fully carved , elegant and graceful statues have been moved out of the complex and are exhibited in the Shimla State Museum . These are 8 such sculptures of Ganesha , Durga , Siva , Surya and Varuna . 
 The architecture of the complex , when viewed during an evening hour , as the sun sets , is an artistic visual treat of a " silhouetted " frozen form of a grief @-@ stricken herd of standing elephants . However , during morning sun light the sculptures , the murals and carvings glow prominently . 
 Apart from the main temple complex , there is a rest house built on the right side over the remaining part of the rocky ridge ; this was built by the Maharaja of Guler , a neighboring state . The rest house is built in a blend of Hindu and Mughal architectural styles with features of arcades and small dome shaped structures . 
 = Vratislav Lokvenc = 
 Vratislav Lokvenc ( born 27 September 1973 ) is a Czech former professional footballer who played as a striker . After playing youth football for Náchod and Hradec Králové , he began his senior club career with the latter team . After moving to Sparta Prague he won five league titles and one cup , as well as the 1999 – 2000 league top scorer award . He subsequently played abroad , playing club football in Germany , Austria and Switzerland for 1 . FC Kaiserslautern , VfL Bochum , Red Bull Salzburg , FC Basel and FC Ingolstadt 04 . He retired in 2009 . 
 Lokvenc played international football for the Czech Republic . He played at the 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup before going on to take part in three major competitions . He made three substitute appearances at Euro 2000 and played in one game at Euro 2004 . His last international tournament was the 2006 World Cup , where he played in two group matches before missing the third through suspension . The Czech Republic did not qualify for the next round of the competition and Lokvenc subsequently retired from international football in 2006 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early success = = = 
 Lokvenc was born into a football family ; his father , also named Vratislav Lokvenc , played club football for FK <unk> nad <unk> in the second football league of Czechoslovakia and later Náchod . Born in 1973 , Lokvenc started his professional career during the 1992 – 93 season with Hradec Králové , joining Sparta Prague in October 1994 . He featured in the 1995 – 96 UEFA Cup for Sparta , scoring the first goal and providing the pass for the second in a 2 – 1 win against Danish club Silkeborg IF , whereby Sparta qualified on the away goals rule for the second round . He scored a goal shortly after entering the game as a substitute in a first round match of the 1996 – 97 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup against Austrian side Sturm Graz ; the match finished 2 – 2 . 
 Lokvenc spent six seasons at Sparta Prague , with whom he won five league titles and the 1995 – 96 Czech Cup . In March 2000 , in a match against České Budějovice , Lokvenc scored four times for Sparta as the match finished 4 – 1 . In doing so he became the third player in the Czech era to score four times in the same match , after Josef <unk> and Robert Vágner . Lokvenc scored twice in the Prague derby match against Slavia Prague in May 2000 , in a 5 – 1 win which secured the league title for Sparta . He was top scorer of the Czech First League in the 1999 – 2000 season with 22 goals , tying the league record , which stood until David <unk> scored 25 goals during the 2011 – 12 season . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Lokvenc joined 1 . FC Kaiserslautern of the German Bundesliga in 2000 , agreeing to the move before the 2000 European Championship . Around the same time , a daughter was born to Lokvenc in May 2000 . He scored six goals in an 11 – 1 friendly match win against an amateur side before the start of the season . In December 2000 Lokvenc scored in the UEFA Cup against Rangers , helping his team qualify for the last 16 of the competition . In the following round Kaiserslautern were paired with Slavia Prague ; after the first match had finished goalless , Lokvenc scored the only goal in the second leg of their two @-@ legged tie to eliminate the Czech team . He scored a hat @-@ trick in the 2002 – 03 DFB @-@ Pokal quarter @-@ final against Bochum , a game which finished 3 – 3 but was won by Kaiserslautern after a penalty shoot @-@ out . Lokvenc played in the final of the competition at the end of May 2003 , but his side were beaten 3 – 1 by league winners Bayern Munich as the latter claimed the double . 
 Kaiserslautern announced that Lokvenc would be sold in April 2004 , citing his salary demands as reasons for his sale . He joined VfL Bochum of the Bundesliga in the summer of 2004 , agreeing the transfer before the European Championships . Bochum were relegated from the league after 33 games of the 34 @-@ game season , with Lokvenc scoring his tenth goal of the season in a 2 – 0 win at third placed Stuttgart . 
 = = = Late career = = = 
 Lokvenc signed for Red Bull Salzburg in the summer of 2005 , rejecting offers from Portsmouth and Hertha Berlin . He described his move to Salzburg as " the best transfer of my life " , arriving around the same time as Germany national team players Thomas Linke and Alexander Zickler . Lokvenc only played four league matches in his first season with the club before requiring surgery on an injury to his right knee in November . He returned to the team in May 2006 , taking part in a match for the first time since July 2005 , as he made an appearance as a substitute in a 2 – 1 home loss against <unk> . The club finished the season as league runners @-@ up , behind Austria Vienna . 
 Lokvenc scored his first league goal of the 2006 – 07 Austrian Football Bundesliga in a December match against Altach , levelling the scores as the game finished 1 – 1 . The club went on to win the league in April 2007 with five matches of the season remaining . 
 In October 2007 Lokvenc scored the only goal in Salzburg 's 1 – 0 UEFA Cup first round win against AEK Athens This was not enough for his team to advance , having lost 3 – 0 in the first leg of their two @-@ legged tie . Lokvenc featured less for Salzburg in the 2007 – 08 season , prompting him to join Swiss Super League team Basel on loan in February 2008 for the remainder of the season . He scored in Basel 's 1 – 0 semi @-@ final Swiss Cup victory against Thun . The club went on to win the 2008 league championship title and the 2008 Swiss Cup . 
 Lokvenc returned to Germany in the summer of 2008 , joining Ingolstadt of the 2 . Bundesliga . 
 = = = Post @-@ playing career = = = 
 After finishing his professional playing career , Lokvenc worked as a scout in the Czech Republic and Slovakia for his former team , Basel . He also played football in the amateur Czech Fourth Division for Union <unk> . He continued to be physically active after his football career , taking part in the 2010 Prague Half Marathon in the same field as former international teammate Pavel Nedvěd . He was again involved in the Prague Half Marathon in 2015 , taking part in a relay alongside Nedvěd , fellow footballer Tomáš <unk> and 2014 Miss Czech Republic , Tereza <unk> . 
 = = International career = = 
 Lokvenc represented his country at under @-@ 21 level , scoring seven goals in 13 matches between 1993 and 1995 . He first played for the senior Czech national team in 1995 . Lokvenc was part of the Czech Republic squad at the 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup in Saudi Arabia . He took part as a substitute in the group stage match against United Arab Emirates and started the third place play @-@ off game versus Uruguay , which the Czech Republic won to finish third overall in the tournament . 
 = = = Euro 2000 = = = 
 At Euro 2000 , Lokvenc made a substitute appearance in the Czech Republic 's opening game against the Netherlands , replacing Pavel Nedvěd after 89 minutes as the match resulted in a 1 – 0 win for the Dutch . He replaced Radek <unk> in the second group match , against France , coming on after 49 minutes in the 2 – 1 loss . Lokvenc appeared in the third group match against Denmark , although due to both teams having lost both of their previous matches , neither team could advance to the next round of the competition . He came on after 79 minutes , replacing Vladimír Šmicer in a 2 – 0 win for his nation . 
 = = = Euro 2004 = = = 
 Lokvenc scored twice as a substitute in a June 2003 qualification match against Moldova , scoring both goals with his head in a 5 – 0 win for his country . He played in one match at Euro 2004 . He started the group match against Germany among a group of players which was described by the BBC as " very much a Czech second string " , but failed to score and was replaced by Milan Baroš after 59 minutes . The Czech Republic won the match , 2 – 1 . 
 = = = 2006 World Cup = = = 
 During the qualification process for the forthcoming World Cup , Lokvenc scored five goals for his country . In a November 2004 match , away at Macedonia , he entered the game in the 76th minute as a substitute for Zdeněk <unk> with the game goalless . He scored the first goal of the game with his head , before Jan Koller made the score 2 – 0 to win the match . In March 2005 , Lokvenc again scored the deciding goal , this time against Finland in Teplice . In a game in which the Czechs had led 3 – 1 , Finland scored twice to level the scores , however Lokvenc made the score 4 – 3 with three minutes remaining . Four days later , Lokvenc scored another goal , heading in a cross from Baroš , in a 4 – 0 away win against Andorra . In June of the same year , Lokvenc scored the first and last goals for his nation in an 8 – 1 home win , also against Andorra . 
 At the 2006 World Cup , Lokvenc replaced the injured Jan Koller as a substitute in the first group match , against the USA . He didn 't score but received a yellow card as his nation won 3 – 0 . He started the second group match , against Ghana , in the absence of fellow strikers Koller and Baroš due to injury . He received another yellow card in the match , which Ghana won 2 – 0 . Due to having received two yellow cards , he was suspended for his country 's final group match , against Italy . The Czech Republic lost to Italy and therefore failed to progress to the next stage of the competition . Lokvenc announced his retirement from international football in September 2006 , becoming the third player from the World Cup team to retire after Karel Poborský and Pavel Nedvěd . He finished his international career with figures of 14 goals in 74 matches . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Lokvenc was particularly noted for his height , being referred to as a " towering forward " , and having " a similar aerial threat " to international teammate Jan Koller . His strength was noted as another of his assets . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = International = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 Scores and results list the Czech Republic 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Sparta Prague 
 Czech First League : 1994 – 95 , 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 , 1998 – 99 , 1999 – 2000 . 
 Czech Cup : 1996 
 Kaiserslautern 
 DFB @-@ Pokal Runner @-@ up : 2002 – 03 
 Salzburg 
 Austrian Football Bundesliga : 2006 – 07 ; Runner @-@ up : 2005 – 06 
 Basel 
 Swiss Super League : 2007 – 08 
 Swiss Cup : 2007 – 08 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Czech Republic 
 FIFA Confederations Cup : Third place 1997 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Top scorer of the Czech First League : 1999 – 2000 
 = Fionna and Cake = 
 " Fionna and Cake " is the ninth episode of the third season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Adam Muto and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Mark Banker , Kent Osborne , Patrick McHale , and series creator Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on September 5 , 2011 . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn and Jake are forced to listen to The Ice King 's fanfiction about the gender @-@ swapped Fionna ( voiced by Madeleine Martin ) and Cake the cat ( voiced by Roz Ryan ) . In his story , Fionna goes on a date with Prince Gumball ( voiced by Neil Patrick Harris ) and fights the evil Ice Queen ( voiced by Grey DeLisle ) . 
 The concept of Fionna and Cake was based on sketches that series ' character designer and storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri made . Ward was pleased with her creations , and decided to canonize them . Originally , the episode did not feature the Ice Queen at all , and the middle part of the episode saw Fionna go on a date with Gumball to a restaurant ; this subsequently changed . The episode was watched by 3 @.@ 315 million people , making it — at the time — the most @-@ watched episode of the series . " Fionna and Cake " received largely positive reviews from fans and critics alike . Two sequels to the episode — " Bad Little Boy " and " The Prince Who Wanted Everything " — were produced during the show 's fifth and sixth season , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fionna and Cake are helping Prince Gumball decorate for the Biennial Gumball Ball when Gumball asks Fionna if she would like to go to it tonight with him . Their conversation is interrupted when the Ice Queen breaks into the castle and tries to kidnap Gumball . Fionna and Cake start to fight her before she mysteriously disappears . Gumball ( who is apparently unharmed ) arranges a date with Fionna . At the Tree Fort , Fionna and Cake argue over whether or not Gumball asked Fionna on a date . Cake decides to come along to help Fionna out . At the Castle Gardens , the two are met by Gumball and his steed Lord Monochromicorn . The group then flies through the air while Gumball serenades Fionna with the song " Oh , Fionna " and eventually asks her to be his girlfriend . When Fionna and Cake get to the ball , Prince Gumball takes Fionna to his room ( decorated with candles and rose petals ) and locks the door . She becomes flustered and backs away when he begins to take his shirt off . A drop of water lands on her shoulder , she looks up to see the real Prince Gumball trapped inside a giant icicle on the ceiling . The fake prince is revealed to be Ice Queen . Fionna is soon incapacitated ; Cake senses trouble and rushes to her rescue . 
 Enraged by the deception , Fionna takes out the crystal sword to fight . The sword turns out to be another one of Ice Queen ’ s tricks and turns into a ball of ice around Fionna ’ s hands . Cake hears noises from downstairs and senses Fionna is in trouble . Undaunted , Fionna uses the ice to beat Ice Queen over the head . Ice Queen pushes her off with a burst of snow which allows Fionna to get close to enough to break Prince Gumball free and knock out the Ice Queen with a broken icicle . Cake bursts in and sees Gumball standing next to Fionna in her torn dress ; she jumps to the wrong conclusion and lunges at him but Fionna stops Cake and tells her it was the Ice Queen all along . Just then Ice Queen recovers and blasts Cake away from Fionna only to have Fionna knock her magic tiara off which negates her powers . The real Gumball asks Fionna on a date and is turned down ; Fionna notes that she does not need a boyfriend at the moment . 
 The episode reveals that the entire story was a fanfiction created by the Ice King that he is reading to Finn and Jake ( who are incapacitated in ice ) . The Ice King asks how they enjoyed his story ; Finn hesitates at first but hurriedly placates him when Ice King threatens them with his ice powers . 
 = = Cast = = 
 " Fionna and Cake " , taking place in a gender @-@ swapped universe , likewise features gender @-@ swapped versions of the inhabitants of Ooo . A list of the major characters that feature in " Fionna and Cake " follows . 
 Fionna ( voiced by Madeleine Martin ) – Fionna is the gender @-@ swapped version of Finn . Fionna is a brave and adventurous girl who struggles with issues pertaining to attraction and romance . 
 Cake ( voiced by Roz Ryan ) – Cake is the gender @-@ swapped version of Jake , and is a cat instead of a dog . Cake is sarcastic and boisterous but is also Fionna 's loyal friend . Much like Jake , she possesses the power to stretch her body into a myriad of convoluted shapes . 
 Prince Gumball ( voiced by Neil Patrick Harris ) – Gumball is the gender @-@ swapped version of Princess Bubblegum . He is the frequent victim of the Ice Queen 's kidnapping schemes and appears that he harbors some sort of feelings for Fionna . 
 The Ice Queen ( voiced by Grey DeLisle ) – The Ice Queen is the gender @-@ swapped version of the Ice King . Much like her male counterpart , the Ice Queen is constantly scheming to kidnap a mate ( her most frequent target being Prince Gumball ) . 
 Lord Monochromicorn – The gender @-@ swapped version of Lady Rainicorn . While Lady speaks in Korean , Lord Monochromicorn communicates exclusively via Morse Code . Lord Monochromicorn and Cake are in a relationship together . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fionna and Cake " was written and storyboarded by Rebecca Sugar and Adam Muto from a story developed by Mark Banker , Patrick McHale , Osborne , and series creator Pendleton Ward . The entry was directed by Larry Leichliter . The genesis for the episode were drawings that character designer and storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri posted onto the internet during her free time . Her creations were eventually canonized by the show 's producers . Allegri even re @-@ rerecorded the show 's theme — which had originally been sung by series creator Pendleton Ward — for the episode . Sugar intended " Fionna and Cake " to both be " a jab [ and ] a huge celebration of , [ sic ] the feeling of being fan " and " allowing something completely ridiculous to make your heart tighten " . 
 Sugar and Muto significantly changed the story from its original outline ; the very first version of the episode did not feature the Ice Queen , the ball , or the crystal sword . The second act of the story featured Gumball and Fionna going on a date in a restaurant , rather than on an adventure . Sugar also wrote several lines for Marshall Lee — Marceline 's male counter @-@ part — but they were cut for time . Sugar " begged " Ward to let her work the character back into the story somehow , but the character only appeared in a non @-@ speaking cameo . Sugar originally wanted the character to be voiced by Dante Basco , although he would later be voiced by Donald Glover in the fifth season episode " Bad Little Boy " . 
 Neil Patrick Harris was Sugar 's first choice to play Prince Gumball ; she explained that she wanted to impress her brother Steve , who was " obsessed " with the Music Meister ( portrayed by Harris ) from Batman : The Brave and the Bold . The scene which featured the song " Oh Fionna " was designed by Sugar to be a blend of the setting from the song " A Whole New World " from the 1992 film Aladdin , as well as scenes featuring the Romani Ranch aliens from Majora ’ s Mask . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Fionna and Cake " aired on Cartoon Network on September 5 , 2011 . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 315 million viewers and saw a dramatic increase in the ratings for all boy demographics . It also marked a 42 percent increase in viewers when compared to a year earlier . At the time , this made " Fionna and Cake " the highest @-@ rated entry of the series . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2013 Fionna and Cake DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' first three seasons . 
 Tyler Foster of DVD Talk praised the episode for its creativity and complimented the entry 's humor and its message to girls . Furthermore , he applauded the song " Oh Fionna " , calling it " wonderful " . Richard Whittaker of The Austin Chronicle noted that the episode was " an adventure in cross play " . He felt that Fionna 's characterization appealed to the show 's universality and managed to also retain respect for the show 's <unk> and that the " strong but emotionally vulnerable " Cake was written in a way that successfully provided a female analog for Jake . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club called the " Fionna and Cake " one of " the most fascinating aspects of the Adventure Time craze " in a review of the fifth season episode " Bad Little Boy " . He wrote that " ' Fionna and Cake ' was reminiscent of the series ' earlier episodes , in regards to its bright animation , well @-@ paced plot , music , its successful blend of fantasy action and comedy , and its focus on character @-@ based drama . As a result , he felt that the entry was composed of elements that make the series as a whole great . In a separate article , Sava named the entry one of the ten most representative episodes of the series and wrote that it is also " the most aggressively girl @-@ friendly episode of the series " . 
 After it aired , " Fionna and Cake " was particularly successful with the fans of the series . Sava noted that although the characters had , at the time , appeared in only a single episode , they had quickly become two of the most popular characters from the show . According to the Entertainment Examiner , fans of the series responded positively to the characters , and wanted them to appear in more episodes . 
 = Long Ashton railway station = 
 Long Ashton railway station was a railway station on the Bristol to Exeter Line , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) southwest of Bristol Temple Meads , serving the village of Long Ashton in North Somerset , England . There were two stations on the site , the first , called " Ashton " , opened in either 1841 or 1852 and closed in 1856 . The second station , originally known as " Long Ashton Platform " before being renamed as " Long Ashton " in 1929 , was operational from 1926 to 1941 . The site is now partly under the A370 Long Ashton Bypass . There is local support for the station to be reopened , possibly sited further to the west , and possibly as part of the University of Bristol 's proposed <unk> Farm development . 
 = = First station = = 
 The Bristol and Exeter Railway was opened between Bristol Temple Meads and Bridgwater on 14 June 1841 , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel and build originally as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge . A station named " Ashton " , serving the nearby village of Long Ashton , was located on an embankment 3 miles 52 chains ( 5 @.@ 87 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 122 miles 3 chains ( 196 @.@ 40 km ) from the Great Western Railway terminus at London Paddington . Quite when the station opened is uncertain – Butt 's Directory of Railway Stations states that the station opened with the line in June 1841 , but Quick 's Railway Passenger Stations states it only opened in June 1852 . Both sources agree that the station closed in January 1856 , however other sources such as Oakley 's Somerset Railway Stations contain no reference to Ashton at all . If the earlier date is correct , services would have originally been provided by the Great Western Railway on behalf of the Bristol & Exeter . The Bristol & Exeter took over passenger operations on 1 May 1849 . 
 The line through Ashton remained open after the station closed . In 1871 , the Bristol & Exeter opened another station called Ashton , closer to Bristol , this station was later renamed Bedminster . The line had been reconstructed as mixed @-@ gauge by 1 June 1875 to accommodate local traffic . A year later in 1876 , the Bristol & Exeter was amalgamated into the Great Western Railway , which took over services . Broad @-@ gauge trains ceased operation on 20 May 1892 . 
 = = Second station = = 
 The station was reopened by the Great Western Railway in 1926 , now called Long Ashton Platform ; Ashton by then was the name of a station on the <unk> Valley Line in Devon . Again , the exact date of opening is disputed : most sources state 12 July 1926 , but some say 20 September the same year . It was located on the same site as the first station . 
 The station was a basic halt , and had two 400 × 10 feet ( 121 @.@ 9 × 3 @.@ 0 m ) platforms . A corrugated iron shelter and lamp hut were provided on the westbound platform , and a small booking office was present on the road to the platform . The estimated cost of construction was £ 1 @,@ 930 . 
 The station was renamed Long Ashton on 23 September 1929 , and closed on 6 October 1941 . There is now no trace of it left , and the site is now partly under the A370 Long Ashton Bypass causeway . 
 = = Future = = 
 Plans were submitted in 2010 to reopen the station as part of the University of Bristol 's <unk> Farm development , which , if granted planning permission , will comprise some 1 @,@ 200 houses , businesses and a school spread over 35 hectares ( 86 acres ) . The new station would be up to 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the original location . The University notes that there is positive support for the station , but that it alone cannot guarantee its construction . Long Ashton parish councillor Anthony Butcher opposes the development , but supports the reopening of the station . The station could be reopened as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan approved in July 2012 which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . 
 The Bristol to Exeter Line through Long Ashton is not currently electrified . The 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line will see the line from London to Bristol electrified , but electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does Member of Parliament for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . 
 = Whitney Russell = 
 Whitney Russell is a fictional character in the American television soap opera Passions , which aired on NBC from 1999 to 2007 and on DirecTV in 2007 – 08 . Passions followed the romantic and supernatural adventures in the fictional , coastal , New England town of Harmony . The role of Witney was created by the soap 's creator and head writer James E. Reilly ; the character was portrayed by Brook Kerr from the series ' debut on July 5 , 1999 , to September 7 , 2007 . In 2005 , <unk> Siobhan Phillips portrayed the character in flashbacks . 
 Whitney is a <unk> of Passions ' Russell family ; she is introduced as the eldest daughter of Eve Russell and T.C. Russell , and the sister of Simone Russell . The character is primarily shown as a confidant to Theresa Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald Crane but her later storylines focus on her romance with Chad Harris @-@ Crane and the possibility they may be engaging in an incestuous relationship . Following Chad 's death , she leaves Harmony to raise her children Miles Harris @-@ Crane and his unnamed sibling in New Orleans with the support of her father and sister . 
 Kerr 's performance was praised by critics ; she was nominated for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series at the 39th NAACP Image Awards . She was also <unk> for the 2005 Soap Opera Digest Awards ' Outstanding Younger Lead Actress , and with co @-@ stars Lindsay Hartley and Justin Hartley for the Favorite Triangle award . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Whitney Russell is one of the 25 original contract cast members created by the program 's co @-@ creator James E. Reilly . In the series , the residents of the fictional , coastal , New England town of Harmony struggle with romantic and familial issues while also contending with supernatural threats . Sheraton Kalouria , senior vice president of NBC ’ s daytime programming , said Whitney and the Russell family were created and casted in an attempt to build characters " as diverse as the U.S. " and to set the show apart from other soap operas . He added the show ’ s racially diverse ensemble represented by " the African American Russells and the Hispanic Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds " reflects " its truly color @-@ blind storytelling " . Each member of the Russell family was designed to be " an integral part of the show " in an attempt to avoid creating token characters . Rodney Van Johnson , who plays the family 's patriarch T.C. Russell , later said in an interview with Jet : 
 We are the only daytime drama with a full African @-@ American family . The Russells have a key role in the community . There aren 't just a flash in the pan . The storylines are heavy . The show has received a huge response from the African @-@ American community for that reason . 
 = = = Casting and characterization = = = 
 Passions ' casting director <unk> <unk> originally rejected 29 @-@ year @-@ old Brook Kerr for the role of Whitney Russell , believing she would look too mature to play a teenager . Despite the rejection , Kerr 's husband Christopher Warren sent in his wife 's head shots into the network and she was hired to play the character . Kerr later described the week of auditioning and two screen tests to be formally cast in the role as " very fast for me " . 
 Kerr described Whitney as initially being " so goal @-@ oriented " and without a sense of balance . Dana Block from Tulsa World described Whitney as " the good girl daughter ... who didn 't concern herself with much else " . While discussing her portrayal of the character , Kerr said , " I was always the sensible one , the friend everyone could count on , always doing what I should " . She said her scenes with love interest Chad Harris @-@ Crane allowed her to explore more of Whitney 's independence and described her portrayal of Whitney 's guilt and confusion at the possibility of Chad being her half @-@ brother and giving birth to his child as allowing her to act the character in new and different ways . 
 Whitney 's storylines with Chad received mixed responses from other Passions cast members . Charles Divins , who was one of the two actors portraying Chad , said the characters ' tumultuous romance met viewers ' expectations for a soap opera and added , " People watch soaps as an escape . People need drama . Whether you love it or hate it , people will talk about it . ” Near the end of the show , Tracey Ross , who portrayed Russell family <unk> Eve Russell , stated " I was never crazy about the incest storyline with Whitney and Chad " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Whitney Russell 's early appearances focus on helping her childhood friend Theresa Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald with her relationship with attorney Ethan Winthrop and her rivalry with Gwen Winthrop . Whitney is initially portrayed as constantly looking up to her parents Eve and T.C. Russell for guidance , and devoting her life to tennis and school at their insistence . She is unaware of her mother 's past drug abuse , and relationship and child with Julian Crane . Whitney briefly dates private detective Frank Lomax , but their relationship rapidly deteriorates when she discovers he was hired to report Theresa for stalking Ethan . Shortly after the break @-@ up , Whitney meets and falls in love with Chad Harris but he becomes involved in a relationship with her sister Simone . Eve discourages Whitney from pursuing a relationship with Chad , fearing he will be a bad influence on her daughter in the same way Julian was on her teenage self . T.C. disapproves of Whitney having relationships that will distract her from tennis . Whitney 's relationship with Chad is complicated by Simone 's crush on him . Whitney and Chad keep their romantic and sexual encounters secret for years while he pretends to be in love with Simone . The love triangle continues until Simone catches Whitney kissing Chad . Simone publicly breaks up with Chad and tells everyone in Harmony about his relationship with Whitney . During 2003 , Whitney 's connection with Chad steadily unravels after the discovery of his marriage to Latoya Harris and her attempt to murder Whitney . 
 In 2004 , Eve 's vengeful adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne arranges for Eve 's past relationship with Julian to be exposed to the Russell family and the rest of Harmony , resulting in Chad being erroneously identified as their son . The possible incestuous implications of Whitney 's relationship with Chad serves as her primary storyline on the soap opera . Whitney initially rejects her mother for hiding her past with Julian , but they reconnect by singing at the Blue Note , a local jazz club . Whitney briefly considers pursuing a career in music and frequently sings at the Blue Note . Vocalist <unk> Foxworth was selected as Whitney 's singing voice ; Kerr lip @-@ synchronized during her scenes . When the possibility Chad could be Eve 's son is revealed , Whitney discovers she is pregnant with Chad 's child ( would later be known as Miles Harris @-@ Crane ) and initially keeps her pregnancy secret . Whitney initiates a relationship with Fox Crane to insinuate he is the father of her unborn child and to protect herself and her child from the stigma of incest . She originally plans to drug and rape Fox to make the cover story believable , but could not complete her plans because they conflict with her moral and ethical beliefs . The couple eventually have consensual sex and Fox identifies himself as the father of her baby . While Fox helps search for Theresa 's missing daughter Jane Winthrop , Whitney persuades him to leave her with his power of attorney . On March 23 , 2005 , she gives birth to a son and immediately uses Fox 's power of attorney to put him up for adoption . Two couples — Julian and Eve , and T.C. and Liz — compete to adopt the boy but Chad is awarded custody of the child . He attempts to use the child to reconnect with Whitney . Whitney and Chad name their baby Miles Davis Harris after jazz musician Miles Davis . 
 The storyline escalates during the earthquake and tsunami in the show 's 2005 summertime extravaganza . Whitney has sex with Chad in the middle of the tsunami and admits to Chad he is Miles 's biological father . Fox overhears her confessions and ends his relationship with her . Whitney is overwhelmed by guilt and shame by the assumption of committing incest ; she joins a convent to become closer to God and prepares to take holy orders . At the convent , she is manipulated by Alistair Crane , who is disguised as a messenger of God as part of his scheme to steal a chalice from the Pope 's private chambers and take over the world . Identified as the Vendetta plot , the show 's 2006 summertime extravaganza centers on Alistair luring Whitney , Chad , and several other residents of Harmony to Rome . While in Rome , Chad is given his birth certificate by tabloid editor JT Cornell and discovers he was conceived during Alistair 's rape of Liz . Following the revelation of his true paternity , Chad restarts his relationship with Whitney and they decide to raise their son together . 
 On December 26 , 2006 , Whitney marries Chad and takes his last name , becoming known as Whitney Russell Harris @-@ Crane . Unbeknown to Whitney , Chad previously began a sexual relationship with the tabloid reporter Vincent Clarkson and continues the affair after their reunion and wedding . Chad is unaware Vincent is actually his half @-@ brother because he is Eve and Julian 's child . Whitney becomes increasingly suspicious of Chad 's fidelity after discovering she is pregnant with their second child . Vincent arranges for Whitney to catch him having sex with Chad in a gay bar , causing her to file for divorce . The estranged couple start to reconcile as they try to help Theresa and Ethan reunite , but the possibility of a union is cut short when Alistair kills Chad on August 28 , 2007 ; Chad dies while professing his love for Whitney and their children . As a result of Alistair 's actions , Whitney chooses to delete Crane from her name and asks to be known as Mrs. Harris . After saying goodbye to Theresa and Eve , Whitney leaves Harmony and moves to New Orleans to live with her sister and son . T.C. is later said to have moved there to help her . On January 2 , 2008 , Whitney contacts police chief Sam Bennett to say she is willing to testify at Alistair 's murder trial . This proves unnecessary when Viki Chatsworth kills Alistair . On July 16 , 2008 , a letter from Simone to her friend Kay Bennett discloses that Whitney has given birth to her child ; the exact date of birth , and the child 's gender and name are never revealed . 
 <unk> Kimball of <unk> reported Kerr 's exit was a result of the cut in costs during the show 's transition to DirecTV . The show 's budget was reduced by " a reported $ 4 @-@ to- $ 5 million " to secure the renewal on a new network . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kerr was nominated for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series at the 39th NAACP Image Awards for her portrayal of Whitney . She was also nominated for Outstanding Younger Lead Actress , and alongside co @-@ stars Lindsay and Justin Hartley for the Favorite Triangle award at the 2005 Soap Opera Digest Awards . 
 The exact nature of Whitney 's relationship with Chad attracted frequent speculation from media outlets and fans . The incest storyline led media outlets to sensationalize Harmony as the place where " half @-@ siblings sleep with one another " . An article in Soap Opera Digest listed the 2006 revelation that Whitney and Chad were not related by blood as one of Passions ' most shocking secrets . 
 = Red or Black ? = 
 Red or Black ? is a British television game show which was broadcast on ITV between 3 September 2011 and 29 September 2012 . Presented by Ant & Dec and developed by Simon Cowell , Red or Black ? is the most expensive game show in television history , with a £ 15 million budget . 
 In each round , contestants choose red or black , with those that choose the incorrect colour being eliminated . During the first series , four finalists guessed the colour correctly in the final round and became millionaires . Over 100 @,@ 000 members of the public applied to be on the show , with the numbers being reduced down to a different final eight contestants per live show each night for seven nights . Whilst most rounds varied , there were two standard rounds in each live final ; " Duel " where the final two contestants went head to head , and the final round where the winner chose a colour on a giant wheel similar to that used in roulette . Celebrities including Jedward , David Hasselhoff and One Direction were involved in the rounds of the show where contestants must choose either red or black in order to pass to the next round , while the show has filmed on locations such as Battersea Power Station and the set of Coronation Street . 
 Red or Black ? was commissioned for a second series , which featured the format having been revamped significantly . While the first series featured six pre @-@ recorded rounds in several different locations and four live rounds , the second series featured six pre @-@ recorded rounds that take place in either the Red or Black ? Arena or in the studio . Celebrities such as Carol Vorderman , Jonathan Ross and Little Mix were involved in the rounds for this series . 
 The show is a joint production between Syco TV and ITV Studios , and was initially broadcast on ITV nightly over the course of seven nights from Saturday to the following Saturday , with the exception of the Tuesday night . The show also featured several Syco @-@ related music acts . Sponsorship for the first series was initially targeted at National Lottery operator Camelot Group , but eventually went with <unk> owner <unk> and Domino 's Pizza . The second series was sponsored by controversial loans site <unk> 
 In the week where the first series of Red or Black ? aired , ITV gained a much larger audience share than it had in the week directly previous , where it had been beaten by BBC One on six out of seven nights . Despite this , reviews of the first series were universally negative , and additional criticism was leveled at the show when it was discovered that Nathan Hageman , the first winner of the £ 1m prize , had a criminal record . The Sun began a campaign calling for Hageman to return the money , but he was eventually allowed to keep it . It did , however , lead to ITV dropping three other contestants from the show , with at least one withdrawn because of their criminal record . This was also a major factor in the pre @-@ recording of series 2 . 
 = = Production = = 
 An initial pilot of the show was ordered in 2003 by ITV , from production company FremantleMedia , and was commissioned by Claudia Rosencrantz , who was the controller of entertainment at ITV at the time . It was presented by Brian Conley , but was not broadcast ; a series was not produced . Rosencrantz spoke of the pilot in 2011 , " I didn 't believe people would like to see someone win a vast sum of money , with no skills at all involved . Second , gambling is not a spectator sport , you get an adrenaline rush from participating in it . " Richard Holloway , who worked with FremantleMedia at the time of producing the pilot , said , " It was a novel idea , you could win a million pounds eventually , I was surprised it didn 't go to series . " Rosencrantz left ITV in 2006 , and there has been a significant turnover in staff since the pilot was originally put together . 
 The show was launched by ITV and Syco at the Millennium Hotel Mayfair , London , on 3 May 2011 . The initial recruitment phase for contestants lasted until 13 May . The updated format was conceived by Simon Cowell , who said that it was inspired by roulette and the story of Ashley Revell , who had bet his entire life savings on " red " in a roulette game in Las Vegas . It is the most expensive game show in history , costing in the region of £ 15m , at around £ 1.5m per episode . ITV 's director of entertainment and comedy , Elaine Bedell , was contacted by Cowell , " This being Simon this was at <unk> , but even then it was quite a compelling idea " . When later talking about the £ 1m prize on offer each night , Cowell said , " It 's expensive if you have to give away a million every night but we have insurance for that . " 
 Being a co – production between Syco TV and ITV Studios , Cowell began planning for international versions straight away , saying , " I 'd love to take it around the world . I think the concept works . If it succeeds it will travel . We 've got interest in America already . " Some Syco @-@ managed acts appeared on the show , including Leona Lewis on the first episode . 
 Domino 's Pizza was announced as the primary sponsor of the show in June 2011 , in a deal worth £ 1m . It had previously been the sponsor of Britain 's Got Talent for three years . National Lottery operator Camelot Group were originally sought after to be the primary sponsors , but did not go ahead . A Camelot spokesperson said , " We were approached by Syco and worked with them and ITV on the Red or Black ? concept . However , after discussions , we didn 't reach an agreement on the venture . " 
 ITV also signed deals with <unk> owner <unk> to produce pay to play games for their website on an exclusive basis . Social TV company <unk> were contracted to create a game that could be played by viewers online whilst watching the show , also allowing viewers to compete with their Facebook friends . Achievement badges could be unlocked by players , and if they managed to get through all ten rounds correctly , then they were awarded entry into the Red or Black ? Millionaire 's Club , normally reserved for those competitors who won the prize money themselves . 
 Cowell stated in an interview during the broadcast week of the first series that he hoped a second series would go ahead , and that he had received three separate approaches from the United States to create an American version . Peter Fincham , ITV 's chief programmer , said in October 2011 that Red or Black ? would only be recommissioned for a second series if some changes were made to the format . 
 Series 2 of Red or Black ? was announced by Ant & Dec on 30 March 2012 during a radio appearance on The Chris Moyles Show . In order to reduce production costs , a new game was also introduced to replace the roulette wheel , which is called " The Vortex " . In this game , the last contestant remaining must predict how long a ball will take to descend a ' mini velodrome ' . If a contestant wins , he or she will receive a rolling jackpot starting at £ 500 @,@ 000 . This increases by £ 500 @,@ 000 for the next show if the jackpot is not won . Series 2 was sponsored by <unk> and is completely pre @-@ recorded . 
 = = Series 1 = = 
 = = = Format = = = 
 Each episode of series 1 of Red or Black ? consisted of 10 rounds ; in each round , the player had to choose either red or black , with those who choose incorrectly being eliminated . The rounds are split into three stages . The first is an arena stage , which is recorded at Wembley Arena . The winning contestants move onto the location stage , where the numbers are eventually reduced down to the final eight . Those eight then go forward to the live studio final , where they are reduced down to the final competitor , who has a chance to play for the £ 1m prize . The first series was broadcast over seven nights in September 2011 , running over the course of a week , except for the Tuesday night , from Saturday to the following Saturday . Over 100 @,@ 000 people applied to compete in the show . 
 In the penultimate round , " Duel " , a video wall displayed a disc split into eight sections , numbered 1 @-@ 8 . Before the round started , an independent adjudicator randomised which sections were coloured red or black , with each colour having four sections ; this choice was hidden to the contestants . A random player chose their colour , while the other player took the remaining colour . Each player then took it in turns to choose a number , with the corresponding section being revealed to the players and the audience . The first player to have all four of their sections revealed progressed to the final round . 
 The final game was a giant modified roulette wheel split into 36 alternately coloured sections ( 18 red and 18 black ) , awarding a £ 1m prize if the player chose the correct colour . Red or Black ? made its first millionaire in the first show , with bricklayer Nathan Hageman , from Reading , winning on red . The following night the second millionaire was made , with carer Kevin Cartwright also winning on red . Two further millionaires , Darren Thompson and Gary Brocklesby , were made during the series . 
 = = = = Rounds = = = = 
 Rounds included golfers Rory McIlroy and Lee Westwood , who were attempting to hit a gong in the middle of a lake from a distance of 100 yards ( 91 m ) near Eastnor Castle , Herefordshire ; Jedward being launched in <unk> balls from <unk> ; and boxers Amir Khan and David Haye competing in a round called " <unk> " . Location filming has taken place on the set of Coronation Street , where there was an issue with a round called " Fit to Burst " featuring actresses Michelle Keegan and Samia Smith who were spinning a wheel in order to burst balloons on a spike . Keegan won the round for her colour , but was subsequently disqualified for taking her hand off the wheel 's handle , resulting in Smith winning for black . Other locations have included Alnwick Castle , Northumberland , and Battersea Power Station , where David Hasselhoff was fired into the air on a reverse bungee . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 The coloured backgrounds denote the result of each of the shows : 
 – indicates the contestant won the whole show and chose the right colour in the final round and won £ 1 million . 
 – indicates the contestant won the whole show but chose the wrong colour in the final round . 
 = = Series 2 = = 
 = = = Format = = = 
 In series 2 , the format consists of six rounds with eight contestants . This time , they do not have to choose their colour prior to the start of a round and can hold their nerve . In each of the first three rounds , the eight contestants watch a series of stunts , sporting challenges or performances . They 'll then use their judgement to predict the outcome or have their powers of observation tested . Either way , the contestants must strike their buzzer and pick either red or black . 
 The first game takes place in the Red or Black ? arena and subsequent games are held in the studio . After the first three rounds , the four players with the highest scores will move on to Part 2 . If a tie occurs , the two or more players will play a tiebreaker round , " Power Bar " , to decide who will move onto the second show . 
 The four remaining contestants participate in the next round , which involves celebrities ( often singers ) . Then , the final two players will move on to the " Duel " , played as it was during the first series , with the exception that the <unk> of each segment 's colours is now shown briefly before being covered ; and the game board now consists of 10 segments instead of 8 . The competing pair will have to memorise the position of the jumbled up segments , then take it in turns to find their colour . The first to have all five of their colour revealed is the winner and advances to the new final round , " The Vortex " . 
 The Vortex is " a true test of skill , nerve and judgment " . It consists of a " mini velodrome " which flashes between red and black at a constant rate . The aim is to watch the sequence and adjust the power of the launcher , which will fire a ball into The Vortex . If the balls lands in the End Zone in the contestant 's chosen colour , they win the jackpot ( starting at ₤ 500 @,@ 000 ) , or else it will increase by ₤ 500 @,@ 000 for the next show . 
 = = = = Rounds = = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ Note 1 : ' Spell Check ' featured Jonathan Ross and Carol Vorderman as participants 
 ^ Note 2 : ' Roses ' featured a dance performance by Derek Hough and Peta Murgatroyd 
 ^ Note 3 : ' Spin @-@ off ' featured <unk> Kicks ' performance of " Down with the Trumpets " 
 ^ Note 4 : ' Speed Darts ' was played by Adrian Lewis and Phil Taylor 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 The coloured backgrounds denote the result of each of the shows : 
 – indicates the contestant won the whole show , chose the right colour in the final round and won the Jackpot . 
 – indicates the contestant won the whole show but chose the wrong colour in the final round . 
 – indicates a decision was reversed regarding the final round . 
 * Chris 's loss on the Vortex was reversed after a review of a smaller camera underneath the Vortex that showed the ball dropping and landing milliseconds before the change in colour to red , thus the money was awarded to him - also note that the rollover still stood . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = = = = Series 1 = = = = 
 In the week prior to the launch of Red or Black ? , ITV had slipped behind Channel 5 in the ratings on the Sunday night while BBC One had nearly three times the audience share of the ITV channel . While the lead was not as large on the remainder of the evenings , BBC One still beat ITV every night on the overall primetime audience share , except for Thursday night . 
 Red or Black ? launched on Saturday 3 September 2011 , with 6 @.@ 41 million viewers , giving the show a 29 @.@ 8 % share of the market between 7pm and 8 : 15pm , beating the Doctor Who episode " Night Terrors " into second place with <unk> It returned later in the night with <unk> However the episode of The X Factor broadcast between the two episodes received a much higher number of viewers , attracting <unk> The second set of episodes , broadcast on the following night , showed a drop in ratings down to <unk> for the first episode , and <unk> for the second . The first episode of the night was beaten by an episode of Countryfile , which commanded <unk> , while the second was beaten by another BBC show , Inspector George Gently , which attracted <unk> 
 The third pair of episodes , on the Monday evening , showed the series regaining some ground , with the first episode moving back up to <unk> , and gaining a larger share of the market during its timeslot than any other channel . The second episode had lower ratings for the first time , with <unk> , seeing it beaten by an episode of New Tricks on BBC One . 
 After a break on the Tuesday evening , the show returned on Wednesday whilst averaging <unk> for the first show of the evening , a 21 % audience share which was larger than anything else in its timeslot . The second episode broadcast at 9 : 30pm , with <unk> , an 18 @.@ 7 % share which was beaten by an episode of BBC One 's Who Do You Think You Are ? on Emilia Fox which commanded 5 @.@ 39 million viewers . Ratings continued to decline on the Thursday evening shows , with both shows being viewed by fewer than four million viewers for the first time , <unk> and <unk> respectively , seeing the first show being beaten by BBC One 's Watchdog which gained <unk> in the 8pm slot . 
 The sixth set of episodes also stayed below the 4 million mark , but in an evening that saw ITV beat BBC One 's audience share in the evening by 19 @.@ 6 % to 19 % , including the earlier episode of Red of Black ? gaining <unk> viewers , while the later show was viewed by slightly more with <unk> However , in direct competition with the later show was BBC One 's Would I Lie to You ? which had slightly more viewers , with 4m tuning in . On the return of Red or Black ? to Saturday night , the show climbed above 4 million for the first time in three days , to <unk> for the first show and then up to <unk> for the second . This enabled ITV to beat BBC One in the primetime ratings overall , by 23 @.@ 3 % to 21 % , even though the first episode of series 8 of Strictly Come Dancing was broadcast on BBC . However Red or Black ? individually placed behind both Strictly and Doctor Who , with the overnights for the BBC shows being 7 @.@ 6 and 6 @.@ 0 million , respectively . Overall through the week the main ITV channel had a higher share of the ratings during primetime than BBC One on five out of the seven occasions , a turnaround from the previous week where it only won on a single evening . 
 = = = = Series 2 = = = = 
 On 11 – 12 August 2012 , the Saturday and Sunday prior to the launch of the second series of Red or Black ? , ITV suffered the worst weekend in its 57 @-@ year history due to BBC One 's coverage of the 2012 Summer Olympics ; it was beaten to second place in the primetime league tables by BBC Three for the first time ever and the only ITV programme on 11 August that was one of the channel 's 30 most watched in the week 6 – 12 August 2012 was the ITV News at Ten . The Olympics closing ceremony the following night gave BBC One more than 20 times the audience share of ITV . While the lead was nowhere near as large on the remainder of the evenings , BBC One still beat ITV every night on the overall primetime audience share , except for Thursday night . 
 Red or Black ? launched its second series on 18 August 2012 , with 3 @.@ 25 million viewers , giving the show a 19 @.@ 6 % share of the market between 7pm and 8 : 15pm ; it was beaten in its timeslot by a showing of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , which gained 4m on BBC One . It returned later in the night with <unk> The episode of The X Factor broadcast between the two episodes received a higher number of viewers , attracting <unk> The second set of episodes , broadcast the week after , saw a small rise in viewers with <unk> for the first episode , and <unk> for the second . In the third week , it got <unk> for the first episode and <unk> for the second . Week four brought in <unk> for the first episode and <unk> for the second . <unk> people tuned in for week five 's first episode and <unk> for the second episode . Week six produced <unk> for the first episode and <unk> for the second . The final set of shows produced <unk> and <unk> viewers for the first and second episodes , respectively . 
 = = = Media response = = = 
 Christopher Hooton , writing for the Metro , chose the show as one of his four weekend picks prior to the first episode . However , Rachel Tarley , writing for the same newspaper , later compared the show to It 's a Knockout , but described the contestants as " morons " and said the show " marks a new era in Syco 's lazy , sinister attempts to make money from a hopelessly stupid viewing public " . Jim Shelley , of the Daily Mirror , described Red or Black ? as " mess " , and described the stunts as " dull " ; Kevin O 'Sullivan , also at the Mirror , described the show as a " sausage factory of sob stories " ; while Ken Smith , of The Herald , described it as the " dullest show of the week " . After the fourth episode , Jan Moir of The Daily Mail reviewed the show , describing it as a " spin of a wheel away from total disaster " , and calling the appearances of Simon Cowell related music acts a " blatant <unk> " . Overall , Moir described the show " overblown and immoral nonsense " . Jonathan Liew , of The Daily Telegraph , requested that readers stopped watching the show , whilst describing it as " so devoid of intellect that it actually sucks nearby intelligence into its vortex . This is , without exaggeration or embellishment , an abominably stupid television programme . " Readers of <unk> named it the worst new game show of 2011 in their " Hall of shame " poll . On 26 October 2012 , Richard Osman , writing for The Guardian , named Red or Black ? among four of UK TV 's worst ever <unk> . 
 During the airing of the first show , Twitter users complained that finalist Angel McKenzie had made it through , as she was previously a housemate during Big Brother 10 in 2009 . However , McKenzie 's appearance was overshadowed by stories relating to £ 1 million winner Nathan Hageman , as it was revealed that he had a criminal background ; it was initially reported that he had served a five @-@ year sentence for breaking into a man 's house and assaulting him , but it was later revealed by The Sun that he had in fact been convicted of attacking an ex – girlfriend . This led to the newspaper and Labour MP Hazel Blears calling for Hageman to be stripped of his prize money . ITV had conducted a CRB check on each finalist towards the end of July , over a month prior to the first live show . When later discussing the incident , Simon Cowell said , " I 'm not in a position to force anyone to do anything . Once he got through that 's why he got the money , that 's his own conscience what he decides to do with it . " 
 Following the media frenzy about details of Hageman 's offence , two contestants that had not yet appeared on the show were removed by ITV . It was revealed that one had failed to disclose that he had a criminal record during the application process , while information on the second contestant was withheld . A third contestant was subsequently removed by ITV . Each contestant was from a different night , with the first removed on the programme aired 7 September ; however footage pre – filmed revealed his identity . One of the three contestants removed , Ryan Keating , was later interviewed by The People , which revealed that he received a 12 – month community order and £ 50 fine in 2008 after he got into a drunken altercation with his wife . He argued that he should not have been removed from the show , saying that he " was honest with them from the outset . I 've been totally on the level . They 've stitched me up because they were scared of the headlines – but it 's total double standards . " 
 The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , an animal rights group , complained after the show was found to have spray painted a number of sheep red and black for a sheep herding round at Roundhay Park in Leeds . A PETA representative told the Daily Star : " Subjecting these shy sensitive animals to long periods of restraint in order to spray them with potentially noxious chemicals will also be stressful and frightening for them . " ITV replied that the paint was non @-@ toxic , saying " While the animals may have looked quite dramatic in their new colours , they did not come to any harm " . 
 = = Transmissions = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = International versions = = 
 The first international version of Red or Black ? was the Ukrainian version <unk> <unk> <unk> ? ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ? ) . It is based on the original British version , with 1 @,@ 000 contenders at the beginning of the show . The first episode aired on 10 November 2012 on Inter with a top prize of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 <unk> . 
 The Italian version of the show is entitled " Red or Black - <unk> o <unk> " and is being aired on television channel Rai 1 . This show was based on the second British version , with eight contenders competing against each other . The first episode aired on 22 February 2013 . 
 = Fort Henry Bridge = 
 The Fort Henry Bridge is a crossing of the Ohio River main channel in Wheeling , West Virginia . The tied @-@ arch bridge carries two lanes in each direction of Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) , U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) , and US 250 . The bridge opened after four years of construction work on September 8 , 1955 , costing $ 6 @.@ 8 million , $ 1 @.@ 8 million over budget . The bridge , along with the aging Wheeling Suspension Bridge , are the only two road links from Wheeling Island to downtown Wheeling . In 2009 , the structure carried an average of over 60 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . 
 = = Description = = 
 The 1 @,@ 660 @-@ foot ( 510 m ) long tied @-@ arch bridge carries four lanes of concurrent highways I @-@ 70 , US 40 and US 250 over the main channel of the Ohio River between Wheeling Island and downtown Wheeling , West Virginia . The bridge is the easternmost portion of a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long chain of elevated structures spanning Wheeling Creek in Ohio , the Ohio River back channel , Wheeling Island , and the main channel . To the east of the bridge after an interchange in downtown Wheeling , I @-@ 70 and US 250 enter the Wheeling Tunnel . Besides the Wheeling Suspension Bridge , the Fort Henry Bridge is the only fixed connection from Wheeling Island to mainland West Virginia . The bridge is named after Fort Henry , which in turn was named after Patrick Henry , the governor of Virginia Territory at the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War . 
 Truck traffic is prohibited from using the Wheeling Suspension Bridge and must take the Fort Henry Bridge to cross between downtown Wheeling and Wheeling Island . The bridge is owned and maintained by the State of West Virginia . Every year , the West Virginia Department of Transportation ( WVDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WVDOT calculated that 60 @,@ 070 vehicles used the Fort Henry Bridge over the main channel of the Ohio River . This represents a 334 percent increase in traffic from 1956 , the first year traffic data was published , when 18 @,@ 000 vehicles used the bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 Contracts to build the Fort Henry Bridge were let to the American Bridge Company , a subsidiary of U.S. Steel , and Dravo Corporation of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . Costing $ 6 @.@ 8 million , $ 1 @.@ 8 million over budget , and taking four years to complete , the Fort Henry Bridge opened to traffic on September 8 , 1955 after a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony with then @-@ governor William C. Marland in front of a crowd of 55 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 people . The bridge earned an Honorable Mention in 1955 from the National Steel Bridge Alliance , a part of the American Institute of Steel Construction , which recognizes the best steel bridges of the year . At the time of construction , the bridge was only the second tied @-@ arch bridge across the Ohio River . 
 The bridge was originally named the Ninth Street Bridge , and was designed to relieve traffic on the National Road 's Wheeling Suspension Bridge . The roadway as originally opened carried four lanes with a 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) median between each direction . During the first years of the bridge it carried US 40 and US 250 from Wheeling Island over the Ohio River main channel . In 1957 plans to add an Interstate Highway designation to the bridge were formed , with the Interstate 70 designation added by 1966 . The bridge underwent a renovation in 1990 which included replacement of its bridge deck . 
 The bridge , along with the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge and the Wheeling Suspension bridge were all closed in January 2005 , stopping any traffic from Ohio or Wheeling Island from entering mainland West Virginia for an hour due to barges breaking loose during heavy flooding along the Ohio River . 
 = Lips Are Movin = 
 " Lips Are Movin " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Meghan Trainor . It was co @-@ written and produced by Kevin Kadish , and was released by Epic Records on October 21 , 2014 , as the second single from Trainor 's fourth studio album Title ( 2015 ) . " Dear Future Husband " and " Title " were both originally considered for receiving a single release , but " Lips Are Movin " was later announced in October 2014 , along with the unveiling of the official single artwork for the song , and was serviced to radio stations in the same month . " Lips Are Movin " is a bubblegum pop , doo @-@ wop and R & B song ; it has wry lyrics about a philandering , untruthful man . 
 Comparing it to Trainor 's previous single " All About That Bass " , critics stated that " Lips Are Movin " elevated Trainor from a one @-@ hit wonder to a successful pop act . " Lips Are Movin " was a commercial success , becoming Trainor 's second consecutive single to reach the top five in Australia , the United Kingdom , and the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at numbers three , two , and four , respectively . It also reached the top ten in several European countries , including Austria , Spain , Germany , and the Netherlands . 
 The music video for " Lips Are Movin " was directed by Philip Andelman and commissioned by Hewlett @-@ Packard . Being a portrayal of behind @-@ the @-@ scenes events during a music video shoot , the video features dancers including Les Twins and Chachi Gonzales . Following its release on November 19 , 2014 , the video received 2 @.@ 5 million views on YouTube in two days and received positive reviews praising its imagery . Trainor has performed " Lips Are Movin " live on several shows , including Today , The Voice , and Dancing with the Stars . It was also performed during Trainor 's That Bass Tour ( 2015 ) and <unk> Tour ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Lips Are Movin " is a bubblegum pop , doo @-@ wop and R & B song . It uses a half @-@ sung , half @-@ rapped format and a retro @-@ soul melody with a beat and a percussion @-@ heavy arrangement . VH1 described it as " a feisty , upbeat track " that " has some spunky lyrics " . According to James Cowan of Canadian Business , the song " shares the same girl @-@ group @-@ influenced harmonies , wry lyrics and candy palette " of its predecessor , " All About That Bass " . Musically , " Lips Are Movin " was likened to Christina Aguilera 's " Candyman " ( 2007 ) by Carl Smith of <unk> The song 's tempo is 139 beats per minute . It is composed in the key G major ; Trainor 's vocals span the tonal nodes F3 to B5 . The song 's chord progression is G – Am – C – G. 
 The song 's lyrics are about a philandering , untruthful man ; they include , " if your lips are movin ' , then you 're lyin ' , lyin ' , lyin , babe " . It was reportedly written in eight minutes by Kevin Kadish and Meghan Trainor and produced by the former . 
 On October 14 , 2014 , the song 's artwork and a full @-@ length low @-@ quality audio were leaked online . The same day , it was announced that " Lips Are Movin " would be officially released to contemporary hit radio in the U.S. on October 21 , 2014 , as Trainor 's second single , canceling the originally intended radio release of " Title " . The song was offered as a " first listen " on Shazam and the official audio premiered on MTV News the following day . The song garnered radio play from three monitored stations the same day , six days before the track 's impact date . The song was released as a download on the same date in Austria , Germany , and Switzerland . It was later released worldwide — except in the United Kingdom — as an " instant grat " promotion from the pre @-@ order of Title , In the United Kingdom , the song was released as a download on January 18 , 2015 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critics compared it to Trainor 's previous single , " All About That Bass " . Christina Garibaldi of MTV News referred to " Lips Are Movin " as a catchy ladies ' anthem . 4Music 's Jessica Lever called it " another pop classic " , and said , " with the same sass as her debut song , we 're sure this one 's also going to rock the music world " . Billboard said " Lips Are Movin " " is definitely in the same vein as ' All About That Bass , ' which spells great things for the song ... " . Megan Friedman of Seventeen enjoyed the song 's references to its predecessor , saying , " when you need a pick @-@ me @-@ up song to help you brush off the haters , you can count on Meghan Trainor " . 
 Some reviewers noted that the song made Trainor from a one @-@ hit wonder to a successful pop artist : one of them included Brian Mansfield of USA Today , who called it much better than " All About That Bass " , and Stefan Kyriazis of the Daily Express . Sarah <unk> of PopSugar ranked " Lips Are Movin " as the ninth @-@ best song of 2014 . In more mixed opinions , Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star said " Lips Are Movin " is " whitewashed into a fairly anodyne mush ... the hip @-@ hop bump and plush basslines that intrude ... are pure cosmetic window dressing " . Nolan Feeney of Time said the track sounded too similar to its predecessor ; she wrote , " From its retro sound to its handclaps and post @-@ chorus chant , ' Lips Are Movin ' seems designed to milk the success of [ Trainor 's ] breakout hit " . Slant Magazine 's Alexa Camp compared " Lips Are Movin " to its predecessor , writing that it " strictly adheres to the same beat sheet as its predecessor ( doo @-@ wop throwback , girl @-@ group harmonies , bubblegum @-@ pop hooks ) " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Lips Are Movin " debuted at number 93 on the Billboard Hot 100 issued for November 8 , 2014 . The song became the " Most Added " in the Mainstream Top 40 format that week . It reached number 50 in its third week on the chart . On December 10 , 2014 , " Lips Are Movin " rose from 13 to eight . Its increase was aided by an eight – five position ( two % ) rise on Digital Songs ( 110 @,@ 000 copies ) , 13 – seven position ( 20 % ) rise on Streaming Songs ( 7 @.@ 8 million streams ) , and a 44 – 36 ( 26 % ) rise on Radio Songs ( 36 million radio audience ) charts . " Lips Are Movin " peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Trainor 's second consecutive top @-@ five hit in the U.S. , and peaked at number four on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . The single peaked at number seven on the Canadian Hot 100 , and at number five on that country 's Digital Songs chart . 
 " Lips Are Movin " debuted at number seven on the Australian Singles Chart on November 9 , 2014 , peaked at number three the following week , and spent 11 weeks in the chart 's top ten . It was Trainor 's second consecutive top @-@ three single in Australia , and was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 140 @,@ 000 copies . " Lips Are Movin " entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 30 on November 10 , 2014 . It reached number eight in its sixth week and peaked at number five , becoming Trainor 's third consecutive top @-@ ten hit in that country . In the U.K. , the song rose from number 50 to number two on January 25 , 2015 , but was blocked from the top spot by Mark Ronson 's song " Uptown Funk " . " Lips Are Movin " debuted at number 96 on the Irish Singles Chart issued for November 20 , 2014 , and peaked at number five on the chart dated January 29 , 2015 . In Germany , the song peaked at number ten , becoming her second top @-@ ten song there , and was certified gold for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere in Europe , " Lips Are Movin " peaked within the top @-@ ten in Austria , the Czech Republic , the Netherlands , and Spain , and peaked at number three on Billboard 's Euro Digital Songs . In France , the song peaked at number 154 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Lips Are Movin " was filmed in Los Angeles and was directed by Philip Andelman . It premiered on Trainor 's Vevo account on November 19 , 2014 . Trainor told MTV News , " Here 's me being sassy and other people dancing with me and having just a good time and trying to get through this feeling of , Ugh he 's cheating on me again " . The video was commissioned by information technology corporation Hewlett @-@ Packard . It features several " influencers " — actors , dancers and set designers with large social media followings . The influencers featured in the video include set designer Bri Emery ; actors Marcus Johns , Cody Johns , and Robby Ayala ; dancers Les Twins ; Spanish stylist Sara Escudero ; hair stylist Kristin Ess ; Japanese nail artist Mei <unk> ; American dancer Chachi Gonzales ; and Pomeranian dog Barkley the Pom . Andelman suggested showcasing behind @-@ the @-@ scenes events occurring during a music @-@ video shoot , which was used as the video 's theme . Trainor 's team asked <unk> to develop the look of the " All About That Bass " music video without straying too far from it . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the song 's music video , Trainor sings into a red microphone in front of a pastel blue wall ; she is sometimes flanked by backup dancers and television screens . Lips are used as a motif throughout the video ; they appear as closeups of Trainor 's mouth and as a large drawing of lips used as a backdrop . Yahoo ! Music writer Lyndsey Parker compared the video to the poster for The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Trainor wears lip @-@ shaped earrings and sunglasses in the video , and is seen reclining on a lip @-@ shaped sofa . Parker compared the sofa in the video to the sofas used in the American television program So You Think You Can Dance . The video 's set changes constantly ; props are lifted on @-@ and @-@ off screen by workers throughout the clip . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music video received over 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 YouTube views in less than two days . Billboard writer Andrew Hampp said its production was a " historic milestone in the realm of YouTube creators " . Cowan of Canadian Business said , " Cynics will view this as a decidedly stodgy brand trying to make itself hip by hanging out with cool kids . But a less @-@ jaded eye might call it something else — arts patronage for the 21st century " . Writing for music website Idolator , Bradley Stern called the video a " squeaky @-@ clean visual , " and praised its bright and colorful imagery , while Daily Express writer Stefan Kyriazis called it " red hot " . Mike Pell of MTV UK wrote that the clip continued the bubbly , bright themes of Trainor 's " All About That Bass " video , and that the singer 's sequinned kitty top resembled one Katy Perry wore for the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards . Yahoo ! writer Lyndsey Parker praised Trainor 's fashion in the video ; she said it " seems to be an unofficial campaign to land her own M.A.C. Viva Glam endorsement deal " . Fuse 's Hilary Hughes wrote that the video was a bold and sassy sentiment , and that its style shift from " All About That Bass " " definitely made a statement " . Hughes described the video 's dance routine as " fierce " ; she called it " a super @-@ meta technicolor dance party " . Mashable 's Brian Anthony Hernandez wrote , " The visuals are what you would expect from a bouncy pop song : young dancers , colorful backgrounds , quirky outfits and exaggerated expressions " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Trainor performed " Lips Are Movin " live on NBC 's The Today Show on November 5 , 2014 . She then performed the song in New York during the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade on November 27 , 2014 . Trainor performed a medley of " Lips Are Movin " and " All About That Bass " on the final episode of the nineteenth season of the American reality television series Dancing with the Stars . In December 2014 , Trainor performed the song as part of her set for the Jingle Ball Tour 2014 and during the final episode of the seventh season of the American reality television series The Voice . On January 15 , 2015 , Trainor performed an acoustic rendition of " Lips Are Movin " on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon . The song appears on the set list of Trainor 's 2015 tours That Bass Tour and <unk> Tour . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Boletus rubroflammeus = 
 Boletus rubroflammeus is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . First described from Michigan in 1971 , it is found in the eastern United States and Mexico , where it grows in a mycorrhizal association with hardwood trees . The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) of the fungus have caps that are deep red to purplish red , and dark red pores . The stem has coarse , dark red reticulations ( raised , net @-@ like ridges ) and a narrow yellow area at the top . All parts of the mushroom quickly stain blue when injured or cut . Lookalikes include Boletus flammans , a lighter @-@ colored species that grows with conifers . Other similar species can be distinguished by differences in distribution , morphology , staining reaction , and microscopic characteristics . Boletus rubroflammeus mushrooms are poisonous , and can cause gastrointestinal distress if consumed . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by American mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Harry D. Thiers in their 1978 monograph on the boletes of Michigan . The type collection was made by Smith near Ann Arbor , and is stored at the University of Michigan Herbarium . The specific epithet rubroflammeus derives from the Latin words ruber ( " red " ) and flammeus ( " flaming " ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The shape of the cap of B. rubroflammeus is convex to broadly convex , and reaches a diameter of 6 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The margin of the cap extends slightly beyond the tubes . The cap surface is dry and initially appears appressed @-@ fibrillose ( with fibrils pressed down flat against the surface ) or has a matted grayish tomentum , but later the hairs slough off and the matted tomentum is present only along the cap margin . In maturity , the center of the caps develop slight cracks . The cap is a deep vinaceous @-@ red color that remains constant throughout the life of the fruit bodies . The flesh is thick , soft , and yellow . Its taste is mild , and it has no distinct odor . On the underside of the cap , the spore @-@ bearing surface comprises vertically arranged minute tubes with pore @-@ like openings . The tubes are yellow , 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) deep , initially adnate ( fused ) to the stem , but later becoming free from attachment ( or nearly so ) . Individual pores are round and small ( about 2 per mm ) , while the overall pore surface is uneven or pitted . Its color is initially deep red , but fades slightly in maturity ; the pore surface quickly turns blue with injury . The stem is 6 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long , 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and equal in width throughout to club @-@ shaped . Inside , it is yellowish with reddish streaks . Most of the stem surface is covered with coarse dark red reticulations , although near the top the color is yellow beneath the reticulations . All parts of the mushroom will quickly stain blue when cut , bruised , or otherwise injured . The mushroom is poisonous , and if consumed can cause gastrointestinal distress ; typical symptoms include cramping , nausea , bloating , vomiting , and diarrhea . 
 Boletus rubroflammeus produces an olive @-@ brown spore print . The spores are smooth , roughly oblong to slightly ventricose ( swollen ) in face view , in profile view inequilateral , and have dimensions of 10 – 14 by 4 – 5 μm . Spores have a broad and shallow suprahilar depression ( a depressed area on the dorsal side of the spore that was once attached to the sterigma ) . They are yellowish hyaline ( translucent ) in Melzer 's reagent , and pale yellow @-@ orange when mounted in a solution of potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped with a long pedicel ( stalk ) , four @-@ spored , and measure 30 – 40 by 8 – 9 μm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the tube faces ) are rare to scattered , 28 – 37 by 9 – 15 μm , fusoid ( somewhat spindle @-@ shaped ) to ventricose , and have a somewhat sharp tip . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on gill edges ) are abundant , 18 – 35 by 5 – 9 μm , and roughly similar in shape to the pleurocystidia . When mounted in KOH , the cheilocystidia have a dingy orange @-@ yellow color , and walls that are smooth and thin . The tissue of the tubes is bilateral , meaning that they have a central strand of roughly parallel hyphae from which other hyphae diverge . The central strand comprises interwoven hyphae that are floccose and orange @-@ yellow in KOH ; the diverging hyphae continue into the hymenium to form a subhymenium that contain smooth hyphae measuring 4 – 6 μm wide . The cap has a cuticle consisting of tightly interwoven pressed @-@ down hyphae that are usually 3 – 5 μm wide . The hyphae in the <unk> zone ( a waxy layer on the surface of the cuticle ) often have fine granular incrustations that can be seen in both KOH and Melzer 's reagent . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae of B. rubroflammeus . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Distinctive field characteristics used to distinguish Boletus rubroflammeus from similar boletes include the deep purple @-@ red cap and the reticulated stem . B. flammans is similar in appearance , but has a more variable cap color , ranging from dark red to brick @-@ red or reddish @-@ brown , a yellow stem base and less prominently reticulate stem , and it grows under conifers . Rubroboletus <unk> is also very similar but has more variable cap color with brown to olive tones and its cut flesh has an odor of overripe fruit that intensifies when dry . The European species R. rhodoxanthus has a paler overall color . Another European species , B. <unk> , has larger spores ( 13 – 16 by 5 – 6 @.@ 5 μm ) , weakly decurrent pores , and only associates with oak trees . 
 In addition to its geographic location , the Colombian species B. <unk> can be distinguished from B. rubroflammeus by its reddish @-@ brown cap ( fading to brownish orange in maturity ) , a brownish @-@ red to deep red stem that is reticulated only at the top , and shallower tubes — up to 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) . B. <unk> , known only from Japan where it grows in deciduous forests , differs primarily in having brownish scales on the cap . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Boletus rubroflammeus is a mycorrhizal species , and its fruit bodies grow scattered or in groups on the ground under hardwood trees . The fungus fruits in summer and autumn months , and tends to appear after hot weather and heavy rains . Known only from North America , its range extends from New England south to Tennessee , and west to Michigan . It has also been recorded from Mexico . 
 = Believe in Me ( Bonnie Tyler song ) = 
 " Believe in Me " is a song by Welsh singer Bonnie Tyler from her sixteenth studio album Rocks and Honey ( 2013 ) . American songwriter Desmond Child composed the song with British songwriters Lauren Christy and Christopher Braide . It was released as the lead single from the album by Celtic Swan Recordings on 13 March 2013 . The song was written with the aim to " uplift the world " , and was completed by Child whilst having dinner with Tyler . 
 The song was recorded in the Blackbird Studios , Nashville , Tennessee . The lyrics depict Tyler telling a lover who does not believe in love or religion to just believe in her . " Believe in Me " was selected as the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest entry for the United Kingdom . To comply with the song duration rules , the album version was cut to three minutes and three seconds for radio play and for live performance . The photograph used for the cover art was taken by Tyler 's nephew , Andrew Hopkins . Following the Eurovision Song Contest , the song peaked at No. 93 in the United Kingdom , but did not chart elsewhere . 
 " Believe in Me " received mixed reviews from music critics , and the song was largely blamed for Tyler 's mediocre final score in the Eurovision Song Contest Grand Final . Despite the single 's chart placing and result at Eurovision , both Tyler and the single won categories in the Eurovision Song Contest Radio Awards ; the first time a UK representative has won in a category in the ESC Radio 's history . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Tyler had been working on her sixteenth studio album Rocks and Honey since 2008 . She recorded the album in the Blackbird Studios , Nashville , Tennessee , and released the album on 8 March 2013 in Europe , one day after Tyler was announced as the United Kingdom 's representative at the Eurovision Song Contest . The official release of " Believe in Me " followed a week later , released on 13 March by Celtic Swan Recordings in the United Kingdom and Ireland , and 15 March in Europe . At her appearance on The One Show Tyler explained that the song had already been written before the BBC suggested it as the Eurovision entry when she sent in a demo of Rocks and Honey in to them . The song has also been added to the SingStar store as a karaoke track . A remix single of the song by <unk> Boy & Matty Menk was released on 13 May by Celtic Swan Recordings . 
 The music video was published on the BBC 's official YouTube channel on 6 March 2013 . The video was shot in East Sussex in a beach hut and on a nearby beach . Alongside the music video film crew there was a second crew that filmed a ' making @-@ of ' video . The BBC published the film in late March . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Lauren Christy and Christopher Braide 's involvement in composing " Believe in Me " is unknown , though when it was announced that the song would represent the United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 , Bonnie Tyler told The Telegraph that Child finished composing the song at dinner . 
 " When I got to Nashville , I was looking for songs around the publishers , and got in touch with Desmond and he said " come up for dinner tomorrow night and I 'll give you some songs . " He 'd already recorded some of these demos , but I said " I really love these two songs . " And he said " But " Believe in Me " isn 't finished yet . I tell you what , come back up for dinner tomorrow night and I 'll finish writing it then , " which is what he did . I 'll never forget that night , we got there and Bob Ezrin was there , the producer of The Wall for Pink Floyd . After dinner [ Child ] wrote the second verse . " 
 Welsh singer Paul Child conducted an interview with Desmond Child in Nashville in April 2013 to discuss his work with Bonnie Tyler , both with " Believe in Me " and in the beginnings when he wrote her hit single " If You Were a Woman " in the 1980s . Paul Child drew similarities between the lyrical and rhythmic structure of " Believe in Me " and the Labelle song " Lady Marmalade " , specifically with the lines " Voulez @-@ vous coucher avec moi ( ce soir ) ? " and " [ ... ] and you laugh at the thought of putting your faith in stuff , like love " . Desmond stated that they ( Child , Christy and Braide ) wanted to write a song that would " uplift the world , and we 're so thrilled that Bonnie sang it and that it got chosen to represent the UK . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its initial release , the song received mixed reviews from music critics . <unk> described the song as " quite blissful with a smooth vocal delivery and some pretty nice lyrics , " but despite not being able to fault the song , the reviewer was unsure that the song was the right choice for the Eurovision Song Contest and predicted that Tyler would suffer the same criticism that Engelbert Humperdinck received the previous year . Robert Copsey from Digital Spy gave the song two stars out of five , stating that the song is a " polar opposite to the slew of Euro @-@ club bangers entering this year 's contest , " but applaud Tyler for entering the Eurovision Song Contest with the contrasting song . The Guardian held a poll on their website asking the public if they expected Tyler to be successful at Eurovision . The results were fairly even with 46 % predicting that Tyler would win and 54 % voting that they didn 't expect Tyler to win . Ann <unk> from the Daily Mirror described the song as " heartfelt , " and went on to say that Tyler " can still sing . " She criticised the songwriters ' choice of " above " and " stuff " as the first rhyming lyrics , but noted the line " you never see the rainbow , you just curse the rain " as an improvement , and an opportunity to " have some fun with the staging on finals night in Malmo . " <unk> concluded by saying that it " doesn 't get into your head like ( 2012 Sweden winning song ) " Euphoria " , " and stated that unless the staging is " spectacular " , the song won 't be remembered by voting time . 
 = = Eurovision Song Contest 2013 = = 
 Tyler was selected by the BBC to represent the United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 . The first rehearsal took place on 12 May , the second on 15 May and the performance in front of the jury on 17 May 2013 . Tyler 's final performance of " Believe in Me " took place on 18 May during the Grand Final , with Anthony <unk> ( guitar and backing vocals ) , Michael Gazzard ( guitar and backing vocals ) , Hayley Sanderson ( guitar and backing vocals ) Kristen Cummings ( keyboards and backing vocals ) and Grant <unk> @-@ Kershaw ( drums ) . The song was staged with Tyler standing by a microphone stand with her backing group before walking down the catwalk onto a rising platform . 
 The song finished in 19th place with points from Ireland ( 7 ) , Malta ( 5 ) , Spain ( 4 ) , Romania ( 3 ) , Switzerland ( 2 ) , Sweden ( 1 ) and Slovenia ( 1 ) , a total of 23 points . 
 = = = Reaction to the Eurovision results = = = 
 Several journalists and singers have made public their views on the song and the result . Irish entrant and three @-@ time winner of Eurovision Johnny Logan complimented Tyler , but argued that the song wasn 't strong enough . He continued , " If you 're going to win Eurovision , to go through some of the incredible voting I 've noticed over the last few years , you have to have something that 's going to stand out above everything else . Otherwise you 're just going to hope to pick up 10 or 11 votes . " Similarly , Nathan Moore agreed that the song was not strong enough , but said " It was a great idea to get Bonnie involved , there 's a lot of love for Bonnie out there . " Mick Dalley ( of Yahoo ! News ) agreed that " although Tyler herself was on form , singing beautifully and rousing the crowd with her <unk> finale , " Believe in Me " was simply not good enough as a song " . 
 1997 UK winner Katrina <unk> ( of Katrina and the Waves ) stated that she was underwhelmed by Denmark 's entry , and expected Tyler to have scored higher than she did . British journalist Dave Goodman acknowledged that Tyler 's entry was an improvement on the previous year , though argued that it was a combination of a poor position in the running order and the song that kept the UK from scoring higher . 
 During promotion for Rocks and Honey in France , Bonnie Tyler spoke out against the Eurovision Song Contest 's incidents . After being asked if she believes the contest is rigged , she replied , " I think so . " 
 " The next day after the Eurovision , the Russians were complaining to Azerbaijan , " why didn 't you give us the ten points we paid for ? " Excuse me ! " We paid for ? " Is this a competition ? ... I don 't care about that . We [ United Kingdom ] haven 't won for sixteen years , and I didn 't expect to win . It 's too bad that politics come in to it , it should be a songwriting competition , not who lives next door to you . " 
 The Daily Mail reported that Tyler overheard the conversation of Russians complaining to Azerbaijanis and spread the rumour , though Tyler challenged this and said that she had seen it on Sky News . 
 = = Performances and promotion = = 
 Tyler first performed the song in Berlin , Germany where she featured as a guest on the Rock Meets Classic Tour in February to March 2013 . Tyler was still involved with the tour when it was announced that she would be representing the United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest in May , and after appearing on The One Show in London , she returned to Germany to begin promoting " Believe in Me " . On 19 April , she stopped off at the Cologne Cathedral and the Madame Tussauds wax museum in Berlin for a photo shoot and unveiled wax figurines of the members of ABBA . On 28 April , the Leute <unk> ( German TV show ) film team published a video from visiting Tyler 's house a few weeks before to interview her on her participation in the Eurovision Song Contest . On the same day she also underwent several interviews with media organisations including Digital Spy , The Sun , and the Daily Mail . At mid @-@ day , Tyler was interviewed and then performed an acoustic version of the song on BBC Radio 2 's Weekend Wogan with her Eurovision group . Her final television appearance in the UK was on 3 May , when she performed " Believe in Me " on The Graham Norton Show . 
 After arriving in Malmö on 10 May , Tyler was received positively by the press and by the other Eurovision entrants . Particular support came from Finland 's entrant Krista Siegfrids and Malta 's entrant Gianluca <unk> . Before the voting concluded , the UK received 2 more points from Switzerland and the Lithuanian spokesperson spoke " I love you , Bonnie Tyler " despite the UK not scoring any Lithuanian votes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of the CD single . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On 19 May 2013 , " Believe in Me " scored the highest Eurovision @-@ related new entry on that week 's Top 100 UK Singles Chart , despite finishing 19th in the contest . The song climbed up to No. 86 in the UK mid @-@ week charts following its debut at No. 93 , but dropped out of the Top 100 by the following weekend . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Germany Maxi CD single 
 " Believe in Me " ( Radio edit ) – 3 : 01 
 " Believe in Me " ( Album version ) – 3 : 57 
 " Stubborn " – 3 : 46 
 UK Digital download 
 " Believe in Me " ( Eurovision edit ) – 3 : 01 
 = = Eurovision Song Contest Radio Awards 2013 = = 
 Eurovision Song Contest Radio is a website that host an international voting poll each year for various awards . Bonnie Tyler won Best Song ( with 12 @.@ 6 % of the vote ) and Best Female Singer ( with 16 @.@ 9 % of the vote ) , and made history as the first representative of the United Kingdom to receive an award from ESC Radio since its initiation in 2006 . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Königsberg @-@ class cruiser ( 1927 ) = 
 The Königsberg class , sometimes referred to as the K class , was a class of light cruisers of the German Reichsmarine and Kriegsmarine . The class comprised three ships named after German cities : Königsberg , Karlsruhe , and Köln , all built between 1926 and 1930 . These ships were the first of the Reichsmarine with a modern cruiser design ; their predecessor , Emden , was based on World War I @-@ era designs . They were armed with a main battery of nine 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns and with twelve 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 All three ships of the class were used extensively as training cruisers throughout the 1930s . They went on numerous overseas cruises and participated in the non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War in 1936 – 1939 . After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , the three ships laid defensive minefields in the North Sea . They all saw action in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway , in April 1940 ; Königsberg was damaged by Norwegian coastal guns outside Bergen and sunk by British bombers the following day . Karlsruhe was sunk by the British submarine HMS Truant ; only Köln survived the attack on Norway . 
 After returning to Germany , Köln operated Flettner Fl 282 helicopters as an experiment . She provided gunfire support to German ground forces during Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 , and returned to Norway in 1942 . Ultimately , she was sunk in Wilhelmshaven in March 1945 by American bombers . Her guns were still above water , which allowed her to support the defending German army against British ground forces until the final days of the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Königsberg class were 169 meters ( 554 ft ) long at the waterline and 174 m ( 571 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 15 @.@ 2 m ( 50 ft ) and a maximum draft of 6 @.@ 28 m ( 20 @.@ 6 ft ) . They had a design displacement of 6 @,@ 750 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 640 long tons ; 7 @,@ 440 short tons ) and a standard displacement , as defined by the Washington Naval Treaty , of 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 t ) . They displaced 7 @,@ 700 long tons ( 7 @,@ 800 t ) at full combat load . The ships ' hulls were constructed from longitudinal steel frames and incorporated extensive welding to save weight ; up to 85 percent of the hulls were welded rather than riveted . The hull was divided into nineteen watertight compartments and had a double bottom that extended for 72 percent of the length of the hull . 
 The Königsberg @-@ class cruisers had a standard crew of 21 officers and 493 enlisted men . This later increased to 23 officers and 588 – 591 enlisted men , and during World War II , the crew size rose to between 820 and 850 officers and men . The ships carried a number of smaller vessels , including two picket boats , two barges , two launches , one cutter , and one dinghy . The ships were moderately good sea boats , were very cranky , and suffered from a slight lee helm . They heeled up to twenty degrees with the rudder hard over . They were nevertheless very maneuverable and lost little speed in a head sea . In a hard turn , they lost up to 20 percent speed . 
 In the 1930s , all three members of the class were modified to carry a pair of float planes for reconnaissance . They were equipped with an aircraft catapult to launch the planes and cranes to recover them after they landed in the water . The ships initially carried two Heinkel He 60 biplane float planes , replaced later in the decade with two Arado Ar 196 monoplane float planes . Only one aircraft could be stored on the catapult at a time ; the second plane had to be disassembled and placed in storage , and the ships did not have a hangar to store it in . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Their propulsion system consisted of four steam turbines and a pair of 10 @-@ cylinder four @-@ stroke diesel engines . The turbines were split into three engine rooms , with the diesels in their own rooms directly aft of the turbines . Steam for the turbines was provided by six Marine @-@ type double @-@ ended oil @-@ fired boilers . The engines powered a pair of three @-@ bladed screws that were 4 @.@ 1 m ( 13 ft ) wide on the first two ships and 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) in diameter on Köln . The ships ' propulsion system provided a top speed of 32 kn ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) and were rated at 65 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 48 @,@ 000 kW ) , though all three ships exceeded 68 @,@ 000 shp ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ) on speed trials . The ships carried 600 t ( 590 long tons ; 660 short tons ) of fuel oil as designed , but could store up to 1 @,@ 350 t ( 1 @,@ 330 long tons ; 1 @,@ 490 short tons ) . This gave them a range of approximately 5 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 600 km ; 6 @,@ 600 mi ) at 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and 7 @,@ 300 nmi ( 13 @,@ 500 km ; 8 @,@ 400 mi ) at 17 kn ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . The ships had three turbo @-@ generators and two diesel generators for electricity ; the generators had a combined output of 540 kilowatts ( 720 hp ) at 220 Volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships were armed with nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns mounted in three triple gun turrets . One turret was located forward , and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . The rear gun turrets were offset to increase their arc of fire . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 080 rounds of ammunition , for 120 shells per gun . As built , the ships were also equipped with two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in single mounts ; they had 400 rounds of ammunition each . The Königsberg class also carried four triple torpedo tube mounts located amidships ; they were supplied with twenty @-@ four 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedoes , though these were replaced with 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) models by 1940 . The ships were also capable of carrying 120 naval mines . 
 The ships ' anti @-@ aircraft batteries were revised and improved throughout the course of their careers . The original single @-@ mounted 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were replaced with twin mounts for the new 8 @.@ 8 cm SK C / 32 guns and a third twin mount was also installed , bringing the number of guns to six . Eight 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns were installed in the mid @-@ 1930s and up to eight 2 cm Flak 30 guns were also added . Köln , the only ship to survive to the end of the war , was ultimately armed with eight 3 @.@ 7 cm and eighteen 2 cm guns , though provisions had been made to mount up to ten and twenty @-@ four guns of the two calibers , respectively . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ships were protected by an armored deck that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships and tapered down to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) on either end . They had an armored belt that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick and capped with 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick bulkheads on either end of the belt . Underwater protection consisted of a 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) torpedo bulkhead and a 20 mm collision bulkhead . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) sides and a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) roof . The ships ' gun turrets had 30 mm faces and 20 mm roofs , sides , and rears . The barbettes for the turrets were also 30 mm thick . Karlsruhe was later fitted with increased armor protection , consisting of a 10 to 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 55 in ) outer plating that consisted of the new Wotan <unk> steel , and an upper deck that was 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) , also Wotan <unk> . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All three ships of the Königsberg class served as training cruisers for naval cadets throughout the 1930s . They conducted numerous cruises in European waters , and both Karlsruhe and Köln traveled to other continents . They were all modified throughout the decade , and had their anti @-@ aircraft armament repeatedly improved , along with other alterations . The three ships took part in the non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War in 1936 – 1939 , and after the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , they laid a series of defensive minefields in the North Sea . 
 The three ships then participated in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway , in April 1940 . Königsberg and Köln were assigned to the assault on Bergen , while Karlsruhe joined the attack on Kristiansand . Königsberg came under heavy fire from a 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) battery outside Bergen , and was badly damaged ; after the port was captured , she moved into harbor for temporary repairs . She was ordered to return to Germany , but was attacked the next morning by British bombers and hit by at least five bombs . She sank slowly enough for the majority of her crew to escape ; there were only eighteen men killed in the attack . 
 Karlsruhe meanwhile suppressed Norwegian coastal guns outside Kristiansand and successfully landed her contingent of ground troops . After Karlsruhe left port , the British submarine HMS Truant attacked the German cruiser and hit her with a pair of torpedoes . The torpedo hits knocked out Karlsruhe 's power and thus prevented her crew from pumping out the water that was rapidly flooding the ship . Her crew was taken off by an escorting torpedo boat , which then fired a pair of torpedoes into the stricken cruiser to ensure she sank quickly . 
 Köln was the only ship of the class to survive the operations off Norway . After returning to Germany , she was modified to serve as a testbed for the Flettner Fl 282 helicopter . She thereafter served in the Baltic , providing gunfire support to advancing German troops in 1941 . In mid 1942 , she returned to Norwegian waters , and unsuccessfully attempted to attack Convoy PQ 18 along with several other German warships . She was then ordered back to Germany , where she served in a variety of roles , including training ship and convoy escort , before again returning to Norway . She was damaged by British bombers in December 1944 and forced to return to Germany for repairs . While in dock in Wilhelmshaven in March 1945 , she was attacked and sunk by American heavy bombers . She sank on an even keel , with her guns still above water , which permitted their use against advancing British forces until the final days of the war . 
 = Dromaeosauridae = 
 Dromaeosauridae is a family of feathered theropod dinosaurs . They were small- to medium @-@ sized feathered carnivores that flourished in the Cretaceous Period . The name Dromaeosauridae means ' running lizards ' , from Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning ' runner ' and sauros ( σαυρος ) meaning ' lizard ' . In informal usage they are often called raptors ( after Velociraptor ) , a term popularized by the film Jurassic Park ; a few types include the term " raptor " directly in their name and have come to emphasize their supposed bird @-@ like habits . 
 Dromaeosaurid fossils have been found across the globe in North America , Europe , Africa , Japan , China , Mongolia , Manchuria , Madagascar , Argentina , and Antarctica , with fossilized teeth giving credence to the possibility that they inhabited Australia as well . They first appeared in the mid @-@ Jurassic Period ( late Bathonian stage , about 167 million years ago ) and survived until the end of the Cretaceous ( Maastrichtian stage , 66 ma ) , existing for over 100 million years , until the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . The presence of dromaeosaurids as early as the Middle Jurassic has been confirmed by the discovery of isolated fossil teeth , though no dromaeosaurid body fossils have been found from this period . 
 = = Description = = 
 The distinctive dromaeosaurid body plan helped to rekindle theories that at least some dinosaurs may have been active , fast , and closely related to birds . Robert Bakker 's illustration for John Ostrom 's 1969 monograph , showing the dromaeosaurid Deinonychus in a fast run , is among the most influential paleontological reconstructions in history . The dromaeosaurid body plan includes a relatively large skull , serrated teeth , narrow snout , and forward @-@ facing eyes which indicate some degree of binocular vision . Dromaeosaurids , like most other theropods , had a moderately long S @-@ curved neck , and their trunk was relatively short and deep . Like other maniraptorans , they had long arms that could be folded against the body in some species , and relatively large hands with three long fingers ( the middle finger being the longest and the first finger being the shortest ) ending in large claws . The dromaeosaurid hip structure featured a characteristically large pubic boot projecting beneath the base of the tail . Dromaeosaurid feet bore a large , recurved claw on the second toe . Their tails were slender , with long , low , vertebrae lacking transverse process and neural spines after the 14th caudal vertebra . 
 It is now known that at least some , and probably all , dromaeosaurids were covered in feathers , including large , vaned , wing and tail feathers . This development , first hypothesized in the mid @-@ late 1980s and confirmed by fossil discoveries in 1999 , represents a significant change in the way dromaeosaurids have historically been depicted in art and film . 
 = = = Foot = = = 
 Like other theropods , dromaeosaurids were bipedal ; that is , they walked on their hind legs . However , whereas most theropods walked with three toes contacting the ground , fossilized footprint tracks confirm that many early paravian groups , including the dromaeosaurids , held the second toe off the ground in a hyperextended position , with only the third and fourth toes bearing the weight of the animal . This is called functional <unk> . The enlarged second toe bore an unusually large , curved , <unk> ( sickle @-@ shaped , alt. <unk> ) claw ( held off the ground or ' retracted ' when walking ) , which is thought to have been used in capturing prey and climbing trees ( see " Claw function " below ) . This claw was especially blade @-@ like in the large @-@ bodied predatory <unk> . One possible dromaeosaurid species , <unk> <unk> , also possessed a first toe which was highly modified in parallel with the second . Both the first and second toes on each foot of B. <unk> were also held retracted and bore enlarged , sickle @-@ shaped claws . 
 = = = Tail = = = 
 Dromaeosaurids had long tails . Most of the tail vertebrae bear bony , rod @-@ like extensions , as well as bony tendons in some species . In his study of Deinonychus , Ostrom proposed that these features stiffened the tail so that it could only flex at the base , and the whole tail would then move as a single , rigid , lever . However , one well @-@ preserved specimen of Velociraptor mongoliensis ( IGM 100 / 986 ) has an articulated tail skeleton that is curved horizontally in a long S @-@ shape . This suggests that , in life , the tail could bend from side to side with a substantial degree of flexibility . It has been proposed that this tail was used as a stabilizer and / or counterweight while running or in the air ; in Microraptor , an elongate diamond @-@ shaped fan of feathers is preserved on the end of the tail . This may have been used as an aerodynamic stabilizer and rudder during gliding and / or powered flight ( see " Flight and gliding " below ) . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Dromaeosaurids were small to medium @-@ sized dinosaurs , ranging from about 0 @.@ 7 metres ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) in length ( in the case of Mahakala ) to over 6 metres ( 20 ft ) ( in Utahraptor , Dakotaraptor and Achillobator ) . Some may have grown larger ; undescribed specimens of Utahraptor in Brigham Young University collections belonged to individuals that may have reached up to 11 m ( 36 ft ) long , though these await more detailed study . Large size appears to have evolved at least twice among dromaeosaurids ; once among the <unk> Utahraptor and Achillobator , and again among the <unk> ( <unk> , which measured 5 metres ( 16 ft ) long ) . A possible third lineage of giant dromaeosaurids is represented by isolated teeth found on the Isle of Wight , England . The teeth belong to an animal the size of the <unk> Utahraptor , but they appear to belong to <unk> , judging by the shape of the teeth . 
 Mahakala is both the most primitive dromaeosaurid ever described and the smallest . This evidence , combined with the small size of other primitive relatives such as Microraptor and the troodontid Anchiornis , indicates that the common ancestor of dromaeosaurids , troodontids , and birds ( which is called the ancestral paravian ) may have been very small , at around 65 cm in length and 600 to 700 grams of mass . 
 = = = Feathers = = = 
 There is a large body of evidence showing that dromaeosaurids were covered in feathers . Some dromaeosaurid fossils preserve long , pennaceous feathers on the hands and arms ( remiges ) and tail ( rectrices ) , as well as shorter , down @-@ like feathers covering the body . Other fossils , which do not preserve actual impressions of feathers , still preserve the associated bumps on the forearm bones where long wing feathers would have attached in life . Overall , this feather pattern looks very much like Archaeopteryx . 
 The first known dromaeosaurid with definitive evidence of feathers was Sinornithosaurus , reported from China by Xu et al. in 1999 . Many other dromaeosaurid fossils have been found with feathers covering their bodies , some with fully developed feathered wings . Microraptor even shows evidence of a second pair of wings on the hind legs . While direct feather impressions are only possible in fine @-@ grained sediments , some fossils found in coarser rocks show evidence of feathers by the presence of quill knobs , the attachment points for wing feathers possessed by some birds . The dromaeosaurids Rahonavis and Velociraptor have both been found with quill knobs , showing that these forms had feathers despite no impressions having been found . In light of this , it is most likely that even the larger ground @-@ dwelling dromaeosaurids bore feathers , since even flightless birds today retain most of their plumage , and relatively large dromaeosaurids , like Velociraptor , are known to have retained pennaceous feathers . Though some scientists had suggested that the larger dromaeosaurids lost some or all of their <unk> covering , the discovery of feathers in Velociraptor specimens has been cited as evidence that all members of the family retained feathers . 
 More recently , the discovery of Zhenyuanlong established the presence of a full feathered coat in relatively large dromaeosaurs . Additionally , the animal displays proportionally large , aerodynamic wing feathers , as well as a tail @-@ spanning fan , both of which unexpected traits that may offer an understanding to the integument of large dromaeosaurs . Dakotaraptor is an even larger dromaeosaur species with evidence of feathers , albeit indirect in the form of quill knobs . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Claw function = = = 
 There is currently disagreement about the function of the enlarged " sickle claw " on the second toe . When John Ostrom described it for Deinonychus in 1969 , he interpreted the claw as a blade @-@ like slashing weapon , much like the canines of some saber @-@ toothed cats , used with powerful kicks to cut into prey . Adams ( 1987 ) suggested that the talon was used to disembowel large ceratopsian dinosaurs . The interpretation of the sickle claw as a killing weapon applied to all dromaeosaurids . However , Manning et al. argued that the claw instead served as a hook , reconstructing the keratinous sheath with an elliptical cross section , instead of the previously inferred inverted teardrop shape . In Manning 's interpretation , the second toe claw would be used as a climbing aid when subduing bigger prey and also as stabbing weapon . 
 Ostrom compared Deinonychus to the ostrich and cassowary . He noted that the bird species can inflict serious injury with the large claw on the second toe . The cassowary has claws up to 125 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) long . Ostrom cited Gilliard ( 1958 ) in saying that they can sever an arm or disembowel a man . <unk> ( 1999 and 2003 ) studied 241 documented cassowary attacks and found that one human and two dogs had been killed , but no evidence that cassowaries can disembowel or dismember other animals . <unk> use their claws to defend themselves , to attack threatening animals , and in agonistic displays such as the Bowed Threat Display . The <unk> also has an enlarged second toe claw , and uses it to tear apart small prey items for swallowing . 
 Phillip Manning and colleagues ( 2009 ) attempted to test the function of the sickle claw and similarly shaped claws on the forelimbs . They analyzed the bio @-@ mechanics of how stresses and strains would be distributed along the claws and into the limbs , using X @-@ ray imaging to create a three @-@ dimensional contour map of a forelimb claw from Velociraptor . For comparison , they analyzed the construction of a claw from a modern predatory bird , the eagle owl . They found that , based on the way that stress was conducted along the claw , they were ideal for climbing . The scientists found that the sharpened tip of the claw was a puncturing and gripping instrument , while the curved and expanded claw base helped transfer stress loads evenly . 
 The Manning team also compared the curvature of the dromaeosaurid " sickle claw " on the foot with curvature in modern birds and mammals . Previous studies had shown that the amount of curvature in a claw corresponded to what lifestyle the animal has : animals with strongly curved claws of a certain shape tend to be climbers , while straighter claws indicate ground @-@ dwelling lifestyles . The sickle @-@ claws of the dromaeosaurid Deinonychus have a curvature of 160 degrees , well within the range of climbing animals . The forelimb claws they studied also fell within the climbing range of curvature . 
 Paleontologist Peter <unk> commented on the Manning team 's study , stating that small , primitive dromaeosaurids ( such as Microraptor ) were likely to have been tree @-@ climbers , but that climbing did not explain why later , gigantic dromaeosaurids such as Achillobator retained highly curved claws when they were too large to have climbed trees . <unk> speculated that giant dromaeosaurids may have adapted the claw to be used exclusively for latching on to prey . 
 In 2009 Phil Senter published a study on dromaeosaurid toes and showed that their range of motion was compatible with the excavation of tough insect nests . Senter suggested that small dromaeosaurids such as Rahonavis and Buitreraptor were small enough to be partial insectivores , while larger genera such as Deinonychus and <unk> could have used this ability to catch vertebrate prey residing in insect nests . However , Senter did not test whether the strong curvature of dromaeosaurid claws was also conducive to such activities . 
 In 2011 , Denver Fowler and colleagues suggested a new method by which dromaeosaurids may have taken smaller prey . This model , known as the " raptor prey restraint " ( RPR ) model of predation , proposes that dromaeosaurids killed their prey in a manner very similar to extant accipitrid birds of prey : by leaping onto their quarry , pinning it under their body weight , and gripping it tightly with the large , sickle @-@ shaped claws . Like accipitrids , the dromaeosaurid would then begin to feed on the animal while still alive , until it eventually died from blood loss and organ failure . This proposal is based primarily on comparisons between the morphology and proportions of the feet and legs of dromaeosaurids to several groups of extant birds of prey with known predatory behaviors . Fowler found that the feet and legs of dromaeosaurids most closely resemble those of eagles and hawks , especially in terms of having an enlarged second claw and a similar range of grasping motion . The short metatarsus and foot strength , however , would have been more similar to that of owls . The RPR method of predation would be consistent with other aspects of dromaeosaurid anatomy , such as their unusual dentition and arm morphology . The arms , which could exert a lot of force but were likely covered in long feathers , may have been used as flapping stabilizers for balance while atop a struggling prey animal , along with the stiff counterbalancing tail . Dromaeosaurid jaws , thought by Fowler and colleagues to be comparatively weak , would have been useful for eating prey alive but not as useful for quick , forceful dispatch of the prey . These predatory adaptations working together may also have implications for the origin of flapping in paravians . 
 = = = Group behavior = = = 
 Deinonychus fossils have been uncovered in small groups near the remains of the herbivore Tenontosaurus , a larger ornithischian dinosaur . This had been interpreted as evidence that these dromaeosaurids hunted in coordinated packs like some modern mammals . However , not all paleontologists found the evidence conclusive , and a subsequent study published in 2007 by Roach and Brinkman suggests that the Deinonychus may have actually displayed a disorganized mobbing behavior . Modern diapsids , including birds and crocodiles ( the closest relatives of dromaeosaurids ) , display minimal cooperative hunting ; instead , they are usually either solitary hunters , or are drawn to previously killed carcasses , where conflict often occurs between individuals of the same species . For example , in situations where groups of Komodo dragons are eating together , the largest individuals eat first and might attack smaller Komodo dragons that attempt to feed ; if the smaller animal dies , it is usually cannibalized . When this information is applied to the sites containing putative pack @-@ hunting behavior in dromaeosaurids , it appears somewhat consistent with a <unk> or crocodile @-@ like feeding strategy . Deinonychus skeletal remains found at these sites are from subadults , with missing parts that may have been eaten by other Deinonychus , which a study by Roach et al. presented as evidence against the idea that the animals cooperated in the hunt . 
 In 2007 , scientists described the first known extensive dromaeosaurid trackway , in Shandong , China . In addition to confirming the hypothesis that the sickle @-@ claw was held retracted off the ground , the trackway ( made by a large , Achillobator @-@ sized species ) showed evidence of six individuals of about equal size moving together along a shoreline . The individuals were spaced about one meter apart , and retained the same direction of travel , walking at a fairly slow pace . The authors of the paper describing these footprints interpreted the trackways as evidence that some species of dromaeosaurids lived in groups . While the trackways clearly do not represent hunting behavior , the idea that groups of dromaeosaurids may have hunted together , according to the authors , could not be ruled out . 
 = = = Flying and gliding = = = 
 The ability to fly or glide has been suggested for at least five dromaeosaurid species . The first , Rahonavis ostromi ( originally classified as avian bird , but found to be a dromaeosaurid in later studies ) may have been capable of powered flight , as indicated by its long forelimbs with evidence of quill knob attachments for long sturdy flight feathers . The forelimbs of Rahonavis were more powerfully built than Archaeopteryx , and show evidence that they bore strong ligament attachments necessary for flapping flight . Luis Chiappe concluded that , given these adaptations , Rahonavis could probably fly but would have been more clumsy in the air than modern birds . 
 Another species of dromaeosaurid , Microraptor gui , may have been capable of gliding using its well @-@ developed wings on both the fore and hind limbs . A 2005 study by Sankar Chatterjee suggested that the wings of Microraptor functioned like a split @-@ level " biplane " , and that it likely employed a phugoid style of gliding , in which it would launch from a perch and swoop downward in a ' U ' shaped curve , then lift again to land on another tree , with the tail and hind wings helping to control its position and speed . Chatterjee also found that Microraptor had the basic requirements to sustain level powered flight in addition to gliding . 
 <unk> <unk> is a close relative of Microraptor gui , also thought to be a glider or flyer based on the presence of four wings and similar limb proportions . However , it is a considerably larger animal , around the size of a wild turkey , being among the largest known flying Mesozoic paravians . 
 Another dromaeosaurid species , Deinonychus antirrhopus , may display partial flight capacities . The young of this species bore longer arms and more robust pectoral girdles than adults , and which were similar to those seen in other flapping theropods , implying that they may have been capable of flight when young and then lost the ability as they grew . 
 The possibility that Sinornithosaurus <unk> was capable of gliding or even powered flight has also been brought up several times , though no further studies have occurred . 
 Zhenyuanlong preserves wing feathers that are aerodynamically shaped , with particularly bird @-@ like coverts as opposed to the longer , wider @-@ spanning coverts of forms like Archaeopteryx and Anchiornis , as well as fused sternal plates . Due to its size and short arms it is unlikely that Zhenyuanlong was capable of powered flight ( though the importance of biomechanical modelling in this regard is stressed ) , but it may suggest a relatively close <unk> from flying ancestors , or even some capacity for gliding or wing @-@ assisted incline running . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 Comparisons between the scleral rings of several dromaeosaurids ( Microraptor , Sinornithosaurus , and Velociraptor ) and modern birds and reptiles indicate that some dromaeosaurids ( including Microraptor and Velociraptor ) may have been nocturnal predators , while Sinornithosaurus is inferred to be cathemeral ( active throughout the day at short intervals ) . However , the discovery of iridescent plumage in Microraptor has cast doubt on the inference of nocturnality in this genus , as no modern birds that have iridescent plumage are known to be nocturnal . 
 Studies of the olfactory bulbs of dromaeosaurids reveal that they had similar olfactory ratios for their size to other non @-@ avian theropods and modern birds with an acute sense of smell , such as tyrannosaurids and the turkey vulture , probably reflecting the importance of the olfactory sense in the daily activities of dromaeosaurids such as finding food . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 In 2001 , Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior . Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by regular behavior than other types of injuries . The researchers found lesion like those caused by stress fractures on a dromaeosaurid hand claw , one of only two such claw lesions discovered in the course of the study . Stress fractures in the hands have special behavioral significance compared to those found in the feet since stress fractures there can be obtained while running or during migration . Hand injuries , by contrast , are more likely to be obtained while in contact with struggling prey . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Relationship with birds = = = 
 Dromaeosaurids share many features with early birds ( clade Avialae or Aves ) . The precise nature of their relationship to birds has undergone a great deal of study , and hypotheses about that relationship have changed as large amounts of new evidence became available . As late as 2001 , Mark Norell and colleagues analyzed a large survey of coelurosaur fossils and produced the tentative result that dromaeosaurids were most closely related to birds , with troodontids as a more distant outgroup . They even suggested that Dromaeosauridae could be paraphyletic relative to Avialae . In 2002 , Hwang and colleagues utilized the work of Norell et al . , including new characters and better fossil evidence , to determine that birds ( avialans ) were better thought of as cousins to the dromaeosaurids and troodontids . A consensus of paleontologists has concluded that there is not yet enough evidence to determine whether any dromaeosaurids could fly or glide , or whether they evolved from ancestors that could . 
 = = = Alternative theories and flightlessness = = = 
 Dromaeosaurids are so birdlike that they have led some researchers to argue that they would be better classified as birds . First , since they had feathers , dromaeosaurids ( along with many other coelurosaurian theropod dinosaurs ) are " birds ” under traditional definitions of the word " bird ” , or " Aves ” , that are based on the possession of feathers . However , other scientists , such as Lawrence Witmer , have argued that calling a theropod like <unk> a bird because it has feathers may stretch the word past any useful meaning . 
 At least two schools of researchers have proposed that dromaeosaurids may actually be descended from flying ancestors . Hypotheses involving a flying ancestor for dromaeosaurids are sometimes called " Birds Came First ” ( BCF ) . George Olshevsky is usually credited as the first author of BCF . In his own work , Gregory S. Paul pointed out numerous features of the dromaeosaurid skeleton that he interpreted as evidence that the entire group had evolved from flying , dinosaurian , ancestors , perhaps something like Archaeopteryx . In that case , the larger dromaeosaurids were secondarily flightless , like the modern ostrich . In 1988 , Paul suggested that dromaeosaurids may actually be more closely related to modern birds than to Archaeopteryx . By 2002 , however , Paul placed dromaeosaurids and Archaeopteryx as the closest relatives to one another . 
 In 2002 , Hwang et al. found that Microraptor was the most primitive dromaeosaurid . Xu and colleagues in 2003 cited the basal position of Microraptor , along with feather and wing features , as evidence that the ancestral dromaeosaurid could glide . In that case the larger dromaeosaurids would be secondarily terrestrial — having lost the ability to glide later in their evolutionary history . 
 Also in 2002 , Steven Czerkas described Cryptovolans , though it is a probable junior synonym of Microraptor . He reconstructed the fossil inaccurately with only two wings and thus argued that dromaeosaurids were powered fliers , rather than passive gliders . He later issued a revised reconstruction in agreement with that of Microraptor 
 Other researchers , like Larry Martin believe that dromaeosaurids , along with all maniraptorans are not dinosaurs at all . Martin asserted for decades that birds were unrelated to maniraptorans , but in 2004 he changed his position , and now he agrees that the two are the closest of relatives . Martin believes that maniraptorans are secondarily flightless birds , and that birds evolved from non – dinosaurian archosaurs , so that most of the species formerly called theropods would now not even be classified as dinosaurs . 
 In 2005 , Mayr and Peters described the anatomy of a very well preserved specimen of Archaeopteryx , and determined that its anatomy was more like non @-@ avian theropods than previously understood . Specifically , they found that Archaeopteryx had a primitive palatine , <unk> hallux , and hyper @-@ extendable second toe . Their phylogenetic analysis produced the controversial result that Confuciusornis was closer to Microraptor than to Archaeopteryx , making the Avialae a paraphyletic taxon . They also suggested that the ancestral paravian was able to fly or glide , and that the dromaeosaurids and troodontids were secondarily flightless ( or had lost the ability to glide ) . Corfe and Butler criticized this work on methodological grounds . 
 A challenge to all of these alternative scenarios came when Turner and colleagues in 2007 described a new dromaeosaurid , Mahakala , which they found to be the most basal and most primitive member of the Dromaeosauridae , more primitive than Microraptor . Mahakala had short arms and no ability to glide . Turner et al. also inferred that flight evolved only in the Avialae , and these two points suggested that the ancestral dromaeosaurid could not glide or fly . Based on this cladistic analysis , Mahakala suggests that the ancestral condition for dromaeosaurids is non @-@ <unk> . However , in 2012 , an expanded and revised study incorporating the most recent Dromaeosaurid finds recovered the Archaeopteryx @-@ like Xiaotingia as the most primitive member of the clade Dromaeosauridae , which appears to suggest the earliest members of the clade may have been capable of flight . 
 = = = Deinonychosauria = = = 
 Since the 1960s , the dromaeosaurids and troodontids have often been classified together in a group or clade named the Deinonychosauria , initially based primarily on the presence of a retractable second toe with sickle @-@ claw ( now also known to be present in some primitive birds ) . The name Deinonychosauria was coined by Ned Colbert and Dale Russell in 1969 , and defined as a clade ( all theropods closer to dromaeosaurids than to birds ) by Jaques Gauthier in 1986 . Through the early 2000s , consensus among paleontologists was that dromaeosaurids were most closely related to the troodontids , and together with the troodontids , with <unk> in turn the sister taxon to avialans , and therefore the closest relatives of avialan birds . In 2012 , Turner et al. conducted a phylogenetic analysis ( using a dataset of 474 characters scored for 111 taxa ) which found Deinonychosauria to be monophyletic . However , several more recent studies have cast doubt on the hypothesis that dromaeosaurids and troodontids were more closely related to each other than either was to birds . A more robust 2013 study by Godefroit et al . ( using a dataset of 1 @,@ 500 characters scored for 358 taxa ) found that troodontids were possibly more closely related to birds than to dromaeosaurids ; forcing troodontids to remain in a monophyletic Deinonychosauria required four extra steps in the analysis , making this result less likely but not implausible . Because Deinonychosauria was originally defined as all animals closer to dromaeosaurids than to birds without specific reference to troodontids , Deinonychosauria is a synonym of Dromaeosauridae if Troodontidae is closer to birds . 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 The authorship of the family Dromaeosauridae is credited to William Diller Matthew and Barnum Brown , who erected it as a subfamily ( Dromaeosaurinae ) of the family Deinodontidae in 1922 , containing only the new genus Dromaeosaurus . 
 The subfamilies of Dromaeosauridae frequently shift in content based on new analysis , but typically consist of the following groups . A number of dromaeosaurids have not been assigned to any particular subfamily , often because they are too poorly preserved to be placed confidently in phylogenetic analysis ( see section Phylogeny below ) , or because they are basal relative to the primary subdivisions of Dromaeosauridae ( Mahakala , for example , is the most primitive known dromaeosaurid and falls outside any named sub @-@ group ) . The most basal subfamily of dromaeosaurids is often found to be the Unenlagiinae . This enigmatic group is the most poorly supported subfamily of dromaeosaurids and it is possible that some or all of its members belong outside of Dromaeosauridae . The larger , ground @-@ dwelling members like Buitreraptor and Unenlagia show strong flight adaptations , although they were probably too large to ' take off ' . One member of this group , Rahonavis , is very small , with well @-@ developed wings that show evidence of quill knobs ( the attachment points for flight feathers ) and it is very likely that it could fly . The next most primitive clade of dromaeosaurids is the Microraptoria . This group includes many of the smallest dromaeosaurids , which show adaptations for living in trees . All known dromaeosaurid skin impressions hail from this group and all show an extensive covering of feathers and well @-@ developed wings . Like the <unk> , some species may have been capable of active flight . The subfamily Velociraptorinae has traditionally included Velociraptor , Deinonychus , and Saurornitholestes , and while the discovery of Tsaagan lent support to this grouping , the inclusion of Saurornitholestes is still uncertain . The Dromaeosaurinae is usually found to consist of medium to giant @-@ sized species , with generally box @-@ shaped skulls ( the other subfamilies generally have narrower snouts ) . 
 The following classification of the various genera of dromaeosaurids follows the table provided in Holtz , 2011 unless otherwise noted . 
 Family Dromaeosauridae 
 <unk> 
 Mahakala 
 Nuthetes ? 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> ( = <unk> ? ) 
 <unk> ? 
 <unk> 
 Subfamily Unenlagiinae 
 <unk> 
 Rahonavis 
 Unenlagia 
 Buitreraptor 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Subfamily <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Microraptor 
 Cryptovolans ? 
 Sinornithosaurus 
 Zhenyuanlong 
 Node <unk> <unk> 
 Bambiraptor 
 Saurornitholestes 
 <unk> 
 Deinonychus 
 Subfamily Velociraptorinae 
 Acheroraptor 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Velociraptor 
 Tsaagan 
 <unk> 
 Subfamily Dromaeosaurinae 
 Achillobator 
 Dromaeosaurus 
 Dakotaraptor 
 Dromaeosauroides 
 Utahraptor 
 <unk> 
 = = = = History of genera = = = = 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Dromaeosauridae was first defined as a clade by Paul Sereno in 1998 , as the most inclusive natural group containing Dromaeosaurus but not Troodon , Ornithomimus or Passer . The various " subfamilies " have also been re @-@ defined as clades , usually defined as all species closer to the groups namesake than to Dromaeosaurus or any namesakes of other sub @-@ clades ( for example , Makovicky defined the clade Unenlagiinae as all dromaeosaurids closer to Unenlagia than to Velociraptor ) . The Microraptoria is the only dromaeosaurid sub @-@ clade not converted from a subfamily . Senter and colleagues expressly coined the name without the subfamily suffix <unk> to avoid perceived issues with erecting a traditional family @-@ group taxon , should the group be found to lie outside <unk> proper . Sereno offered a revised definition of the sub @-@ group containing Microraptor to ensure that it would fall within Dromaeosauridae , and erected the subfamily <unk> , attributing it to Senter et al . , though this usage has only appeared on his online <unk> database and has not been formally published . The extensive cladistic analysis conducted by Turner et al . ( 2012 ) further supported the monophyly of Dromaeosauridae . 
 The cladogram below follows a 2015 analysis by paleontologists Robert DePalma , David Burnham , Larry Martin , Peter Larson , and Robert Bakker , using updated data from the Theropod Working Group . 
 = = Technical diagnosis = = 
 Dromaeosaurids are diagnosed by the following features ; short T @-@ shaped frontals that form the rostral boundary of the supratemporal fenestra ; a <unk> overhanging shelf of the squamosal ; a lateral process of the quadrate that contacts the <unk> ; raised , stalked , <unk> on the dorsal vertebrae , a modified pedal digit II ; chevrons and prezygapophyses of the caudal vertebrae elongate and spanning several vertebrae ; the presence of a <unk> fossa on the coracoid . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Velociraptor , a dromaeosaurid , gained much attention after it was featured prominently in the 1993 Steven Spielberg film Jurassic Park . However , the dimensions of the Velociraptor in the film are much larger than the largest members of that genus . Robert Bakker recalled that Spielberg had been disappointed with the dimensions of Velociraptor and so upsized it , adding that soon afterwards he named Utahraptor which was more the size depicted , or larger . Gregory S. Paul , in his book Predatory Dinosaurs of the World , considered Deinonychus antirrhopus a species of Velociraptor , and so rechristened the species Velociraptor antirrhopus . This taxonomic opinion has not been widely followed . 
 = Syro = 
 Syro ( pronounced / <unk> / ; often stylised as <unk> ) is the sixth studio album by the electronic musician Richard D James , released under the pseudonym Aphex Twin on 19 September 2014 on Warp . It is his first studio album release under the name Aphex Twin in 13 years since Drukqs ( 2001 ) and his first album of new material since Analord ( 2005 ) . The album is also his first official release as Aphex Twin since Chosen Lords ( 2006 ) , a compilation of tracks from the Analord series . 
 Recorded over a period of several years in various studios — including James ' own studio in rural Scotland — Syro features 12 tracks and incorporates several subgenres of electronic music including techno , glitch , jungle and ambient . The album also features edited vocal tracks provided by James and his family . Syro 's cryptic promotional campaign included an announcement made available only on the Deep Web , as well as several press releases in broken English and events in various international cities . Upon its release Syro received widespread acclaim from music critics and placed in several international charts , as well as earning a nomination for the Choice Music Prize and winning the 2015 Grammy Award for Best Dance / Electronic Album . It was nominated for the 2015 Mercury Music Prize . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of Drukqs in October 2001 Richard D James released a compilation album , 26 Mixes for Cash ( 2003 ) , and the penultimate installment of an extended play series titled Analord under the <unk> pseudonym . A selection of tracks from Analord were later released on the compilation album Chosen Lords ( 2006 ) . A long absence followed , during which time James ceased releasing Aphex Twin material and only performed occasional disc jockey sets in the United Kingdom and Europe . He also relocated to rural Scotland , where he constructed a recording studio . 
 Warp founder Steve Beckett mentioned on BBC Radio 6 Music in 2009 that a new Aphex Twin studio album would " hopefully " be available by the end of the year , though no album was released . Later in 2010 , James revealed in an interview with culture and fashion magazine Another Man that he had six studio albums completed . Describing the records , he said among them were two " very non @-@ commercial abstract , modular @-@ synthesis field recordings " which were completed in 2006 , as well as Melodies from Mars , a collection of unreleased material from 1995 which James reworked in 2007 . 
 In April 2014 Fact reported that an anonymous record collector had listed a test pressing of Caustic Window — an unreleased album James recorded under the Caustic Window alias — on <unk> . The album was on sale for US $ 13 @,@ 500 ( £ 8 @,@ 050 ) . In response , members of We Are the Music Makers , an electronic music internet forum , negotiated a deal between the collector , the forum 's administrator , James and Rephlex Records and launched a crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter with a funding goal of $ 9 @,@ 300 ( £ 5 @,@ 000 ) in order to purchase the album . The campaign eventually raised over $ 67 @,@ 000 ( £ 41 @,@ 000 ) from 4 @,@ 124 contributions . A digital transfer of the album was made available to the campaign 's contributors and the LP was auctioned on eBay , where it was purchased for $ 46 @,@ 300 ( £ 28 @,@ 100 ) by Minecraft creator Markus Persson . The proceeds from Caustic Window 's sale were split between James , Rephlex and Médecins Sans Frontières , also known as Doctors Without Borders . James said in retrospect that the campaign was " really touching , and really sweet " and , upon realising the continued interest in his music , he was inspired to release Syro . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Syro is an electronic music album . All 12 songs on the album were written by James in @-@ studio . According to James , the songs were written over an extended period ; Syro features both archived and more recent compositions , with the album 's oldest track around " six or seven years old " . The album was recorded in six different studios , including James ' own studio in Scotland , which he spent three years building and which was completed in 2006 . One audio engineer spent three months with James , helping him wire together patch panels and " then [ the engineer ] realized he was doing it all wrong and had to start again " . Describing the overall process as " brutal " , James referred to the in @-@ studio technical issues as the catalyst for writing new music that would be featured on Syro . 
 James used various audio setups when composing Syro 's material . He noted that by rearranging equipment — and often keeping the same setup for around just five minutes — it allowed him to explore more writing possibilities ; he said " that will achieve some sort of purpose , so the way I 've wired it together becomes the track in itself . " James also explained that when composing the " logical thing to do is not change anything and just do another one using the same set of sounds " , but during Syro 's recording sessions he would often " get bored and swap things out " . 
 A total of 138 pieces of equipment were used on Syro , including synthesisers , samplers , sequencers , processing units , MIDI interfaces , drum machines , vocoders , graphic equalisers and mixing desks . Among the brands James used were Yamaha , SSL , Sennheiser , Boss , Roland , Korg and AKG . Several pieces of equipment were further modified by James himself . 
 In addition to instrumentation , Syro features several vocal tracks . Among them are edited " unintelligible " tracks of James , his wife Anastasia Rybina and his two sons , as well as both his mother and father , who appear on " <unk> _ <unk> [ 120 ] " . He recorded several additional " poppy " vocals of his parents — none of which were used on Syro — and stored " entire sample packs of their voices " during the process . On the album 's overall sound , James said it 's " [ his ] pop album , or as poppy as it 's going to get " and " pleasurable to listen to … maybe just the composition 's changed , but there 's no next @-@ level beats on there " . He attributed this change in style to the fact he no longer used computer @-@ controlled percussion during Syro 's sessions . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Syro ( pronounced / <unk> / ) is a neologism that was coined by one of James ' children . It is a shortened version of " <unk> " , a " nonsense word one of his sons blurted out while listening to [ the album ] . " The majority of the album 's track titles are named after the working titles stored on James ' hard drives and reference individual pieces of equipment James used in its recording , as well as the tracks ' respective BPM values . A comprehensive list of all equipment featured on Syro is included as part of the album 's packaging ; Creative Review referred to the list as a " <unk> " . 
 Syro 's cover artwork was designed by the Designers Republic , a graphic design studio that provided designs for previous Aphex Twin releases , including the 1999 single " Windowlicker " and the compilation album 26 Mixes for Cash . The cover art resembles a receipt , with the official Aphex Twin logo and album title printed upon it . According to Creative Review , the receipt on the album cover details the production and promotional costs of Syro , " from courier charges to photoshoot expenses , expressed per disc and tailored for both vinyl and CD versions . " 
 Ian Anderson , the founder of the Designers Republic , noted that the final concept for the album cover was conceived after receiving a number of suggestions from James . Among James ' other suggestions for the album 's packaging was " the idea of pressing the album or a single track into the fabric of the cover , effectively as a <unk> " , or using various images of the raw vinyl pucks from which all copies of Syro are pressed . These suggestions were implemented into Syro 's final LP packaging , with James ' wife Anastasia Rybina credited for additional design and " <unk> " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The promotional campaign for Syro began when a chartreuse @-@ coloured blimp featuring the Aphex Twin logo and the number " 2014 " appeared over London , England on 16 August 2014 . On the same day Aphex Twin graffiti was reported outside Radio City Music Hall and various other locations in New York , United States . Two days later Aphex Twin 's official Twitter account posted a link to a hidden service , accessible using the Deep Web software Tor , detailing the album 's title and track listing . The service accumulated over 133 @,@ 000 views in less than a day , according to The Guardian . 
 In the following week several purported leaks of Syro appeared on YouTube and Soundcloud ; Richard D James subsequently denied that any of the leaks were legitimate . " Listening events " for Syro were then organised in various cities in the UK , Belgium , Canada , Netherlands and the US as part of the album 's promotional campaign . Beginning on 5 September in London and concluding on 10 September in Utrecht , the events allowed applicants who had won an online lottery ballot to hear the album in its entirety prior to its international release . " <unk> 67 [ 120 @.@ 2 ] " , Syro 's opening track , was released as the album 's lead single on 4 September . It was made available for stream and as a digital download following its premiere on BBC Radio 1 earlier that day . 
 Syro was released on Warp on 19 September 2014 in Australia , Germany , Ireland , New Zealand and Switzerland ; 22 September in the UK and various European countries , including Denmark and Netherlands ; 23 September in the US ; and 24 September in Japan . The album was released on triple LP , CD and various digital formats , including MP3 , AAC , WAV and FLAC . A limited @-@ edition box set version of Syro , featuring a bonus track <unk> on perspex vinyl , was released through <unk> Limited to 200 pressings , interested users had to first enter a lottery , " in the interest of fairness " , to become eligible . 
 In a Rolling Stone interview about the release of Syro , James replied : 
 Horny . I 'm feeling really horny about it . And very smug … I 'm in that mode now , so hopefully I 'll stay in it for a while … I 've got a few more things planned — at least a couple more albums , some EPs , things like that . Some more dance @-@ y things I did about 10 years ago . Experimental things , noise things , weird things . <unk> of stuff . They 're all pretty much ready to go . 
 Following Syro 's release , Computer Controlled Acoustic Instruments <unk> and a collection of 155 unreleased tracks were released in early 2015 . The tracks were uploaded by James to several Soundcloud accounts under different usernames , including " <unk> " , " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Though there was initial speculation as to the authenticity of the recordings , James ' friend and collaborator Mike <unk> confirmed that the tracks were legitimate . The Guardian 's Stuart Aitken drew comparisons between the surprise online releases and the promotional campaign for Syro , calling them " the latest example of a new willingness on the part of Aphex Twin to embrace digital media in very unexpected ways " and " explor [ ing ] the creative possibilities offered by the internet " . 
 On 5 March 2015 , it was announced that Syro 's Japanese bonus track " <unk> edit 2b 96 " would be released as a 12 @-@ inch single on 6 April 2015 , backed with alternative versions of the title track and Syro 's " <unk> _ <unk> [ 120 ] ( <unk> mix ) " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Syro received an average score of 86 , based on 36 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . Clash editor Mike Diver referred to the album as " an effortless comeback " and described it as " a more immediately engaging collection " than Drukqs ( 2001 ) and " an album that plays almost exclusively to its maker 's long @-@ established strengths " , rating it eight out of ten . Writing for The Guardian , Tim Jonze said that " [ Syro ] doesn 't do what some fans will have been hoping , in that it does not completely reshape the sonic landscape in the way Richard D James repeatedly did through the [ 19 ] 90s … and yet by sounding simply like a series of Aphex Twin tracks , Syro is still utterly engrossing and remains , somewhat unbelievably , on a completely different planet " . Jonze awarded the album a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five star rating . 
 NME reviewer Louis Pattison rated Syro 9 out of 10 and surmised that the album is " a banging reminder of why the Cornish raver is one of music 's true innovators " . Pattison further stated that " whereas Drukqs sometimes felt alienating or punishing , Syro charms and <unk> … [ it is ] amazing : bug @-@ eyed , banging rave that sounds quintessentially Aphex while not quite sounding like anything he 's done before . " In his review for The Wire , Derek Walmsley wrote positively about the album . He said that " Syro feels like a perfected memory of [ 19 ] 80s music " , adding " its sweeping melodies , with echoes of 1991 's Analogue <unk> , could be seen as a return to his roots " but concluded that " Aphex Twin 's music seems as new as it ever was . " Rolling Stone reviewer Will Hermes gave Syro a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five star rating and stated that the record is " thick with Seventies jazz @-@ funk nods " and " answers Daft Punk 's Random Access Memories with future @-@ shock electronics supplanting nostalgic dazzle … graying snobs once called this ' intelligent dance music . ' Even now , few do it better . " 
 The Independent 's Andy Gill awarded a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five star rating to Syro and called it " a collection primarily concerned with the somatic rather than cerebral sides of Richard James ' music , overdosing somewhat on staccato , bouncing synth twangs and jittery drum 'n'bass beats . " " <unk> [ 102 ] " , Syro 's closing track , drew comparisons to the works of French composer Erik Satie from both The Independent and Drowned in Sound , whose reviewer Tom Fenwick awarded the album a full 10 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 10 rating . Summarising the album , Fenwick said that " Syro sees a master craftsman return with renewed inspiration . And while it might not technically be James ' most innovative album , it way [ sic ] well be his best … and once you let the hype drain away — what 's revealed is pretty much flawless . " 
 Resident Advisor 's Jordan Rothlein described Syro as " look [ ing ] in no obvious direction … Syro is freewheeling and playful , but its every warbled note and compositional hard @-@ left betray consideration and technical expertise that didn 't come overnight . In terms of impressive twists and turns , they 're myriad . Tracks morph , pressurize and reorganize — but never break down , exactly — following a completely unpredictable if utterly natural logic . " He rated the album a full five @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five rating . Writing for AllMusic , Andy Kellman referred to Syro as " one of James ' most inviting and enjoyable releases " and said the album is " decked in accents and melodies that are lively even at their most distressed " in his four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five @-@ star review . Derek Staples of Consequence of Sound commented on the album 's wide range of genres , including glitch , chillwave , techno , acid jazz and jungle , and said Syro " peaks as Aphex Twin 's most accessible album since his ambient works " , ultimately giving the album a B + rating . Pitchfork highlighted Syro as part of the publication 's " Best New Music " ; editor Mark Richardson rated the album 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 , writing that Syro " has few extremes , no hyper @-@ intense splatter @-@ breaks or satanic ' Come to Daddy ' vocals or rushes of noise . On the other end of the spectrum , Syro doesn 't cast James in a quasi @-@ classical light ; there 's no ' serious composer ' tracks … without all that , what 's left ? Sixty @-@ five minutes of highly melodic , superbly arranged , precisely mixed , texturally varied electronic music that sounds like it could have come from no other artist . " 
 Australian national radio station Double J selected Syro as its " Feature Album " for the week beginning 22 September 2014 . The station concluded its review with the statement : " This is another fascinating record from one of the few artists on this planet who can make something very weird sound utterly amazing . " Syro was also selected as " Album of the Week " by Mojo and The Sunday Times , ranked number one on The Washington Post 's September list of " best new music " , featured among Dazed 's " top ten albums of the month " for September , and was the highest @-@ scoring album on Metacritic that month . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Syro placed on the mid @-@ week UK Albums Chart at number 2 , selling 9 @,@ 000 copies less than This Is All Yours by alt @-@ J. It subsequently debuted at number 8 on the weekly chart , selling 17 @,@ 751 copies in its first week of release . Syro is James ' first album to reach the top 10 in the chart , and his highest peaking album in the UK to date ; Selected Ambient Works Volume II had previously peaked at number 11 in March 1994 . Syro also appeared on four other British charts ; it placed at number 2 on the Independent Albums Chart and number 7 on the Scottish Albums Chart , as well as reaching number 1 on both the Dance Albums and Official Record Store Albums charts . 
 Syro entered the top 10 in several international charts , including the Irish Albums Chart , the Irish Independent Albums Chart and the Russian Albums Chart , where it debuted at number 10 with first week sales of 10 @,@ 029 . The album entered the weekly Japanese Albums Chart at number 8 and sold 10 @,@ 553 physical copies in its first week of release . Syro debuted at number 35 on the Belgian Albums Chart in Flanders and subsequently entered the top 10 , rising to number 7 in its second week . 
 On the United States ' Billboard charts , Syro placed in the top 10 in several charts , having sold 23 @,@ 000 first @-@ week copies — 22 per cent of which were LP copies and responsible for " the largest sales week in 2014 for a dance / electronic album on vinyl " , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Syro topped the Vinyl Albums , Dance / Electronic Albums and Tastemaker Albums charts , and entered the Digital Albums chart at number 8 and the Independent Albums chart at number 2 . As of February 2015 , Syro had sold 54 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Syro was featured on several publications ' year @-@ end critics ' lists . The album fared particularly well in the British press ; The Guardian selected Syro as the fourth @-@ best album of 2014 , and the album placed at number 9 on the newspaper 's reader poll . The Wire named Syro album of the year , while NME placed Syro at number 4 on its list " Top 50 Albums of 2014 " , Q ranked the album at number 10 on its " Top 50 Albums of 2014 " feature and Uncut selected it as the third @-@ best album on its list of the " Best Albums of 2014 " . Syro was also featured at number 6 on Dazed 's " top 20 albums of 2014 " and number 8 on Clash 's " Fuss @-@ Free Top 40 Albums Of 2014 " . 
 Elsewhere , Syro was featured in Rolling Stone at number 41 on its " 50 Best Albums of 2014 " list , on Stereogum 's " 50 Best Albums of 2014 " at number 33 and Pitchfork Media 's " 50 Best Albums of 2014 " at number 4 . Critics on behalf of Billboard selected Syro as the eighth @-@ best album of 2014 and PopMatters placed the album at number 9 on its " Best Albums of 2014 " feature , while Resident Advisor ranked it at number 4 on its " Top 20 albums of 2014 " . In its end @-@ of @-@ year roundup <unk> selected Syro as the top album of the 2014 , surmising that the album is " a poignant reminder of the relevance of one of the most important artists of our time . " 
 Syro won a Grammy Award for Best Dance / Electronic Album at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015 ; sales of the album in the US increased 101 per cent following James ' win . Syro was nominated for <unk> 's European Independent Album of the Year and is also shortlisted for the 2015 Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year , due to be awarded in March 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Richard D James . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All personnel credits adapted from Syro 's album notes . 
 Performer 
 Richard D James – piano , synthesizers , keyboards , drums , percussion , vocoder , programming , production 
 Technical personnel 
 Mandy Parnell – mastering ( 2 – 13 ) 
 Beau Thomas – mastering ( 1 ) 
 Design personnel 
 The Designers Republic – design , cover art 
 Anastasia Rybina – design , " <unk> " 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tengo Un Amor = 
 " Tengo Un Amor " ( English : " I Have One Love " ) is the debut single by Puerto Rican @-@ American singer @-@ songwriter Toby Love from his self @-@ titled debut studio album . It was released on November 6 , 2006 by Sony BMG Norte . A remix version with R.K.M & Ken @-@ Y was also recorded and included on the album . After separating from the Bachata group Aventura in 2006 , Toby Love set out on his own to record his debut album . The song became a success in the Latin market , reaching number one in the Billboard Latin Rhythm Airplay chart , the top five of both the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks and Billboard Latin Tropical Airplay charts while peaking at # 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 Toby Love was born and raised in the Bronx , New York to Puerto Rican parents . Toby exclaimed that he fell in love with the genre of bachata , after being exposed to it as a child . He explained that his mother had always listened to that type of music . His mother had remarried to a Dominican and Love was raised around both cultures . He stated that he is a big fan of R & B and found it easy to incorporate it in his music . 
 After spending six years with the Bachata group Aventura , first appearing on the album Generation Next at the age of 16 , Love embarked on his solo career . He met with Aventura while he was still in a merengue group as a teenager . Living in the same neighborhood as the group , he became close friends with the member Max " Mikey " Santos , who later asked Love to join . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Tengo Un Amor " was written by Love with additional composition by Edwin Perez who also handled production for the song . The song was written with Spanglish lyrics combining crunk hip hop with bachata . David Jefferies , while reviewing the parent album , called the song an " incredibly smooth , lush , and glittery ballad " while listing the song as a selected " Allmusic Pick " . Love later called " Tengo Un Amor " the " door @-@ opener " for all of his future success . 
 His influential musicians include Michael Jackson , Lauryn Hill , Juan Luis Guerra and Héctor <unk> , which helped combined the mixture of R & B and bachata found on " Tengo Un Amor " . According to Billboard , the original version of the song is a " straightforward bachata song while the remix with R.K.M & Ken @-@ Y , known then as Rakim & Ken @-@ Y provides " urban street cred " . The remix also features a verse by R.K.M where he raps to a rhythm of bachata infused with reggaetón , or bachaton . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 " Tengo Un Amor " was released digitally on November 6 , 2006 by Sony BMG Norte . After reaching number three on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 , the song debuted and peaked at # 100 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the week of November 18 , 2006 . On the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart , the song debuted for the issue week of August 5 , 2006 and peaked at number two for the week of November 11 , 2006 . This gave R.K.M & Ken @-@ Y their third Top 10 single following " Down " and " Me Matas " . On the Billboard Latin Tropical Airplay chart , the song debuted for the week of August 19 , 2006 and peaked at number three for the week of November 11 , 2006 . On the Billboard Latin Pop Airplay chart , the song debuted for the week of October 7 , 2006 and peaked at # 25 for the week of October 28 , 2006 . In Los Angeles , the song became one of the top five most requested tracks on the Rhythmic Top 40 <unk> ( 96 @.@ 3 ) , the Senior Vice President of which called the song a " smash " while citing its success as an acceptance of Hispanic audiences and urban tastes . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 " Tengo Un Amor " received three nominations at the 2007 Latin Billboard Music Awards for Best Vocal Duet or Collaboration and Tropical Airplay Song of the Year , Duo or Group for the remix version while winning the award for Tropical Airplay Song of the Year , New Artist category . He was also awarded Best Rap / Hip @-@ Hop Album for Toby Love . The song was award an ASCAP award for Urban Song of the Year from the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers . According to Jon Caramanica of New York Times , " Tengo Un Amor " is Love 's " biggest hit " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Ode to Psyche = 
 " Ode to Psyche " is a poem by John Keats written in spring 1819 . The poem is the first of his 1819 odes , which include " Ode on a Grecian Urn " and " Ode to a Nightingale " . " Ode to Psyche " is an experiment in the ode genre , and Keats 's attempt at an expanded version of the sonnet format that describes a dramatic scene . The poem serves as an important departure from Keats 's early poems , which frequently describe an escape into the pleasant realms of one 's imagination . Keats uses the imagination to show the narrator 's intent to resurrect Psyche and reincarnate himself into Eros ( love ) . Keats attempts this by dedicating an " untrodden region " of his mind to the worship of the neglected goddess . 
 = = Background = = 
 Keats was never a professional writer . Instead , he supported himself with a small income that he earned as a surgeon for Guy 's Hospital . At the age of 23 , Keats left the hospital , losing his source of income , in order to devote himself to writing poetry . He lived with Charles Brown , a friend who collected Keats 's poetry while supporting him , during spring 1819 and composed poetry . The early products of this effort included La Belle Dame sans Merci and " Ode to Psyche " , the first of a series of odes that he would write that year . It is uncertain as to when the poem was actually completed , but Keats sent the poem to his brother on 3 May 1819 with an attached letter saying , " The following poem , the last I have written , is the first and only one with which I have taken even moderate pains ; I have , for the most part , dashed off my lines in a hurry ; this one I have done leisurely ; I think it reads the more richly for it , and it will I hope encourage me to write other things in even a more peaceable and healthy spirit . " 
 Keats was exposed to a few sources of the Psyche myth . His contemporary sources for the myth included Lempriere 's Classical Dictionary and Mary Tighe 's Psyche , an 1805 work that Keats read as a child and returned to in 1818 . Keats wrote to his brother George , just a few months before writing " Ode to Psyche " , to say that he was no longer delighted by Tighe 's writing . Dissatisfied , he turned to Apuleius 's Golden Ass , translated by William Adlington in 1566 , and read through the earlier version of the Cupid and Psyche myth . After reading the work and realizing that the myth was established during the twilight of Roman mythology , Keats wrote to George : " You must recollect that Psyche was not embodied as a goddess before the time of Apuleius the Platonist who lived after the Augustan age , and consequently the Goddess was never worshipped or sacrificed to with any of the ancient fervour — and perhaps never thought of in the old religion — I am more orthodox than to let a heathen Goddess be so neglected . " 
 = = Structure = = 
 " Ode to Psyche " , Keats 's 67 line ode , was the first of his major odes of 1819 . As such , the poem is an experiment in the ode structure that he was to then rely on for his next five odes . Although Keats spent time considering the language of the poem , the choice of wording and phrasing is below that found within his later works , including Hyperion or the odes that followed . " Ode to Psyche " is important because it is Keats 's first attempt at an altered sonnet form that would include longer more lines and would end with a message or truth . Also , he did not want the poem to be based simply around that message , so he incorporated narrative elements , such as plot and characters , along with a preface to the poem . Of these additions , the use of a preface was discontinued in his next odes along with the removal of details that describe setting within the poems ; they would only be implied within later odes . 
 H. W. Garrod , in his analysis of Keats 's sonnet form , believes that Keats took various aspects of sonnet forms and incorporated only those that he thought would benefit his poetry . In particular , Keats relies on Petrarch 's sonnet structure and the " pouncing rhymes " that are found within Petrarch 's octave stanzas . However , M. R. Ridley disputes that Keats favours Petrarch and claims that the odes incorporate a Shakespearean rhyme scheme . Regardless of which sonnet structure was favoured over the other , Keats wanted to avoid the downsides of both forms . " Ode to Psyche " begins with an altered Shakespearean rhyme scheme of <unk> . The use of rhyme does not continue throughout the poem , and the lines that follow are divided into different groups : a quatrain , couplets , and a line on its own . These are then followed by a series of twelve lines that are modelled after the Shakespearean sonnet form , but lack the final couplet . The next lines are of two quatrains , with cddc rhyme , followed by two lines that repeat the previous rhymes , and then a final quatrain , with efef rhyme . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem does not describe the plot of the original Cupid and Psyche myth : according to Harold Bloom , the poem " has little to do with the accepted myth " . In the original myth , Aphrodite punishes Psyche , a well admired girl , by having Cupid use his power to make her fall in love . Cupid , instead , falls in love with her , but he could only be with her in the cover of darkness in order to disguise his identity . Curious , she uses a light to reveal Cupid 's identity , but he flees from her presence . Psyche begins to search after Cupid , and Aphrodite forces her to perform various tasks before she could be united with her love . After nearly dying from one of the tasks , Cupid asks Zeus to transform Psyche into a goddess so the two can be together . 
 The action of " Ode to Psyche " begins with a narrator witnessing two individuals embracing . The narrator immediately recognizes Cupid and is astonished when he recognizes Psyche : 
 I wandered in a forest thoughtlessly , 
 And , on the sudden , fainting with surprise , 
 Saw two fair creatures , couched side by side 
 In deepest grass , beneath the whisp 'ring roof 
 Of leaves and trembled blossoms , where there ran 
 A <unk> , scarce espied : 
 * * * * * 
 The winged boy I knew ; 
 But who wast thou , O happy , happy dove ? 
 His Psyche true ! ( lines 7 – 12 , 21 – 23 ) 
 The third stanza describes how Psyche , though a newer Goddess , is better than the other deities . However , she is neglected while the others were worshipped : 
 O latest born and loveliest vision far 
 Of all Olympus ' faded hierarchy ! 
 Fairer than Phoebe 's sapphire @-@ <unk> star , 
 Or Vesper , amorous glow @-@ worm of the sky ; 
 Fairer than these , though temple thou hast none , 
 Nor altar heaped with flowers ; 
 Nor virgin @-@ choir to make delicious moan 
 Upon the midnight hours ; ( lines 24 – 31 ) 
 The previous list of what Psyche lacks in terms of religious worship only describes external symbols of worship . In the fourth stanza , the narrator emphasizes the internal when he describes how he is inspired by Psyche : 
 O brightest ! though too late for antique vows , 
 Too , too late for the fond believing lyre , 
 When holy were the haunted forest boughs , 
 Holy the air , the water , and the fire ; 
 Yet even in these days so far retired 
 From happy pieties , thy lucent fans , 
 <unk> among the faint Olympians , 
 I see , and sing , by my own eyes inspired . ( lines 36 – 43 ) 
 The narrator , inspired by young goddess , becomes her priest . His imagination allows him to join with both the natural and supernatural elements of Psyche , and his form of worship is within himself while " Ode to Psyche " the poem serves as a song in praise of the goddess . The narrator becomes the prophet for Psyche and says in the final stanza : 
 Yes , I will be thy priest , and build a fane 
 In some untrodden region of my mind , 
 Where branched thoughts , new grown with pleasant pain , 
 Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind : ( lines 50 – 53 ) 
 In the conclusion of the poem , the narrator metaphorically says that he will expand his consciousness , which would allow him to better understand both the good and the bad of the world . This will allow the narrator to attain a new sense of inspiration while providing Psyche with a sanctuary : 
 And in the midst of this wide quietness 
 A rosy sanctuary will I dress 
 With the wreathed trellis of a working brain , 
 With buds , and bells , and stars without a name , 
 With all the gardener Fancy e 'er could feign , 
 Who breeding flowers , will never breed the same : 
 And there shall be for thee all soft delight 
 That shadowy thought can win , 
 A bright torch , and a casement ope at night , 
 To let the warm Love in ! ( lines 58 – 67 ) 
 = = Theme = = 
 The moment that Cupid and Psyche are revealed is an example of " Keatsian intensity " as they are neither in a state of separation nor are they united ; they exist in a state somewhere in between in a similar manner to the figures depicted in Keats 's " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . The narrator 's ability to witness the union is unique to Keats 's version of the Psyche myth because the lovers in the original story were covered in darkness . However , the narrator questions if he was able to see them at all or if he was dreaming . This inability of the narrator to know if he was awake is a theme that appears in many of Keats 's odes that followed , including " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , and " Ode to a Nightingale " . Regardless of the narrator 's state of consciousness , he is able to relate himself to Cupid as he believes himself to be in love with Psyche , representing the mind . 
 Part of the problem within " Ode to Psyche " is in the narrator 's claim that Psyche was neglected since she became a goddess later than the other Greco @-@ Roman deities . As such , the narrator serves as a prophetic figure who is devoted to the soul . Worship towards the soul is through use of the imagination , an idea that shows the influence of William Wordsworth upon the poem 's themes . In particular , the lines are reminiscent of the description of inspiration and the muse within Wordsworth 's " The Recluse . " To serve Psyche , the narrator of " Ode to Psyche " seeks to worship her by thoroughly exploring the regions of his mind . However , the temple dedicated to the goddess within his mind does not yet exist . 
 This reveals that there is a struggle between the acceptance of imaginative experience that exists only within a small part of the mind . This struggle , according to Walter Evert , has " no relevance to the world of external action and perhaps no truth to offer even the visionary dreamer himself . " However Anthony Hecht looks at the problem in a different way and believes that there must be a connection between the external and internal worlds for the narrator to even face the problem . Regardless , the narrator never states that this worship of Psyche or embracing the imagination would aid mankind , but the poem does rejoice in exercising the imagination . 
 In addition to the theme of dedicating one 's self to the mind , the theme of reception plays heavily upon the poem 's presentation ; Andrew Bennett states that the poem , like all poems , is " ' heard ' both by itself ( and therefore not heard ) and by an audience that reads the poem and ' hears ' it differently " . Bennett implies that the word " wrung " in line one contains a double entendre as it also alludes to the " ringing in the ears " involved with active listening . The poem 's treatment of the reader as a third @-@ party to the conversation between the narrator and the goddess exemplifies the narrative question common among many of Keats 's odes and leads Bennett to question how exactly the reader should regard his place within the poem , or outside of it . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Responding to the poem , Keats 's friend Leigh Hunt declared that " When Mr Keats errs in his poetry , it is from the ill management of the good things , <unk> of ideas . Once or twice , he does so in a taste positively bad , like Marino or Cowley , as in a line in his ' Ode to Psyche ' ... but it is once or twice only , in his present volume . " 
 Robert Bridges , turn of the 19th @-@ century literary critic , wrote " for the sake of the last section ( l . 50 to end ) , tho ' this is open to the objection that the imagery is work 'd up to outface the idea — which is characteristic of Keats ' manner . Yet the extreme beauty quenches every dissatisfaction . The beginning of this ode is not so good , and the middle part is midway in excellence . " Later , T. S. Eliot thought very highly of Keats 's work and wrote " The Odes — especially perhaps the Ode to Psyche — are enough for his reputation . " 
 Kennet Allott , in defending against any possible harsh criticism of " Ode to Psyche " , argues that the poem " is the Cinderella of Keats 's great odes , but it is hard to see why it should be so neglected , and at least two poets imply that the conventional treatment of the poem is shabby and undeserved " . Allott then cites Bridges and Eliot as views that he sympathizes with , and he believes that the poem " is neither <unk> nor the best of odes , but to me it illustrates better than any other Keats 's possession of poetic power in conjunction with what was for him an unusual artistic detachment , besides being a remarkable poem in its own right . This may be another way of saying that it is the most architectural of the odes , as it is certainly the one that culminates most dramatically . " 
 Walter Jackson Bate states that the poem has " always puzzled readers [ ... ] But finding the poem so elusive , we return to it only after we know the others far better . If we had hope to use them as keys , we discover they do not quite fit the lock . Meanwhile they have given us a standard hard to equal . Hence we either feel a disappointment about the ' Ode to Psyche ' or else , remembering the care Keats supposedly gave it , we once more put the poem aside for future consideration . " However , he also states that " The modern , respectful attitude toward this ode is deserved . But the itch for novelty has encouraged a few critics to suggest that the poem , in some dark but fundamental way , has more to it as a whole than do the later odes . " 
 To Harold Bloom , the last lines of Keats 's ode " rivals any as an epitome of the myth @-@ making faculty " . He elaborates further on this when he writes , " The poem Ode to Psyche is unique , and also central , for its art is a natural growth out of nature , based as it is upon a very particular act of consciousness , which Keats arrests in all its concreteness . " 
 = Stanisław August Poniatowski = 
 Stanisław II August ( also Stanisław August Poniatowski ; born Stanisław Antoni Poniatowski ; 17 January 1732 – 12 February 1798 ) was the last King and Grand Duke of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( 1764 – 95 ) . He remains a controversial figure in Polish history . Recognized as a great patron of the arts and sciences . <unk> and firm supporter of progressive reforms , he is also remembered as the last king of the Commonwealth whose election was marred by Russian involvement . Main criticism resonates around being the one who failed to stand against the partitions , and in the end to prevent the destruction of Poland . 
 Arriving at the Russian imperial court in Saint Petersburg in 1755 , he became romantically involved with the twenty @-@ six @-@ year @-@ old Catherine <unk> ( the future Empress Catherine the Great , reigned 1762 – 1796 ) , three years his senior . With her support , in 1764 he was elected king of Poland . Against expectations , he attempted to reform and strengthen the ailing Commonwealth . His efforts met with external opposition from Prussia , Russia and Austria , all interested in keeping the Commonwealth weak ; and from internal conservative interests , which saw reforms as threatening their traditional liberties and prerogatives . 
 The defining crisis of his early reign , the War of the Bar Confederation ( 1768 – 1772 ) , led to the First Partition of Poland ( 1772 ) . The latter part of his reign saw reforms wrought by the Great Sejm ( 1788 – 1792 ) and the Constitution of 3 May 1791 . These reforms were overthrown by the 1792 Targowica Confederation and by the War in Defense of the Constitution , leading directly to the Second Partition of Poland ( 1793 ) , the Kościuszko Uprising ( 1794 ) and the final Third Partition of Poland ( 1795 ) , marking the end of the Commonwealth . Stripped of all meaningful power , Poniatowski abdicated in November 1795 and spent the last years of his life in semi @-@ captivity in Saint Petersburg . 
 A Polish noble of the <unk> coat of arms and a member of the Poniatowski family , he was the son of Count Stanisław Poniatowski , Castellan of Kraków , and Princess Konstancja Czartoryska ; brother of Michał Jerzy Poniatowski ( 1736 – 94 ) , Primate of Poland ; and uncle to Prince Józef Poniatowski , ( 1763 – 1813 ) . 
 = = Royal titles = = 
 The English translation of the Polish text of the 1791 Constitution gives his title as : Stanisław August , by the grace of God and the will of the people , King of Poland , Grand Duke of Lithuania and Duke of Ruthenia , Prussia , Masovia , Samogitia , Kiev , Volhynia , Podolia , Podlasie , Livonia , Smolensk , <unk> and Chernihiv . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Stanisław August Poniatowski was born on 17 January 1732 in Wołczyn , then located in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth and now part of Belarus , to Stanisław Poniatowski and Konstancja née Czartoryska . The Poniatowski family of the <unk> coat of arms was among the highest of the Polish nobility ( szlachta ) . He spent the first few years of his childhood in Gdańsk ; afterward , his family moved to Warsaw . He was educated by his mother , then by private tutors , including Russian ambassador Herman Karl von Keyserling . He did not have many friends in his teenage years ; instead , he developed a fondness for books , which continued throughout his life . He made his first foreign voyage in 1748 , when he accompanied the Russian army as it advanced to Germany . During that trip he visited Aachen and the Netherlands . Later that year he returned to the Commonwealth , stopping in Dresden . 
 = = = Political career = = = 
 Poniatowski spent the following year as an apprentice in the chancellery of Michał Fryderyk Czartoryski , then the Deputy Chancellor of Lithuania . In 1750 , he traveled to Berlin . There he met the British diplomat Charles Hanbury Williams , who became his mentor and friend . In 1751 , Poniatowski was elected to the Treasury Tribunal in Radom , where he served as a commissioner the following year . He spent most of January 1752 at the Austrian court in Vienna . Later that year , after serving at a Radom Tribunal and meeting with King Augustus III of Poland , he was a sejm ( Polish parliament ) deputy . During that Sejm his father acquired for him the title of starost of Przemyśl . In March 1753 he left on another foreign trip , this time through Hungary to Vienna , where he met Williams again . 
 He spent more time in the Netherlands , where he met many key members of that country 's political and economical sphere . By late August he arrived in Paris , where he again entered the high social circles . In February 1754 he left Paris and traveled to England , where he spent the next few months . There he befriended Charles Yorke , future Lord Chancellor of Great Britain . He returned to the Commonwealth later that year , this time not participating in the Sejm , as his parents wanted to keep him out of the political drama surrounding the Ostrogski family 's fee tail ( <unk> <unk> ) . Next year he received a title of <unk> of Lithuania . 
 Ultimately , Poniatowski owed his career to his family connections with the powerful Czartoryski family and their political faction , known as Familia , to whom he grew closer . It was the Familia who sent him in 1755 to Saint Petersburg in the service of Williams , who had been named British ambassador to Russia . 
 In Saint Petersburg , Poniatowski met the 26 @-@ year @-@ old Catherine <unk> ( the future empress Catherine the Great ) . The two became lovers . Whatever his feelings for Catherine , it is likely Poniatowski also saw an opportunity to use the relationship for his own benefit , using her influence to bolster his career . 
 Poniatowski had to leave St. Petersburg in July 1756 due to court intrigue . Through the combined influence of Catherine , Russian empress Elizabeth and chancellor <unk> @-@ Ryumin , Poniatowski rejoined the Russian court as ambassador of Saxony the following January . In St. Petersburg , he became the source of more intrigue between various European governments , some supporting his appointment , others demanding his withdrawal . Eventually , he left the Russian capital on 14 August 1758 . 
 Poniatowski attended the Sejms of 1758 , 1760 and 1762 . He continued his involvement with the Familia , and supported a pro @-@ Russian and anti @-@ Prussian stance in Polish politics . His father died in 1762 , leaving him a moderate inheritance . In 1762 , when Catherine ascended to the Russian throne , she sent him several letters professing her support for his ascension to the Polish throne , but asking him to stay away from St. Petersburg . Nevertheless , Poniatowski hoped that Catherine would consider marriage , an idea that was seen as plausible by some international observers . He was involved with the unrealized plans of the Familia for a coup d 'état against Augustus III . In August 1763 , however , Catherine advised him and the Familia that she would not support a coup as long as Augustus III were alive . 
 = = = King = = = 
 = = = = Years of hope = = = = 
 Upon the death of Poland 's King Augustus III in October 1763 , negotiations began concerning the election of the new king . Catherine threw her support behind Poniatowski . The Russians spent about 2.5m rubles supporting his election , Poniatowski 's supporters and opponents engaged in some military posturing and even minor clashes , and in the end , the Russian army was deployed only a few miles from the election sejm , which met at Wola near Warsaw . In the end , there were no other serious contenders , and during the convocation sejm on 7 September 1764 , the 32 @-@ year @-@ old Poniatowski was elected king , with 5 @,@ 584 votes . He swore the pacta conventa on 13 November , and the formal coronation took place in Warsaw on 25 November . The new King 's uncles in the Familia would have preferred another nephew on the throne , Prince Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski , characterized by one of his contemporaries as <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( debauched if not depraved ) , but Czartoryski had declined to seek the office . 
 Stanisław August , as he now styled himself , combining the names of his two immediate royal predecessors , began his rule with rough support within the nation ; particularly , the lower nobility was favorable towards him . In his first years , he attempted to introduce a number of reforms . He founded the Knights School , and began to form a diplomatic service , with semi @-@ permanent diplomatic representatives throughout Europe , Russia and the Ottoman Empire . On 7 May 1765 , Poniatowski established the Order of the Knights of Saint Stanislaus , Bishop and Martyr , in honor of Poland 's and his own patron saint , as Poland 's second order of chivalry , to reward Poles for noteworthy service to the king . Together with the Familia he tried to reform the ineffective government , reducing the powers of the hetmans ( Commonwealth 's top military commanders ) and treasurers , moving them to commissions elected by the Sejm and responsible to the king . In his memoirs , Poniatowski called this period the " years of hope . " The Familia , which was interested in strengthening the power of their own faction , was dissatisfied with his conciliatory policy as he reached out to many former opponents of their policies . This uneasy alliance between Poniatowski and the Familia continued for most of the first decade of his rule . One of the points of contention between Poniatowski and the Familia concerned the rights of the religious minorities in Poland ; whereas Poniatowski reluctantly supported a policy of religious tolerance , the Familia was opposed to it . The growing rift between Poniatowski and the Familia was exploited by the Russians , who used this issue as a pretext to intervene in the Commonwealth 's internal politics and destabilize the country . Catherine had no desire to see Poniatowski 's reform succeed ; she had supported his ascent to the throne to ensure that the Commonwealth would remain a weak state under Russian control , and his attempts to reform the state 's ailing machinery were a threat to the status quo . 
 = = = = Bar Confederation and First Partition of Poland = = = = 
 Matters came to a head in 1766 . During the Sejm in October of that year , Poniatowski attempted to push a radical reform , restricting the disastrous liberum veto policy . He was opposed by conservatives such as Michał Wielhorski , who were supported by the Prussian and Russian ambassadors , who threatened war if the reform was passed . The dissidents , supported by the Russians , formed a confederation , the Radom Confederation . Abandoned by the Familia , Poniatowski 's reforms failed to pass at the Repnin Sejm , named after Russian ambassador Nicholas Repnin , who promised to guarantee the Golden Liberties of the Polish nobility , enshrined in the Cardinal Laws , with all the might of the Russian Empire . 
 Although it had abandoned the cause of Poniatowski 's reforms , the Familia did not receive the support it expected from the Russians , who continued to press for the dissidents ' rights . Meanwhile , some factions now rallied under the banner of the Bar Confederation , aimed against the dissidents , Poniatowski and the Russians . After an unsuccessful attempt to find allies in Western Europe ( France , England and Austria ) , Poniatowski and the Familia had no choice but to rely more heavily on the Russian Empire , which treated Poland as a protectorate . In the War of the Bar Confederation ( 1768 – 1772 ) , Poniatowski supported the Russian army 's repression of the Bar Confederation . In 1770 , the Council of the Bar Confederation proclaimed him dethroned . The following year , he was kidnapped by Bar Confederate sympathizers and briefly held prisoner outside of Warsaw , but managed to escape . Faced with the weakness of Poland and continuing chaos , Austria , Russia and Prussia decided to intervene militarily , in exchange for significant territorial concessions from the Commonwealth – a decision they made without consulting Poniatowski or other Polish parties . 
 Although Poniatowski protested the First Partition of the Commonwealth ( 1772 ) , he was powerless to do anything about it . He considered abdication , but decided against it . During the Partition Sejm of 1773 – 1775 , in which Russia was represented by ambassador Otto von Stackelberg , with no help forthcoming from abroad and the armies of the partitioning powers occupying Warsaw to compel the Sejm by force of arms , no alternative was available save submission to their will . Eventually Poniatowski and the Sejm acceded to the partition treaty ; at the same time , several other reforms were passed . The Cardinal Laws were confirmed and guaranteed by the partitioning powers . Royal power was restricted , as the king lost the power to give out titles , and positions of military officers , ministers and senators , the starostwo territories , and Crown lands would be awarded through an auction . The Sejm also created two notable institutions : the Permanent Council , a main governmental body in continuous operation , and the Commission of National Education . The partitioners intended the Council to be easier to control than the unruly Sejms , and indeed it remained under the influence of the Russian Empire . Nevertheless , it was a significant improvement in the Commonwealth governance . The new legislation was guaranteed by the Russian Empire , giving it another excuse to interfere in Commonwealth politics if the legislation it favored was changed . 
 The political scene in the aftermath of the Partition Sejm saw the rise of a conservative faction which was opposed to the Permanent Council , seeing it as a threat to their Golden Freedoms . This faction was supported by the Czartoryski family , but not by Poniatowski , who proved to be quite adept at making the Council follow his wishes ; this marked the formation of new anti @-@ royal and pro @-@ royal factions in Polish politics . The royal faction was made up primarily of people indebted to the king , who planned to build their careers on service to him ; few were privy to his plans for reforms , which were kept hidden from the conservative opposition and Russia . Poniatowski scored a political victory during the Sejm of 1776 , which further strengthened the Council . Chancellor Andrzej Zamoyski was tasked with the codification of the Polish law , a project that became known as the Zamoyski Code . Russia supported some , but not all , of the 1776 reforms , and to prevent Poniatowski from growing too powerful , it supported the opposition during the Sejm of 1778 . This marked the end of Poniatowski 's reforms , as he found himself without sufficient support to carry them through . 
 = = = = Great Sejm and Constitution of 3 May 1791 = = = = 
 In the 1780s , Catherine slightly favored Poniatowski over the opposition , but did not support any of his plans for significant reforms . Despite repeated attempts , Poniatowski failed to confederate the sejms , which would have made them immune to liberum veto . Thus , although he had a majority in the Sejms , Poniatowski was unable to pass even the smallest reform . The Zamoyski Code was rejected by the Sejm of 1780 , and opposition attacks on the king dominated the Sejms of 1782 and 1786 . 
 Reforms became possible again in the late 1780s . In the context of the wars being waged against the Ottoman Empire by both the Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire , Poniatowski tried to draw Poland into the Austro @-@ Russian alliance , seeing a war with the Ottomans as an opportunity to strengthen the Commonwealth . Catherine gave permission for the next Sejm to be confederated , as she considered some form of limited military alliance with Poland against the Ottomans might be useful . 
 The Polish @-@ Russian alliance was not implemented , as in the end the only acceptable compromise proved unattractive to both sides . However , in the ensuing Four @-@ Year Sejm of 1788 – 92 ( known as the Great Sejm ) , Poniatowski threw his lot with the reformers associated with the Patriotic Party of Stanisław Małachowski , Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj , and co @-@ authored the Constitution of 3 May 1791 . The Constitution introduced sweeping reforms . According to Jacek Jędruch , the constitution , in the liberality of its provisions , " fell somewhere below the French , above the Canadian , and left the Prussian far behind " , but was " no match for the American Constitution " . George Sanford notes that the Constitution gave Poland " a constitutional monarchy close to the English model of the time . " Poniatowski himself described it , according to a contemporary account , as " founded principally on those of England and the United States of America , but avoiding the faults and errors of both , and adapted as much as possible to the local and particular circumstances of the country . " The Constitution of 3 May remained to the end a work in progress . A new civil and criminal code ( tentatively called the Stanisław August Code ) was in the works . Poniatowski also planned a reform improving the situation of the Polish Jews . 
 In foreign policy , spurned by Russia , Poland turned to another potential ally , the Triple Alliance , represented on the Polish diplomatic scene primarily by the Kingdom of Prussia , which led to the formation of the ultimately futile Polish – Prussian alliance . The pro @-@ Prussian shift was not supported by Poniatowski , who nevertheless acceded to the decision of the majority of Sejm deputies . The passing of the Constitution of 3 May , although officially applauded by Frederick William II of Prussia , who sent a congratulatory note to Warsaw , caused further worry in Prussia . The contacts of Polish reformers with the revolutionary French National Assembly were seen by Poland 's neighbors as evidence of a conspiracy and a threat to their absolute monarchies . Prussian statesman Ewald von Hertzberg expressed the fears of European conservatives : " The Poles have given the coup de grâce to the Prussian monarchy by voting a constitution " , elaborating that a strong Commonwealth would likely demand the return of the lands Prussia acquired in the First Partition ; a similar sentiment was later expressed by Prussian Foreign Minister Friedrich Wilhelm von Schulenburg @-@ Kehnert . Russia 's wars with the Ottomans and Sweden having ended , Catherine was furious over the adoption of the Constitution , which threatened Russian influence in Poland . One of Russia 's chief foreign policy authors , Alexander Bezborodko , upon learning of the Constitution , commented that " the worst possible news have arrived from Warsaw : the Polish king has become almost sovereign . " 
 = = = = War in Defense of the Constitution and end of the Commonwealth = = = = 
 Shortly thereafter , conservative Polish nobility formed the Targowica Confederation to overthrow the Constitution , which they saw as a threat to the traditional freedoms and privileges they enjoyed . The confederates aligned themselves with Russia 's Catherine the Great , and the Russian army entered Poland , marking the start of the Polish – Russian War of 1792 , also known as the War in Defense of the Constitution . The Sejm voted to increase the Polish Army to 100 @,@ 000 men , but due to insufficient time and funds this number was never achieved . Poniatowski and the reformers could field only a 37 @,@ 000 @-@ man army , many of them untested recruits . This army , under the command of the King 's nephew Józef Poniatowski and Tadeusz Kościuszko , managed to defeat the Russians or fight them to a draw on several occasions . Following the victorious Battle of Zieleńce , in which Polish forces were commanded by his nephew , the king founded a new order , the Order of Virtuti Militari , to reward Poles for exceptional military leadership and courage in combat . 
 Despite Polish requests , Prussia refused to honor its alliance obligations . In the end , the numerical superiority of the Russians was too great , and defeat looked inevitable . Poniatowski 's attempts at negotiations with Russia proved futile . In July 1792 , when Warsaw was threatened with siege by the Russians , the king came to believe that surrender was the only alternative to total defeat . Having received assurances from Russian ambassador Yakov Bulgakov that no territorial changes would occur , a cabinet of ministers called the Guard of Laws ( or Guardians of Law , Polish : Straż <unk> ) voted eight to four in favor of surrender . On 24 July 1792 , Poniatowski joined the Targowica Confederation . The Polish Army disintegrated . Many reform leaders , believing their cause lost , went into self @-@ exile , although they hoped that Poniatowski would be able to negotiate an acceptable compromise with the Russians , as he had done in the past . Poniatowski had not saved the Commonwealth , however . He and the reformers had lost much of their influence , both within the country and with Catherine . Neither were the Targowica Confederates victorious . To their surprise , there ensued the Second Partition of Poland . With the new deputies bribed or intimidated by the Russian troops , the Grodno Sejm took place . On 23 November 1793 , it annulled all acts of the Great Sejm , including the Constitution . Faced with his powerlessness , Poniatowski once again considered abdication ; in the meantime he tried to salvage whatever reforms he could . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Poniatowski 's plans were ruined by the Kościuszko Uprising . The king did not encourage it , but once it began he supported it , seeing no other honorable option . Its defeat marked the end of the Commonwealth . Poniatowski tried to govern the country in the brief period after the defeat of the Uprising , but on 2 December 1794 , Catherine demanded that he leave Warsaw , a request to which he acceded on 7 January 1795 , leaving the capital under Russian military escort and settling briefly in Grodno . On 24 October 1795 , the act of the final , Third Partition of Poland was signed ; one month and one day later , on 25 November , Poniatowski signed his abdication . Catherine died on 17 November 1796 , succeeded by Paul I of Russia . On 15 February 1797 , Poniatowski left for Saint Petersburg , Russia . He hoped to be allowed to travel abroad , but was not able to secure permission to do so . A virtual prisoner in St. Petersburg 's Marble Palace , he subsisted on a pension granted to him by Catherine . Despite financial troubles , he still supported some of his former allies , and he tried to represent the Polish case at the Russian court . He also worked on his memoirs . 
 Poniatowski died after a stroke on 12 February 1798 . Paul I sponsored a royal state funeral , and on 3 March he was buried at the Catholic Church of St. Catherine in St. Petersburg . In 1938 , when the Soviet Union planned to demolish the Church , his remains were transferred to the Second Polish Republic , and put in a church at Wołczyn , his birthplace . This was done in secret , and it caused a controversy in Poland when the issue became known . In the 1990 , due to poor state of the <unk> Church ( then in Belarus ) , his body was transferred to Poland once more , to St. John 's Cathedral in Warsaw , where , on 3 May 1791 , he had celebrated the adoption of the Constitution he had co @-@ authored and endorsed . A final funeral ceremony was held on 14 February 1995 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Patron of culture = = = 
 Poniatowski may have been the most important patron of the arts of the Polish Enlightenment . His political goals included the overthrow of the myth of the Golden Freedoms and the reform of the backwards culture of sarmatism , and many of his artistic projects aimed to eradicate the negative qualities he associated with them . The " Thursday Dinners " he hosted were considered the most brilliant social functions in the Polish capital . 
 He founded the Warsaw National Theatre , the first Polish public theatre , and sponsored many of its expenses , actors and an associated ballet school . He remodeled the Ujazdów Castle and the Royal Castle in Warsaw , and erected the elegant Royal Baths in Warsaw 's most romantic park . He was deeply involved with the details of the architectural projects , and his eclectic style became known as the Stanisław August style , a term coined by Polish art historian Władysław Tatarkiewicz . His chief architects included Domenico <unk> and Jan <unk> . He was also a patron of numerous painters , many of them on personal retainer . They included Poles Anna <unk> , Franciszek Smuglewicz , Jan <unk> <unk> , Józef Wall and Zygmunt Vogel , as well as foreign painters , namely Marceli Bacciarelli , Bernardo <unk> , Jean Pillement , Louis <unk> and Per Krafft the Elder . His retinue of sculptors was led by Andrzej Le Brun , and included Giacomo <unk> , Franciszek Pinck and Tommaso Righi . Jan Filip <unk> was his court engraver and designer of many commemorative medals . According to a 1795 inventory , his art collection , spread throughout numerous buildings , contained 2 @,@ 889 pieces , including ones by Rembrandt , Rubens , van Dyck and others . His plan to create a large painting gallery in Warsaw was interrupted by the dismembering of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ; nonetheless , most of the paintings he ordered can now be seen at the Dulwich Picture Gallery in London . Poniatowski also planned to fund an Academy of Fine Arts , but this dream was also never realized . 
 Poniatowski accomplished much in the realm of education and literature . He established the School of Chivalry ( also called the " Corps of Cadets " ) , which functioned from 1765 to 1794 and whose alumni included Tadeusz Kościuszko ; he supported the creation of the Commission of National Education , considered to be the world 's first Ministry of Education . In 1765 he helped found the Monitor , one of the first Polish newspapers and the leading periodical of the Polish Enlightenment . He sponsored many articles that appeared in the Monitor ( and perhaps even wrote some himself ) . Writers and poets who received his patronage included Stanisław <unk> , Franciszek Salezy <unk> , Franciszek <unk> and Franciszek <unk> . He also supported publishers , including Piotr <unk> , and library owners such as Józef Lex . 
 He supported the development of the sciences , particularly cartography ; he hired a personal cartographer ( Karol de <unk> ) even before his election as king . A plan he initiated to map the entire territory of the Commonwealth , however , was never finished . At the Royal Castle in Warsaw , he organized an astronomical observatory and supported astronomers Jan Śniadecki and Marcin <unk> <unk> . He also sponsored historical studies , including the collection , cataloging and copying of historical manuscripts . He encouraged publications of biographies of famous Polish historical figures , and sponsored their paintings and sculptures . 
 For his contributions to the arts and sciences , Poniatowski was awarded membership in 1766 to the Royal Society , where he was the first royal member outside the British royalty . In 1778 , he was awarded membership to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences , and in 1791 to the Berlin Academy of Sciences . 
 He also supported the development of industry and manufacturing , fields in which the Commonwealth lagged behind most of Western Europe . Among the endeavors in which he invested were the manufacture of cannons and firearms and the mining industry . 
 Poniatowski himself left several literary works : his memoirs , some political brochures and recorded speeches from the Sejm . He was considered a great orator and a skilled conversationalist . 
 = = = Conflicting assessments = = = 
 King Stanisław August remains a controversial figure . In Polish historiography and popular works , he has been criticized or marginalized by Szymon Askenazy , Joachim Lelewel , Jerzy Łojek ( whom Andrzej Zahorski describes as Poniatowski 's most vocal critic among modern historians ) , Tadeusz <unk> , Karol <unk> and Krystyna Zienkowska , whereas more neutral or positive views have been expressed by Paweł Jasienica , Walerian Kalinka , Władysław Konopczyński , Stanisław Mackiewicz , Emanuel Rostworowski and Stanisław <unk> . 
 When elected to the throne , he was seen by many as a simple " instrument for displacing the somnolent Saxons from the throne of Poland " , yet as Norman Davies notes , " he turned out to be an ardent patriot , and a convinced reformer . " Still , according to many , his reforms did not go far enough , leading to accusations that he was being overly cautious , even indecisive , a fault to which he himself admitted . His decision to rely on Russia has been often criticized . Poniatowski saw Russia as a " lesser evil " – willing to support the independence of a weak Poland within the Russian sphere of influence ; however in the end Russia chose to support the partitions of Poland rather than reform . He was accused by others of weakness and subservience , even of treason , especially in the years following the Second Partition ; during the Kościuszko Uprising , some rumors claimed that Polish Jacobins were planning a coup d 'état and his assassination . Another line of criticism alleged poor financial planning on his part . Poniatowski had little personal wealth ; most of his income came from royal lands and monopolies . His patronage of the arts and sciences was a major drain on his treasury ; he also supported numerous public initiatives , and attempted to use the royal treasury to cover the country 's expenses when tax revenue was insufficient . The Sejm promised to compensate him several times , with little practical effect . Nonetheless the accusation of being a spendthrift was frequently levied at him by his contemporary critics . 
 Andrzej Zahorski dedicated a book to the discussion of Poniatowski , The Dispute over Stanisław August ( <unk> o Stanisława Augusta , Warsaw , 1988 ) . He notes that the discourse concerning Poniatowski is significantly colored by the fact that he was the last king of Poland – the king who failed to save the country . This failure , and his prominent position , made him a convenient scapegoat for many . Zahorski argues that Poniatowski made an error by joining the Targowica Confederation ; he wanted to preserve the Polish state , but it was too late for that – he only succeeded in damaging his reputation for centuries to come . 
 = = = Remembrance = = = 
 Poniatowski has been the subject of numerous biographies and many works of art . Voltaire , who saw Poniatowski as a model reformist , modeled King <unk> in his drama Les Lois de Minos ( 1772 ) after him . At least 58 contemporary poems were dedicated to him or praised him . Since then , he has been a major character in many works of Józef Ignacy Kraszewski , in the Rok 1794 trilogy by Władysław Stanisław Reymont , in the novels of Tadeusz <unk> , and in the dramas of Ignacy Grabowski , Tadeusz <unk> , Roman <unk> and Bogdan <unk> . He is discussed in Luise <unk> 's novel Joseph II and His Court , and appears in Jane Porter 's Thaddeus of Warsaw . 
 On screen he has been played by <unk> <unk> in the 1976 3 Maja directed by Grzegorz <unk> . He will appear in an upcoming Russian TV series . 
 He has been a subject of numerous portraits , medals and coins . Poniatowski is prominent figure in Jan Matejko 's 1891 painting , Constitution of 3 May 1791 . Matejko also portrayed him on another large painting , Rejtan , and in his series of portraits of Polish monarchs . His bust was unveiled in Łazienki in 1992 . Numerous cities in Poland have streets named after him , including Warsaw and Kraków . 
 = = Family = = 
 Poniatowski was the son of Stanisław Poniatowski ( 1676 – 1762 ) and Princess Konstancja Czartoryska ( 1700 – 1759 ) ; brother of Michał Jerzy Poniatowski ( 1736 – 94 ) , Kazimierz Poniatowski ( 1721 – 1800 ) , Andrzej Poniatowski , ( 1734 – 1773 ) ; and uncle to Józef Poniatowski ( 1763 – 1813 ) . 
 He never married . In his youth , he had loved his cousin Elżbieta Czartoryska , but her father August Aleksander Czartoryski disapproved because he did not think him influential or rich enough . When this was no longer an issue , she was already married . His pacta conventa specified that he should marry a Polish noblewoman , although he himself always hoped to marry into some royal family . Upon his accession to the throne , he had hopes of marrying Catherine II , writing to her on 2 November 1763 in a moment of doubt , " If I desired the throne , it was because I saw you on it . " When she made it clear through his envoy Rzewuski that she would not marry him , there were hopes of an Austrian archduchess . 
 A few historians believe that he later undertook a secret marriage to Elżbieta <unk> . However , according to <unk> <unk> , a contemporary who knew them both , this rumour only spread after the death of Poniatowski , was generally disbelieved , and moreover , was circulated by Elżbieta herself , so the marriage is considered by most to be unlikely . 
 He had several notable lovers , two of whom bore him children . Magdalena Agnieszka <unk> ( Lubomirska ) ( 1739 – 1780 ) bore Konstancja <unk> ( 1768 – 1810 ) and Michał <unk> ( 1770 – 1828 ) . Elżbieta <unk> ( 1748 – 1810 ) bore him Stanisław <unk> @-@ Grabowski ( 1780 – 1845 ) , Michał Grabowski ( 1773 – 1812 ) , Kazimierz Grabowski ( <unk> ? ) , Konstancja Grabowska and Izabela Grabowska ( 1776 – 1858 ) . It is also very likely that Anna Petrovna ( 1757 – 1758 ) , Catherine the Great 's second child , was his daughter . 
 = = = Ancestors = = = 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 = Elgato = 
 Elgato is a brand of consumer technology products . The manufacturer , also called Elgato , was founded in 1992 by Markus Fest and is headquartered in Munich , Germany . 
 Elgato is best known for a line of video @-@ recording products called EyeTV , which record video from over @-@ the @-@ air antennas , satellite TV , or mobile devices . The first EyeTV product was introduced in November 2002 . 
 More recently , Elgato introduced a line of " smart " products , such as a key fob that track 's the user 's distance from their car or purse and provides notifications to help them find it . In 2014 , it introduced a home monitoring system called Eve , which provides alerts to users regarding things like air pressure , temperature and water use . Elgato also developed light bulbs that can respond to programming on a mobile device and respond to commands over Bluetooth and it produces two Thunderbolt products : a dock for MacBooks and an external hard drive . 
 = = EyeTV = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The first EyeTV hardware device was introduced in November 2002 . It was a small USB @-@ powered device that contained a cable tuner and hardware encoder in order to convert television video into an MPEG @-@ 1 format for watching on a computer . It also had coaxial and RCA plugs to connect it with a VCR or camcorder . A 2002 article in Macworld said it was the " first step " in bridging computers and television , but at this point still had " some <unk> " . 
 The next iteration was released in 2004 and called EyeTV 200 . EyeTV 200 introduced a digital remote control and converted video programming into the higher @-@ quality MPEG @-@ 2 format . A Macworld review gave it 4 out of 5 stars for " very good " and emphasized the video quality and ease @-@ of @-@ use . A story in the Washington Post said it was more expensive than some alternatives , but worked on a Mac and had good @-@ quality recordings . Also in 2004 the first EyeTV product for satellite television was introduced with the EyeTV 310 , which was later discontinued and replaced with EyeTV Sat . 
 That same year a home media server called <unk> was introduced . It had recording features similar to other EyeTV products , but was also intended for steaming a computer display to a television . It connected Mac computers and televisions that share the same home network . A review in Macworld gave it three stars or a " good " rating , saying that it was easy to install and worked well with Apple applications , but some aspects were quirky or frustrating . Sound and Vision Magazine said it was " pretty darn cool " and an easy , inexpensive way to get media server functionality , though there were some user interface quirks . It gave the product an 89 out of 100 rating . 
 By 2005 , several other EyeTV products had been introduced , such as the EyeTV for DTT , the EyeTV EZ and the EyeTV Wonder . The EyeTV for DTT ( digital terrestrial TV ) is a small USB @-@ powered device with an antenna for receiving free over @-@ the @-@ air television broadcasts . It received a 4 out of 5 rating in TechRadar . A review in The Register gave it an 85 percent rating . The Eye TV Wonder was only available from July 2005 to January 2006 , before being discontinued and replaced with the Eye TV EZ . The EZ was a basic , entry @-@ level product with an analog tuner for watching TV on a Mac computer . 
 In 2006 , version 2 @.@ 1 of the EyeTV software was introduced with a new user @-@ interface , an integrated TV guide from <unk> and compatibility with Apple remotes . The interface was similar to that of other Apple products . An article in Macworld praised the update and especially the new editing features , but said it had some quirks , such as a difficult @-@ to @-@ find Edit button . Some of the iHome software , which plays video content from a computer onto a television , was released in 2006 as a universal binary . 
 Version 2 @.@ 4 of the EyeTV software was released in 2007 and added an export tool for Apple TV . 
 = = = = Exit from the ATSC tuner market = = = = 
 As of February 2015 , Elgato no longer sells ATSC tuners . ( ATSC is the digital television standard used in the United States , Canada , South Korea , Mexico and the Dominican Republic . ) The Elgato web site explicitly declines to give a reason : " Elgato Technical Support is not able to comment on this business decision . " 
 = = = Current products = = = 
 = = = = Over the air = = = = 
 The EyeTV Diversity is a USB @-@ powered device with dual tuners for receiving over the air television broadcasts . The tuners can be used simultaneously for an optimized signal , or one tuner can be used to record a channel , while another is used to watch a separate show . Diversity was first introduced in November 2006 . A driver in 2009 added compatibility with Windows 7 . A review in TechRadar gave EyeTV Diversity five out of five stars . PC advisor and Pocket @-@ Lint both gave it four out of five stars . 
