 The Franklin half dollar was struck in relatively small numbers in its first years , as there was limited demand due to a glut of Walking Liberty halves . No half dollars were struck at Denver in 1955 and 1956 due to a lack of demand for additional pieces . The San Francisco Mint closed in 1955 ; it did not reopen until 1965 . In 1957 , with improved economic conditions , demand for the pieces began to rise . They were struck in much greater numbers beginning in 1962 , which saw the start of the greatly increased demand for coins which would culminate in the great coin shortage of 1964 . No Franklin half dollar is rare today , as even low @-@ mintage dates were widely saved . Proof coins were struck at the Philadelphia Mint from 1950 . " Cameo proofs " , with frosted surfaces and mirror @-@ like fields , were struck in small numbers and carry a premium . Just under 498 million Franklin half dollars , including proofs , were struck . 
 There are only 35 different dates and mintmarks in the series , making it a relatively inexpensive collecting project . A widely known variety is the 1955 " Bugs Bunny " half . This variety was caused by a die clash between an obverse die and a reverse die . The impact of the eagle 's wings on the other die caused a marking outside of Franklin 's mouth which , according to some , resembles buck teeth . The quality of half dollars struck by the Mint decreased in the late 1950s , caused by deterioration of the master die from which working dies were made for coinage . 
 In an initial attempt to improve the quality of the pieces , the Mint made slight modifications to the designs , though both the old ( Type I ) and new ( Type II ) were struck in 1958 and 1959 . One obvious difference between the types is the number of long tail feathers on the eagle — Type I half dollars have four tail feathers , Type II only three . Approximately 20 % of the 1958 Philadelphia coinage is Type II , struck from dies which were first used to strike the 1958 proofs . About 70 % of the 1959 half dollars struck at Philadelphia are Type II ; all 1958 @-@ D and 1959 @-@ D half dollars are Type I. The Mint recut the master die before beginning the 1960 coinage , improving quality . 
 An especially well @-@ struck Franklin half dollar is said to have full bell lines . To qualify , the seven parallel lines making up the bottom of the bell must be fully visible , and the three wisps of hair to the right of Franklin 's ear on the obverse must also fully show , and not blend together . Many Franklins have been damaged by " roll friction " : the tendency of pieces in a loose coin roll to rub together repeatedly , causing steel @-@ gray abrasions , usually on Franklin 's cheek and on the center of the Liberty Bell . 
 By mintages , the key dates in this series are the 1948 , 1949 @-@ S , 1953 and 1955 . Franklin half dollars have been extensively melted for their silver , and many dates are rarer than the mintage figures indicate . For example , although more than nine million 1962 halves were struck for circulation , and an additional three million in proof , the coin was more valuable as bullion than in any condition when silver prices reached record levels in 1979 – 1980 . In 2010 , the 1962 half in MS @-@ 65 condition sold for about US $ 145 , second only to the 1953 @-@ S in price in that grade . 
 = = = Mintage figures = = = 
 Note : Numbers in parentheses represent coins which were distributed in proof sets , which are also included in the totals . 
 = Lofty Large = 
 Donald " Lofty " Large ( 27 September 1930 – 22 October 2006 ) was a British soldier and author . 
 Having joined the Army as a boy , Large fought in the Korean War and was wounded and taken prisoner at the Battle of Imjin . He spent two years in a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp , where his injuries went untreated and he lost more than a third of his body weight . After his release and rehabilitation , he joined the Special Air Service ( SAS ) and went on to serve in various conflicts around the world , hunting communist guerrillas in Malaya , suppressing rebellions in Oman and Aden , and conducting deniable cross @-@ border reconnaissance and raids during the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation . 
 An imposing figure – he was almost 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) tall – he was given the nickname " Lofty " after joining the Army . 
 After his retirement , Large wrote two books about his Army career , preceding such authors as Andy McNab and Chris Ryan . Andy McNab has said that Large and his books were " instrumental in setting the template for future members of the [ SAS ] Regiment " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Large was born in Oxfordshire , the first child of Joseph Large and his wife Emily ( née <unk> ) . His sister , Janet , was nine years his junior . In 1939 , the family moved to a cottage 2 miles ( 3 km ) outside the village of Guiting Power in the Gloucestershire Cotswolds . As a child his father taught him how to shoot game ; he later said of this experience , " little did I realise I would spend a lot of time , many years later [ in the SAS ] , being trained in exactly that type of instinctive shooting " . 
 Large would later dedicate his first book to " the best parents a man could ask for " . 
 Growing up during the Second World War , and having watched British and American soldiers on field exercises in the Cotswold Hills , Large said that he had always wanted to be a soldier . He also joined the Army Cadet Force . 
 = = Army career = = 
 Large joined the British Army as a " band boy " at the age of 15 . Unable to join his county regiment ( the Gloucestershire Regiment ) because of a lack of vacancies , he instead joined the Wiltshire Regiment , with whom he served for five years in England , Germany and Hong Kong . During this time he was given the nickname " Lofty " , having reached his adult height of 6 feet 5 3 ⁄ 4 inches ( <unk> ) . In 1951 , by requesting a transfer to the Gloucestershire Regiment , Large volunteered to fight in the Korean War . After a combat training course in Japan , he was deployed to the front line . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 In March 1951 , along with half a dozen other newly badged Glosters , Large was sent to B Company 's position in the low hills above the Imjin River . The Glosters , as part of the 29th Brigade , were defending routes through the valley that could potentially be used by the Chinese in a southbound offensive towards Seoul . On 22 April 1951 , they engaged with Chinese troops in the Battle of Imjin . By the morning of 24 April , B Company had fought off seven assaults before they were able to rejoin the remainder of their battalion on what became known as Gloster Hill . By this time the battalion was vastly outnumbered , low on ammunition and cut off from United Nations lines . Large himself was shot in the left shoulder and , along with most of the remaining Glosters , was forced to surrender . 
 After a 10 @-@ day forced march north , and having received only basic medical attention , Large arrived at a prison camp outside <unk> , about 50 miles north east of Sinuiju . He spent two years in the camp and celebrated his 21st birthday there . Throughout his incarceration he had two bullets and at least 18 pieces of shrapnel embedded in his body . To help Large cope with the chronic pain of his untreated injuries , an American POW introduced him to marijuana , which grew wild in the area . Although he found it to be a highly effective – and enjoyable – painkiller , he was somewhat alarmed by its psychoactive effects and subsequently tried to limit his use of the drug . Like many of his fellow prisoners , Large also suffered from beri @-@ beri and dysentery . 
 In March 1953 , a Chinese doctor operated on Large and removed a tracer round from his ribs as a preliminary to his being released as part of an exchange of wounded prisoners . Having weighed 217 pounds ( 98 kg ) in March 1951 , he had dropped to 136 pounds ( 62 kg ) by the time of his release . He also still had very limited movement in his atrophied and wasted left arm and was later told that if he had been treated by a British doctor at the time of his injury his arm would probably have been amputated . 
 Large was one of a batch of 22 exchanged British POWs whose release and subsequent return to Britain became front @-@ page news : The Guardian newspaper reported that the group had been unaware of the death of King George VI ( which had occurred over a year earlier ) , but were now looking forward to the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . Interviewed after his release , Large described the war as " useless " and said that he believed the communist 's claims that the US had engaged in germ warfare . 
 For its defence of Gloster Hill in the Battle of Imjin , the 1st Battalion , Gloucestershire Regiment was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation . The citation is conferred on units of the armed forces of the United States and of allied nations , and was awarded to the Glosters for " exceptionally outstanding performance of duty and extraordinary heroism in action against the armed enemy ... Every yard of ground they surrendered was covered with enemy dead , until the last gallant soldier of the fighting battalion was over @-@ powered by the final surge of the enemy masses . " 
 After returning to the UK , Large was offered a discharge on medical grounds , which he declined . He went on to serve briefly in the quartermaster 's stores , as an instructor , and in the regimental police . Throughout this time he worked on regaining his fitness and rehabilitating his arm . 
 = = = Special Air Service = = = 
 In 1957 , wanting to escape the " <unk> of drill " and the " bullshit " of the regular Army , Large volunteered for the SAS ; however , while riding home from the Brecon Beacons within hours of successfully completing the notoriously tough selection course , he crashed his motorbike , and , having injured his ankle , he had to repeat selection – this time with one boot two sizes larger than the other to accommodate the bandages and swelling . He went on to serve with 22 SAS in Malaya , Oman , Borneo and Aden . 
 Large 's first operation with the SAS was in Malaya , hunting the Malayan Races Liberation Army ( <unk> ) guerrillas engaged in the Malayan Emergency uprising . By the time of Large 's involvement there was little communist activity and , despite months of jungle patrols and encounters with leeches , scorpions , civet cats and tigers , he never had any contact with <unk> guerrillas . 
 While suppressing a rebellion in Oman in 1958 , Large infamously lost his temper with a recalcitrant donkey . Recalling the incident in a 2003 interview , he said : 
 All the donkey handler did was laugh . Just as I turned round , the donkey 's face was right by me and it shook its head and I stuck a punch in among it somewhere , and the donkey went down like it was shot ... much to my amazement . But not to as much amazement as the donkey handler 's – I 've never seen a bloke sober up so quick . It was a hole in one : the donkey struggled to its feet and looked really willing to go up the hill and the donkey handler lost his laugh . 
 Several weeks later , in January 1959 , Large was part of the " A " and " D " Squadron assault on the Jebel Akhdar . This entailed a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ metre ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) overnight ascent of the south side of the <unk> , with each soldier carrying up to 120 pounds ( 54 kg ) of kit . Having completed the ascent the SAS were able to surprise and defeat the rebels , who had previously held the plateau as a virtually impregnable stronghold . 
 During the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation in Borneo , Large took part in Operation Claret . As the leader of a four @-@ man SAS patrol , he spent up to two weeks at a time hidden in the jungle on deniable incursions into Indonesia , performing reconnaissance or ambushing Indonesian forces . While hidden on the banks of the Sungei Koemba River during one of these incursions , Large and his patrol had the opportunity to assassinate Colonel Leonardus Moerdani , the commander of the Indonesian special forces in the area ( and later Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Indonesian Armed Forces and subsequently Indonesia 's Minister of Defence and Security ) , who was passing by on a river boat . However , at the last moment Large spotted a woman on the boat . He later described the incident : 
 There could have been other women and there could have been children on the boat . And we don 't do that sort of target , so ... it went . And it was in fact the very man we 'd been looking for for three months : Colonel Moerdani of the Indonesian <unk> unit , and he was on the end of my rifle and I let him go – but ... you can 't <unk> women and kids . 
 For his service in Borneo , he was mentioned in despatches . 
 Parachuting was an important part of SAS training and operations , but it was not an experience that Large enjoyed : He suffered from a fear of heights and his considerable bulk meant that he descended far too quickly to have any chance of a comfortable landing . Despite this , he eventually qualified as a parachute instructor , although the footnote on his course report read , " not suited to parachuting – either in size or inclination . " 
 In his memoirs Large recalls that the last shots he fired on active duty were warning shots . Fired at long range at the ground a few feet in front of a local woman ( it is unclear where the incident took place ) , they were intended to dissuade her from heading into " certain danger " . Despite firing increasingly close to the woman 's feet , she continued forward , moving out of sight , only to reappear moments later leading the previously unseen bull which she had been intent on retrieving – " What a player ! God help any poor son @-@ in @-@ law she might have . " 
 Large spent the final years of his 27 @-@ year Army career as an instructor with 23 SAS Regiment ( one of the SAS 's two reserve regiments ) , eventually leaving the Army in 1973 as a Squadron Sergeant Major and Warrant Officer Class 2 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his book SAS Heroes : Remarkable Soldiers , Extraordinary Men , former SAS soldier Pete <unk> describes Large as " simply the finest soldier [ I ] had ever met ... an inspiration to those around him ... with an admirable sense of fair play " . 
 Andy McNab , who joined the SAS 11 years after Large 's departure , has written about Large 's enduring impact on the Regiment : 
 Being like Lofty was something I aspired to without realising it . When I joined the Regiment I was told that the best way to survive those first years in the Sabre squadron was to pick out someone who you thought you would like to be . Shut up , watch and listen . For me there were a number of the ' old and bold ' who fitted that requirement . It wasn 't until later in my service that I learned that most of them , as newly ' badged ' members to a squadron , had picked Lofty . 
 A memorial bench was donated to the Allied Special Forces Memorial Grove at the National Memorial Arboretum by a group of Large 's former SAS colleagues . The inscription reads : 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Before leaving for Hong Kong with the Wiltshire Regiment in 1951 , Large had met Ann , a nanny at the Regiment 's depot in Devizes . She wrote to him five times a week during his captivity in <unk> , although only about 90 of these letters were actually delivered to Large . They eventually married in 1955 and afterwards lived in an Army rental property on the top floor of a farmhouse in Longford , on the outskirts of Gloucester . 
 When Large volunteered for the SAS in 1957 it was not a unit that was well known outside of military circles – a fact that Large took advantage of by initially telling his wife that the Regiment 's job was to air drop supplies to troops in the jungle . 
 In 1960 the couple moved with the Regiment to Hereford , where they later had two children , Andy and Donna . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After leaving the Army Large worked in the UK and the Middle East . Having earned a heavy goods vehicle driving licence and a qualified testing officer 's certificate during his time in the Army , he spent the last 14 years of his working life as a driving instructor . 
 He wrote two books about his time in the Army : One Man 's SAS and One Man 's War in Korea , and was one of the first non @-@ commissioned officers ( NCOs ) to write about the SAS , preceding such soldiers @-@ turned @-@ authors as Andy McNab and Chris Ryan . A third book , Soldier Against the Odds : From Korean War to SAS , consisted of revised versions of his first two books together with some additional material . Andy McNab has said that " [ Large 's first two books ] were recommended reading for Regiment candidates . He was instrumental in setting the template for future members of the Regiment . " 
 In his seventies , Large , along with Pete <unk> , returned to the Borneo jungle as part of a 2003 Channel 4 documentary about the history of the SAS , taking the camera crew to the exact spot on the bank of the Sungei Koemba River where his patrol had successfully ambushed an Indonesian Army river boat in 1965 . 
 Having been ill with leukaemia for three years , Large died aged 76 at St Michael 's Hospice , Hereford . His funeral was held on 1 November 2006 at St Martin 's Church ( which has a long association with the SAS ) . 
 = Empedocles ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Empedocles " is the seventeenth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on April 22 , 2001 . The episode was written by Greg Walker and directed by Barry K. Thomas . " Empedocles " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 3 and was viewed by 7 @.@ 46 million households and over 12 @.@ 46 million viewers . Overall , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) enlists Mulder ’ s help investigating a killer ’ s connection to the unsolved murder of Doggett ’ s son , but Mulder soon finds himself clashing with Doggett . 
 " Empedocles " was named after the famed Greek pre @-@ Socratic philosopher of the same name . The episode marked the return of Special Agent Monica Reyes , who was first introduced in the earlier season eight episode " This is Not Happening " . Reyes would later become Doggett 's partner , in the show 's ninth season . The episode included an elaborate special effects sequence wherein actor Jay Underwood rips off his face to reveal fire underneath his skin , which was created via green screen technology . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In New Orleans , Jeb <unk> Dukes is fired from his job . After he leaves the office , Jeb witnesses a car chase which ends in a fiery crash . A burning figure that only Jeb can see emerges from the wreck and seems to merge with him . Jeb , now possessed by the being , returns to his office to fatally shoot his boss and co @-@ workers . 
 Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) arrives at the crime scene and meets NOPD detective Franklin Potter , who has called her in out of his belief that the murders are related to <unk> . Reyes merely answers the detective that it was not devil worship , and that the killer probably was under stress . As she is leaving , she witnesses one of the bodies <unk> into a charred corpse in front of her , only to have it revert to normal . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) takes a pregnant Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to the hospital when she doubles over in pain . There , Reyes phones him to ask about the case , but Mulder cedes to the authority of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , who is formally running the X @-@ Files . However , Reyes says she can 't call Doggett since it is about him . Meanwhile , Jeb is in a hotel room in Georgia trying to shoot himself in the head . Suddenly , he notices something wrong with his face ; he claws at his face , peeling away the skin to reveal burning embers beneath the skin . 
 Mulder and Reyes meet in an FBI records room , where she divulges the story about the death of Doggett ’ s son , Luke : years ago , when Doggett ’ s son disappeared , the FBI were called in to investigate . Reyes was one of the agents on the case . They never found the killer , and when they discovered Luke ’ s body , both Reyes and Doggett saw it transform into ashes instantly . Reyes says that Doggett has spent the last few years convincing himself he did not see it . Reyes believes it was a psychic clue , and now with the other crime scene , she has seen it again . 
 Doggett soon attacks Mulder for looking into his son 's case , but Reyes explains why they are investigating . She reveals that Bob Harvey , a suspect in Luke 's murder , died in the car crash in New Orleans . Reyes stresses her vision 's importance , but Doggett dismisses it . Reyes goes to visit Jeb 's sister , Katha , and learns he did not know Bob Harvey . While Reyes is there , Katha receives a call from Jeb , but tells him to call later . As Jeb leaves the phone booth , he kills a female motorist . Meanwhile , Doggett learns from Scully that she has suffered a placental <unk> . He asks her what made her start to believe in the paranormal . She says she realized she was “ afraid to believe . ” Scully later tells Mulder to keep trying to help Doggett . 
 As Doggett approaches the body of Jeb 's latest victim , he has a flashback of when he found Luke 's body . Doggett storms off , but Reyes refuses to let it go , finally revealing her theory : she believes that the boy 's murder was part of a “ thread of evil , ” an interconnected series of terrible events . Meanwhile , Katha returns home with her daughter and finds Jeb there . He insists that it wasn 't him who committed the murder , and pleads to his sister for help . Katha calls the agents and tries to separate her daughter from Jeb , but he realizes what she is planning and uses his niece as a hostage . Before Jeb can shoot Doggett , Reyes incapacitates him with a round to the throat . 
 Doggett finally embraces the memory of his vision . Mulder tells him that when he worked in violent crimes and saw the horrible things people did , he began to think of evil like a disease that infected people . Some lack immunity to this disease of evil because of some tragedy in their lives . Jeb dies while Reyes and Katha are in the room . After the doctors leave , Katha ’ s eyes glow , much like Jeb 's . She hits Reyes over the head with an oxygen tank and takes her gun . Before she can execute Reyes for killing her brother , Doggett appears and wrestles her to the ground . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by Greg Walker and directed by Barry K. Thomas , marking his directoral debut . The episode takes its title from the famed Greek pre @-@ Socratic philosopher of the same name . Empedocles believed that out of the four classic elements — earth , wind , fire , and water — fire was the most superior . According to legend , in order to become a god , Empedocles threw himself into a volcano in Mount Etna . As such , Empedocles is often associated with fire . 
 The episode marked the return of Special Agent Monica Reyes , who was first introduced in the earlier season eight episode " This is Not Happening " . Although Reyes would later become Doggett 's partner , the series attempted to differentiate the Doggett / Reyes relationship from the Mulder / Scully relationship . Robert Patrick later noted , " We 're not going to try to duplicate [ the Mulder and Scully relationship ] , we 're not going to try to regenerate the magic chemistry . " 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 In order to create the " Lava Face " effect , actor Jay Underwood 's face was painted green . A mask with pre @-@ cut slits was then placed over the skin . Underwood then tore the mask off of his own face , revealing streaks of the green coloring . A matte of the scene was then cut and various fire effects were placed into Underwood 's face via green screen technology . In order to make the " cracks " appear , digital technology was created to " smooth over " the skin and then slowly reveal the pre @-@ cut slits . Producer Paul Rabwin later joked that Underwood " had fire for brains " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Empedocles " first aired on Fox on April 22 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 3 , meaning that it was seen by 7 @.@ 3 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 46 million households and over 12 @.@ 46 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 40th most @-@ watched episode for the week ending April 22 . The episode subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on July 28 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " The murder of Doggett 's son is about to become an X @-@ file . " 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly mixed . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted that the " X @-@ File in itself is an interesting concept , but left frustratingly vague . " Shearman and Pearson , however , did positively write that the episode is " a character study which gives its new leads some background and depth and , better yet , somewhere new to develop . " VanDerWerff later awarded the episode an " C + " and wrote that " there are a lot of things to like in “ Empedocles , ” but the central conceit is just too stupid for the episode as a whole to work . " While he enjoyed the " way that [ the episode ] features all four FBI agents in the same episode " , he was critical of both the plot and the Mulder and Scully dynamic , noting that it fell flat . 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She criticized several of the plot points in the episode , most notably how a " big @-@ city " New Orleans detective could mistake Marilyn Manson CDs as signs of blatant satanic imagery . Vitaris further criticized the " sidelined " behavior of Scully and the " shoehorned " characterization of Reyes . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , wrote a largely negative review of the episode . He criticized the down @-@ sized role Mulder and Scully played in the episode , noting that they had been " reduced to mere footnotes " . Furthermore , Kessenich reasoned that , by trying to " prep for [ a ] future " of just Doggett and Reyes and " [ connect ] to the past " with Mulder and Scully , the episode ultimately " served to remind us how Doggett and Reyes pale in comparison to the magic of Mulder and Scully . " 
 Not all reviews were negative . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a B − . Sarah Stegall awarded the episode five stars out of five and noted " Being dead has done wonders for Fox Mulder . " Stegall concluded that the episode " is one of the best episodes of the new era . Mulder and Scully get one last chance to remind us why we will miss them , and Doggett and Reyes get a chance to earn their stripes . [ ... ] If this is the season where the torch gets passed , it 's good to see that it 's got one last flare in it . " 
 = Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? = 
 Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? is author and poet Maya Angelou 's fourth volume of poetry , published by Random House in 1983 . It was published during one of the most productive periods in Angelou 's career ; she had written four autobiographies and published three other volumes of poetry up to that point . Angelou considers herself a poet and a playwright , but is best known for her seven autobiographies , especially her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , although her poetry has also been successful . She began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Many of the poems in Shaker focus on survival despite threatened freedom , lost love , and defeated dreams . Over half of them are love poems , and emphasize the inevitable loss of love . " Caged Bird " , which refers to Angelou 's first autobiography , is contained in this volume . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing is Maya Angelou 's fourth volume of poetry . She studied and began writing poetry at a young age . After her rape at the age of eight , as recounted in her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature , including poetry , which helped bring her out of her self @-@ imposed muteness . 
 The publication of Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing occurred during one of the most productive periods of Angelou 's career . She had written songs for Roberta Flack and had composed movie scores . She had written articles , short stories , TV scripts and documentaries , autobiographies , and poetry , she produced plays , and was named a visiting professor of several colleges and universities . Angelou was given a multitude of awards during this period , including over thirty honorary degrees from colleges and universities from all over the world . In 1981 , after ten years of marriage , Angelou and her husband Paul du Feu divorced . Angelou returned to the southern United States , where she accepted the lifetime Reynolds Professorship of American Studies at Wake Forest University in Winston @-@ Salem , North Carolina , and taught a variety of subjects that reflected her interests , including philosophy , ethics , theology , science , theater , and writing . 
 Although Angelou considered herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write Caged Bird , she has been best known for her autobiographies . Many of Angelou 's readers identify her as a poet first and an autobiographer second , but like Lynn Z. Bloom , many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry . Critic William Sylvester agrees , and states that although her books have been best @-@ sellers , her poetry has " received little serious critical attention " . Bloom also believes that Angelou 's poetry is more interesting when she recites them . Bloom calls her performances " characteristically dynamic " , and says that Angelou " moves exuberantly , vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines , the tone of the words . Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases " . 
 Angelou 's began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . By the time Shaker was published in 1983 , she had published four autobiographies , eventually going on to publish seven . Her publisher , Random House , placed the poems in Shaker in her first collection of poetry , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou ( 1994 ) , perhaps to capitalize on her popularity following her reading of her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's inauguration in 1993 . Also in the 1994 collection were her three previous collections , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well , and And Still I Rise ( 1978 ) , along with I Shall Not Be Moved , published in 1990 . Angelou 's publisher placed four poems in a smaller volume , entitled Phenomenal Woman in 1995 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to critic Carol E. Neubauer , like Angelou 's previous poetry collections , " Shaker celebrates the ability to survive despite threatened freedom , lost love , and defeated dreams . Neubauer also states that the poems in this volume are full of " the control and confidence that have become characteristic of Angelou 's work in general " . Their tone moves from themes of strength to humor and satire , and captures , more than her previous poetry , the loneliness of lovers and the sacrifice that many slaves experienced without succumbing to defeat or despair . 
 Over half the poems in Shaker focus on love and doomed relationships . In " The Lie " , for example , the speaker feels compelled to use deception to protect herself from her lover 's abandonment . In the brief poem " Prelude to a Parting " , the speaker instinctively senses the inevitable and implicit end of her relationship , especially when her lover draws away from her touch . Not all the love poems in the volume focus on dishonesty or deception , but most , such as the title poem " Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? " , describe the inevitable loss of love . 
 The rest of the poems in Shaker emphasize determination despite the " <unk> anguish over the oppression of the black race " , and deal with the cruel treatment of slaves in the South . In the poem " Family Affairs " , Angelou uses the German fairy tale " Rapunzel " as a framework to summarize her painful origins of slavery and to compare Black / white tensions . Critic J. T. Keefe calls it " a wise and deeply felt poem " . Neubauer considers Angelou 's poem " Caged Bird " , which she says " inevitably brings Angelou 's audience full circle " with her first autobiography , as the most powerful poem in the volume . Keefe agrees , and calls it Angelou 's " central motif " and a rhythmical and hypnotic chant that cries out to be sung " . Neubauer states , " Her poems in Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing imply that as long as such melodies are sung and heard , hope and strength will overcome defeated dreams " . Scholar Yasmin Y. DeGout agrees , and cites " A Plagued Journey " as an example of Angelou 's themes of liberation found in all her poetry . In the poem , Angelou calls for a reconsideration of the beliefs that limit human beings , and insists that " hope allows action and forces engagement with the world " . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Janet B. Blundell , in Library Journal , finds Angelou 's poetry lacking in comparison to her prose , and states , " The reader is jarred by stilted , ' poetic ' language and stilted , sing @-@ song , school @-@ girlish rhyme " . She finds the best poems in Shaker are the ones that are structured like blues music . Mary S. Cosgrove , in Horn Book Magazine , calls the poems in Shaker " a lyrical outpouring of seasoned feelings from the heart and mind " , and calls Angelou " musical , rhythmical , and enchanting " . J.T. Keefe , in World Literature Today , says about Shaker " : " <unk> light and graceful , Maya Angelou 's poems are lyrical , emotional , melancholy " . Keefe compares Angelou 's poems to music , especially the music of French singer Édith Piaf , and also states , " These poems are full of shining hurt as , like curving scimitars , they skillfully pierce the hearts of their readers " . 
 = = Poems = = 
 Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? , which contains 28 poems , is dedicated to Angelou 's son , Guy Johnson , and to her grandson , Colin Ashanti Murphy Johnson . 
 = Juventus F.C. = 
 Juventus Football Club S.p.A. ( from Latin <unk> , " youth " ; Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , colloquially known as Juve ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) , is a professional Italian association football club based in Turin , Piedmont . The club is the third oldest of its kind in the country and has spent the majority of its history , with the exception of the 2006 – 07 season , in the top flight First Division ( known as Serie A since 1929 ) . 
 Founded in 1897 as Sport @-@ Club Juventus by a group of young Torinese students , among them , who was their first president , Eugenio <unk> , and his brother Enrico , author of the company 's historical memory ; they have been managed by the industrial Agnelli family since 1923 , which constitutes the oldest sporting partnership in Italy , thus making Juventus the first professional club in the country . 
 Over time , the club has become a symbol of the nation 's <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , due to their tradition of success , some of which have had a significant impact in Italian society , especially in the 1930s and the first post @-@ war decade ; and the ideological politics and socio @-@ economic origin of the club 's sympathisers . This is reflected , among others , in the club 's contribution to the national team , uninterrupted since the second half of the 1920s and recognised as one of the most influential in international football , having performed a decisive role in the World Cup triumphs of 1934 , 1982 and 2006 . The club 's fan base is larger than any other Italian football club and is one of the largest worldwide . Support for Juventus is widespread throughout the country and abroad , mainly in countries with a significant presence of Italian immigrants . 
 Juventus is historically the most successful club in Italian football and one of the most <unk> and important globally . Overall , they have won sixty @-@ one official titles on the national and international stage , more than any other Italian club : a record thirty @-@ two official league titles , a record eleven Coppa Italia titles , a record seven Supercoppa Italiana titles , and , with eleven titles in confederation and inter @-@ confederation competitions ( two Intercontinental Cups , two European Champion Clubs ' Cup / UEFA Champions Leagues , one European Cup Winners ' Cup , three UEFA Cups , one UEFA Intertoto Cup and two UEFA Super Cups ) the club ranks fourth in Europe and eighth in the world with the most trophies won . 
 In 1985 , under the management of Giovanni Trapattoni , who led the Torinese team to thirteen official trophies in ten years until 1986 , including six league titles and five international titles ; Juventus became the first club in the history of European football to have won all three major competitions organised by the Union of European Football Associations : the European Champions ' Cup , the ( now @-@ defunct ) Cup Winners ' Cup and the UEFA Cup ( the first Italian and Southern European side to win the tournament ) . After their triumph in the Intercontinental Cup the same year , the club also became the first in football history — and remains the only one at present — to have won all possible official continental competitions and the world title . According to the all @-@ time ranking published in 2009 by the International Federation of Football History and Statistics , an organisation recognised by FIFA , based on clubs ' performance in international competitions , Juventus were Italy 's best club and second in Europe of the 20th century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Juventus were founded as Sport @-@ Club Juventus in late 1897 by pupils from the Massimo D <unk> Lyceum school in Turin , but were renamed as Foot @-@ Ball Club Juventus two years later . The club joined the Italian Football Championship during 1900 . In 1904 the businessman <unk> @-@ Marsan revived the finances of the football club Juventus , making it also possible to transfer the training field from Piazza d 'Armi to the more appropriate Velodrome Umberto I. During this period the team wore a pink and black kit . Juventus first won the league championship in 1905 while playing at their Velodrome Umberto I ground . By this time the club colours had changed to black and white stripes , inspired by English side Notts County . 
 There was a split at the club in 1906 , after some of the staff considered moving Juve out of Turin . President Alfred Dick was unhappy with this and left with some prominent players to found FBC Torino which in turn spawned the Derby della Mole . Juventus spent much of this period steadily rebuilding after the split , surviving the First World War . 
 = = = League dominance = = = 
 Fiat owner Edoardo Agnelli gained control of the club in 1923 , and built a new stadium . This helped the club to its second scudetto ( league championship ) in the 1925 – 26 season beating Alba Roma with an aggregate score of 12 – 1 , Antonio Vojak 's goals were essential that season . The club established itself as a major force in Italian football since the 1930s , becoming the country 's first professional club and the first with a decentralised fan base , which led it to win a record of five consecutive Italian championships the first four under the management of Carlo Carcano and form the core of the Italy national team during the Vittorio Pozzo 's era , including the 1934 world champion squad . With star players such as Raimundo Orsi , Luigi Bertolini , Giovanni Ferrari and Luis Monti amongst others . 
 Juventus moved to the Stadio Comunale , but for the rest of the 1930s and the majority of the 1940s they were unable to recapture championship dominance . After the Second World War , Gianni Agnelli was appointed honorary president . The club added two more league championships to its name in the 1949 – 50 and 1951 – 52 seasons , the latter of which was under the management of Englishman Jesse Carver . Two new strikers were signed during 1957 – 58 ; Welshman John Charles and Italo @-@ Argentine Omar Sivori , playing alongside longtime member Giampiero Boniperti . That season saw Juventus awarded with the Golden Star for Sport Excellence to wear on their shirts after becoming the first Italian side to win ten league titles . In the same season , Omar Sivori became the first ever player at the club to win the European Footballer of the Year . The following season they beat Fiorentina to complete their first league and cup double , winning Serie A and Coppa Italia . Boniperti retired in 1961 as the all @-@ time top scorer at the club , with 182 goals in all competitions , a club record which stood for 45 years . 
 During the rest of the decade , the club won the league just once more in 1966 – 67 , The 1970s , however , saw Juventus further solidify their strong position in Italian football . Under former player <unk> <unk> , they won the scudetto in 1971 – 72 and 1972 – 73 , with players such as Roberto Bettega , Franco <unk> and José Altafini breaking through . During the rest of the decade , they won the league twice more , with defender Gaetano Scirea contributing significantly . The later win was under Giovanni Trapattoni , who also led the club to their first ever major European title , the UEFA Cup , in 1977 , and helped the club 's domination continue on into the early part of the 1980s . During Trapattoni 's tenure , many Juventus players also formed the backbone of the Italy national team during Enzo <unk> 's successful managerial era , including the 1978 World Cup , UEFA Euro 1980 and 1982 world champion squads . 
 = = = European stage = = = 
 The Trapattoni era was highly successful in the 1980s ; the club started the decade off well , winning the league title three more times by 1984 . This meant Juventus had won 20 Italian league titles and were allowed to add a second golden star to their shirt , thus becoming the only Italian club to achieve this . Around this time , the club 's players were attracting considerable attention ; Paolo Rossi was named European Footballer of the Year following his contribution to Italy 's victory in the 1982 World Cup , where he was named Player of the Tournament . 
 Frenchman Michel Platini was also awarded the European Footballer of the Year title for three years in a row in 1983 , 1984 and 1985 , which is a record . Juventus are the only club to have players from their club winning the award in four consecutive years . Indeed , it was Platini who scored the winning goal in the 1985 European Cup final against Liverpool , however this was marred by a tragedy which changed European football . That year , Juventus became the first club in the history of European football to have won all three major UEFA competitions and , after their triumph in the Intercontinental Cup , the club also became the first in association football history — and remain the world 's only one at present — to have won all possible confederation competitions and the club world title . 
 With the exception of winning the closely contested Italian Championship of 1985 – 86 , the rest of the 1980s were not very successful for the club . As well as having to contend with Diego Maradona 's Napoli , both of the Milanese clubs , Milan and Internazionale , won Italian championships ; Juventus did win a Coppa Italia @-@ UEFA Cup double in 1990 under the guidance of former club legend Dino Zoff , however . In 1990 , Juventus also moved into their new home , the Stadio delle Alpi , which was built for the 1990 World Cup . Despite the arrival of Italian star Roberto Baggio later that year for a world record transfer fee , the early 1990s under Luigi <unk> and subsequently Trapattoni once again also saw little success for Juventus , as they only managed to win the UEFA Cup in 1993 . 
 = = = Lippi era of success = = = 
 Marcello Lippi took over as Juventus manager at the start of the 1994 – 95 campaign . His first season at the helm of the club was a successful one , as Juventus recorded their first Serie A championship title since the mid @-@ 1980s , as well as the Coppa Italia . The crop of players during this period featured Ciro Ferrara , Roberto Baggio , Gianluca Vialli and a young Alessandro Del Piero . Lippi led Juventus to their first Supercoppa Italiana , and the Champions League the following season , beating Ajax on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw in which Fabrizio Ravanelli scored for Juve . 
 The club did not rest long after winning the European Cup : more highly regarded players were brought into the fold in the form of Zinedine Zidane , Filippo Inzaghi and Edgar Davids . At home , Juventus won the 1996 – 97 and 1997 – 98 Serie A titles , as well as the 1996 UEFA Super Cup and the 1996 Intercontinental Cup . Juventus reached the 1997 and 1998 Champions League finals during this period , but lost out to Borussia Dortmund and Real Madrid respectively . 
 After a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ season absence , Lippi returned to the club in 2001 , following his replacement Carlo Ancelotti 's dismissal , signing big name players such as Gianluigi Buffon , David Trezeguet , Pavel Nedvěd and Lilian Thuram , helping the team to two more scudetto titles during the 2001 – 02 and 2002 – 03 seasons . Juventus were also part of an all Italian Champions League final in 2003 but lost out to Milan on penalties after the game ended in a 0 – 0 draw . At the conclusion of the following season , Lippi was appointed as the Italy national team 's head coach , bringing an end to one of the most fruitful managerial spells in Juventus ' history . 
 = = = " Calciopoli " scandal = = = 
 Fabio Capello was appointed as Juventus 's coach in 2004 and led the club to two more consecutive Serie A titles . In May 2006 , however , Juventus became one of the five clubs linked to a 2006 Italian football scandal , the result of which saw the club relegated to Serie B for the first time in its history . The club was also stripped of the two titles won under Capello in 2005 and 2006 . 
 Many key players left following the demotion to Serie B , including Lillian Thuram , star striker Zlatan Ibrahimović and defensive stalwart Fabio Cannavaro . Other big name players , however , such as Gianluigi Buffon , Alessandro Del Piero , David Trezeguet and Pavel Nedvěd , remained to help the club return to Serie A , while youngsters from the Primavera ( youth team ) , such as Sebastian Giovinco and Claudio <unk> , were integrated into the first team . Juventus were promoted straight back up to the top division as league winners after the 2006 – 07 season , while captain Del Piero claimed the top scorer award with 21 goals . 
 As early as 2010 , Juventus considered challenging the stripping of their <unk> from 2005 and 2006 , dependent on the results of trials connected to the 2006 scandal . Subsequent investigations found in 2011 that Juventus ' relegation in 2006 was without merit . When former general manager Luciano <unk> 's conviction in criminal court in connection with the scandal was thrown out by an appeals court in 2015 , the club sued the Italian Football Federation ( FIGC ) for € 443 million for damages caused by their 2006 relegation . FIGC president Carlo <unk> offered to discuss reinstatement of the lost <unk> in exchange for Juventus dropping the lawsuit . 
 = = = Return to Serie A = = = 
 After returning to Serie A in the 2007 – 08 season , Juventus appointed Claudio Ranieri as manager . They finished in third place in their first season back in the top flight , and qualified for the Champions League third qualifying round in the preliminary stages . Juventus reached the group stages , where they beat Real Madrid in both home and away legs , before losing in the knockout round to Chelsea . Ranieri was sacked following a string of unsuccessful results , and Ciro Ferrara was appointed as manager on a temporary basis for the last two games of the 2008 – 09 season , before being subsequently appointed as the manager for the 2009 – 10 season . 
 Ferrara 's stint as Juventus manager , however , proved to be unsuccessful , with Juventus knocked out of Champions League and Coppa Italia , and just lying on the sixth place in the league table at the end of January 2010 , leading to the dismissal of Ferrara and the naming of Alberto Zaccheroni as caretaker manager . Zaccheroni could not help the side improve , as Juventus finished the season in seventh place in Serie A. For the 2010 – 11 season , Jean @-@ Claude Blanc was replaced by Andrea Agnelli as the club 's president . Agnelli 's first action was to replace Zaccheroni and director of sport Alessio Secco with Sampdoria manager Luigi Delneri and director of sport Giuseppe Marotta . Delneri , however , failed to improve their fortunes and was dismissed . Former player and fan favourite Antonio Conte , fresh after winning promotion with Siena , was named as Delneri 's replacement . In September 2011 , Juventus relocated to the new Juventus Stadium . 
 = = = Conte and Allegri era of success = = = 
 With Conte as manager , Juventus went unbeaten for the entire 2011 – 12 Serie A season . Towards the second half of the season , the team was mostly competing with northern rivals Milan for first place in a tight contest . Juventus won the title on the 37th matchday , after beating Cagliari 2 – 0 , and Milan losing to Internazionale 4 – 2 . After a 3 – 1 win in the final matchday against Atalanta , Juventus became the first team to go the season unbeaten in the current 38 @-@ game format . Other noteworthy achievements include the biggest away win ( 5 – 0 at Fiorentina ) , best defensive record ( 20 goals conceded , fewest ever in the current league format ) in Serie A and second best in the top six European leagues that year . 
 In 2013 – 14 , Juventus won a third consecutive Scudetto with a record 102 points and 33 wins . The title was the 30th official league championship in the club 's history . They also achieved the semi @-@ finals of Europa League being eliminated at home against ten @-@ man Benfica 's catenaccio , missing the final at the Juventus Stadium . In 2014 – 15 , Massimiliano Allegri was appointed as manager , with whom Juventus won their 31st official title , making it a fourth @-@ straight , as well as achieving a record tenth Coppa Italia for the double . The club also beat Real Madrid in the semi finals of the Champions League 3 – 2 on aggregate to face Barcelona in the final in Berlin for the first time since the 2002 – 03 Champions League . Juventus lost the final to Barcelona 3 – 1 after an early fourth @-@ minute goal from Ivan Rakitić , followed by an Álvaro Morata equalizer in the 55th minute ; Barcelona took the lead again with a goal from Luis Suárez in the 70th minute , followed by a final minute goal by Neymar as Juventus were caught out on the counterattack . On 14 December 2015 , Juventus won the Serie A Football Club of the Year award for the 2014 – 15 season , the fourth time in succession . On 25 April 2016 , the club won their fifth @-@ straight title ( and 32nd overall ) since last winning five @-@ straight between 1930 – 31 and 1934 – 35 , after second place Napoli lost to Roma to give Juventus mathematical certainty of the title with three games to spare ; last losing to <unk> on 25 October 2015 , which left them in 12th place , before taking 73 points of a possible 75 . On 21 May , the club then won the Coppa Italia for the 11th time , and their second @-@ straight title , becoming the first team in Italy 's history to complete Serie A and Coppa Italia doubles in back @-@ to @-@ back seasons . 
 = = Colours , badge , nicknames and mascot = = 
 Juventus have played in black and white striped shirts , with white shorts , sometimes black shorts since 1903 . Originally , they played in pink shirts with a black tie . The father of one of the players made the earliest shirts , but continual washing faded the colour so much that in 1903 the club sought to replace them . 
 Juventus asked one of their team members , Englishman John Savage , if he had any contacts in England who could supply new shirts in a colour that would better withstand the elements . He had a friend who lived in Nottingham , who being a Notts County supporter , shipped out the black and white striped shirts to Turin . Juve have worn the shirts ever since , considering the colours to be aggressive and powerful . 
 Juventus Football Club 's official emblem has undergone different and small modifications since the 1920s . The last modification of the Juventus badge took place before 2004 – 05 season . Since then , the emblem of the team is a black @-@ and @-@ white oval shield of a type used by Italian ecclesiastics . It is divided in five vertical stripes : two white stripes and three black stripes , inside which are the following elements ; in its upper section , the name of the society superimposed on a white convex section , over golden curvature ( gold for honour ) . The white silhouette of a charging bull is in the lower section of the oval shield , superimposed on a black old French shield ; the charging bull is a symbol of the Comune di Torino . 
 There is also a black silhouette of a mural crown above the black spherical triangle 's base . This is a reminiscence to Augusta <unk> , the old city of the Roman era which the present capital of Piedmont region is its cultural heiress . 
 Juventus was also the first team in association football history to adopt a star who added one above their badge in 1958 to represent their tenth Italian Football Championship and Serie A title , at the time and has since become popularized with other clubs as well . 
 In the past , the convex section of the emblem had a blue colour ( another symbol of Turin ) and , furthermore , its shape was concave . The old French shield and the mural crown , also in the lower section of the emblem , had a considerably greater size with respect to the present . The two Golden Stars for Sport Excellence were located above the convex and concave section of Juventus ' emblem . During the 1980s , the club emblem was the silhouette of a zebra , to both sides of the <unk> 's head , the two golden stars and , above this badge , forming an arc , the club 's name . 
 Juventus unofficially won their 30th league title in 2011 – 12 , but a dispute with the Italian Football Federation , who stripped Juventus of their 2004 – 05 and 2005 – 06 titles due to their involvement in a 2006 Italian football scandal , left their official total at 28 . However , they elected to wear no stars at all the following season . Juventus won their 30th title in 2013 – 14 and thus earned the right to wear their third star , however , club president Andrea Agnelli stated that the club suspended the use of the stars until another team wins their 20th championship , thus having the right to wear two stars , " to emphasise Juventus ' superiority " . However , for the 2015 – 16 season , Juventus reintroduced the stars and added the third star to their jersey as well with new kit manufacturers Adidas . For the 2016 – 17 season , Juventus re @-@ designed their kit with a different take on the trademark white and black stripes . 
 During its history , the club has acquired a number of nicknames , la Vecchia Signora ( the Old Lady ) being the best example . The " old " part of the nickname is a pun on Juventus which means " youth " in Latin . It was derived from the age of the Juventus star players towards the middle of the 1930s . The " lady " part of the nickname is how fans of the club affectionately referred to it before the 1930s . The club is also nicknamed la <unk> d 'Italia ( the Girlfriend of Italy ) , because over the years it has received a high level of support from Southern Italian immigrant workers ( particularly from Naples and Palermo ) , who arrived in Turin to work for FIAT since the 1930s . Other nicknames include ; [ La ] Madama ( Piedmontese for : Madam ) , i <unk> ( the black @-@ and @-@ whites ) , le <unk> ( the zebras ) in reference to Juventus ' colours . I <unk> ( the <unk> ) is the nickname that is used to define Juventus supporters , but is also used sometimes for team 's players . The most widely accepted origin of <unk> dates to the fifties , when the <unk> wore a large jersey . When players ran on the field , the jersey , which had a laced opening at the chest , generated a bulge over the back ( a sort of parachute effect ) , making the players look hunchbacked . 
 On 10 September 2015 , Juventus officially announced a new project called <unk> for its junior supporters on its website . Along with this project , Juventus also introduced a new mascot to all its fans which is called " J " . " J " is a cartoon @-@ designed zebra , black and white stripes with golden edge piping on its body , golden shining eyes , and three golden stars on the front of its neck . " J " made its debut at Juventus Stadium on 12 September 2015 . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 After the first two years ( 1897 and 1898 ) , during which Juventus played in the Parco del Valentino and Parco Cittadella , their matches were held in the Piazza d 'Armi Stadium until 1908 , except in 1905 , the first year of the scudetto , and in 1906 , years in which it played at the Corso Re Umberto . 
 From 1909 to 1922 , Juventus played their internal competitions at Corso <unk> Camp , and before moving the following year to Corso <unk> Camp where they remained until 1933 , winning four league titles . At the end of 1933 they began to play at the new Stadio Mussolini stadium inaugurated for the 1934 World Championships . After the Second World War , the stadium was renamed as Stadio Comunale Vittorio Pozzo . Juventus played home matches at the ground for 57 years , a total of 890 league matches . The team continued to host training sessions at the stadium until July 2003 . 
 From 1990 until the 2005 – 06 season , the Torinese side contested their home matches at Stadio delle Alpi , built for the 1990 FIFA World Cup , although in very rare circumstances , the club played some home games in other stadia such as Renzo Barbera at Palermo , Dino <unk> at Cesena and the Stadio Giuseppe <unk> at Milan . 
 In August 2006 , Juventus returned to play in the Stadio Comunale , then known as Stadio Olimpico , after the restructuring of the stadium for the 2006 Winter Olympics onward . In November 2008 , Juventus announced that they would invest around € 120 million to build a new ground , the Juventus Stadium , on the site of delle Alpi . Unlike the old ground , there is not a running track ; instead the pitch is only 7 @.@ 5 metres away from the stands . The capacity is 41 @,@ 475 . Work began during spring 2009 and the stadium was opened on 8 September 2011 ahead of the start of the 2011 – 12 season . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Juventus are the best @-@ supported football club in Italy , with over 12 million fans or tifosi , which represent approximately 29 % of the total Italian football fans according to a research published in September 2010 by Italian research agency Demos & Pi , and one of the most supported football clubs in the world , with 180 million supporters ( 43 million in Europe alone ) , particularly in the Mediterranean countries , to which a large number of Italian diaspora have emigrated . The Torinese side has fan clubs branches across the globe . 
 Demand for Juventus tickets in occasional home games held away from Turin is high ; suggesting that Juventus have stronger support in other parts of the country . Juve is widely and especially popular throughout mainland Southern Italy , Sicily and Malta , leading the team to have one of the largest followings in its away matches , more than in Turin itself . 
 = = Club rivalries = = 
 Juventus have significant rivalries with two clubs . Their traditional rivals are fellow Turin club Torino and matches between the two side are known as the Derby della Mole ( Turin Derby ) . The rivalry dates back to 1906 as Torino was founded by break @-@ away Juventus players and staff . Their most high @-@ profile rivalry is with Internazionale , another big Serie A club located in Milan , the capital of the neighbouring region of Lombardy . Matches between these two clubs are referred to as the Derby d 'Italia ( Derby of Italy ) and the two regularly challenge each other at the top of the league table , hence the intense rivalry . Until the Calciopoli scandal which saw Juventus forcibly relegated , the two were the only Italian clubs to have never played below Serie A. Notably the two sides are the first and the second most supported clubs in Italy and the rivalry has intensified since the later part of the 1990s ; reaching its highest levels ever post @-@ Calciopoli , with the return of Juventus to Serie A. They also have rivalries with Milan , Roma , Fiorentina , and Napoli . 
 = = Youth programme = = 
 The Juventus youth set @-@ up has been recognised as one of the best in Italy for producing young talents . While not all graduates made it to the first team , many have enjoyed successful careers in the Italian top flight . Under long @-@ time coach Vincenzo Chiarenza , the Primavera ( Under @-@ 20 ) squad enjoyed one of its successful periods , winning all age @-@ group competitions from 2004 to 2006 . 
 The youth system is also notable for its contribution to the Italian national senior and youth teams . 1934 World Cup winner Gianpiero Combi , 1936 Gold Medal and 1938 World Cup winner Pietro Rava , Giampiero Boniperti , Roberto Bettega , 1982 World Cup hero Paolo Rossi and more recently , Claudio <unk> and Sebastian Giovinco are a number of former graduates who have gone on to make the first team and full Italy squad . 
 Like Dutch club Ajax and many Premier League clubs , Juventus operates several satellite clubs and football schools outside of the country ( i.e. United States , Canada , Greece , Saudi Arabia , Australia and Switzerland ) and numerous camps in the local region to expand talent scouting . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Primavera = = = 
 = = = Management Staff = = = 
 See also List of Juventus F.C. managers 
 Source : <unk> ( archive link ) 
 = = Presidential history = = 
 Juventus have had numerous presidents over the course of their history , some of which have been the owners of the club , others have been honorary presidents , here is a complete list of them : 
 = = Managerial history = = 
 Below is a list of Juventus managers from 1923 when the Agnelli family took over and the club became more structured and organised , until the present day . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Italy 's most successful club of the 20th century , and the most successful club in the history of Italian football , Juventus have won the Italian League Championship , the country 's premier football club competition and organised by Lega Nazionale <unk> Serie A ( <unk> ) , a record 32 times and have the record of consecutive triumphs in that tournament ( five , between 1930 – 31 and 1934 – 35 as well as between 2011 – 12 and 2015 – 16 ) . They have also won the Coppa Italia , the country 's primary cup competition , a record eleven times , and becoming the first team to retain the trophy successfully with their triumph in the 1959 – 60 season . In addition , the club holds the record for Supercoppa Italiana wins with seven , the most recent coming in 2015 . 
 Overall , Juventus have won 61 official competitions , more than any other team in the country : 50 domestic trophies , which is also a record , and 11 official international competitions , making them , in the latter case , the second most successful Italian club in European competition . The club is fourth in Europe and eighth in the world with the most international titles won officially recognised by their respective association football confederation and Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) . 
 In 1977 , the Torinese side become the first in Southern Europe to have won the UEFA Cup and the first — and only to date — in Italian football history to achieve an international title with a squad composed by national footballers . In 1993 the club won its third competition 's trophy , an unprecedented feat in the continent until then and the most for an Italian club . Juventus was , also , the first Italian club to achieve the title in the European Super Cup , having won the competition in 1984 , and the first European club to win the Intercontinental Cup , in 1985 , since it was restructured by Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) and Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol ( CONMEBOL ) ' s organizing committee five years beforehand . 
 The club has earned the distinction of being allowed to wear three Golden Stars ( it . Stelle d 'oro ) on its shirts representing its league victories , the tenth of which was achieved during the 1957 – 58 season , the twentieth in the 1981 – 82 season and the thirtieth in the 2013 – 14 season . Juventus were the first Italian team to have achieved the national double thrice ( winning the Italian top tier division and the national cup competition in the same season ) , in the 1959 – 60 , 1994 – 95 and 2014 – 15 seasons . They achieved the double in the 2015 – 16 season as well . 
 The club is unique in the world in having won all official international competitions , and they have received , in recognition to winning the three major UEFA competitions — first case in the history of the European football — The UEFA Plaque by the Union of European Football Associations on 12 July 1988 . 
 The Torinese side was placed seventh — but the top Italian club — in the FIFA Club of the Century selection of 23 December 2000 . 
 Juventus have been proclaimed World 's Club Team of the Year twice ( 1993 and 1996 ) and was ranked in 3rd place — the highest ranking of any Italian club — in the All @-@ Time Club World Ranking ( 1991 – 2009 period ) by the International Federation of Football History & Statistics . 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 = = = = League = = = = 
 Italian Football Championship / Serie A 
 Winners ( 32 ) – record : 1905 , 1925 – 26 , 1930 – 31 , 1931 – 32 , 1932 – 33 , 1933 – 34 , 1934 – 35 , 1949 – 50 , 1951 – 52 , 1957 – 58 , 1959 – 60 , 1960 – 61 , 1966 – 67 , 1971 – 72 , 1972 – 73 , 1974 – 75 , 1976 – 77 , 1977 – 78 , 1980 – 81 , 1981 – 82 , 1983 – 84 , 1985 – 86 , 1994 – 95 , 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 , 2001 – 02 , 2002 – 03 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Serie B 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2006 – 07 
 = = = = Cups = = = = 
 Coppa Italia 
 Winners ( 11 ) – record : 1937 – 38 , 1941 – 42 , 1958 – 59 , 1959 – 60 , 1964 – 65 , 1978 – 79 , 1982 – 83 , 1989 – 90 , 1994 – 95 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Supercoppa Italiana 
 Winners ( 7 ) – record : 1995 , 1997 , 2002 , 2003 , 2012 , 2013 , 2015 
 = = = European = = = 
 European Cup / UEFA Champions League 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1984 – 85 , 1995 – 96 
 European Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1983 – 84 
 UEFA Cup 
 Winners ( 3 ) : 1976 – 77 , 1989 – 90 , 1992 – 93 
 UEFA Intertoto Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1999 
 European Super Cup / UEFA Super Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1984 , 1996 
 = = = Worldwide = = = 
 Intercontinental Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1985 , 1996 
 = = Club statistics and records = = 
 Alessandro Del Piero holds Juventus ' official appearance record of 705 appearances . He took over from Gaetano Scirea on 6 March 2008 against Palermo . He also holds the record for Serie A appearances with 478 . 
 Including all official competitions , Alessandro Del Piero is the all @-@ time leading goalscorer for Juventus , with 290 — since joining the club in 1993 . Giampiero Boniperti , who was the all @-@ time topscorer since 1961 comes in second in all competitions with 182 . 
 In the 1933 – 34 season , Felice Borel scored 31 goals in 34 appearances , setting the club record for Serie A goals in a single season . Ferenc <unk> is the club 's highest scorer in a single season with 35 goals in 26 appearances in the 1925 – 26 season ( record of Italian football ) . The most goals scored by a player in a single match is 6 , which is also an Italian record . This was achieved by Omar Enrique Sivori in a game against Internazionale in the 1960 – 61 season . 
 The first ever official game participated in by Juventus was in the Third Federal Football Championship , the predecessor of Serie A , against Torinese ; Juve lost 0 – 1 . The biggest ever victory recorded by Juventus was 15 – 0 against Cento , in the second round of the Coppa Italia in the 1926 – 27 season . In terms of the league ; Fiorentina and <unk> were famously on the end of the Juventus 's biggest championship wins , both were beaten 11 – 0 and were recorded in the 1928 – 29 season . Juventus ' heaviest championship defeats came during the 1911 – 12 and 1912 – 13 seasons ; they were against Milan in 1912 ( 1 – 8 ) and Torino in 1913 ( 0 – 8 ) . 
 The sale of Zinédine Zidane to Real Madrid of Spain from Juventus in 2001 , was the world football transfer record at the time , costing the Spanish club around € 75 million . 
 The intake of Gianluigi Buffon in 2001 from Parma cost Juventus € 45 million , making it the most expensive transfer for a goalkeeper of all @-@ time . On 20 March 2016 Gianluigi Buffon set a new Serie A record for the longest period without conceding a goal , 974 minutes , in the Derby della Mole during the 2015 – 16 season . 
 On 26 July 2016 , Juventus signing Gonzalo Higuaín became the third highest football transfer of all @-@ time and highest ever transfer for an Italian club , when he signed for € 90 million from Napoli . 
 = = Contribution to the Italian national team = = 
 Overall , Juventus are the club that has contributed the most players to the Italian national team in history , they are the only Italian club that has contributed players to every Italian national team since the 2nd FIFA World Cup . Juventus have contributed numerous players to Italy 's World Cup campaigns , these successful periods principally have coincided with two golden ages of the Turin club 's history , referred as <unk> d 'Oro ( The Golden <unk> ) , from 1931 until 1935 , and <unk> <unk> ( The Legendary Cycle ) , from 1972 to 1986 . 
 Below are a list of Juventus players who represented the Italian national team during World Cup winning tournaments ; 
 1934 FIFA World Cup ( 9 ) ; Gianpiero Combi , Virginio Rosetta , Luigi Bertolini , Felice Borel <unk> , Umberto <unk> , Giovanni Ferrari , Luis Monti , Raimundo Orsi , and Mario <unk> <unk> 
 1938 FIFA World Cup ( 2 ) ; Alfredo Foni and Pietro Rava 
 1982 FIFA World Cup ( 6 ) ; Dino Zoff , Antonio Cabrini , Claudio Gentile , Paolo Rossi , Gaetano Scirea , and Marco Tardelli 
 2006 FIFA World Cup ( 5 ) ; Fabio Cannavaro , Gianluigi Buffon , Mauro <unk> , Alessandro Del Piero , and Gianluca <unk> 
 Two Juventus players have won the golden boot award at the World Cup with Italy ; Paolo Rossi in 1982 and Salvatore Schillaci in 1990 . As well as contributing to Italy 's World Cup winning sides , two Juventus players Alfredo Foni and Pietro Rava , represented Italy in the gold medal winning squad at the 1936 Summer Olympics . Three Juventus players represented their nation during the 1968 European Football Championship win for Italy ; Sandro Salvadore , Ernesto <unk> and Giancarlo <unk> . 
 The Torinese club has also contributed to a lesser degree to the national sides of other nations . Zinédine Zidane and captain Didier Deschamps were Juventus players when they won the 1998 World Cup with France , making it as the association football club which supplied the most FIFA World Cup winners globally ( 24 ) ( three other players in the 1998 squad , Patrick Vieira , David Trezeguet and Lilian Thuram have all played for Juventus at one time or another ) . Three Juventus players have also won the European Football Championship with a nation other than Italy , Luis del Sol won it in 1964 with Spain , while the Frenchmen Michel Platini and Zidane won the competition in 1984 and 2000 respectively . 
 = = Financial information = = 
 Since 27 June 1967 , Juventus Football Club has been a joint @-@ stock company ( it. <unk> per <unk> ) and since 3 December 2001 the <unk> side is listed on the Borsa Italiana . At 31 December 2015 , the Juventus ' shares are distributed between 63 @.@ 8 % to <unk> S.p.A , the Agnelli family 's holding ( a company of the Giovanni Agnelli & <unk> Group ) , 5 @.@ 0 % to <unk> Train Ltd. and 31 @.@ 2 % to other shareholders . ( < 2 @.@ 0 % ) As report at 5 July 2016 , <unk> Train Ltd. increased its holding to 10 % and <unk> <unk> decreased to 60 @.@ 0 % . Since 2012 , Jeep became the new sponsor of Juventus , a car brand acquired by FIAT after the 2000s Global Financial Crisis . 
 Along with Lazio and Roma , Juventus is one of only three Italian clubs quoted on Borsa Italiana ( Italian stock exchange ) . Juventus was also the only association football club in the country member of STAR ( Segment of Stocks conforming to High Requirements , it . <unk> <unk> con <unk> <unk> ) , one of the main market segment in the world . However , due to 2011 financial results , Juventus had to move from the STAR segment to MTA market . 
 The club 's training ground was owned by Campi di <unk> S.p.A , controlled by Juventus Football Club S.p.A. to 71 @.@ 3 % . In 2003 the club bought the lands from the subsidiary and later the company was dissolved . Since then , Juventus FC did not had any subsidiary . 
 From 1 July 2008 , the club has implemented a safety management system for employees and athletes in compliance with the requirements of international <unk> <unk> : 2007 regulation and a Safety Management System in the medical sector according to the international ISO <unk> : 2000 resolution . 
 The club is one of the founders of the European Club Association ( ECA ) , which was formed after the dissolution of the G @-@ 14 , an international group of Europe 's most elite clubs of which Juventus were also a founding member . 
 According to the Deloitte Football Money League , a research published by consultants Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu on 17 January 2014 , Juventus are the ninth @-@ highest earning football club in the world with an estimated revenue of € 272 @.@ 4 million , the most for an Italian club . The club is also ranked ninth on Forbes ' list of the most valuable football clubs in the world with an estimate value of US $ 850 million ( € 654 million ) , making them the second richest association football club in Italy . The club was located in 2012 in top 50 sporting teams at worldwide level in terms of value . 
 Juventus re @-@ capitalized on 28 June 2007 , increased € 104 @,@ 807 @,@ 731 @.@ 60 shares capital . The team made an aggregate net loss in the following seasons ( 2006 to date ) : – € 927 @,@ 569 ( 2006 – 07 ) , – € 20 @,@ 787 @,@ 469 ( 2007 – 08 ) , net income € 6 @,@ 582 @,@ 489 ( 2008 – 09 ) and net loss € 10 @,@ 967 @,@ 944 ( 2009 – 10 ) . After an <unk> € 43 @,@ 411 @,@ 481 net loss was recorded in the first nine months of 2010 – 11 season , the <unk> announced that a capital increase of € 120 million was planned , scheduled to submit to the extraordinary shareholder 's meeting in October . Eventually , the 2010 – 11 season net loss was € 95 @,@ 414 @,@ 019 . In the 2012 – 13 season Juventus continued to recover from recent seasons ' net losses thanks to the biggest payment in <unk> 's Champions League 2012 – 13 revenue distribution , earning € 65 @.@ 3 million . Despite being knocked out in the quarterfinal stage , Juventus took the lion 's share thanks to the largesse of the Italian national TV market and the division of revenues with the only other Italian team attended at the competition 's final phase , AC Milan . Confirming the trend of marked improvement in net result , the 2013 – 14 financial year closed with a loss of € 6 @.@ 7 million but with the first positive operating income since 2006 . In the 2014 – 15 season , by the excellent sports results achieved ( the fourth year in a row of Serie A titles , the tenth Coppa Italia title , and playing the Champions League Final ) , net income reached at € 2 @.@ 3 million . Compared to the loss of € 6 @.@ 7 million last year , 2014 – 15 shows a positive change of € 9 million and returns to a profit after six years since 2008 – 09 . 
 = = = Shirt sponsors and manufacturers = = = 
 = Apollo , Apollo = 
 " Apollo , Apollo " is the sixteenth episode of the third season of American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 52nd episode of the series overall . It was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and directed by Millicent Shelton . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on March 26 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Adam West and Dean Winters . 
 The episode is set on the fiftieth birthday of Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , and much of the plot revolves around his concerns with his age and desire to reclaim the happiness of his childhood . At the same time , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is forced to deal with her ex @-@ boyfriend Dennis Duffy ( Winters ) and his self @-@ diagnosis as a sex addict as well as the fact that Dennis slept with her close friend Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) . A final plotline in the episode involves the desire of Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to travel in space , and the efforts by Liz and Jack to deceive him into thinking he has done so . 
 " Apollo , Apollo " was generally well received by television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 7 @.@ 2 million households during its original broadcast . " Apollo , Apollo " was nominated for four Primetime Emmy Awards and won for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . Robert Carlock won the Writers Guild of America Award for Episodic Comedy for his work on this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with an announcement by Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) on television that he plans to travel to outer space , and is willing to pay up to thirty million dollars to do so . Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) agrees to help Tracy with his dream of traveling in space , promising to call his friends at NASA . Instead of doing this , however , he asks The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) to create a fake space experience for Tracy . Pete and the TGS crew construct a model space shuttle and place Tracy in it after disorienting him by flying him in a helicopter blindfolded . The deception is a success , and Tracy believes that he is , in fact , flying in space . 
 At the same time , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is visited by her ex @-@ boyfriend , Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) , who informs her that he is a sex addict , now atoning for his past errors . Liz is unimpressed and asks Dennis to leave , before going to work . Later , after arriving at work , Liz answers Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) cellphone , and is surprised to find that Dennis is calling Jenna . Liz pretends to be Jenna and discovers that Jenna and Dennis slept together . Liz is determined not to let this revelation affect her friendship with Jenna , so the two go to confront Dennis about his behavior . During the confrontation , Liz discovers that Jenna and Dennis actually slept together in her bed , leading her to resent Jenna 's actions . As a result , she fails to tell Jenna about an improperly attached piece of equipment , leading Jenna to injure her leg . 
 Meanwhile , Jack 's fiftieth birthday is approaching and he has received home movies of some of his earlier birthdays from his mother , Collen Donaghy ( Elaine Stritch ) . While watching the tapes , Jack discovers just how happy he was when he was younger , and is determined to reclaim that happiness and innocence . After examining a list he made while he was younger , he discovers that he has done all of the things but one , befriending Batman . Thus , he arranges for actor Adam West , who played Batman , to come to his birthday party . At the party , however , West calls Jack by the wrong name , leading him to realize that he is in fact unhappy , despite his accomplishments . In an effort to reclaim his happiness , Jack attempts to find the same toy that made him so happy on his tenth birthday , a model of an Apollo Lunar Module . He buys one from a vintage toy store , but still remains unhappy . 
 Later , Liz apologizes to Jenna for allowing her to be injured , and agrees to let Jenna tell the TGS writing staff about her role in an advertisement for a phone sex line . The writers find the ad online , and greatly enjoy watching it . Jack comes in while the writers are watching and laughs so hard that he vomits . The laughter lifts Jack out of his bad mood , and he tells Liz what an important friend she is . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Apollo , Apollo " was written by executive producer Robert Carlock , making it his eleventh writing credit after " Jack the Writer " , " Jack @-@ Tor " , " The Source Awards " , " Cleveland " , " Jack Gets in the Game " , Episode 210 , " Subway Hero " , " Sandwich Day " , " Believe in the Stars " , and " Generalissimo " . This was Millicent Shelton 's first 30 Rock directed episode , and would later return to helm the fourth season episode " Floyd " . Shelton had spent two years in negotiations with the show 's producers before she was hired to direct this episode . " Apollo , Apollo " originally aired in the United States on March 26 , 2009 , on NBC as the sixteenth episode of the show 's third season and the 52nd overall episode of the series . 
 In this episode of 30 Rock , actor Dean Winters reprised his role as Dennis Duffy , a former boyfriend of Liz Lemon , for the sixth time , having appeared in " Jack Meets Dennis " , " Tracy Does Conan " , " The Break @-@ Up " , " Subway Hero " , and " Cooter " . Actor Adam West played himself on the show , in which he introduces Jack Donaghy by the wrong name at Jack 's fiftieth birthday party . Liz 's phone sex line commercial , the full @-@ length version , is featured on 30 Rock 's season three DVD as part of the Bonus features . 
 In a scene in " Apollo , Apollo " , Jack wonders what it would be like to see the world through NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) eyes , revealing that Kenneth sees everyone as Muppets . To accommodate this , Sesame Street puppeteers Joey Mazzarino , Carmen Osbahr , and Matt Vogel were brought in to do the muppet versions of Jack , Liz , and Tracy Jordan . This angle would later be used again in the show 's fourth season episode " Dealbreakers Talk Show " in which Kenneth appears as a muppet while walking by a high @-@ definition camera . In addition , the program was parodied by Sesame Street , in the show 's 39th season , entitled " 30 Rocks " . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode in 2006 where Tracy is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger , and dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four recent Halloweens , and while trying to get out of jury duty in Chicago . Star Wars is also referenced when Tracy takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . In " Apollo , Apollo " , Tracy reveals to Liz and Jack that going into space has been a childhood dream of his , and that when he is there , he would like to kill the Ewok . Tina Fey , the series creator of 30 Rock , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to Carlock , whom she described as " the resident expert " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , an average of 7 @.@ 2 million viewers watched " Apollo , Apollo " during its original United States broadcast , placing it in third place for its timeslot . The show also claimed a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 8 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 4 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was an increase from the previous episode , " The Bubble " , which was watched by 7 million American viewers . 
 " Apollo , Apollo " was generally , though not universally , well received among critics . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that the episode was " easily the best 30 Rock of the season , and one of the series ' best episodes to date " . He complimented Robert Carlock for " [ zooming ] in on the narcissistic worldview " of the Dennis character as it " cranked those qualities up to appropriately absurd 30 Rock proportions . " In addition , Sepinwall wrote that all of the elements featured in the episode " all came together " . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad was similarly laudatory , writing that it was " one of the most explosively hysterical and imaginative half hours of TV this season , and one of this show 's best episodes ever " . Time contributor James Poniewozik was favorable to the episode , observing that it was " [ e ] asily the funniest 30 Rock in months , and probably the whole season . " Poniewozik said it " nailed it , from the too @-@ many @-@ good @-@ jokes ... to the sweet heart at the center of each character . " The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed Adam West 's cameo , but noted that Tracy 's plot " felt awfully <unk> and sitcommy to me . " He opined that " Apollo , Apollo " was " pretty great " for Jane Krakowski 's Jenna , and in conclusion , Rabin said " I had initially pegged this episode as good but not great and essentially minor in the grand scheme of things but while writing this post I came to realize just how much of it I loved . 30 Rock is pretty great even when it 's not that great . " Rick Porter , a contributor for Zap2it , said he " loved " the episode , writing that it made " perfect sense " for Kenneth to see everyone around him as muppets , and noted that Liz 's commercial was a " strong ending " to the episode . 
 Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly agreed that the episode was " another solid 30 Rock " , but was somewhat less positive , writing that it " didn 't quite slay me like the last few episodes have . " In addition , Lyons was not thrilled with the Jenna character , reporting " It 's been a long time since we 've seen Jenna do something redemptive – and I 'd settle for anything not strenuously vacant and narcissistic . I get that that 's her bit , but ... that note is starting to drive me crazy . " IGN contributor Robert Canning also delivered a mixed review of the episode , writing that he laughed " quite a bit " but said it ultimately " felt like it could have been so much more . " Canning also concluded his review by stating that it " fell shy of being an absolute classic . " Writing for The Palm Beach Post Kevin D. Thompson said " While last night 's episode was far from unwatchable , it wasn 't one of the show 's best , either . But as I 've written before , a so @-@ so 30 Rock is still better than 99 percent of TV 's other so @-@ called comedies . " Thompson noted that he was not thrilled with the return of Dean Winters as Dennis , and called his plot with Liz and Jenna " the show 's least interesting plot " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Apollo , Apollo " received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations , winning one ; Millicent Shelton received a nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series , Robert Carlock received a nomination for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , Matthew Clark received a nomination for Outstanding Cinematography for a Half @-@ Hour Series nomination , and Ken Eluto won for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 At the February 2010 ceremony for the Writers Guild of America Awards , Carlock won for Episodic Comedy , <unk> with Modern Family 's Steven Levitan and Christopher Lloyd for their work on the pilot episode . Eluto garnered the American Cinema Editors " Eddie " Award for Best Edited Half @-@ Hour Series for Television . In addition , " Apollo , Apollo " was nominated for the ADG Excellence in Production Design Award for Half Hour Single @-@ Camera Television Series . 
 = Edward Coke = 
 Sir Edward Coke SL PC ( / <unk> / ( " cook " ) , formerly / <unk> / ; 1 February 1552 – 3 September 1634 ) was an English barrister , judge and , later , opposition politician , who is considered to be the greatest jurist of the Elizabethan and Jacobean eras . Born into a middle @-@ class family , Coke was educated at Trinity College , Cambridge , before leaving to study at the Inner Temple , where he was called to the Bar on 20 April 1578 . As a barrister he took part in several notable cases , including Slade 's Case , before earning enough political favour to be elected to Parliament , where he served first as Solicitor General and then as Speaker of the House of Commons . Following a promotion to Attorney General he led the prosecution in several notable cases , including those against Robert Devereux , Sir Walter Raleigh , and the Gunpowder Plot conspirators . As a reward for his services he was first knighted and then made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas . 
 As Chief Justice , Coke restricted the use of the ex officio ( Star Chamber ) oath and , in the Case of Proclamations and Dr. Bonham 's Case , declared the King to be subject to the law , and the laws of Parliament to be void if in violation of " common right and reason " . These actions eventually led to his transfer to the Chief Justiceship of the King 's Bench , where it was felt he could do less damage . Coke then successively restricted the definition of treason and declared a royal letter illegal , leading to his dismissal from the bench on 14 November 1616 . With no chance of regaining his judicial posts , he instead returned to Parliament , where he swiftly became a leading member of the opposition . During his time as a Member of Parliament he wrote and campaigned for the Statute of Monopolies , which substantially restricted the ability of the monarch to grant patents , and authored and was instrumental in the passage of the Petition of Right , a document considered one of the three crucial constitutional documents of England , along with the Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights 1689 . 
 Coke is best known in modern times for his Institutes , described by John Rutledge as " almost the foundations of our law " , and his Reports , which have been called " perhaps the single most influential series of named reports " . Historically , he was a highly influential judge ; within England and Wales , his statements and works were used to justify the right to silence , while the Statute of Monopolies is considered to be one of the first actions in the conflict between Parliament and monarch that led to the English Civil War . In America , Coke 's decision in Dr. Bonham 's Case was used to justify the voiding of both the Stamp Act 1765 and writs of assistance , which led to the American War of Independence ; after the establishment of the United States his decisions and writings profoundly influenced the Third and Fourth amendments to the United States Constitution while necessitating the Sixteenth . 
 = = Family background and early life = = 
 The surname " Coke " , or " Cocke " , can be traced back to a William Coke in the hundred of South <unk> , now the Norfolk town of Swaffham , in around 1150 . The family was relatively prosperous and influential – members from the 14th century onwards included an Under @-@ Sheriff , a Knight <unk> , a barrister and a merchant . The name " Coke " was pronounced / <unk> / during the Elizabethan age , although it is now pronounced / <unk> / . The origins of the name are uncertain ; theories are that it was a word for " river " among early Britons , or was descended from the word " Coc " , or leader . Another hypothesis is that it was an attempt to disguise the word " cook " . 
 Coke 's father , Robert Coke , was a barrister and Bencher of Lincoln 's Inn who built up a strong practice representing clients from his home area of Norfolk . Over time , he bought several manors at <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and was granted a coat of arms , becoming a minor member of the gentry . Coke 's mother , Winifred Knightley , came from a family even more intimately linked with the law than her husband . Her father and grandfather had practised law in the Norfolk area , and her sister Audrey was married to Thomas Gawdy , a lawyer and Justice of the Court of King 's Bench with links to the Earl of Arundel . This connection later served Edward well . Winifred 's father later married Agnes , the sister of Nicholas Hare . 
 Edward Coke was born on 1 February 1552 in Mileham , one of eight children . The other seven were daughters – Winifred , Dorothy , Elizabeth , Ursula , Anna , Margaret and Ethelreda – although it is not known in which order the children were born . Two years after Robert Coke died on 15 November 1561 , his widow married Robert <unk> , a property trader noted for his piety and strong business acumen ( once forcing Nicholas Bacon to pay an exorbitant amount of money for a piece of property ) . He had a tremendous influence on the Coke children : from <unk> Coke learnt to " loathe <unk> , prefer godly men and briskly do business with any willing client " , something that shaped his future conduct as a lawyer , politician , and judge . 
 = = Education and call to the Bar = = 
 At the age of eight in 1560 , Coke began studying at the Norwich Free Grammar School . The education there was based on erudition , the eventual goal being that by the age of 18 the students would have learned " to vary one sentence diversely , to make a verse exactly , to <unk> an epistle eloquently and <unk> , to declaim of a theme simple , and last of all to attain some competent knowledge of the Greek tongue " . The students were taught rhetoric based on the <unk> ad Herennium , and Greek centred on the works of Homer and Virgil . Coke was taught at Norwich to value the " forcefulness of freedom of speech " , something he later applied as a judge . Some accounts relate that he was a diligent student who applied himself well . 
 After leaving Norwich in 1567 he matriculated to Trinity College , Cambridge , where he studied for three years until the end of 1570 , when he left without gaining a degree . Little is known of his time at Trinity , though he certainly studied rhetoric and dialectics under a program instituted in 1559 . His biographers felt he had all the intelligence to be a good student , though a record of his academic achievements has not been found . Coke was proud of Cambridge and the time he spent there , later saying in Dr. Bonham 's Case that Cambridge and Oxford were " the eyes and soul of the realm , from whence religion , the humanities , and learning were richly diffused into all parts of the realm . " 
 After leaving Trinity College he travelled to London , where he became a member of Clifford 's Inn in 1571 . This was to learn the basics of the law – the Inns of Chancery , including Clifford 's Inn , provided initial legal education before transfer to the Inns of Court , where one could be called to the Bar and practise as a barrister . Students were educated through arguments and debates — they would be given precedents and writs each day , discuss them at the dinner table and then argue a moot court based on those precedents and their discussions . Coke also studied various writs " till they turned honey sweet on his tongue " , and after completing this stage of his legal education transferred to the Inner Temple on 24 April 1572 . 
 At the Inner Temple he began the second stage of his education , reading legal texts such as Glanville 's Treatises and taking part in moots . He took little interest in the theatrical performances or other cultural events at the Inns , preferring to spend his time at the law courts in Westminster Hall , listening to the Serjeants argue . After six years at the Inner Temple he was called to the Bar on 20 April 1578 , a remarkably fast rate of progress given the process of legal education at the time , which normally required eight years of study . Polson , a biographer of Coke , suggests that this was due to his knowledge of the law , which " excited the Benchers " . 
 = = Practice as a barrister = = 
 After being called to the Bar on 20 April 1578 Coke immediately began practising as a barrister . His first case was in the Court of King 's Bench in 1581 , and was known as Lord Cromwell 's Case after the claimant , Lord Henry Cromwell , a landlord in Coke 's home county of Norfolk . The case was a charge of slander against a Mr Denny , the Vicar of <unk> and Coke 's client . In a dispute with Denny , Cromwell had hired two unlicensed preachers to harass him , denounce the Book of Common Prayer and preach the gospel in his area . Denny retorted by telling Cromwell " you like not of me , since you like those that maintain sedition " . Cromwell argued that Denny was guilty of scandalum magnatum , slander against a peer of the realm , because his statement implied that Cromwell himself was seditious or had seditious tendencies . 
 The case was actually two actions , with the first judgement being given in Denny 's favour after Coke 's research found a flaw in the pleadings that invalidated Cromwell 's case . His counsel had worked from an inaccurate English copy of the Latin statute of scandalum magnatum which had mistranslated several passages , forcing them to start the case anew . After the case was restarted , Coke argued that Denny had commented on Cromwell 's support of people attacking the Book of Common Prayer , and was not implying any deeper disloyalty . The judge ruled that Denny 's statement had indeed meant this , and from this position of strength Coke forced a settlement . Coke was very proud of his actions in this case and later described it in his Reports as " an excellent point of learning in actions of slander " . The next year he was elected Reader of Lyon 's Inn for three years , something surprising considering his young age and likely related to his conduct in Lord Cromwell 's Case . As Reader he was tasked with reading to the students at the Inn , a group that numbered about thirty at any one time , and the quality of his readings increased his reputation even further . His lectures were on the Statute of Uses , and his reputation was such that when he retired to his house after an outbreak of the plague , " nine Benchers , forty barristers , and others of the Inn accompanied him a considerable distance on his journey " in order to talk to him . 
 During the 1580s , Coke became intimately linked with the Howard family , the Dukes of Norfolk and Earls of Arundel . His uncle Thomas Gawdy had close links to Earl Arundel himself . In Norfolk Arundel held a liberty – he was essentially a local prince who appointed all officials , maintained his own prison , executed justice and bribed any royal clerks . His power base was his household , particularly the network of lawyers and stewards who held his estates together . Coke 's uncle Thomas Gawdy had served as Steward to the Third Duke of Norfolk , and during the 1580s Coke was employed by the Howards to counter lawyers employed by the Crown , who argued that the Howards ' lands were forfeit owing to the treason of the 4th Duke . As well as defeating these direct attacks Coke traveled to Cardiff to answer a challenge by Francis Dacre , son of William Dacre , 3rd Baron Dacre and uncle @-@ in @-@ law to the 4th Duke 's three sons , Philip Howard and his two half @-@ brothers , Thomas Howard , 1st Earl of Suffolk and Lord William Howard – he proved that Dacre 's evidence was false and had the case dismissed . 
 Coke became involved in the now classic Shelley 's Case in 1581 , which created a rule in real property that is still used in some common law jurisdictions today ; the case also established Coke 's reputation as an attorney and case reporter . His next famous case was Chudleigh 's Case , a dispute over the interpretation of the Statute of Uses , followed by Slade 's Case , a dispute between the Common Pleas and King 's Bench over assumpsit now regarded as a classic example of the friction between the two courts and the forward movement of contract law ; Coke 's argument in Slade 's Case formed the first definition of consideration . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Thanks to his work in their behalf , Coke had earned the favour of the Dukes of Norfolk . When he secured the Lordship of Aldeburgh for them in 1588 he also obtained the Aldeburgh Parliamentary Constituency , which elected two Members of Parliament ( MPs ) . With their support , Coke was returned for Aldeburgh as an MP in February 1589 . 
 = = = Elizabeth I = = = 
 = = = = Solicitor General and Speaker = = = = 
 The political " old guard " began to change around the time Coke became a Member of Parliament . The Earl of Leicester died in 1588 , followed by Sir Walter Mildmay , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , a year later , and Sir Francis <unk> a year after that . In 1592 the Lord Chief Justice died and , according to custom the Attorney General , John Popham , succeeded him , with the Solicitor General , Thomas Egerton , succeeding Popham . This created a vacancy among the Law Officers of the Crown , and thanks to the influence of the Cecil family , Coke became Solicitor General on 16 June 1592 . This was likely a narrow victory owing to Coke 's defence of unpopular clients ; he was summoned before Elizabeth I , who berated him until he cried before confirming him as Solicitor General . 
 Coke held the position only briefly ; by the time he returned from a tour of Norfolk to discuss election strategy , he had been confirmed as Speaker of the House of Commons by the Privy Council , having been proposed by Francis Knollys and Thomas Heneage following his return to Parliament as MP for Norfolk . Coke held the positions of Speaker and Solicitor @-@ General at the same time , although he did not take up his post as Speaker until the state opening of Parliament on 19 February 1593 ( despite being confirmed on 28 January 1593 ) . After " disabling " himself in the House of Lords ( a ceremony in which the incoming Speaker apologised for his failings ) Parliament was suspended until 24 February ; Coke returned two days later , having suffered from a stomach problem . The Parliament was intended to be a brief and simple one ; with the Black Death resurgent throughout England and the threat of Spain on the horizon , the only matter was to impose certain taxes to fund the Queen 's campaign against the Spanish , with no bills to be introduced . The taxes were paramount ; subsidies collected in 1589 had been spent , and the war continued . 
 The idea of a calm , swift Parliament foundered on the rocks of religious conflict . On 27 February James Morice , a Puritan Member of Parliament , proposed two new bills : one against the bishops of the Church of England , and the other against the Court of High Commission . Morice was placed under house arrest , and seven Members of Parliament were later arrested , but the bills remained in Parliament . They were defended by Francis Knollys , one of the few remaining Puritan Members of Parliament , while other Puritans spat and coughed to drown out speeches by opponents . Coke and Cecil , the government 's two strongest defenders in Parliament , made several efforts to put off or end the debate over the bills . Cecil first pointed out that the Queen had forbidden bills on religion ; Parliament ignored him , and the bill went ahead . Coke , as Speaker of the House of Commons ( whose job was to schedule any bills ) , conducted a delaying campaign , first suggesting that the bill was too long to be read in the morning and then that it be delegated to a committee ; both suggestions were voted down by the Commons . Coke continued talking until the end of the Parliamentary day in a filibuster action , granting a day of delay for the government . Immediately afterwards , Coke was summoned by the Queen , who made it clear that any action on the bills would be considered evidence of disloyalty . The warning was accepted by the Commons , and no more action was taken on the two Puritan bills . 
 = = = = Attorney General = = = = 
 On 10 April 1594 , Coke was made Attorney General for England and Wales thanks to his partnership with the Cecil family . Francis Bacon , his rival , was supported by Robert Devereux , who waged a constant war against Robert Cecil for control of the English government . The position of Master of the Rolls had become vacant in April 1593 , and Coke was expected to be appointed according to convention ; Bacon , therefore , would become Attorney General . Coke reacted by becoming even more dogmatic in his actions on behalf of the Crown , and when Devereux approached the queen on Bacon 's behalf , she replied that even Bacon 's uncle [ Lord Burghley ] considered him the second best candidate , after Coke . The Attorney General was the main prosecutor of the Crown , expected to bring all charges on its behalf and serve as its legal advisor in any situation . Coke was appointed in a time of particular difficulty ; besides famine and the conflict with Spain , war had recently broken out in Ireland . 
 Coke primarily dealt with matters of treason , such as the cases of Sir John Smythe and Edward Squire . He also handled religious incidents such as the disputes between the Jesuits and the Church of England , personally interrogating John Gerard after his capture . As the 1590s continued , the infighting between Cecil and Devereux persisted , with Devereux 's raid on Cadiz earning him national fame . In March 1599 Devereux was sent to defeat the growing rebellion in Ireland and was given command of 18 @,@ 000 men , but by November his army was reduced to 4 @,@ 000 , the rest " frittered away " in exchange for " [ conquering ] nothing " . On 5 June 1600 he faced a panel of Privy Councillors , judges and members of the nobility at York House , where he was charged with appointing generals without the Queen 's permission , ignoring orders and negotiating " very <unk> " with the leader of the rebel forces . While the members of the nobility wished to be gentle with Devereux , the lawyers and judges felt differently , recommending fines and confinement in the Tower of London . In the end a compromise was reached , with Devereux put under house arrest and dismissed from all his government offices . 
 Devereux immediately began plotting rebellion . Orders were sent out for " bedding " and " draperies " – codenames for weapons – and rebellious gentlemen gathered at Essex House to hear him talk of Elizabeth 's " crooked mind and crooked carcass " . In response , Coke and Cecil began a counter @-@ plot . In 1599 Sir John Hayward had written and published The First Part of the Life and <unk> of King Henrie IV , dedicating it to Devereux . Elizabeth , furious , had banned the book , suggesting that it was a " seditious prelude " intended to show her as a corrupt and poor monarch . Against the backdrop of Devereux 's plot , Coke and Cecil started a new investigation into the book , hoping to prove some involvement of Devereux in the publishing . Coke interviewed Hayward 's licensing cleric , Samuel <unk> , who complained that the dedication had been " foisted " on him by Devereux . In reaction , Coke decided to bring charges of treason against Devereux , saying that he had " plotted and practised with the Pope and king of Spain for the deposing and selling of himself as well as the crown of England ... His permitting underhand that treasonable book of Henry IV to be printed and published ; it being plainly deciphered , not only by the matter , and by the epistle itself , for what end and for whose behalf it was made , but also the Earl himself being present so often at the playing thereof , and with great applause giving countenance to it " . 
 The charges were never brought because of an incident that soon transpired . On 8 February 1601 Devereux ordered his followers to meet at Essex House . A day later a group of emissaries led by Thomas Egerton and John Popham were sent to Devereux , and immediately taken hostage . After a failed attempt to garner support from the population of London , Devereux found himself surrounded in Essex House ; after burning his personal papers , he surrendered . On 19 February he was tried for treason , along with the Earl of Southampton . Coke led the case for the government , and Devereux was found guilty and executed ; the Earl of Southampton was reprieved . 
 = = = James I = = = 
 On 24 March 1603 , Elizabeth I died . James VI of Scotland set out to claim the English throne , taking the title James I , and the Cokes immediately began ingratiating themselves with the new monarch and his family . Elizabeth Hatton , Coke 's wife , travelled to Scotland to meet Anne of Denmark , the incoming Queen , and " the high @-@ tempered beauty somehow pleased that withdrawn , strong @-@ willed woman ... for as long as Anna lived ... Lady Hatton and her husband would retain the queen 's affection and trust " . Coke attended divine service with the new king on 22 May , who , following the service , took a sword from his bodyguard and knighted Coke . Coke was reconfirmed as Attorney General under James , and immediately found himself dealing with " a series of treasons , whether real or imaginary " . The first of these was the trial of Sir Walter Raleigh ; according to Cuthbert William Johnson , one of Coke 's biographers , " There is , perhaps , no reported case in which the proofs against the prisoner were weaker than in this trial ... never was an accused person condemned on slighter grounds " . 
 Raleigh was brought to trial on 17 November 1603 , on charges of " conspiring to deprive the King of his Government ; to alter religion ; to bring in the Roman superstition ; and to procure foreign enemies to invade the kingdom " . The government alleged that on 11 June 1603 , Raleigh had met with Lord Cobham , and they had agreed to bring Lady Arbella Stuart ( a great great granddaughter of Henry VII ) to the English throne , and to accept 600 @,@ 000 marks from the Spanish government . As such , Raleigh was charged with supporting Stuart 's claim to the throne and claiming Spanish money . He pleaded not guilty , with Coke 's only evidence being a confession from Cobham , who was described as " a weak and unprincipled creature ... who said one thing at one time , and another thing in another , and could be relied upon in nothing " . This case was " no case at all ... It supports the general charges in the indictment only by the vaguest possible reference to ' these practices , ' and ' plots and invasions ' of which no more is said " . 
 Coke 's behaviour during the trial has been repeatedly criticised ; on this weak evidence , he called Raleigh a " notorious traitor " , " vile viper " and " damnable atheist " , perverting the law and using every slip of the tongue as a way of further showing Raleigh 's guilt . Raleigh was found guilty and imprisoned in the Tower of London for more than a decade before finally being executed . It is generally concluded that the trial was biased strongly against Raleigh , although the assessment of Coke varies . While Magruder , in the Scottish Law Review , writes that Coke 's " fair fame was tarnished and outraged " by his part in the trial , Boyer notes that Coke was , above all , loyal . He prosecuted Raleigh in that fashion because he had been asked to show Raleigh 's guilt by the king , and as Attorney General , Coke was bound to obey . 
 The next significant government prosecution was the trial of the eight main Gunpowder Plot conspirators in Westminster Hall . The men were indicted on 27 January 1605 and tried by the Lords Commissioners . Coke conducted the prosecution for the government – an easy one , since the conspirators had no legal representation – and through his speeches , " blacken [ ed ] them in the eyes of the world " . The conspirators were all sentenced to death and died through various means . Due to his judicial appointment , this was the last important prosecution Coke participated in . 
 = = Judicial work = = 
 Coke 's first judicial postings came under Elizabeth ; in 1585 , he was made Recorder of Coventry , in 1587 Norwich , and in 1592 Recorder of London , a position he resigned upon his appointment as Solicitor General . 
 = = = Common Pleas = = = 
 On 20 June 1606 , Coke was made a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Law , a requirement for his elevation to Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , which occurred on 30 June . His conduct was noted by Johnson as " from the first , excellent ; ever perfectly upright and fearlessly independent " , although the convention of the day was that the judges held their positions only at the pleasure of the monarch . A biographer of Francis Bacon noted that " [ t ] he most offensive of Attorney Generals [ sic ] transformed into the most admired and venerated of Judges " . Some assert that Coke became Chief Justice due to his prosecutions of Raleigh and the Gunpowder Plot conspirators , but there is no evidence to support this ; instead , it was traditional at the time that a retiring Chief Justice would be replaced with the Attorney General . 
 = = = = Court of High Commission = = = = 
 Coke 's changed position from Attorney General to Chief Justice allowed him to openly attack organisations he had previously supported . His first target was the Court of High Commission , an ecclesiastical court established by the monarch with near unlimited power ; it administered a mandatory ex officio oath that deliberately trapped people . The High Commission was vastly unpopular among both common lawyers and Members of Parliament , as the idea of " prerogative law " challenged both authorities . The appointment of Richard Bancroft as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1604 caused the issue to grow in importance ; according to P.B. Waite , a Canadian historian , Bancroft 's zeal and strictness " could hardly fail to produce an atmosphere in which principles and issues would crystallize , in which logic would supplant reasonableness " . The judges , particularly Coke , began to unite with Parliament in challenging the High Commission . In 1607 Parliament openly asked for Coke 's opinion on the High Commission 's practices ; he replied that " No man ecclesiastical or temporal shall be examined upon secret thoughts of his heart or of his secret opinion " . 
 During this period a " notorious suit " ran through the courts , known as Fuller 's Case after the defendant , Nicholas Fuller . A barrister , Fuller had several clients fined by the High Commission for non @-@ conformity , and stated that the High Commission 's procedure was " popish , under jurisdiction not of Christ but of anti @-@ Christ " . For this , Fuller was held in custody for contempt of court . The Court of King 's Bench argued that this was a lay matter , while the High Commission claimed it fell under their jurisdiction . Coke had no official role , other than acting as a mediator between the two , but in the end Fuller was convicted by the High Commission . This was a defeat for the common law , and in response Coke spent the summer issuing writs of prohibition to again challenge Bancroft and the High Commission . On 6 November 1608 , the common law judges and members of the High Commission were summoned before the king and told that they would argue and allow him to decide . Finding themselves unable to even argue coherently , instead " [ standing ] sullen , merely denying each others ' statements " , the group was dismissed and reconvened a week later . Coke , speaking for the judges , argued that the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts was limited to cases where no temporal matters were involved and the rest left to the common law . 
 At this point the king 's own position in relation to the law , and his authority to decide this matter , was brought up , in what became known as the Case of Prohibitions . James stated that " In cases where there is not express authority in law , the King may himself decide in his royal person ; the Judges are but delegates of the King " . Coke challenged this , saying " the King in his own person cannot adjudge any case , either criminal – as treason , felony etc , or betwixt party and party ; but this ought to be determined and adjudged in some court of justice , according to the Law and Custom of England " . Coke further stated that " The common law protecteth the King " , to which James replied " The King protecteth the law , and not the law the King ! The King maketh judges and bishops . If the judges interpret the laws themselves and suffer none else to interpret , they may easily make , of the laws , shipmen 's hose ! " . Coke rejected this , stating that while the monarch was not subject to any individual , he was subject to the law . Until he had gained sufficient knowledge of the law , he had no right to interpret it ; he pointed out that such knowledge " demanded mastery of an artificial reason ... which requires long study and experience , before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it " . Coke was only saved from imprisonment by Cecil , who pleaded with the king to show leniency , which he granted . After the conclusion of this dispute , Coke freely left , and continued to issue writs of prohibition against the High Commission . 
 = = = = Dr. Bonham 's Case = = = = 
 Thomas Bonham v College of Physicians , commonly known as Dr. Bonham 's Case was a decision of the Court of Common Pleas under Coke in which he ruled that " in many cases , the common law will controul Acts of Parliament , and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly void : for when an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason , or repugnant , or impossible to be performed , the common law will controul it , and adjudge such Act to be void " . Coke 's meaning has been disputed over the years ; some interpret his judgment as referring to judicial review of statutes to correct misunderstandings which would render them unfair , while others argue he meant that the common law courts have the power to completely strike down those statutes they deem to be repugnant . 
 Whatever Coke 's meaning , after an initial period of application , Bonham 's Case was thrown aside in favour of the growing doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty . Initially written down by William Blackstone , this theory makes Parliament the sovereign law @-@ maker , preventing the common law courts from not only throwing aside but also reviewing statutes in the fashion Coke suggested . Parliamentary sovereignty is now the universally @-@ accepted judicial doctrine in England and Wales . Bonham 's Case met a mixed reaction at the time , with the king and Lord Ellesmere both deeply unhappy with it . Nineteenth and twentieth century academics are scarcely more favourable , calling it " a foolish doctrine alleged to have been laid down extra @-@ judicially " , and an " abortion " . 
 In the United States , Coke 's decision met with a better reaction . During the legal and public campaigns against the writs of assistance and Stamp Act 1765 , Bonham 's Case was given as a justification for nullifying the legislation . Marbury v. Madison , the American case which forms the basis for the exercise of judicial review in the United States under Article III of the Constitution , uses the words " void " and " repugnant " , seen as a direct reference to Coke . Some academics , such as Edward Samuel Corwin , have argued that Coke 's work in Bonham 's Case forms the basis of judicial review and the declaration of legislation as unconstitutional in the United States . Gary L. McDowell calls this " one of the most enduring myths of American constitutional law and theory , to say nothing of history " , pointing out that at no point during the Constitutional Convention was Bonham 's Case referenced . 
 = = = King 's Bench = = = 
 Coke was transferred from the Common Pleas , where he was succeeded by Hobart , to the Court of King 's Bench on 25 October 1613 , on the advice of Bacon , presumably because Bacon and the king felt that if he was moved from a court dedicated to protecting the rights of the people to one dedicated to the rights of the king , " his capacity for harm would be diminished " . From Bacon 's point of view , the King 's Bench was a far more precarious position for someone loyal to the common law rather than the monarch . Coke 's first case of note there was Peacham 's Case , in which he dictated that the writing of a sermon by Thomas Peacham which advocated the death of the king – a sermon which was never preached or published – could not constitute treason . The king was unwilling to accept this decision and instead had him tried by Coke 's opponents on the bench , who " not surprisingly " found him guilty . Refusing to admit his guilt , Peacham was tortured on the rack , but " before torture , between torture and after torture ; nothing could be drawn from him " . 
 In 1616 , two years after Peacham 's Case , the case of <unk> arose . The in <unk> writ was a method of transferring ecclesiastical property , which James used in this case to allow Richard <unk> to hold his bishopric and associated revenues without actually performing the duties . On 25 April 1616 the courts , at Coke 's bidding , held that this action was illegal , writing to the king that " in case any letters come unto us contrary to law , we do nothing by such letters , but certify your Majesty thereof , and go forth to do the law notwithstanding the same " . James called the judges before him and , furious , ripped up the letter , <unk> telling them that " I well know the true and ancient common law to be the most favourable to Kings of any law in the world , to which law I do advise you my Judges to apply your studies " . While all the other judges " succumbed to royal pressure and , throwing themselves on their knees , prayed for pardon " , Coke defended the letter and stated that " When the case happens I shall do that which shall be fit for a judge to do " . 
 This was the last straw ; on advice from Bacon , who had long been jealous of Coke , James I suspended Coke from the Privy Council , forbade him from going on circuit and , on 14 November , dismissed him from his post as Chief Justice of the King 's Bench . This was greeted by deep resentment in the country , which saw the king 's actions as tampering with justice . Coke himself reacted by sinking into a deep depression . James I then ordered Coke to spend his time " expunging and retracting such novelties and errors and offensive conceits as are dispersed in his Reports " . Bacon , now in royal favour , became Lord Chancellor on 3 March 1617 and set up a commission to purge the Reports , also using his authority to expand the powers of the High Commission . With James unable to declare Coke incompetent , some of what Humphry William <unk> describes as " <unk> excuses " were produced to justify Coke 's dismissal ; he was accused of concealing £ 12 @,@ 000 , uttering " high words of contempt " as a judge , and declaring himself Chief Justice of England . 
 = = Return to politics = = 
 Now out of favour and with no chance of returning to the judiciary , Coke was re @-@ elected to Parliament as an MP , ironically by order of the king , who expected Coke to support his efforts . Elected in 1620 , Coke sat for Liskeard in the 1621 Parliament , which was called by the king to raise revenues ; other topics of discussion included a proposed marriage between the Prince of Wales and Maria Anna of Spain , and possible military support for the king 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Frederick V , Elector Palatine . Coke became a leading opposition MP , along with Robert Phelips , Thomas Wentworth and John Pym , campaigning against any military intervention and the marriage of the Prince of Wales and Maria Anna . His position at the head of the opposition was unsurprising given his extensive experience in both local and central government , as well as his ability to speak with authority on matters of economics , parliamentary procedure and the law . He subsequently sat as MP for Coventry ( 1624 ) , Norfolk ( 1625 ) and Buckinghamshire ( 1628 ) . 
 In June 1614 , the University of Cambridge by unanimous vote elected Coke High Steward , honorary office next below Chancellor of the University . Through Cecil , ( previously High Steward and then Chancellor of Cambridge ) , Coke had procured for the University the right to send its own two representatives to Parliament , a matter of much practical benefit . A fervent <unk> , Coke had a habit of naming Cambridge first , including in Parliament . When reminded that precedence belonged to Oxford " by vote of the House , " Coke persisted in giving Cambridge primacy . A Privy Councilor , Sir Thomas <unk> , interrupted with a rebuke . It was reported that Coke suggested <unk> not bother worrying about the primacy of Oxford or Cambridge , given that he had not attended either university . 
 = = = Monopolies = = = 
 Coke used his role in Parliament as a leading opposition MP to attack patents , a system he had already criticised as a judge . Historically , English patent law was based on custom and the common law , not on statute . It began as the Crown granted patents as a form of economic protection to ensure high industrial production . As gifts from the Crown , there was no judicial review , oversight or consideration , and no actual law concerning patents . To boost England 's economy , Edward II began encouraging foreign workmen and inventors to settle in England , offering letters of protection that protected them from guild policy on the condition that they train English apprentices and pass on their knowledge . The letters did not grant a full monopoly ; rather they acted as a passport , allowing foreign workers to travel to England and practice their trade . This process continued for three centuries , with formal procedures set out in 1561 to issue letters patent to any new industry , allowing monopolies . The granting of these patents was highly popular with the monarch because of the potential for raising revenue ; a patentee was expected to pay heavily for the patent , and unlike a tax raise ( another method of raising Crown money ) any public unrest as a result of the patent was normally directed at the patentee , not the monarch . 
 Over time , this system became more and more problematic ; instead of temporary monopolies on specific , imported industries , long @-@ term monopolies came about over more common commodities , including salt and starch . These monopolies led to a showdown between the Crown and Parliament , in which it was agreed in 1601 to turn the power to administer patents over to the common law courts ; at the same time , Elizabeth revoked a number of the more restrictive and damaging monopolies . Even given a string of judicial decisions criticising and overruling such monopolies , James I , when he took the throne , continued using patents to create monopolies . Coke used his position in Parliament to attack these patents , which were , according to him , " now grown like hydras ' heads ; they grow up as fast as they are cut off " . Coke succeeded in establishing the Committee of Grievances , a body chaired by him that abolished a large number of monopolies . This was followed by a wave of protest at the patent system . On 27 March 1621 , James suggested the House of Commons draw up a list of the three most objectionable patents , and he would remove them , but by this time a statute was already being prepared by Coke . After passing on 12 May it was thrown out by the House of Lords , but a Statute of Monopolies was finally passed by Parliament on 25 May 1624 . 
 In response to both this and Coke 's establishment of a sub @-@ committee to establish freedom of speech and discuss the rights of the Commons , James announced that " you usurp upon our prerogative royal and meddle with things far above your reach " . He first adjourned Parliament and then forbade the Commons from discussing " matters of state at home or abroad " . Ignoring this ban , Parliament issued a " Remonstrance to the King " on 11 December 1621 , authored by Coke , in which they restated their liberties and right to discuss matters of state , claiming that such rights were the " ancient and undoubted birthright and inheritance of the subjects of England " . After a debate , it was sent to James , who rejected it ; the Commons instead resolved to enter it into the Journal of the Commons , which required no royal authorisation . In the presence of Parliament , the king reacted by tearing the offending page from the Journal , declaring that it should be " razed out of all memories and utterly annihilated " , then dissolved Parliament . Coke was then imprisoned in the Tower of London on 27 December , but released nine months later . 
 = = = Liberty and the Resolutions = = = 
 James died on 27 March 1625 and was succeeded by his son , who became Charles I of England . Coke was made High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire by the king in 1625 , which prohibited him from sitting in Parliament until his term expired a year later . Following his father 's example , Charles raised loans without Parliament 's sanction and imprisoned without trial those who would not pay . The judges of the Court of Common Pleas and King 's Bench declared this to be illegal , and the Chief Justice Sir Ranulph Crewe was dismissed ; at this , the remaining judges succumbed to the king 's pressure . More and more people refused to pay , leading to Darnell 's Case , in which the courts confirmed that " if no cause was given for the detention ... the prisoner could not be freed as the offence was probably too dangerous for public discussion " . The result of this was that wealthy landowners refused to pay the loan and the Crown 's income fell below Charles 's expectations , forcing him to call a fresh Parliament in March 1627 . With popular anger at Charles 's policies , many MPs were opposed to him , including Pym , Coke and a young Oliver Cromwell . 
 Martial law was then declared , with continued imprisonment for a failure to pay the forced loans and soldiers billeted in the homes of private citizens to intimidate the population – something which led to Coke 's famous declaration that " the house of an Englishman is to him as his castle " . The Commons responded to these measures by insisting that the Magna Carta , which expressly forbade the imprisonment of freemen without trial , was still valid . Coke then prepared the Resolutions , which later led to the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 . These declared that Magna Carta was still in force , and that furthermore : 
 no freeman is to be committed or detained in prison , or otherwise restrained by command of the King or the Privy Council or any other , unless some lawful cause be shown ... the writ of habeas corpus cannot be denied , but should be granted to every man who is committed or detained in prison or otherwise restrained by the command of the King , the Privy Council or any other ... Any freeman so committed or detained in prison without cause being stated should be entitled to bail or be freed . 
 In addition , no tax or loan could be levied without Parliament 's permission , and no private citizen could be forced into accepting soldiers into his home . Coke , John Selden and the rest of the Committee for Grievances presented the Resolutions to the House of Lords , with Coke citing seven statutes and 31 cases to support his argument . He told the Lords that " Imprisonment in law is a civil death [ and ] a prison without a prefixed time is a kind of hell " . The Lords , supportive of the king , were not swayed , and Charles himself eventually rejected the Resolutions , insisting that the Commons trust him . 
 = = = Petition of Right = = = 
 Coke undertook the central role in framing and writing the Petition of Right . The ongoing struggles over martial law and civil liberties , along with the rejection of the Resolutions seriously concerned the Commons . Accordingly , Coke convinced the Lords to meet with the Commons in April 1628 in order to discuss a petition to the king confirming the rights and liberties of royal subjects . The Commons immediately accepted this , and after a struggle , the Lords agreed to allow a committee chaired by Coke to draft the eventual document . Hearing of this , the king sent a message to Parliament forbidding the Commons from discussing matters of state . The resulting debate led to some MPs being unable to speak due to their fear that the king was threatening them with the destruction of Parliament . Coke , despite the fear in Parliament , stood and spoke , citing historical precedents supporting the principle that members of the Commons could , within Parliament , say whatever they wished – something now codified as Parliamentary privilege . 
 The Petition of Right was affirmed by the Commons and sent to the Lords , who approved it on 17 May 1628 ; the document 's publication was met with bonfires and the ringing of church bells throughout England . As well as laying out a long list of statutes which had been broken , it proclaimed various " rights and liberties " of free Englishmen , including a freedom from taxation without Parliamentary approval , the right of habeas corpus , a prohibition on soldiers being billeted in houses without the owner 's will , and a prohibition on imposing martial law on civilians . It was later passed into formal law by the Long Parliament in 1641 and became one of the three constitutional documents of English civil liberties , along with the Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights 1689 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 When Parliament was dissolved in 1629 , Charles decided to govern without one , and Coke retired to his estate at Stoke Poges , Buckinghamshire , about 20 miles west of London , spending his time making revisions to his written works . He made no attempt to return to politics , stating that the Petition of Right would be left as his " greatest inheritance " ; his desire to complete his writings , coupled with his advanced age , may also have been factors . Despite his age , Coke was still in good health , and exercised daily . Following an accident in which his horse fell on him , he refused to consult doctors , saying that he had " a disease which all the drugs of Asia , the gold of Africa , nor all the doctors of Europe could cure – old age " , and instead chose to remain confined to the house without medical treatment . As he was on his deathbed the Privy Council ordered that his house and chambers be searched , seizing 50 manuscripts , which were later restored ; his will was permanently lost . 
 Coke died on 3 September 1634 , aged 82 , and lay in state for a month at his home in <unk> to allow for friends and relatives to view the body . He was buried in St Mary 's Church , <unk> . His grave is covered by a marble monument with his effigy lying on it in full judicial robes , surrounded by eight shields holding his coat of arms . A Latin inscription on the monument identifies him as " Father of twelve children and thirteen books " . A second inscription , in English , gives a brief chronicle of his life and ends by stating that " His <unk> <unk> [ were ] thy <unk> come , <unk> will be done . <unk> , reader to live so , that thou may 'st so die " . Coke 's estates , including Holkham Hall , passed to his son Henry . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 13 August 1582 Coke married Bridget , the daughter of John Paston , a Counsellor from Norwich . Paston came from a long line of lawyers and judges – his great grandfather , William Paston , was a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas . Having grown up nearby Coke knew the family , and asked for Bridget 's hand immediately after she turned eighteen . At the time he was a thirty @-@ one @-@ year @-@ old barrister with a strong practice , and her father had no qualms about accepting his offer . Six months after they married John Paston died , leaving his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law his entire estate and several of his clients . Bridget maintained a diary , which reveals that she mainly ran the household . Despite this she was an independent woman , travelling without her husband and acting as a helpmate to Coke . Bridget was noted by <unk> as an " incomparable " woman who had " inestimable value clearly manifested by the eulogies which are lavished on her character " . The couple settled at the manor of Huntingfield , described by Catherine Drinker Bowen as " enchanting , with a legend for every turret ... A splendid gallery ran the length of the house , the Great Hall was built around six massive oaks which supported the roof as they grew " . 
 The couple had ten children – seven sons and three daughters . The sons were Edward , Robert , Arthur , John , Henry , Clement and Thomas . Edward died young , Robert became a Knight Bachelor and married <unk> , daughter of Thomas Berkeley , Arthur married Elizabeth , heir of Sir George <unk> , John married Meriel , daughter of Anthony <unk> , bringing Holkham Hall into the Coke family , Henry married Margaret , daughter of Richard Lovelace , and inherited the manor at Holkham from his brother John ( who had seven daughters but no son ) , Clement married Sarah , heiress of Alexander <unk> , and Thomas died as an infant . The daughters were Elizabeth , Anne and Bridget . Elizabeth died young , Anne married Ralph Sadleir , son and heir of Sir Thomas Sadleir , and Bridget married William Skinner , son and heir of Sir Vincent Skinner . Coke 's descendants through Henry include the Earls of Leicester , particularly Coke of Norfolk , a landowner , Member of Parliament and agricultural reformer . 
 Following his first wife 's death in 1598 , Coke married Elizabeth Hatton , a desirable marriage due to her wealth ; when he found out that Bacon was also pursuing her hand , Coke acted with all speed to complete the ceremony . It was held at a private house at the wrong time , rather than at a church between 8 and 12 in the morning ; all involved parties were prosecuted for breaching ecclesiastical law , and Coke had to beg for a pardon . It is said that Coke first suggested marrying Hatton to Sir Robert Cecil , Hatton 's uncle , at the funeral of Lord Burghley , Coke 's patron ; he needed to ensure that he would continue his rise under Burghley 's son , Cecil , and did this by marrying into the family . Hatton was 26 years younger than Coke , hot @-@ tempered and articulate ; Boyer wrote that " if she and Coke were not compatible , at least they were well @-@ matched " . Their marriage having broken down in 1604 , Hatton went on to become a formidable protagonist and thorn in his side . 
 Coke was buried beside his first wife , who was called his " first and best wife " by his daughter Anne ; his second wife died in 1646 . Coke had two children with his second wife , both daughters : Elizabeth and Frances . Frances married John Villiers , 1st Viscount Purbeck . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Coke is best known for his written work – thirteen volumes of law reports , and the four @-@ volume Institutes of the Lawes of England . John Marshall Gest , writing in the Yale Law Journal , notes that " There are few principles of the common law that can be studied without an examination of Coke 's Institutes and Reports which summed up the legal learning of his time " , although " the student is deterred by the too common abuse of Coke 's character and the general criticism of his writings as dry , crabbed , verbose and pedantic " . John Campbell , in The Lives of the Chief Justices of England , said that " His reasoning ... is narrow minded ; [ he had ] utter contempt for method and style in his compositions " , and says that Coke 's Reports were " <unk> with quaintness and pedantry " . Gest , noting this criticism , points out that : 
 Coke , like every man , was necessarily a product of the age in which he lived . His faults were the faults of his time , his <unk> those of all time . He was diffuse ; he loved metaphor , literary quibbles and verbal conceits ; so did Bacon , and so did Shakespeare . So did all the writers of his day . They were creative , not critical . But Coke as a law writer was as far superior in importance and merit to his predecessors , at least if we except Bracton , as the Elizabethan writers in general were superior to those whom they succeeded , and , as the great Elizabethans fixed the standard of our English tongue , so Coke established the common law on its firm foundation . A modern lawyer who heaps his abuse on Coke and his writings seems as ungrateful as a man who climbs a high wall by the aid of the sturdy shoulders of another and then gives his friend a parting kick in the face as he makes the final leap . 
 = = = Reports = = = 
 His Law Reports , known as Coke 's Reports , were an archive of judgements from cases he had participated in , watched or heard of . They started with notes he made as a law student in the winter of 1572 , with full reporting of cases from October 1579 . The Reports were initially written down in seven notebooks , four of which are lost ; the first notebook contains not only law reports , but also a draft version of Coke 's first Institutes of the Lawes of England . Coke began reporting cases in the traditional manner , by copying out and repeating cases found in earlier law reports , such as those of Edmund Plowden . After being called to the Bar in 1578 he began attending court cases at Westminster Hall , and soon drew the attention of court officials – many early reports have notes that he was told " by old Plowden " or " by Wray CJ " . The original reports were kept in a generally chronological order , interspersed with personal memos , obituaries and notes on court practices . They are not entirely chronological ; during his career , Coke took note of earlier cases he had heard of or which had drawn his attention . These were written down with the plea roll reference and the year in which Coke recorded them , but later editions failed to include the plea roll reference and led to inaccuracies . 
 The Reports have gained significant academic acclaim ; writing in the Cornell Law Quarterly , Theodore Plucknett describes them as works of " incomparable richness " with a " profound influence upon the literature , and indeed the substance , of English law " . John Baker has described them as " perhaps the single most influential series of named reports " , and even Francis Bacon , Coke 's rival , wrote in praise of them , saying " Had it not been for Sir Edward Coke 's Reports ( which though they may have errors , and some peremptory and extrajudicial resolutions more than are warranted , yet they contain infinite good decisions and rulings over of cases ) , for the law by this time had been almost like a ship without ballast ; for that the cases of modern experience are fled from those that are adjudged and ruled in former time " . 
 Although loaned to friends and family , and therefore in slight public circulation , Coke 's Reports were never formally used during his lifetime . Select cases were published in 1600 , containing the most famous of his decisions and pleadings , while a second volume in 1602 was more chronological in nature . The third part , published in the same year , was also chronological , while the fourth , published in 1604 , was arranged by subject . The fifth part , published in 1605 , is arranged similarly , as is the sixth , published in 1607 . Five more volumes were published until 1615 , but Coke died before he could publish a single bound copy . No trace has been found of the draft manuscript . 
 Some academics have questioned the accuracy of the Reports . Coke 's famous Case of Proclamations , and his speech there , was first brought into the public consciousness through its inclusion in Volume 12 of his Reports , and Roland G. Usher , writing in the English Historical Review , notes that " Certain manuscripts at Hatfield House and elsewhere seem to throw some doubt upon this famous account of a famous interview " . One of the reasons given for possible inaccuracies in the later volumes of the Reports is that they were published posthumously . In July 1634 , officials acting on order of the king had seized Coke 's papers , but a 1641 motion in the House of Commons restored the extant papers to Coke 's eldest son . The twelfth and thirteenth volumes of the reports were based on fragments of notes several decades old , not on Coke 's original manuscript . 
 = = = Institutes = = = 
 Coke 's other main work was the Institutes of the Lawes of England , a four @-@ volume treatise described as his " masterwork " . The first volume , the Commentary upon Littleton , known as Coke on Littleton , was published in 1628 . It is ostensibly a commentary on Sir Thomas Littleton 's Treatise on <unk> , but actually covered many areas of the law of his time . The other three volumes were all published after his death , and covered 39 constitutional statutes of importance ( starting with the Magna Carta ) , the law relating to criminal law , and constitutional and administrative law respectively . While the Reports were intended to give an explanation of the law chronologically , Coke 's intentions with the Institutes were to provide an English language tutorial for students studying law at the Inns of Court . This served as an alternative to the Roman law lectures at university , which were based on Latin ; according to Bowen it was " a double vision ; the Institutes as authority , the Reports as illustration by actual practise " . 
 Part one , the Commentary upon Littleton , was undoubtedly the most famous ; copies were exported to the United States early in the colonial era . The work was first printed in an American edition in 1812 , by which point the English version was in its sixteenth edition , and had been commented on itself by various later legal authorities . As with the Reports , Coke 's Institutes became a standard textbook in the United States , and was recorded in the law libraries of Harvard College in 1723 and Brown University in 1770 ; John Jay , John Adams , Theophilus Parsons and Thomas Jefferson were all influenced by it . John Rutledge later wrote that " Coke 's Institutes seems to be almost the foundations of our law " , while Jefferson stated that " a sounder Whig never wrote more profound learning in the orthodox doctrine of British liberties " . The Third Institutes has been described as " the first really adequate discussion of treason , a work which went far towards offering the remedy of a humanized common law to the injustices of trial procedures " . 
 The work had its detractors , with some writers criticising it for " repulsive pedantry " and " overbearing assertions " , as well as incorrect citations to works that were later discredited . There are also factual inaccuracies ; Kenyon <unk> in the Ecclesiastical Law Journal notes that despite being considered the supreme legal authority on the subject of consecration , which Coke covered in the third volume of the Institutes , he offered no legal support for his opinion and ignored those pieces of case law which rejected his interpretation . 
 = = = Jurisprudence = = = 
 Coke 's jurisprudence centres on the hierarchy of the judges , the monarch , and Parliament in making law . Coke argued that the judges of the common law were those most suited to making law , followed by Parliament , and that the monarch was bound to follow any legal rules . This principle was justified by the idea that a judge , through his professional training , internalised what political historian and theorist Alan Cromartie referred to as " an infinity of wisdom " , something that mere politicians or laypersons could not understand due to the complexity of the law . Coke 's Commentary on Littleton has been interpreted as deliberately obtuse , with his aim being to write what Cromartie called " a sort of anti @-@ textbook , a work whose very form denied that legal knowledge could be organised . The original edition could not be used for reference purposes , as Coke had published it without an index ... It is a book to be ' read in ' and lived with , rather than consulted , a monument to the uselessness of merely written knowledge unless it is internalised in a trained professional mind " . This theory – that judges were the natural arbiters of the law – is known as the " appeal to reason " , with " reason " referring not to rationality but the method and logic used by judges in upholding and striking down laws . Coke 's position meant that certainty of the law and intellectual beauty was the way to see if a law was just and correct , and that the system of law could eventually become sophisticated enough to be predictable . 
 John Selden similarly thought that the common law was the proper law of England . He argued that this did not necessarily create judicial discretion to alter it , and that proper did not necessarily equal perfect . The law was nothing more than a contract made by the English people ; this is known as the " appeal to contract " . Thomas Hobbes and Francis Bacon argued against Coke 's theory . They were proponents of natural law , created by the king 's authority , not by any individual judge . Hobbes felt that there was no skill unique to lawyers , and that the law could be understood not through Coke 's " reason " ( the method used by lawyers ) , but through understanding the king 's instructions . While judges did make law , this was only valid because it was " tacitly confirmed ( because not disapproved ) by the [ king ] " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Coke 's challenge to the ecclesiastical courts and their ex officio oath is seen as the origin of the right to silence . With his decision that common law courts could issue writs of prohibition against such oaths and his arguments that such oaths were contrary to the common law ( as found in his Reports and Institutes ) , Coke " dealt the crucial blow to the oath ex officio and to the High Commission " . The case of John Lilburne later confirmed that not only was such an oath invalid , but that there was a right to silence , drawing from Coke 's decisions in reaching that conclusion . In the trial of Sir Roger Casement for treason in 1916 , Coke 's assertion that treason is defined as " giving aide and comfort to the King 's enemies within the realme or without " was the deciding factor in finding him guilty . His work in Slade 's Case led to the rise of modern contract law , and his actions in the Case of Proclamations and the other pleadings which led to his eventual dismissal went some way towards securing judicial independence . The Statute of Monopolies is considered one of the first steps towards the eventual English Civil War , and also " one of the landmarks in the transition of [ England 's ] economy from the feudal to the capitalist " . 
 Coke was particularly influential in the United States both before and after the American War of Independence . During the legal and public campaigns against the writs of assistance and Stamp Act 1765 , Bonham 's Case was given as a justification for nullifying the legislation , and in the income tax case of 1895 , Joseph Hodges Choate used Coke 's argument that a tax upon the income of property is a tax on the property itself to have the Supreme Court of the United States declare the Wilson – Gorman Tariff Act unconstitutional . This decision ultimately lead to the passage of the Sixteenth Amendment . The castle doctrine originates from Coke 's statement in the Third Institutes that " A man 's home is his castle – for where shall he be safe if it not be in his house ? " , which also profoundly influenced the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution ; the Third Amendment , on the other hand , was influenced by the Petition of Right . Coke was also a strong influence on and mentor of Roger Williams , an English theologian who founded the Rhode Island colony in North America and was an early proponent of the doctrine of separation of church and state . 
 = = Character = = 
 Coke was noted as deriving great enjoyment from and working hard at the law , but enjoying little else . He was versed in the Latin classics and maintained a sizeable estate , but the law was his primary concern . Francis Bacon , his main competitor , was known as a philosopher and man of learning , but Coke had no interest in such subjects . Notably , when given a copy of the Novum Organum by Bacon , Coke wrote puerile insults in it . 
 Coke 's style and attitude as a barrister are well documented . He was regarded , even during his life , as the greatest lawyer of his time in both reputation and monetary success . He was eloquent , effective , forceful , and occasionally overbearing . His most famous arguments can be read in Complete State Trials Volume I and II . Most early lawyers were not noted for their eloquence , with Thomas Elyot writing that " [ they ] lacked elocution and pronunciation , two of the principal parts of <unk> " , and Roger Ascham saying that " they do best when they cry loudest " , describing a court case where an advocate was " roaring like a bull " . In court , Coke was insulting to the parties , disrespectful to the judges and " rough , blustering , overbearing " ; a rival once wrote to him saying " in your pleadings you were wont to insult over misery and to <unk> bitterly at the persons , which bred you many enemies " . Coke was pedantic and technical , something which saw him win many cases as a barrister , but when he became Attorney General " he showed the same qualities in a less pleasing form ... He was determined to get a conviction by every means in his power " . 
 Francis Watt , writing in the Juridical Review , portrays this as Coke 's strongest characteristic as a lawyer : that he was a man who " having once taken up a point or become engaged in a case , believes in it with all his heart and soul , whilst all the time conscious of its weakness , as well as ready to resort to every device to bolster it up " . Writers have struggled to reconcile his achievements as a judge surrounding the rejection of executive power and the rights of man with his tenure as Attorney General , with Gerald P. Bodet noting that his early career as a state prosecutor was one of " arrogance and brutality " . 
 Coke made a fortune from purchasing estates with clouded titles at a discount , whereupon , through his knowledge of the intricacies of property law , he would clear the titles on the acquired properties to his favor . About the year 1615 , his amassed property acquisitions attracted the attention of the government . James I claimed that Coke " had already as much land as it was proper a subject should possess . " Coke requested the King 's permission to just " add one acre more " to his holdings and upon approval proceeded to purchase the fine estate of Castle Acre Priory in Norfolk , one of the most expensive " acres " in the land . 
 = Coprinopsis variegata = 
 Coprinopsis variegata , commonly known as the scaly ink cap or the <unk> inky cap , is a species of fungus in the family Psathyrellaceae . Distributed in eastern North America , it has a medium @-@ sized , bell @-@ shaped to flattened cap up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , with felt @-@ like , patchy scales . The gills , initially white , turn black in maturity and eventually dissolve into a black " ink " . Fruit bodies grow in clusters or groups on leaf litter or rotted hardwood , although the wood may be buried , giving the appearance of growing in the soil . The fungus is found in the United States , in areas east of the Great Plains . Coprinus ebulbosus and Coprinus quadrifidus are names assigned by Charles Horton Peck to what he believed were species distinct from C. variegata ; they were later shown to represent the same species , and are now synonyms . The mushroom is not recommended for consumption , and has been shown to cause allergic reactions in susceptible individuals . 
 = = History and taxonomy = = 
 American mycologist Charles Horton Peck described three similar species over the course of a 24 @-@ year time period . The first , Coprinus variegata ( 1873 ) , followed later by C. ebulbosus ( 1895 ) , and finally C. quadrifidus ( 1897 ) . C. ebulbosus was initially considered a variety of the European species Coprinus <unk> ( <unk> ex Fr . ) <unk> ( currently known as Coprinopsis <unk> ) . Four years later , Peck published a more complete description of var. ebulbosus and raised it to species rank , having found it to differ consistently from C. <unk> in its smaller stature , lack of a bulbous stem base , and much smaller spores . 
 The three species described by Peck were distinguished on the basis of physical features that were later found to be somewhat overlapping . In terms of microscopic characters , spore sizes were not sufficiently different between them to be used as discriminating taxonomic characters . Subsequent investigators of North American mushroom flora had difficulties in interpreting Peck 's concepts of these three taxa and in confirming their presence in their regional investigations . For example , McIlvaine ( 1902 ) , Hard ( 1908 ) , and McDougall ( 1925 ) reported ( as variety or species ) only C. ebulbosus . <unk> ( 1938 ) , Christensen ( 1946 ) , Smith ( 1958 ) , and Groves ( 1962 ) mentioned only C. quadrifidus . Both Kauffman ( 1918 ) and Graham ( 1944 ) described C. ebulbosus and C. quadrifidus ; Graham , however , only included C. quadrifidus in his key to his descriptions of Coprinus species . In 1979 , W. Patrick published a comparative analysis of the three taxa from material collected by Peck , and , after concluding that the three were not sufficiently distinct to be considered separate species , reduced them to synonymy with Coprinopsis variegata , the earliest name . 
 The specific epithet variegata derives from the Latin passive verb participle variegatus meaning " to have different colors , to variegate " . The synonym name quadrifidus refers to the four segments into which the cap frequently split when mature , while ebulbosus means " not being bulbous " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " scaly ink cap " or the " <unk> inky cap " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of C. variegata is thin , initially oval @-@ shaped then bell @-@ shaped , and then flattened with the margin turned upward ; it reaches diameters of up to 12 in ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) . When young , the surface of the cap is covered with a woolly whitish or yellowish veil that breaks up into short @-@ lived flakes or scales ; this process reveals the radially striate ( grooved ) gray to grayish @-@ brown cap surface . The gills are broad , thin , crowded closely together , and free from attachment to the stem . They are initially white but turn to dark purplish @-@ brown as the spores mature . The stem is 4 to 12 in ( 10 @.@ 2 to 30 @.@ 5 cm ) and up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick , hollow , and whitish . It is roughly the same width throughout the length of the stem , and may have a wispy , cotton @-@ like ring present near the base . Clusters of fruit bodies have a mass of rhizomorphs at the base called an <unk> . 
 In deposit , the spores are dark brown . A light microscope may be used to reveal more features of the spores , including smooth surfaces , a dark brown color , an ellipsoid shape in face view and an egg shape in side view , and dimensions of 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 by 4 – 4 @.@ 5 µm . The apex of the spore appears truncated because of the presence of a germ pore . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are hyaline ( translucent ) , with dimensions of 14 – 16 by 6 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 µm . The paraphyses are 9 – 11 by 8 – 10 µm , hyaline , and collapse readily . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia present on the gill face ) are abundant , roughly cylindrical , hyaline , and measure 100 – 150 by 20 – 35 µm . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the edge of an gill ) are present in young specimens , and are roughly ellipsoid , measuring 50 – 80 by 15 – 25 µm . Clamp connections are abundant in the hyphae in all tissues through the fruit body . 
 The edibility of Coprinopsis variegata has not been clearly established , and opinions differ as to its desirability . One 1987 field guide to North American species warns against consumption , calling it " not recommended " , a conclusion shared in a 2006 field guide to Pennsylvanian and mid @-@ Atlantic mushrooms , but not before describing it as " the best of the inky caps , with a richer flavor and better texture than the famous shaggy mane " . The bitter @-@ tasting mushroom is not considered poisonous . However , the fruit bodies are suspected to contain the Antabuse @-@ like chemical coprine , which causes a poisoning reaction when consumed with alcohol . Additionally , cases of allergic reactions against extracts from mushroom tissues have been reported in skin tests . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Coprinopsis atramentaria is a cosmopolitan species that is roughly similar in size , color , and stature , but does not have patchy woolly tufts on the cap like C. variegata . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 The species is saprobic — deriving nutrients by decomposing and digesting organic matter — and grows in clusters or in groups on decaying leaf litter or well @-@ decayed wood . It typically fruits in a narrow window from June to July ; this spring and early summer fruiting distinguishes it from the more common Coprinus <unk> and Coprinopsis atramentaria , which produce fruit bodies in late autumn . It is found in the United States , in areas east of the Great Plains . 
 Coprinopsis variegata can attack soil bacteria , such as species of Pseudomonas and Agrobacterium , and use them as nutrient sources . The fungus achieves this by growing specialized hyphae in the direction of the bacteria , sensing them with some <unk> mechanism not yet fully understood . The fungus then secretes compounds to digest the bacteria while growing assimilative hyphae to absorb the nutrients . The process is relatively rapid , and bacterial colonies can be assimilated in less than 24 hours . 
 = Edward Wright ( mathematician ) = 
 Edward Wright ( baptised 8 October 1561 ; died November 1615 ) was an English mathematician and cartographer noted for his book Certaine Errors in Navigation ( 1599 ; 2nd ed . , 1610 ) , which for the first time explained the mathematical basis of the Mercator projection , and set out a reference table giving the linear scale multiplication factor as a function of latitude , calculated for each minute of arc up to a latitude of 75 ° . This was in fact a table of values of the integral of the secant function , and was the essential step needed to make practical both the making and the navigational use of Mercator charts . 
 Wright was born at <unk> and educated at Gonville and Caius College , Cambridge , where he became a fellow from 1587 to 1596 . In 1589 the College granted him leave after Elizabeth I requested that he carry out navigational studies with a raiding expedition organised by the Earl of Cumberland to the Azores to capture Spanish galleons . The expedition 's route was the subject of the first map to be prepared according to Wright 's projection , which was published in Certaine Errors in 1599 . The same year , Wright created and published the first world map produced in England and the first to use the Mercator projection since Gerardus Mercator 's original 1569 map . 
 Not long after 1600 Wright was appointed as surveyor to the New River project , which successfully directed the course of a new man @-@ made channel to bring clean water from Ware , Hertfordshire , to Islington , London . Around this time , Wright also lectured mathematics to merchant seamen , and from 1608 or 1609 was mathematics tutor to the son of James I , the heir apparent Henry Frederick , Prince of Wales , until the latter 's very early death at the age of 18 in 1612 . A skilled designer of mathematical instruments , Wright made models of an astrolabe and a pantograph , and a type of armillary sphere for Prince Henry . In the 1610 edition of Certaine Errors he described inventions such as the " sea @-@ ring " that enabled mariners to determine the magnetic variation of the compass , the sun 's altitude and the time of day in any place if the latitude was known ; and a device for finding latitude when one was not on the meridian using the height of the pole star . 
 Apart from a number of other books and pamphlets , Wright translated John Napier 's pioneering 1614 work which introduced the idea of logarithms from Latin into English . This was published after Wright 's death as A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes ( 1616 ) . Wright 's work influenced , among other persons , Dutch astronomer and mathematician Willebrord Snellius ; Adriaan <unk> , the geometer and astronomer from Holland ; and the English mathematician Richard Norwood , who calculated the length of a degree on a great circle of the earth using a method proposed by Wright . 
 = = Family and education = = 
 The younger son of Henry and Margaret Wright , Edward Wright was born in the village of <unk> in Norfolk , East Anglia , and was baptised there on 8 October 1561 . It is possible that he followed in the footsteps of his elder brother Thomas ( died 1579 ) and went to school in Hardingham . The family was of modest means , and he matriculated at Gonville and Caius College , University of Cambridge , on 8 December 1576 as a sizar . <unk> were students of limited means who were charged lower fees and obtained free food and / or lodging and other assistance during their period of study , often in exchange for performing work at their colleges . 
 Wright was conferred a Bachelor of Arts ( B.A. ) in 1580 – 1581 . He remained a scholar at Caius , receiving his Master of Arts ( M.A. ) there in 1584 , and holding a fellowship between 1587 and 1596 . At Cambridge , he was a close friend of Robert Devereux , later the Second Earl of Essex , and met him to discuss his studies even in the weeks before Devereux 's rebellion against Elizabeth I in 1600 – 1601 . In addition , he came to know the mathematician Henry Briggs ; and the soldier and astrologer Christopher Heydon , who was also Devereux 's friend . Heydon later made astronomical observations with instruments Wright made for him . 
 = = Foreign expedition = = 
 In 1589 , two years after being appointed to his fellowship , Wright was requested by Elizabeth I to carry out navigational studies with a raiding expedition organised by the Earl of Cumberland to the Azores to capture Spanish galleons . The Queen effectively ordered Caius to grant him leave of absence for this purpose , although the College expressed this more diplomatically by granting him a sabbatical " by Royal mandate " . Wright participated in the confiscation of " lawful " prizes from the French , Portuguese and Spanish – Derek Ingram , a life fellow of Caius , has called him " the only Fellow of Caius ever to be granted sabbatical leave in order to engage in piracy " . Wright sailed with Cumberland in the Victory from Plymouth on 8 June 1589 ; they returned to Falmouth on 27 December of the same year . An account of the expedition is appended to Wright 's work Certaine Errors of Navigation ( 1599 ) , and while it refers to Wright in the third person it is believed to have been written by him . 
 In Wright 's account of the Azores expedition , he listed as one of the expedition 's members a " <unk> <unk> <unk> , alias Wright , who in S. <unk> Drakes West @-@ Indian <unk> was <unk> of the Hope " . In another work , The Haven @-@ finding Art ( 1599 ) ( see below ) , Wright stated that " the time of my first employment at sea " was " now more than <unk> <unk> since " . The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography asserts that during the expedition Wright called himself " Captain Edward <unk> " , and that he was also the captain of the Hope in Sir Francis Drake 's voyage of 1585 – 1586 to the West Indies , which evacuated Sir Walter Raleigh 's Colony of Virginia . One of the colonists was the mathematician Thomas Harriot , and if the Dictionary is correct it is probable that on the return journey to England Wright and Harriot became acquainted and discussed navigational mathematics . However , in a 1939 article , <unk> Parsons and W.F. Morris note that in Capt. Walter <unk> and Lt. Crofts ' book A <unk> and True Discourse of Sir Frances Drakes West Indian Voyage ( 1589 ) , Edward Careless was referred to as the commander of the Hope , but Wright was not mentioned . Further , while Wright spoke several times of his participation in the Azores expedition , he never alluded to any other voyage . Although the reference to his " first employment " in The Haven @-@ finding Art suggests an earlier venture , there is no evidence that he went to the West Indies . Gonville and Caius College holds no records showing that Wright was granted leave before 1589 . There is nothing to suggest that Wright ever went to sea again after his expedition with the Earl of Cumberland . 
 Wright resumed his Cambridge fellowship upon returning from the Azores in 1589 , but it appears that he soon moved to London for he was there with Christopher Heydon making observations of the sun between 1594 and 1597 , and on 8 August 1595 Wright married Ursula Warren ( died 1625 ) at the parish church of St. Michael , Cornhill , in the City of London . They had a son , Samuel ( 1596 – 1616 ) , who was himself admitted as a sizar at Caius on 7 July 1612 . The St. Michael parish register also contains references to other children of Wright , all of whom died before 1617 . Wright resigned his fellowship in 1596 . 
 = = Mathematician and cartographer = = 
 = = = Certaine Errors in Navigation = = = 
 Wright helped the mathematician and globe maker Emery Molyneux to plot coastlines on his terrestrial globe , and translated some of the explanatory legends into Latin . Molyneux 's terrestrial and celestial globes , the first to be manufactured in England , were published in late 1592 or early 1593 , and Wright explained their use in his 1599 work Certaine Errors in Navigation . He dedicated the book to Cumberland , to whom he had presented a manuscript of the work in 1592 , stating in the preface it was through Cumberland that he " was first moved , and received maintenance to divert my mathematical studies , from a <unk> speculation in the <unk> , to the practical demonstration of the use of Navigation " . 
 The most significant aspect of the book was Wright 's method for dividing the meridian ; an explanation of how he had constructed a table for the division ; and the uses of this information for navigation . Essentially , the problem that occupied Wright was how to depict accurately a globe on a two @-@ dimensional map according to the projection used by Gerardus Mercator in his map of 1569 . Mercator 's projection was advantageous for nautical purposes as it represented lines of constant true bearing or true course , known as <unk> or rhumb lines , as straight lines . However , Mercator had not explained his method . 
 On a globe , circles of latitude ( also known as parallels ) get smaller as they move away from the Equator towards the North or South Pole . Thus , in the Mercator projection , when a globe is " unwrapped " on to a rectangular map , the parallels need to be stretched to the length of the Equator . In addition , parallels are further apart as they approach the poles . Wright compiled a table with three columns . The first two columns contained the degrees and minutes of latitudes for parallels spaced 10 minutes apart on a sphere , while the third column had the parallel 's projected distance from the Equator . Any cartographer or navigator could therefore lay out a Mercator grid for himself by consulting the table . Wright explained : 
 I first thought of correcting so many gross errors ... in the sea chart , by increasing the distances of the parallels , from the <unk> towards the poles , in such sort , that at every point of latitude in the chart , a part of the meridian might have the same proportion to the like part of the parallel , that it has in the globe . 
 While the first edition of Certaine Errors contained an abridged table six pages in length , in the second edition which appeared in 1610 Wright published a full table across 23 pages with figures for parallels at one @-@ minute intervals . The table is remarkably accurate – American geography professor Mark <unk> wrote a computer program to replicate Wright 's calculations , and determined that for a Mercator map of the world 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) wide , the greatest discrepancy between Wright 's table and the program was only 0 @.@ 00039 inches ( 0 @.@ <unk> mm ) on the map . In the second edition Wright also incorporated various improvements , including proposals for determining the magnitude of the Earth and reckoning common linear measurements as a proportion of a degree on the Earth 's surface " that they might not depend on the uncertain length of a barley @-@ corn " ; a correction of errors arising from the eccentricity of the eye when making observations using the cross @-@ staff ; amendments in tables of declinations and the positions of the sun and the stars , which were based on observations he had made together with Christopher Heydon using a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) quadrant ; and a large table of the variation of the compass as observed in different parts of the world , to show that it is not caused by any magnetic pole . He also incorporated a translation of Rodrigo <unk> 's <unk> de la Arte de <unk> ( Compendium of the Art of Navigation , Seville , 1581 ; 2nd ed . , 1588 ) . 
 Wright was prompted to publish the book after two incidents of his text , which had been prepared some years earlier , being used without attribution . He had allowed his table of meridional parts to be published by Thomas Blundeville in his Exercises ( 1594 ) and in William Barlow 's The Navigator 's Supply ( 1597 ) , although only Blundeville acknowledged Wright by name . However , an experienced navigator , believed to be Abraham Kendall , borrowed a draft of Wright 's manuscript and , unknown to him , made a copy of it which he took on Sir Francis Drake 's 1595 expedition to the West Indies . In 1596 Kendall died at sea . The copy of Wright 's work in his possession was brought back to London and wrongly believed to be by Kendall , until the Earl of Cumberland passed it to Wright and he recognised it as his work . Also around this time , the Dutch cartographer Jodocus Hondius borrowed Wright 's draft manuscript for a short time after promising not to publish its contents without his permission . However , Hondius then employed Wright 's calculations without acknowledging him for several regional maps and in his world map published in Amsterdam in 1597 . This map is often referred to as the " Christian Knight Map " for its engraving of a Christian knight battling sin , the flesh and the Devil . Although Hondius sent Wright a letter containing a faint apology , Wright condemned Hondius 's deceit and greed in the preface to Certaine Errors . He wryly commented : " But the way how this [ Mercator projection ] should be done , I learned neither of Mercator , nor of any man <unk> . And in that point I wish I had beene as wise as he in keeping it more <unk> to myself " . 
 The first map to be prepared according to Wright 's projection was published in his book , and showed the route of Cumberland 's expedition to the Azores . A manuscript version of this map is preserved at Hatfield House ; it is believed to have been drawn about 1595 . Following this , Wright created a new world map , the first map of the globe to be produced in England and the first to use the Mercator projection since Gerardus Mercator 's 1569 original . Based on Molyneux 's terrestrial globe , it corrected a number of errors in the earlier work by Mercator . The map , often called the Wright – Molyneux Map , first appeared in the second volume of Richard Hakluyt 's The Principal Navigations , Voiages , Traffiques and Discoueries of the English Nation ( 1599 ) . Unlike many contemporary maps and charts which contained fantastic speculations about unexplored lands , Wright 's map has a minimum of detail and blank areas wherever information was lacking . The map was one of the earliest to use the name " Virginia " . Shakespeare alluded to the map in Twelfth Night ( 1600 – 1601 ) , when Maria says of Malvolio : " He does smile his face into more lynes , than is in the new Mappe , with the augmentation of the Indies . " Another world map , larger and with updated details , appeared in the second edition of Certaine Errors ( 1610 ) . 
 Wright translated into English De <unk> ( 1599 ) by the Flemish mathematician and engineer Simon Stevin , which appeared in the same year as The Haven @-@ Finding Art , or the Way to Find any Haven or Place at Sea , by the Latitude and Variation . He also wrote the preface to physician and scientist William Gilbert 's great work De Magnete , <unk> <unk> , et de Magno Magnete <unk> ( The Magnet , Magnetic Bodies , and the Great Magnet the Earth , 1600 ) , in which Gilbert described his experiments which led to the conclusion that the Earth was magnetic , and introduced the term electricus to describe the phenomenon of static electricity produced by rubbing amber ( called <unk> in Classical Latin , derived from ' <unk> ( <unk> ) in Ancient Greek ) . According to the mathematician and physician Mark Ridley , chapter 12 of book 4 of De Magnete , which explained how astronomical observations could be used to determine the magnetic variation , was actually Wright 's work . 
 Gilbert had invented a dip @-@ compass and compiled a table recording the dip of the needle below the horizon . Wright believed that this device would prove to be extremely useful in determining latitude and , with the help of Blundeville and Briggs , wrote a small pamphlet called The Making , Description and Use of the Two Instruments for Seamen to find out the Latitude ... First Invented by Dr. Gilbert . It was published in 1602 in Blundeville 's book The Theoriques of the Seuen Planets . That same year he authored The Description and Use of the Sphære ( not published till 1613 ) , and in 1605 published a new edition of the widely used work The <unk> of <unk> . 
 = = = Surveying = = = 
 Wright also developed a reputation as a surveyor on land . He prepared " a plat of part of the <unk> whereby a newe River may be brought from Uxbridge to St. James , Whitehall , Westminster [ , ] the Strand , St Giles , Holbourne and London " , However , according to a 1615 paper in Latin in the annals of Gonville and Caius College , he was prevented from bringing this plan to fruition " by the tricks of others " . Nonetheless , early in the first decade of the 17th century , he was appointed by Sir Hugh Myddelton as surveyor to the New River project , which successfully directed the course of a new man @-@ made channel to bring clean water from Chadwell Spring at Ware , Hertfordshire , to Islington , London . Although the distance in a straight line from Ware to London is only slightly more than 20 miles ( 32 km ) , the project required a high degree of surveying skill on Wright 's part as it was necessary for the river to take a route of over 40 miles following the 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) contour line on the west side of the Lea Valley . As the technology of the time did not extend to large pumps or pipes , the water flow had to depend on gravity through canals or aqueducts over an average fall of 5 @.@ 5 inches a mile ( approximately 8 @.@ 7 centimetres per kilometre ) . 
 Work on the New River started in 1608 – the date of a monument at Chadwell Spring – but halted near Wormley , Hertfordshire , in 1610 . The stoppage has been attributed to factors such as Myddelton facing difficulties in raising funds , and landowners along the route opposing the acquisition of their lands on the ground that the river would turn their meadows into " bogs and quagmires " . Although the landowners petitioned Parliament , they did not succeed in having the legislation authorising the project repealed prior to Parliament being dissolved in 1611 ; the work resumed later that year . The New River was officially opened on 29 September 1613 by the Lord Mayor of London , Sir John Swinnerton , at the Round Pond , New River Head , in Islington . It still supplies the capital with water today . 
 = = = Other mathematical work = = = 
 For some time Wright had urged that a navigation lectureship be instituted for merchant seamen , and he persuaded Admiral Sir William Monson , who had been on Cumberland 's Azores expedition of 1589 , to encourage a stipend to be paid for this . At the beginning of the 17th century , Wright succeeded Thomas Hood as a mathematics lecturer under the patronage of the wealthy merchants Sir Thomas Smyth and Sir John Wolstenholme ; the lectures were held in Smyth 's house in Philpot Lane . By 1612 or 1614 the East India Company had taken on sponsorship of these lectures for an annual fee of £ 50 ( about £ 6 @,@ 500 as of 2007 ) . Wright was also mathematics tutor to the son of James I , the heir apparent Henry Frederick , Prince of Wales , from 1608 or 1609 until the latter 's death at the age of 18 on 6 November 1612 . Wright was described as " a very poor man " in the Prince 's will and left the sum of £ 30 8s ( about £ 4 @,@ 300 in 2007 ) . To the Prince , who was greatly interested in the science of navigation , Wright dedicated the second edition of Certaine Errors ( 1610 ) and the world map published therein . He also drew various maps for him , including a " sea chart of the <unk> Passage ; a <unk> sea @-@ chart of the World from 30 ° Latitude northwards ; [ and ] a plat of the drowned <unk> about <unk> , Lincolnshire , Cambridgeshire , & c " . 
 Wright was a skilled designer of mathematical instruments . According to the 1615 Caius annals , " [ h ] e was excellent both in contrivance and execution , nor was he inferior to the most ingenious mechanic in the making of instruments , either of brass or any other matter " . For Prince Henry , he made models of an astrolabe and a pantograph , and created or arranged to be created out of wood a form of armillary sphere which replicated the motions of the celestial sphere , the circular motions of the sun and moon , and the places and possibilities of them eclipsing each other . The sphere was designed for a motion of 17 @,@ 100 years , if the machine should last that long . In 1613 Wright published The Description and Use of the Sphære , which described the use of this device . The sphere was lost during the English Civil War , but found in 1646 in the Tower of London by the mathematician and surveyor Sir Jonas Moore , who was later appointed Surveyor General of the Ordnance Office and became a patron and the principal driving force behind the establishment of the Royal Observatory at Greenwich . Moore asked the King to let him have it , restored the instrument at his own expense and deposited it at his own house " in the Tower " . 
 The Caius annals also report that Wright " had formed many other useful designs , but was hindered by death from bringing them to perfection " . The 1610 edition of Certaine Errors contained descriptions of the " sea @-@ ring " , which consisted of a universal ring dial mounted over a magnetic compass that enabled mariners to determine readily the magnetic variation of the compass , the sun 's altitude and the time of day in any place if the latitude was known ; the " sea @-@ quadrant " , for the taking of altitudes by a forward or backward observation ; and a device for finding latitude when one was not on the meridian using the height of the pole star . 
 In 1614 Wright published a small book called A Short Treatise of <unk> : Shewing , the Making of All Sorts of Sun @-@ dials , but he was mainly preoccupied with John Napier 's <unk> <unk> <unk> Descriptio ( Description of the Wonderful Rule of Logarithms ) , which introduced the idea of logarithms . Wright at once saw the value of logarithms as an aid to navigation , and lost no time in preparing a translation which he submitted to Napier himself . The preface to Wright 's edition consists of a translation of the preface to the Descriptio , together with the addition of the following sentences written by Napier himself : 
 But now some of our <unk> in this Island well affected to these studies , and the more publique good , procured a most learned Mathematician to translate the same into our vulgar English tongue , who after he had finished it , sent the <unk> of it to me , to bee seene and considered on by myselfe . I having most willingly and gladly done the same , <unk> it to bee most exact and precisely conformable to my <unk> and the <unk> . Therefore it may please you who are inclined to these studies , to receive it from me and the Translator , with as much good will as we recommend it unto you . 
 While working on the translation , Wright died in late November 1615 and was buried on 2 December 1615 at St. <unk> <unk> in the City of London . The Caius annals noted that although he " was rich in fame , and in the promises of the great , yet he died poor , to the scandal of an ungrateful age " . Wright 's translation of Napier , which incorporated tables that Wright had supplemented and further information by Henry Briggs , was completed by Wright 's son Samuel and arranged to be printed by Briggs . It appeared posthumously as A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes in 1616 , and in it Wright was lauded in verse as " [ t ] hat famous , learned , Errors true Corrector , / England 's great Pilot , Mariners Director " . 
 According to Parsons and Morris , the use of Wright 's publications by later mathematicians is the " greatest tribute to his life 's work " . Wright 's work was relied on by Dutch astronomer and mathematician Willebrord Snellius , noted for the law of refraction now known as Snell 's law , for his navigation treatise <unk> <unk> ( Batavian <unk> , 1624 ) ; and by Adriaan <unk> , the geometer and astronomer from Holland , for Primum Mobile ( 1631 ) . Following Wright 's proposals , Richard Norwood measured a degree on a great circle of the earth at 367 @,@ 196 feet ( 111 @,@ 921 m ) , publishing the information in 1637 . Wright was praised by Charles Saltonstall in The Navigator ( 1642 ) and by John Collins in Navigation by the Mariners Plain Scale New Plain 'd ( 1659 ) , Collins stating that Mercator 's chart ought " more properly to be called Wright 's chart " . The Caius annals contained the following epitaph : " Of him it may truly be said , that he studied more to serve the public than himself " . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Authored = = = 
 Wright , Edward ( 1599 ) , Certaine Errors in Navigation , arising either of the <unk> Erroneous Making or <unk> of the Sea Chart , Compasse , Crosse <unk> , and Tables of Declination of the Sunne , and Fixed <unk> Detected and Corrected . ( The Voyage of the Right Ho . George Earle of Cumberl. to the Azores , & c . ) , London : Printed ... by Valentine Sims . Another version of the work published in the same year was entitled Wright , Edward ( 1599 ) , Errors in <unk> 1 Error of two , or three whole points of the compas , and more somtimes [ sic ] , by reason of making the sea @-@ chart after the accustomed maner ... 2 Error of one whole point , and more many times , by neglecting the variation of the <unk> . 3 Error of a degree and more sometimes , in the vse of the crosse staffe ... 4 Error of 11 @.@ or 12 @.@ <unk> [ sic ] in the declination of the sunne , as it is set <unk> in the regiments most commonly <unk> among mariners : and consequently error of halfe a degree in the place of the sunne . 5 Error of halfe a degree , yea an whole degree and more many times in the declinations of the principall fixed <unk> , set forth to be <unk> by mariners at sea . Detected and corrected by often and diligent <unk> . <unk> is <unk> , the right H. the Earle of Cumberland his voyage to the Azores in the yeere 1589 @.@ <unk> were taken 19 . Spanish and Leaguers ships , together with the towne and <unk> of Fayal , London : Printed ... [ by Valentine Simmes and W. White ] for Ed . Agas . Later editions and reprints : 
 Wright , Edward ( 1610 ) , Certaine Errors in Navigation , Detected and Corrected with Many Additions that were not in the Former Edition ... [ with an Addition Touching the Variation of the Compasse ] , London : [ s.n. ] . 
 Wright , Edward ( 1657 ) , Certaine Errors in Navigation Detected and Corrected , with Many Additions that were not in the Former Edition .. ( 3rd ed . ) , London : J [ <unk> ] Moxon . 
 Wright , Edward ( 1974 ) , Certaine errors in navigation ; the voyage of ... George Earle of Cumberl. to the Azores , Amsterdam ; Norwood , N.J. : Theatrum Orbis Terrarum ; Walter J. Johnson . <unk> of the 1599 edition . 
 Chapter 12 of book 4 of Gilbert , William ( 1600 ) , De Magnete , <unk> <unk> , et de <unk> <unk> <unk> ; <unk> nova , <unk> & <unk> , & <unk> <unk> [ The Magnet , Magnetic Bodies , and the Great Magnet the Earth ; New Natural Science , <unk> by Many Arguments and Experiments ] , London : Excudebat Petrus Short ( Latin ) . 
 The Making , Description and Use of the Two Instruments for Seamen to find out the Latitude ... First Invented by Dr. Gilbert , published in Blundeville , Thomas ; Briggs , Henry ; Wright , Edward ( 1602 ) , The Theoriques of the Seuen Planets shewing all their <unk> Motions , and all other Accidents , called Passions , thereunto Belonging . Now more Plainly set forth in our Mother Tongue by M. Blundeuile , than <unk> they haue been heretofore in any other Tongue <unk> , and that with such Pleasant <unk> Figures , as euery Man that hath any Skill in <unk> , may easily <unk> the same . ... <unk> is added by the said Master Blundeuile , a <unk> Extract by him made , of <unk> his Theoriques , for the Better <unk> of the <unk> Tables , to Calculate thereby the <unk> Motions of the Seuen Planets . There is also hereto added , the Making , Description , and Vse , of Two Most Ingenious and Necessarie Instruments for Sea @-@ men ... First <unk> by M. Doctor Gilbert ... and now here <unk> set downe in our Mother Tongue by Master Blundeuile , London : Printed by Adam Islip . 
 Wright , Edward ( 1613 ) , The Description and Vse of the Sphære . <unk> into Three Principal Partes : whereof the First <unk> especially of the Circles of the Vppermost <unk> Sphære , and of the <unk> Vses of euery one of them <unk> : the Second <unk> the Plentifull Vse of the Vppermost Sphære , and of the Circles therof <unk> : the Third <unk> the Description of the Orbes whereof the <unk> of the Sunne and Moone haue beene supposed to be Made , with their Motions and Vses . By Edward Wright . The Contents of each Part are more particularly Set Downe in the Table , London : Printed [ by E. <unk> ] for Iohn Tap dwelling at S. Magnus corner . Later editions and reprints : 
 Wright , Edward ( 1627 ) , The Description and Use of the Sphære . <unk> into Three Principall Parts . Whereof the First <unk> especially of the Circles of the Vppermost <unk> Sphære , and of the Manifold Vses of euery one of them <unk> . The Second <unk> the Plentifull Vse of the Vppermost Sphære , and of the Circles thereof <unk> . The Third <unk> the Description of the Orbes whereof the Sphære of the Sunne and Moone haue been supposed to bee Made , with their Motions and Vses . By <unk> Wright . The Contents of each Part are more particularly Set Downe in the Table , London : Printed by B [ <unk> ] A [ <unk> ] and T [ homas ] <unk> for Iohn Tap , and are to bee sold at his shop at S. Magnus corner . 
 Wright , Edward ( 1969 ) , The Description and Use of the Sphære . London 1613 , Amsterdam ; New York , N.Y. : Theatrum Orbis Terrarum ; Da Capo Press . 
 Wright , Edward ( 1614 ) , A Short Treatise of <unk> Shewing , the Making of All Sorts of Sun @-@ dials , Horizontal , Erect , Direct , Declining , <unk> , Reclining ; <unk> any Flat or Plaine <unk> , <unk> Placed , with Ruler and Compasse onely , without any <unk> Calculation , London : Printed by Iohn Beale for William Welby . 
 = = = Edited and translated = = = 
 Stevin , Simon ; Wright , Edward , transl . ( 1599 ) , The <unk> @-@ finding Art , or The <unk> to Find any <unk> or Place at Sea , by the Latitude and Variation . Lately Published in the Dutch , French , and Latine Tongues , by <unk> of the Right Honourable Count Mauritz of Nassau , Lord High Admiral of the <unk> <unk> of the Low Countries , <unk> all Seamen that Take Charge of Ships <unk> his <unk> , to Make Diligent <unk> , in all their Voyages , according to the Directions Prescribed herein : and now Translated into English , for the Common <unk> of the Seamen of England [ by E. Wright ] etc , London : Imprinted by G. B [ <unk> ] R. N [ <unk> ] and R. B [ <unk> ] . Reprinted as : 
 Stevin , Simon ( 1968 ) , The Haven @-@ finding Art , Amsterdam ; New York , N.Y. : Theatrum Orbis Terrarum ; Da Capo Press . 
 Norman , Robert , transl . ( 1605 ) , Wright , Edward , ed . , The <unk> of <unk> , or Great Rutter . <unk> the Courses , <unk> , <unk> , Soundings , <unk> and <unk> , with the Marks for the <unk> of Sundry <unk> both of England , <unk> , Spaine , Ireland . <unk> , and the <unk> of <unk> , with other Necessarie Rules of Common <unk> . Translated out of Dutch ... by Robert Norman ... Newly corrected and augmented by E [ dward ] W [ right ] , London : By E. <unk> for H. Astley . 
 Napier , John ; Wright , E [ dward ] , transl . ( 1616 ) , A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes : With a Declaration of the ... Use thereof . Invented and Published in Latin by ... L. John <unk> ... and Translated into English by ... Edward Wright . With an Addition of an <unk> Table to <unk> the Part <unk> , Invented by the Translator , and Described in the Ende of the Booke by Henry Brigs , etc , London : N. <unk> . Later editions and reprints : 
 Napier , John ; Wright , E [ dward ] , transl . ( 1618 ) , A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes : With a Declaration of the Most Plentifull , <unk> and Speedy Use thereof in both kinds of <unk> , as also in all Mathematicall Calculations . Invented and Published inn Latine by that Honourable Lord John <unk> , Baron of <unk> , and translated into English by the late learned and famous Mathematician , Edward Wright . With an Addition of the <unk> Table to <unk> the part of the <unk> , intended by the Translator , and described in the end of the Booke by Henrie Brigs Geometry @-@ reader at Gresham House in London . All <unk> and Approved by the <unk> , and Published since the Death of the Translator . Whereunto is added New Rules for the Ease of the Student ( 2nd ed . ) , London : Printed for Simon Waterson . 
 Napier , John ( 1969 ) , A Description of the Admirable Table of Logarithmes , London 1616 , Amsterdam ; New York , N.Y. : Theatrum Orbis Terrarum ; Da Capo Press . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Edward Wright 's World Chart 1599 , Terrae <unk> , The Journal of the Society for the History of Discoveries , Volume 46 @.@ 1 , April 2014 , pp 3 – 15 . 
 Pumfrey , Stephen ; <unk> , Frances ( 2004 ) , " Science and Patronage in England , 1570 – 1625 : A Preliminary Study " ( PDF ) , History of Science 42 : 137 – 188 . 
 Wallis , P.J. ( 1976 ) , " Edward Wright " , in Gillespie , Charles <unk> , Dictionary of Scientific Biography 14 , New York , N.Y. : Charles Scribner 's Sons , pp. 513 – 515 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Taylor , E [ va ] G [ <unk> ] R [ <unk> ] ( 1954 ) , The Mathematical Practitioners of Tudor & Stuart England , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , pp. 181 – 182 . 
 Venn , John , comp . ( 1897 ) , Biographical History of Gonville and Caius College , 1349 – 1897 : Containing a List of All Known Members of the College 1 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , pp. 88 – 89 . 
 = The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes = 
 The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , and published by Frederick Warne & Co. in October 1911 . Timmy Tiptoes is a squirrel believed to be a nut @-@ thief by his fellows , and imprisoned by them in a hollow tree with the expectation that he will confess under confinement . Timmy is tended by Chippy Hackee , a friendly , mischievous chipmunk who has run away from his wife and is camping @-@ out in the tree . Chippy urges the prisoner to eat the nuts stored in the tree , and Timmy does so but grows so fat he cannot escape the tree . He regains his freedom when a storm topples part of the tree . The tale contrasts the harmonious marriage of its title character with the less than harmonious marriage of the chipmunk . 
 The book sold well at release , but is now considered one of Potter 's weakest productions . Potter never observed the tale 's indigenous North American mammals in nature , and , as a result , her depictions are thought stiff and unnatural . Other elements in the story have come under fire : the rhymes , for example , reveal nothing about the characters nor do they provide an amusing game for the child reader in the manner of the rhymes in The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin . The storm in the finale is viewed as a weak plot device introduced solely to hurry the tale to its conclusion , and the marriage of the chipmunks has been described as " abrasive and shocking " and an impediment to the flow of the tale . 
 The tale 's disappointing qualities have been ascribed to Potter 's growing lack of interest in writing for children , to pressure from her publisher for yet another book , and to Potter 's desire to exploit the lucrative American market . Potter 's artistically successful books were written for specific children ; Timmy Tiptoes however was composed for Potter 's amorphous , ill @-@ defined American fanbase . By 1911 , the demands of her aging parents and the business operations at her working farm , Hill Top , occupied much of Potter 's time and attention to the exclusion of nearly everything else , and are accounted as some of the reasons for the author 's declining artistry and her lack of interest in producing children 's books . 
 Characters from the tale have been reproduced as porcelain figurines , enamelled boxes , music boxes , and various ornaments by Beswick Pottery , Crummles , Schmid , and ANRI . 
 = = Background = = 
 Helen Beatrix Potter was born on July 28 , 1866 to barrister Rupert William Potter and his wife Helen ( Leech ) Potter in London . She was educated by governesses and tutors , and passed a quiet childhood reading , painting , drawing , tending a nursery menagerie of small animals , and visiting museums and art exhibitions . Her interests in the natural world and country life were nurtured with holidays in Scotland , the Lake District , and Camfield Place , the Hertfordshire home of her paternal grandparents . 
 Potter 's adolescence was as quiet as her childhood . She matured into a spinsterish young woman whose parents groomed her to be a permanent resident and housekeeper in their home . She continued to paint and draw , and experienced her first professional artistic success in 1890 when she sold six designs of humanized animals to a greeting card publisher . She hoped to lead a useful life independent of her parents , and tentatively considered a career in mycology , but the all @-@ male scientific community regarded her as nothing more than an amateur and she abandoned fungi . 
 In 1900 , Potter revised a tale about a humanized rabbit she had written for a child friend in 1893 , fashioned a dummy book of it in imitation of Helen Bannerman 's 1899 bestseller The Story of Little Black Sambo , and privately published her tale for family and friends in December 1901 after several publishers ' rejections . Frederick Warne & Co. had earlier rejected the tale , but , eager to compete in the lucrative small format children 's book market , reconsidered and accepted the " bunny book " ( as the firm called it ) on the recommendation of their prominent children 's book artist L. Leslie Brooke . Potter agreed to colour the pen and ink illustrations of her privately printed edition , chose the then @-@ new Hentschel three @-@ colour process for reproducing her watercolours , and in October 1902 The Tale of Peter Rabbit was released . 
 Potter continued to publish with Warnes , and , in August 1905 , used sales profits and a small legacy from an aunt to buy Hill Top , a working farm of 34 acres ( 13 @.@ 85 ha ) at Sawrey in the Lake District . In the years immediately following its purchase , she produced tales and illustrations inspired by the farm , its woodland surroundings , and nearby villages . 
 Potter produced two books per annum for Warne , but by 1910 she was juggling the demands of aging parents with the business of operating Hill Top , and her literary and artistic productivity began to decline . The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse was the only book Potter published in 1910 . She wrote a friend on New Year 's Day 1911 : " I did not succeed in finishing more than one book last year ... I find it very difficult lately to get the drawings done . I do not seem to be able to go into the country for a long enough time to do a sufficient amount of sketching and when I was at Bowness last summer I spent most of my time upon the road going backwards & forwards to the farm – which was amusing , but not satisfactory for work . " 
 She intended to follow Mrs. Tittlemouse with a tale about a pig in a large format book similar to the original Ginger and Pickles , but was forced to abandon the project after several unproductive attempts at composition . Instead , she occupied the winter of 1910 – 11 with supervising the production of Peter Rabbit 's Painting Book , and composing Timmy Tiptoes , a tale about indigenous North American mammals . 
 = = Production = = 
 Potter completed the text of Timmy Tiptoes but decided it was too long . She was also uncertain exactly how to put the bird calls into print . She revised the text , and wrote publisher Harold Warne : " I have compressed the words in the earlier pages , but it seems unavoidable to have a good deal of nuts . The songs of the little birds will be easier to judge as to spelling when one sees it in type . " The illustrations presented another problem . For her earlier productions , Potter was able to observe the species concerned in the wild , and kept specimens at home as pets and models . For Timmy Tiptoes however , she was unable to do so . Instead , she relied on specimens in the London Zoological Gardens as models , and checked photographs in reference books including one from the firm of taxidermist Rowland Ward . " The book obtained from Rowland Ward will be very useful , " she wrote . 
 At the end of July 1911 , she sent the text and most of the illustrations to Warne from <unk> Howe , her parents ' summering place in Windermere . An embarrassed Harold Warne wrote her suggesting a few minor alterations , but she was unperturbed . " There is no need to apologize for criticism , " she wrote , " But there is no doubt the animals strongly resemble rabbits , the head which you question was copied from a photograph in the book . " The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes was released in October 1911 to popular and commercial success . 
 In Beatrix Potter : A Life in Nature ( 2007 ) , biographer Linda Lear describes Timmy Tiptoes as " the least satisfactory " of Potter 's books , and ascribes its literary and artistic shortcomings to the author 's desire to satisfy her publisher 's demand for yet another book , to court her American fans with a tale about North American animals , and to make quick money in the American market . Potter 's output decreased strikingly after Timmy Tiptoes and the length of time between books increased . Two books that followed Timmy Tiptoes , The Tale of Mr. Tod ( 1912 ) and The Tale of Pigling Bland ( 1913 ) , have been described as the culmination of Potter 's well @-@ structured , imaginative art rather than a continuation of that art . 
 Potter had become tired of writing for children and increasingly unfamiliar with them . The Moore children ( for whom she had written several tales early in her career ) were grown , and Potter had not replaced them with other children , although she continued to write letters to child fans who had written her . She was out of touch with the interests of American children . Her marriage to William <unk> on October 15 , 1913 effectively ended her literary and artistic career . Although she published sporadically in the years following her marriage , her works depended principally upon decades @-@ old concepts filed away in her publisher 's offices and ageing illustrations tucked away in her portfolio . Only The Tale of Johnny Town @-@ Mouse ( 1918 ) brought forth a completely new set of illustrations from the artist . She devoted herself to marriage and farming , and avoided publicity and fans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The tale is set in a forest and begins with " once upon a time " . Timmy Tiptoes is " a little fat comfortable grey squirrel " living in a nest thatched with leaves in the top of a tall tree with his little wife , Goody . Over the course of several days , the two collect nuts in their little sacks for the coming winter and spring , and store the nuts in hollow tree stumps near their home . Timmy wears a red jacket he removes while working , and his wife wears a pink dress and apron . When the stumps are full , the couple make use of a tree @-@ hole that once belonged to a woodpecker . The nuts rattle " down – down – down inside " , and Goody wonders how they will ever retrieve them . Timmy reminds her he will be much thinner by springtime and will be able to pass through the little hole . 
 In an aside , the narrator tells the reader that the couple had great quantities of nuts because they never lost them , noting that most squirrels lose half their nuts because they cannot remember where they buried them . Silvertail is the most forgetful of squirrels in the wood , and , while trying to find his nuts , digs up another squirrel 's hoard . A commotion erupts among the <unk> squirrels , and , as ill luck would have it , a flock of birds fly by singing " Who 's bin [ sic ] digging @-@ up my nuts ? " and " Little bit @-@ a @-@ bread and @-@ no @-@ cheese ! " One bird finds a perch in the bush where Timmy is working and continues to sing about digging up nuts . The other squirrels take notice , suspect Timmy of robbing others of their hoards , rush upon him , scratch and cuff him , chase him up a tree , and stuff him with great difficulty through the woodpecker 's hole . Silvertail suggests they leave him there until he confesses . 
 Timmy lays " stunned and still " on the peck of nuts he has stored in the hollow tree while Goody searches fruitlessly for him . Eventually , Timmy stirs and discovers himself in a mossy little bed surrounded by ample provisions . Chippy Hackee , a small striped chipmunk , tends him with kindness , mentioning that it has been raining nuts through the top of tree and he has also " found a few buried " . The chipmunk coaxes Timmy to eat the nuts and Timmy grows " fatter and fatter ! " 
 Goody is very concerned about her husband 's disappearance , but has gone back to work collecting nuts and hiding them under a tree root . Mrs. Hackee , Chippy 's wife , emerges from beneath the root to demand an explanation regarding the shower of nuts into her home . Eventually , the two ladies complain about their runaway husbands , but the chipmunk knows where her husband is camping @-@ out because a little bird has told her . Together , they hurry to the woodpecker 's hole and hear their husbands deep within the tree singing : 
 " My little old man and I fell out , 
 How shall we bring this matter about ? 
 Bring it about as well as you can , 
 And get you gone , you little old man ! " 
 Mrs. Hackee refuses to enter the tree because her husband bites , but Goody calls to her husband and he comes to the hole with a kiss for her . He is too fat to squeeze through the hole , but Chippy Hackee ( who is not too fat ) refuses to leave and remains below chuckling . A fortnight later , a big wind blows off the top of the tree , and Timmy makes his escape . He hurries home through the rain , huddling under an umbrella with his wife . 
 Chippy Hackee continues to camp @-@ out in the tree stump for another week , but a bear comes lumbering through the neighbourhood ( looking for nuts perhaps ? ) and Chippy decides it 's time to hurry home . He suffers a cold in his head and is quite uncomfortable . Timmy now keeps the family nuts " fastened up with a little padlock " , and Goody is seen in the accompanying illustration sitting outside the nest tending three tiny babies . " And whenever that little bird sees the Chipmunks , he sings – ' Who 's @-@ been @-@ digging @-@ up my @-@ nuts ? Who 's been digging @-@ up my @-@ nuts ? ' But nobody ever answers ! " Chippy Hackee and his wife are seen in the last illustration trying to drive the little bird away with their tree @-@ leaf umbrella . 
 Potter 's idea to make the squirrel grow so fat he cannot escape the tree was imitated by A. A. Milne in Winnie the Pooh . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 Anne Stevenson Hobbs in Beatrix Potter 's Art ( 1989 ) asserts " Minute subjects demanded minute strokes : with Bewick , William Hunt , and Birket Foster , [ Potter ] is a descendant of the pictures ' in little ' approach of the Elizabethans . " In addition to the miniaturists , Potter once admitted that the Pre @-@ Raphaelites , with their " somewhat niggling but absolutely genuine admiration for copying natural detail " , had influenced her style . 
 Timmy Tiptoes is unique amongst Potter 's children 's books : it is the only one depicting American mammals . The title character is an eastern grey squirrel , a species exported from America to Britain , and flourishing there around 1900 . It was unlikely Potter saw the animals in the woods around Hill Top as they had yet to become established in the Lake District . She probably relied for models on specimens in the Small Mammal House of a zoo , and consulted reference works in the library of the Natural History Museum to aid her work . 
 Potter either had no live models for the eastern chipmunk characters , or borrowed a pet chipmunk from a cousin . Initially , she may have been unsure of how to draw the chipmunks and chose to clothe them , then was forced to follow suit and clothe the two main players as well , while leaving the other squirrels in their natural state . Or , she may have clothed Timmy and Goody because they collect their nuts in sacks ( an unnatural way for squirrels to behave ) in imitation of a ruse she employed in Peter Rabbit when Peter only walks on his hind legs while wearing his blue jacket . When he loses his jacket , he reverts to being an animal and moves about on all fours . Because Timmy and Chippy were not drawn from nature , the two suggest stuffed animals in their lack of engaging facial expressions . 
 Potter probably modelled the American black bear on a specimen in the London Zoological Gardens in Regent 's Park . She wrote in her manuscript in reference to her drawing of the bear : " Intended to represent the American black bear , it has a smooth coat , like a sealskin coat . " Kutzer suggests the bear in Potter 's two illustrations of the animal would theoretically be recognized by American children , but the depiction of the bear is almost as stiff and unnatural as Potter 's depictions of humans in her other books . The bear lacks any of the species ' " clumsy gracefulness " , she argues , which Potter could only have realized after seeing bears in the wild – an opportunity that simply did not exist for her in England . The inclusion of an American black bear @-@ looking creature in the tale and its depiction in the illustrations only emphasize Potter 's awkward struggle with subject matter she had not directly observed in nature or of which she had little knowledge . 
 MacDonald points out that the forest backgrounds were imagined and not drawn from nature ; they thus lack the " infusions of warmth [ and ] character " that distinguish the books that were drawn and painted from the Sawrey woodlands . She concludes that it was impossible for Potter to clearly write about or draw her subjects without some sort of inspiration close at hand . Judy Taylor and her collaborators on Beatrix Potter 1866 @-@ 1943 : The Artist and Her World conclude that Timmy Tiptoes is " an uneasy book " and one in which the animals do not fit naturally into the background . 
 = = Scholarly commentaries = = 
 Ruth K. MacDonald , Professor of English at New Mexico State University and author of Beatrix Potter ( 1986 ) , observes that the depiction of domestic discord in Timmy Tiptoes is not typical for Potter or for children 's literature of the period . She considers the marital relationship between the chipmunks " abrasive and shocking " . Though their relationship may reflect the non @-@ monogamous mating habits of eastern chipmunks and offer a contrast with the happy pairing of Timmy and Goody , it is an obstacle in the flow of the tale . The reader is forced to turn his attention from the star of the book to a secondary player , and , while Timmy 's story ends with the hero happily reunited with his wife , the reunion dealt the chipmunks is uncertain and less satisfying than that granted Timmy and Goody . 
 The reader is forced to question the stability of the Hackee union : Chippy stays away from home long after Timmy 's situation is resolved and returns to his wife only after being frightened from the tree by a bear entirely superfluous to the tale . At home , Chippy suffers with a head cold , but Mrs. Hackee 's lack of expression in the illustration leaves the reader wondering how she took his abrupt return . One wonders why Mrs. Hackee did not pursue Chippy once she learned of his whereabouts from a bird . After the reader discovers Goody is the happy mother of triplets and Timmy has made the decision to keep his nuts under lock and key , he may wonder what sort of fate the future holds for the <unk> . 
 MacDonald observes that the dedication , " For Many Unknown Little Friends , Including Monica " , is evidence that Potter 's audience for Timmy Tiptoes was not as clearly defined as the audiences for her other books , especially those books composed for very specific children . Though " Monica " suggests a particular child of Potter 's acquaintance , Monica was simply one of many children who posted fan letters to the author . " I do not know the child , " Potter wrote , " She is the school friend of a little cousin , who asked for it as a favour , and the name took my fancy . " MacDonald suggests it was this lack of a clearly defined audience that led to Potter 's lack of imagination and control in the tale , and her " false step " with the chipmunks ' marital relationship . 
 M. Daphne Kutzer , Professor of English at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh and author of Beatrix Potter : Writing in Code ( 2003 ) , detects some similarities to The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin ( 1903 ) . Both tales have touches of the pourquoi story in their explanations of why squirrels collect nuts , and both incorporate rhymes and riddles in their narratives . However , there is a crucial difference that diminishes the artistry of Timmy Tiptoes : the rhymes and riddles in Squirrel Nutkin shed light on Nutkin 's character and create a guessing game for the reader while those in Timmy Tiptoes are bland devices that simply move the characters to reunions with their wives and the tale to its conclusion . 
 Kutzer points out Timmy and his wife wear clothes , but the other squirrels and the bear do not . There is no apparent reason for this differentiation . She admits that this may be Potter 's attempt to separate her anthropomorphized animals from her natural ones , but she believes the attempt fails on both narrative and artistic grounds . Logically , she argues , all the squirrels should wear ( or not wear ) clothes because they all live and behave in a natural manner : Timmy and Goody inhabit a nest in a tree ( not a comfortable little house somewhere ) , and all the squirrels gather nuts for the coming winter . Except for Timmy having a wife , there is no clear distinction between natural and personified squirrel nature . In another stumbling block to logic , Timmy 's red jacket appears then disappears then reappears in the illustrations with no basis either in the plot or Timmy 's character , but apparently in Potter 's personal need for a splash of colour here and there . In this case , Potter has allowed an external force to shape the tale rather than letting the tale find its own shape . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Potter confidently asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics , and part of the process in making them so was marketing strategy . She was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales with a Peter Rabbit doll , an unpublished Peter Rabbit board game , and a Peter Rabbit nursery wallpaper between 1903 and 1905 . Similar " side @-@ shows " ( as she termed the spinoffs ) were produced over the following two decades . 
 In 1947 , Frederick Warne & Co. granted Beswick Pottery of Longton , Staffordshire rights and licences to produce the Potter characters in porcelain . In 1948 , Timmy Tiptoes became one of the first ten figurines , and was followed by Goody Tiptoes in 1961 , Chippy Hackee in 1979 , and Timmy and Goody under an umbrella in 1986 . 
 In 1973 , The Eden Toy Company of New York became the first and only American company to be granted licensing rights from Warne to manufacture stuffed Potter characters in plush . In 1975 , Timmy Tiptoes and Goody Tiptoes were released . In 1975 , Crummles of Poole , Dorset began manufacturing enamelled boxes depicting Potter characters on their lids , and eventually produced a 1 and 5 / 8 inch diameter Timmy Tiptoes box . 
 In 1977 , Schmid & Co. of Toronto and Randolph , Massachusetts were granted licensing rights to Beatrix Potter , and produced a Goody Tiptoes music box , a Chippy Hackee music box playing " Feed the Birds " , and a " Baby 's First Christmas " ornament depicting Goody cuddling one of her babies . In the middle 1980s , the Italian firm of ANRI manufactured ornaments and figurines of Timmy Tiptoes composed of a synthetic substance called <unk> . 
 = = Reprints and translations = = 
 As of 2010 , all of Potter 's 23 small format books were still in print and available in a 400 @-@ page omnibus edition , and in complete sets in presentation boxes . Timmy Tiptoes is available in paperback , board book , a Kindle edition , an Audible Audio edition , and an <unk> format . First editions and reprints were available through antiquarian booksellers . 
 The English language editions of Potter 's little books still bore the Frederick Warne imprint in 2010 though the company was bought by Penguin Books in 1983 . The printing plates were remade by Penguin from new photographs of the original drawings in 1985 , and all 23 volumes released in 1987 as The Original and Authorized Edition . 
 Potter 's small format books have been translated into nearly thirty languages including Greek and Russian . The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes was published in the Initial Teaching Alphabet in 1966 and in Dutch as Het Verhaal van <unk> <unk> in 1968 under licence to <unk> <unk> , Amsterdam . The tale was published in Spanish by Grange Books in 1997 , and a German Thesaurus edition intended for German ESL and English GSL students in 2009 . The Thesaurus edition was printed in English with translations of difficult or unusual words and expressions located in footnotes . In 1986 , MacDonald observed that the Potter books had become a traditional part of childhood in both English @-@ speaking lands and those in which the books had been translated . 
 = Tremella mesenterica = 
 Tremella mesenterica ( common names include yellow brain , golden jelly fungus , yellow trembler , and witches ' butter ) is a common jelly fungus in the <unk> family of the Agaricomycotina . It is most frequently found on dead but attached and on recently fallen branches , especially of angiosperms , as a parasite of wood decay fungi in the genus Peniophora . The gelatinous , orange @-@ yellow fruit body of the fungus , which can grow up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) diameter , has a convoluted or lobed surface that is greasy or slimy when damp . It grows in crevices in bark , appearing during rainy weather . Within a few days after rain it dries into a thin film or shriveled mass capable of reviving after subsequent rain . This fungus occurs widely in deciduous and mixed forests and is widely distributed in temperate and tropical regions that include Africa , Asia , Australia , Europe , North and South America . Although considered bland and flavorless , the fungus is edible . Tremella mesenterica produces carbohydrates that are attracting research interest because of their various biological activities . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The species was originally described from Sweden as Helvella mesenterica by the naturalist Anders Jahan Retzius in 1769 . It was later ( 1822 ) sanctioned by Elias Magnus Fries in the second volume of his Systema Mycologicum . It is the type species of the genus Tremella . Its distinctive appearance has led the species to accumulate a variety of common names , including " yellow trembler " , " yellow brain " , " golden jelly fungus " , and " witches ' butter " , although this latter name is also applied to <unk> glandulosa . The specific epithet is a Latin adjective formed from the Ancient Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , " middle intestine " , from <unk> ( meso- , " middle , center " ) and <unk> ( <unk> , " intestine " ) , referring to its shape . 
 The species formerly recognized as Tremella lutescens is now seen as a form of T. mesenterica with washed @-@ out colors and considered a synonym . 
 Based on molecular analysis of the sequences of the D1 / D2 regions of the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene and the internal transcribed spacer regions of rRNA , T. mesenterica is most closely related to T. <unk> , T. <unk> , and T. brasiliensis . This analysis included 20 of the estimated 120 Tremella species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body has an irregular shape , and usually breaks through the bark of dead branches . It is up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) broad and 2 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 0 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) high , rounded to variously lobed or brain @-@ like in appearance . The fruit body is gelatin @-@ like but tough when wet , and hard when dry . The surface is usually smooth , the lobes translucent , deep yellow or bright yellow @-@ orange , fading to pale yellow , rarely unpigmented and white or colorless . The fruit bodies dry to a dark reddish or orange . The spores , viewed in mass , are whitish or pale yellow . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are ellipsoid to roughly spherical in shape , not or rarely stalked , and typically 15 – 21 µm wide . They contain two to four septa that divide it into compartments ; the septa are most frequently diagonal or vertical . Asexual reproduction in T. mesenterica is carried out through the formation of spores called conidia , which arise from conidiophores — specialized hyphal cells that are morphologically distinct from the somatic hyphae . The conidiophores are densely branched and normally abundant in the hymenium ; young specimens may be entirely conidial . The conidia are roughly spherical , ovoid , or ellipsoid , and about 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 by 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 5 µm . They may be so numerous that young fruit bodies may be covered in a bright yellow , conidial slime . The spores are broadly ellipsoid to oblong , on average 10 @.@ 0 – 16 @.@ 0 by 6 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 5 µm ; they germinate by germ tube or by yeast @-@ like conidia of identical form to the conidia produced on the conidiophores . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Although some have claimed the fungus to be inedible or merely " non @-@ poisonous " , most other sources agree that it is edible but flavorless . The gelatinous to rubbery consistency lends texture to soups . In China , the fungus is used by vegetarians to prepare " an <unk> cooling soup with lotus seed , lily bulbs , jujube , etc . " 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Tremella mesenterica is frequently confused with Tremella aurantia , a widespread species parasitic on the plant pathogenic fungus Stereum hirsutum . Tremella aurantia can often be recognized by the presence of its host , which typically grows on logs , stumps , and trunks . Though the two species are similarly colored , the surface of T. aurantia is usually matte , not greasy or shiny , and its lobes or folds are thicker than those of T. mesenterica . Fruit bodies of T. aurantia contain unclamped , thick @-@ walled host hyphae and consequently retain their shape when dried , rather than shriveling or collapsing to a film ( as in T. mesenterica ) . Microscopically , T. aurantia has smaller basidia and smaller , differently shaped spores measuring 8 @.@ 5 – 10 by 7 – 8 @.@ 5 µm . T. brasiliensis , known from neotropical areas and Japan , and the North American species T. <unk> are also similar . 
 Tremella mesenterica may also be confused with members of the <unk> family , like <unk> chrysospermus ( formerly D. palmatus ) , due to their superficial resemblance . Microscopic examination shows that the <unk> have Y @-@ shaped basidia with two spores , unlike the longitudinally split basidia characteristic of Tremella ; additionally , D. chrysospermus is smaller , has a whitish attachment point to its substrate , and grows on conifer wood . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Tremella mesenterica has a <unk> phase in its life cycle that arises as a result of budding of basidiospores . The alternation between asexual and sexual propagation is achieved by mating of yeast @-@ form haploid cells of two compatible mating types . Each mating type secretes a mating pheromone that elicits sexual differentiation of the target cell having the opposite mating type to the pheromone @-@ producing cell . The sexual differentiation is characterized by the arrest of the growth in the G1 phase of the cell division cycle and subsequent formation of an elongated mating tube . Formation of the mating tube , initiated by the pheromones A @-@ 10 and a @-@ 13 , is similar to the process of bud emergence during bipolar budding in yeasts . <unk> A @-@ 10 has been purified and its chemical structure found to be S @-@ <unk> peptide . Fruit bodies arise from a primordium located beneath the wood bark , and sometimes more than one fruit body can originate separately from the same primordia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Tremella mesenterica has a cosmopolitan distribution , having been recorded from Europe , North , Central , and South America , Africa , Asia , and Australia . Fruit bodies are formed during wet periods throughout the year . In British Columbia , Canada , it is sometimes found on maple , poplar , or pine , but is most abundant on red alder . It prefers to grow in habitats ranging from mesic to wet . The fungus grows parasitically on the mycelium of wood @-@ rotting corticioid fungi in the genus Peniophora . Occasionally , T. mesenterica and its host fungus can be found fruiting together . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Some Tremella species produce polysaccharides that are of interest to the medical field , because of their biological activity ; several patents have been filed in China pertaining to the use of these compounds for cancer prevention or immune system enhancement . In 1966 , Slodki reported discovering an acidic polysaccharide from haploid cells of T. mesenterica that closely resembled those produced by the species Cryptococcus <unk> . The structural similarity of the polysaccharides from the two species suggested a phylogenetic relationship between them . Subsequently , researchers chemically synthesized the polysaccharide , and determined the chemical identities of the component sugar units . The polysaccharide , known as <unk> — produced by fruit bodies and in pure culture conditions — has been shown to consist of a mannan backbone that is acetylated with xylan chains in a regular repeating structure . Laboratory tests have associated a number of biological activities with T. mesenterica <unk> , including <unk> , protecting against radiation , antidiabetic , anti @-@ inflammatory , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> effects . 
 = Katherine Reutter = 
 Katherine Reutter ( / <unk> / ; born July 30 , 1988 ) is a former American short track speed skater . She is a two @-@ time medalist ( one silver , one bronze ) in the Winter Olympics , 2011 overall world silver medalist and the 2010 – 2011 overall ISU Short Track Speed Skating World Cup champion . 
 At the 2010 Winter Olympics , Reutter won silver in the 1000 m and bronze in the 3000 m relay . She has won one gold , two silvers , and four bronze medals at the World Championships , including overall silver medal at the 2011 World Championships . She has also won two bronze medal at the World Team Championships . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Reutter was born and raised in Champaign , Illinois . Reutter was inspired to become a speed skater after meeting five @-@ time Olympic gold medalist Bonnie Blair at her high school . She learned to skate with her mother during a figure skating class when she was four years old , but immediately found she was more interested in speed skating . Reutter first started speed skating professionally in 2005 at the age of 17 . She began training at the Olympic Training Center in Marquette , Michigan that year . Reutter graduated from Centennial High School in 2006 . She has trained in Salt Lake City , Utah since 2007 , where she has paid for room , board , and training at her own expense . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2008 – 2009 = = = 
 At the 2008 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships , Reutter won a bronze medal in the 3000 m with a time of 5 : 46 @.@ 518 , finishing behind Zhou Yang and Jung Eun @-@ Ju . 
 In February 2009 , Reutter completed a 1000 m race in 1 : 29 @.@ 667 in Dresden , Germany . It was less than 0 @.@ 2 of a second short of the world record set the previous year by Chinese short track speed skater Wang Meng . At the 2009 World Short Track Speed Skating Team Championships , in March 2009 , Reutter won a bronze medal along with Kimberly Derrick , Alyson Dudek , Lana Gehring , and Jessica Smith . 
 Reutter won four silver medals at the 2009 Short Track Speed Skating World Cup . She won the women 's 1500 m at the 2009 – 10 Short Track Speed Skating World Cup on November 7 , 2009 , finishing in 2 : 23 @.@ 275 , beating Cho Ha @-@ Ri of South Korea . Reutter made the 2010 U.S. Olympic team after winning the 1000 and 1500 m at the 2010 U.S. Olympic Team Trials in September 2009 . 
 = = = 2010 Winter Olympics = = = 
 Reutter ranked 1st in her qualifying heats for the 500 m with a time of 44 @.@ 187 . She then set an Olympic record in the first quarterfinal with a time of 43 @.@ 834 but the record was beaten by Wang Meng of China in the next heat , with a time of 43 @.@ 284 . Reutter started slow in the semifinals , resulting in a fourth @-@ place finish , eliminating her from medal contention . She finished seventh overall in the women 's 500 m . 
 Reutter competed in the semifinals for the 3000 m relay with teammates Alyson Dudek , Allison Baver and Kimberly Derrick . The U.S. team qualified for the final in second place behind South Korea with a time of 4 : 15 @.@ 376 . Reutter finished in fourth place in the 1500 m final , behind Zhou Yang of China , with Lee Eun @-@ <unk> of South Korea in second , and Park Seung @-@ Hi of South Korea in third . Reutter got tangled up with Wang Meng in the semifinal , causing both skaters and Cho Ha @-@ Ri of South Korea to fall , resulting in Meng being disqualified from the final . Reutter repeated the same move in the final , bumping into Park , and later expressed remorse for both mistakes , stating " I think the room was there but maybe I just wasn 't there . I don 't know . But … I messed up and messed up some people around me , which I 'm very sorry for . " In the heats of the 1000 m , Reutter set an Olympic record and finished first overall in the heats . About an hour and a half later , Reutter competed in the 3000 m relay ( with Allison Baver , Alyson Dudek , Lana Gehring ) and won bronze behind China and Canada due to the disqualification of South Korea . In the final of the 1000 m , Reutter was edged out for the gold medal by Wang Meng , finishing behind her 1 : 29 @.@ 324 to 1 : 29 @.@ 213 . 
 = = = 2010 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships = = = 
 At the 2010 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships , in Sofia , Bulgaria , Reutter , who was fighting the flu , won bronze medals in the 1000 m and the 3000 m relay . In her first event , the 1000 m , Reutter placed third with a time of 1 : 31 @.@ 747 , finishing behind Wang Meng and Cho Ha @-@ Ri . Reutter then combined with Alyson Dudek , Kimberly Derrick , and Lana Gehring in the 3000 m relay to finish third behind South Korea and Canada with a time of 4 : 14 @.@ 231 . Reutter also placed 6th in the 500 m , 4th in the 1500 m , and 4th in the 3000 m . 
 = = = 2011 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships = = = 
 At the 2011 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships in Sheffield , England , Reutter won one gold , two silvers , and one bronze . She finished second overall with 68 points . In her first event , the 1500 m , Reutter won the gold ahead of Koreans Park Seung @-@ Hi and Cho Ha @-@ Ri in a time of 2 : 33 @.@ 978 . In winning the gold , Reutter became the first American woman to win a gold medal at a World Short Track Speed Skating Championships since Bonnie Blair did in 1986 . After the 1500 m , Reutter competed in the 3000 m relay semifinals but fell during the race , resulting in the United States not advancing to the final . In her next event , the 500 m , Reutter did not advance past the semifinals , finishing 6th overall . In the 1000 m , Reutter finished in third place behind Cho Ha @-@ Ri and Italian Arianna Fontana in a time of 2 : 23 @.@ 268 even though she tripped on a lane block . In her last event , the 3000 m , Reutter just missed the gold medal , finishing behind Cho Ha @-@ Ri 5 : 13 @.@ 677 to 5 : 13 @.@ 353 . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 In early 2013 due to constant injuries , Reutter announced her retirement at the age of 24 . After that , she became a coach at the Pettit National Ice Center . 
 = = Appearances and endorsements = = 
 Reutter appeared as a guest on Comedy Central 's The Colbert Report on December 14 , 2009 . Host Stephen Colbert autographed her thigh , an idea by Reutter that initially caught the comedian off guard ( Although Reutter 's website suggest that it was her manager 's idea and they had discussed it with Colbert beforehand ) . Colbert began raising funds for the U.S. Speedskating team when their sponsor , the Dutch DSB Bank , went bankrupt . 
 Reutter was sponsored by U.S. Speedskating , Verizon , <unk> 20 / 20 , Bioenergy <unk> , Nike , Oakley and the Champaign Police Department , who helped pay the costs of her training in Utah . 
 = Paul Brown = 
 Paul Eugene Brown ( September 7 , 1908 – August 5 , 1991 ) was an American football coach and executive in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and National Football League ( NFL ) . Brown was the first coach of the Cleveland Browns and later played a role in founding the Cincinnati Bengals . His teams won seven league championships in a professional coaching career spanning 25 seasons . He is the only NFL coach ever to have an NFL team named after him . 
 Brown began his coaching career at Severn School in 1931 before becoming the head football coach at Massillon Washington High School in Massillon , Ohio , where he grew up . His high school teams lost only 10 games in 11 seasons . He was then hired at Ohio State University and coached the school to its first national football championship in 1942 . After World War II , he became head coach of the Browns , who won four AAFC championships before joining the NFL in 1950 . Brown coached the Browns to three NFL championships – in 1950 , 1954 and 1955 – but was fired in January 1963 amid a power struggle with team owner Art Modell . Brown in 1968 co @-@ founded and was the first coach of the Bengals . He retired from coaching in 1975 but remained the Bengals ' team president until his death in 1991 . The Bengals named their home stadium Paul Brown Stadium in honor of Brown . He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1967 . 
 Brown is credited with a number of American football innovations . He was the first coach to use game film to scout opponents , hire a full @-@ time staff of assistants , and test players on their knowledge of a playbook . He invented the modern face mask , the taxi squad and the draw play . He also played a role in breaking professional football 's color barrier , bringing some of the first African @-@ Americans to play pro football in the modern era onto his teams . Despite these accomplishments , Brown was not universally liked . He was strict and controlling , which often brought him into conflict with players who wanted a greater say in play @-@ calling . These disputes , combined with Brown 's failure to consult Modell on major personnel decisions , led to his firing as the Browns ' coach in 1963 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brown grew up in Massillon , Ohio , where he moved with his family from Norwalk when he was nine years of age . His father , Lester , was a dispatcher for the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railroad . Massillon was a shipping and steel town obsessed with its high school and professional football teams , both called the Tigers . Massillon 's main rival at both levels was nearby Canton , at the time a bigger and richer town . When the professional teams folded in the 1920s , the rivalry between the high school teams took center stage . 
 Brown entered Massillon Washington High School in 1922 . Although he played football as a child , Brown was undersized for the game at less than 150 pounds and at first focused his athletic energies on the pole vault . Harry <unk> , who went on to be one of Notre Dame 's legendary Four Horsemen , was then the high school quarterback . But Massillon coach Dave Stewart saw Brown 's determination to be a good vaulter despite his small size and brought him onto the football team ; as a junior in 1924 , he took over as the starting quarterback . Massillon posted a win @-@ loss record of 15 – 3 in Brown 's junior and senior years as the starter . 
 Brown graduated in 1925 and enrolled at Ohio State University the following year , hoping to make the Buckeyes team . He never got past the tryout phase . After his freshman year , he transferred to Miami University in Oxford , Ohio , where he followed Weeb Ewbank as the school 's starting quarterback . Under Coach Chester <unk> , Brown was named to the All @-@ Ohio small @-@ college second team by the Associated Press at the end of 1928 . In two seasons at Miami , Brown guided the team to a 14 – 3 record . He married his high school sweetheart Katie <unk> the following year . Brown had taken pre @-@ law at Miami and considered studying history on a Rhodes Scholarship , but after college he instead took his first job as a coach . On Stewart 's recommendation , Severn School , a private prep school in Maryland , hired him in 1930 . 
 = = High school coaching career = = 
 = = = Severn School = = = 
 Brown spent two successful years at Severn . The team was undefeated in his first season and won the Maryland state championship . In 1931 , the team 's win @-@ loss @-@ tie record was 5 – 2 – 1 . Brown 's overall record was 12 – 2 – 1 . After his second year , Massillon 's head coaching job became available , and Brown took the position . 
 = = = Massillon Tigers = = = 
 Brown returned to Massillon in 1932 , when he was 24 years old and barely two years out of college . His assignment was to turn around a Tigers team that had fallen into mediocrity over the six seasons since the departure of Stewart , Brown 's old coach . In 1931 , the year before Brown arrived , the Tigers finished with a 2 – 6 @-@ 2 <unk> : Massillon Tiger Football Booster Club Brown 's strategy was to build up a disciplined , hard @-@ working team . He fired an assistant early on for arriving at a practice late because he had to work on his farm . No Tigers player was allowed to sit on the bench during a game ; Brown made them stand . At Massillon , Brown put in an offense and blocking scheme he learned from Duke 's Jimmy DeHart and Purdue 's Noble Kizer . He emphasized quickness over strength . 
 In his first season at Massillon , Brown 's team posted a 5 – 4 – 1 record , better than the previous year but far from Brown 's exacting standards . The Tigers improved again in 1933 , ending with an 8 – 2 record but losing to their chief rivals , the Canton McKinley High School Bulldogs . In 1934 , Massillon won all of its games until a 21 – 6 defeat to Canton in the final game of the season . As the pressure on Brown grew to turn the tables on Canton , Massillon finally accomplished the feat the following year in an undefeated season , the first of several with Brown at the helm . 
 By then , Brown had put his system into place : a strict , systematic approach to coaching combined with a well @-@ organized recruitment network that drew promising young players from Massillon 's junior high school football program . He paid no attention to race , and brought several African @-@ American players onto the team at a time when many northern schools excluded them . 
 In the ensuing five seasons , Massillon lost only one game , a 7 – 0 defeat at New Castle , Pennsylvania in 1937 after several players came down with the flu . As the Tigers ' prestige grew , Brown in 1936 convinced the school to build a new stadium almost triple the size of the existing 7 @,@ 000 @-@ seat facility . The stadium was finished in 1939 , and is now named after Brown . The pinnacle of Brown 's career at Massillon was a victory in the 1940 season against Toledo 's Waite High School . The Tigers and Waite both went undefeated in the 1939 season , and both claimed the state championship . The teams decided to settle the score the following year , and Brown 's team won 28 – 0 . The Massillon 1940 squad is still regarded by historians as one of the best in the history of state high school football . 
 During his nine years at Massillon , Brown invented the playbook , a detailed listing of formations and set plays , and tested his players on their knowledge of it . He also originated the practice of sending in plays to his quarterback from the sideline using hand signals . His overall record at the school was 80 – 8 – 2 , including a 35 @-@ game winning streak . Between 1935 and 1940 , the team won the state football championship six times and won the High School Football National Championship four times , outscoring opponents by 2 @,@ 393 points to 168 over that span . After the early losses to Canton , the Tigers beat the Bulldogs six straight times . 
 = = College and military career = = 
 = = = Ohio State Buckeyes = = = 
 Brown 's success at Massillon raised his profile in Ohio considerably ; people started calling him the " Miracle Man of Massillon . " When Ohio State was looking for a new coach in 1940 – Francis Schmidt left after losing to the rival Michigan Wolverines three times in a row – Brown was a candidate for the job . Ohio State officials were skeptical about the 33 @-@ year @-@ old making the transition to college football but were worried that they might lose talented high school recruits loyal to Brown if they did not sign him . 
 Ohio State offered Brown a $ 6 @,@ 500 salary ( $ 104 @,@ 574 in 2016 dollars ) , about $ 1 @,@ 500 above his Massillon pay . He accepted in January 1941 and immediately began to institute his rigorous system . Players were drilled and quizzed , and Brown focused on preparing the freshmen to take starting roles as graduating seniors left . He conditioned his players to emphasize quickness , adopting the 40 @-@ yard dash as a measure of speed because that was the distance players needed to run to cover a punt . 
 Brown 's first year at Ohio State was a success . The Buckeyes won all but one of eight games in 1941 ; the only loss was to Northwestern University and its star tailback , Otto Graham . The final game of the season was a 20 – 20 tie with Michigan , which the school 's supporters saw as a good outcome given that Ohio State was a heavy underdog . The Buckeyes tied for second place in the Western Conference , a grouping of college teams from the Midwestern United States ( now known as the Big Ten ) , and finished 13th in the AP Poll . Brown was fourth in balloting for national Coach of the Year . 
 Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 threatened to derail the 1942 season , but most college teams played on , adjusting schedules to include military teams composed of players serving in the military . The Buckeyes opened the season by beating a Fort Knox team 59 – 0 , followed by two more wins against Southern California and Indiana University . In the first AP Poll of the season , Ohio State was ranked best in the nation , the first time the school had achieved that mark . The 1942 team was the first composed mainly of players hand @-@ picked by Brown , including Bill Willis , Dante Lavelli and star halfback Les Horvath . In the middle of the season , the Buckeyes lost to the University of Wisconsin after numerous players drank bad water and got sick . That was the team 's only loss of the season , which culminated with a 21 – 7 victory over Michigan . The Buckeyes won the Western Conference and claimed their first @-@ ever national title after finishing the season at the top of the AP Poll . 
 The 1943 season was a disaster for Brown and the Buckeyes . Depleted by the military draft and facing tough competition from teams on Army and Navy bases , Brown was forced to play 17 @-@ year @-@ old recruits who had not yet enlisted . Ohio State had affiliated itself with the Army Specialized Training Program , which did not allow its trainees to participate in varsity sports , while schools such as Michigan and Purdue became part of the Navy 's V @-@ 12 training program , which did . The Buckeyes ended with a 3 – 6 record . In three seasons at Ohio State , Brown amassed an 18 – 8 – 1 record . 
 = = = Great Lakes Bluejackets = = = 
 Brown was classified 1 @-@ A in 1944 and commissioned as a lieutenant in the U.S. Navy . He served at the Great Lakes Naval Training Station outside Chicago as head coach of its <unk> football team , which competed against other service teams and college programs . The station was a waypoint for Navy recruits between training and active service in World War II , but its commanders took athletics seriously and saw winning as a morale @-@ booster and a point of personal pride . Brown could have been called up for active duty – Tony Hinkle , his predecessor , was already serving in the Pacific – but the war began to wind down as Brown arrived . Brown had little time to institute his system , and instead adopted Hinkle 's offensive scheme , borrowed from the Chicago Bears . He had a smattering of talented players , including defensive end George Young and halfback Ara Parseghian . In 1944 , the team lost to Ohio State and Notre Dame , but finished with a 9 – 2 – 1 record and was among the top 20 teams in the AP Poll . 
 In September 1944 , Arch Ward , the influential sports editor of the Chicago Tribune , proposed a new eight @-@ team professional football league called the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) to compete against the more established National Football League ( NFL ) once the war was over . Ward lined up wealthy owners for the new league , which included teams in Los Angeles , New York City , San Francisco and Cleveland . Arthur B. " Mickey " McBride , a taxi @-@ cab magnate who made a fortune in the newspaper business , was the owner of the Cleveland franchise . As Brown was preparing for the 1945 Bluejackets season , Ward came on McBride 's behalf to ask Brown if he wanted to coach the new team . McBride offered $ 17 @,@ 500 a year ( $ 230 @,@ 023 in today 's dollars ) – more than any coach at any level – plus a stake in the team and a stipend while he was still in the military . 
 On February 8 , 1945 , Brown accepted the job , saying he was sad to leave Ohio State , but he " couldn 't turn down this deal in fairness to my family . " Brown was still Ohio State 's head coach in absentia , and the decision surprised and outraged school officials who expected him to return after the war . The AAFC did not start play until after the war , however , and Brown continued to get ready for the 1945 season at Great Lakes . That year , many of his best players were transferred to bases on the West Coast as the focus of the war shifted to the Pacific . The team started with a 0 – 4 – 1 record , but rattled off six straight wins after the war ended and players returned from service overseas . Within weeks of Brown 's final Bluejackets game , a 39 – 7 victory over Notre Dame , he set off for his new job in Cleveland . 
 = = Professional coaching career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Browns in the AAFC ( 1946 – 1949 ) = = = 
 By the time Brown arrived in Cleveland , the team had signed a number of players to its roster , including quarterback Otto Graham , whose Northwestern squad had beaten the Buckeyes in 1941 . Many of the players came from Ohio State , Great Lakes and Massillon teams that Brown coached . Lou Groza , a placekicker and tackle , played for Brown at Ohio State before the war intervened . Receiver Dante Lavelli was a sophomore on Ohio State 's championship @-@ winning team in 1942 . Bill Willis , a defensive lineman who Brown coached at Ohio State , and Marion Motley , a running back who grew up in Canton and played for Brown at Great Lakes , became two of the first black athletes to play professional football when they joined the team in 1946 . Other signings included receiver Mac Speedie , center Frank Gatski and back Edgar " Special Delivery " Jones . Brown brought in assistants including Blanton Collier , who had been stationed at Great Lakes and met Brown at Bluejackets practices . 
 The name of the team was at first left up to Brown , who rejected calls for it to be christened the Browns . McBride then held a contest to name the team in May 1945 ; " Cleveland Panthers " was the winning choice , but Brown rejected it because it was the name of an earlier failed football team . " That old Panthers team failed , " Brown said . " I want no part of that name . " In August , McBride gave in to popular demand and christened the team the Browns , despite Paul Brown 's objections . With the roster fixed and the team 's name chosen , Brown set out to build a dynasty . " I want to be what the New York Yankees are in baseball or Ben Hogan is in golf , " he said . 
 After a training camp at Bowling Green State University , the Browns played their first game in September 1946 at Cleveland Stadium . A crowd of 60 @,@ 135 people showed up to see the Browns beat the Miami Seahawks 44 – 0 , then a record attendance mark for professional football . That touched off a string of wins ; the team ended the season with a 12 – 2 record and the top spot in the AAFC 's western division . The Browns then beat the AAFC 's New York Yankees in the championship . 
 Cleveland won the AAFC championship again in 1947 behind an offensive attack that employed the forward pass more frequently and effectively than was typical at the time . The Browns ' offensive success was driven by Brown 's version of the T formation , which was gradually replacing the single @-@ wing formation as football 's most popular and effective scheme . 
 The Browns won every game in the 1948 season , a feat that went unmatched until the Miami Dolphins ( coached by Brown disciple Don Shula ) did it in 1972 . Cleveland then won the AAFC championship for the fourth time in a row in 1949 . By then , however , the league was struggling for survival , due in part to the Browns ' dominance . Attendance at games dwindled in 1948 and 1949 as fans lost interest in lopsided victories , and at the end of the 1949 season the AAFC dissolved . Three of its teams , the San Francisco 49ers , the Baltimore Colts and the Browns , merged into the NFL . The Browns picked up a few good former AAFC players from other teams , including offensive guard Abe Gibron and defensive end Len Ford , but some observers saw Brown 's team as the lone standout in an otherwise minor league . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns in the NFL ( 1950 – 1955 ) = = = 
 The Browns ' first game in the NFL in 1950 was against the two @-@ time defending champion Philadelphia Eagles in Philadelphia . They won the game 35 – 10 , the first of 10 victories that year . After beating the New York Giants in a playoff game , the Browns went on to win the championship game against the Los Angeles Rams on a last @-@ minute field goal by Groza . " The flag of the late lamented AAFC flies high , and Paul Brown has the last laugh , " the Plain Dealer 's editorial page proclaimed . Brown said his was " the greatest football team a coach ever had , and there was never a game like this one . " In 16 seasons , Brown had led his teams to 12 championships . He was the first head coach to win both a college and NFL championship , a feat not repeated until Jimmy Johnson and later Barry Switzer did it with the Dallas Cowboys in the 1990s , and Pete Carroll who accomplished the feat with USC in 2004 and the Seattle Seahawks in 2013 . 
 As the Browns climbed to the top of the NFL , speculation began to mount that Brown might return to the Buckeyes . Wes <unk> had resigned as the team 's coach , and Brown was seen as a possible replacement . But Brown had also alienated many Ohio State alumni by failing to return to the school after World War II and for signing away players including Groza before their college eligibility expired . He interviewed with the university 's athletic board on January 27 , 1951 , but the board unanimously rejected Brown in favor of Woody Hayes , who was unanimously endorsed by the board of trustees . 
 The Browns reached the championship each of the next three years , but lost all of those games . In both 1952 and 1953 , Cleveland lost championships to the Detroit Lions , who were then on the rise after decades of mediocrity . Before the 1953 season , McBride sold the team to a group of local businessmen led by David Jones for $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 306 @,@ 716 in 2016 dollars ) . While Brown was upset that McBride did not consult him about the deal , the new owners said they would stay out of the picture and let Brown run the team . Brown saw this as a crucial issue : he felt he needed full control over personnel decisions and coaching to make his system work . 
 Graham announced in 1953 that the following season would be his last . But the team won the championship in 1954 in a rematch against the Lions , and Brown convinced Graham to come back . Cleveland finished 1955 with a 9 – 2 – 1 record , reaching the championship game again . The Browns beat the Rams for their second straight championship , and Graham retired after the season . 
 = = = Later years in Cleveland ( 1956 – 1963 ) = = = 
 With Graham gone and the quarterback situation in flux , the Browns ended 1956 with a 5 – 7 record , Paul Brown 's first losing season as a professional coach . In the next year 's draft , the team selected Jim Brown out of Syracuse University . As television began to help football leapfrog baseball as America 's most popular sport , Jim Brown became a larger @-@ than @-@ life personality . He was handsome and charismatic in private and dominant on the field . Paul Brown , however , was critical of some aspects of Jim Brown 's game , including his disinclination to block . In Jim Brown 's first season , the team reached the championship game , again against the Lions , but lost 59 – 14 . The Browns did not contend for the championship in the following two years , when a Baltimore Colts team coached by Brown 's former protege Weeb Ewbank won a pair of titles . 
 As Jim Brown 's star rose , players began to question Paul Brown 's leadership and play @-@ calling in the late 1950s . The skepticism came to a head in a game against the Giants at the end of the 1958 season in which a win or tie would have given the Browns a spot in the championship game against Ewbank 's Colts . In the third quarter , the Browns drove to New York 's 16 @-@ yard line with a 10 – 3 lead and lined up for a field goal . But Coach Brown called a timeout before Groza could make the try , which alerted the Giants to a possible fake kick . Brown indeed called a fake , and the holder stumbled as he got up to throw , ruining the play . The Giants came back to win the game by a field goal and reach the championship , while the Browns went home without a spot in the title game for the second year in a row . 
 Paul Brown blamed the struggles on quarterback Milt Plum , whom the team had drafted in 1957 , saying the Browns had " lost faith in Plum 's ability to play under stress . " But the players were instead losing faith in Coach Brown and his autocratic style . Jim Brown started a weekly radio show , which Paul Brown did not like ; it undercut his control over the team and its message . But the coach found it hard to question Jim Brown given his feats on the field , and the tension between the two men grew . The team finished second in its division in 1959 and 1960 , even as Jim Brown racked up league @-@ leading seasons in rushing . 
 Art Modell , a New York advertising executive , bought the team in 1961 for almost $ 4 million ( $ 31 @,@ 674 @,@ 833 today ) . Modell , who was 35 years old at the time , bought out Brown 's 15 % stake in the team for $ 500 @,@ 000 and gave Brown a new eight @-@ year contract . He said he and Brown would have a " working partnership " , and began to play a more direct role than previous owners in the team 's operation . This angered Brown , who was used to having a free hand in football matters . Modell , who was single and only a few years older than most players , started to listen to their concerns about the coach . He became particularly close to Jim Brown , calling him " my senior partner " . Modell sat in the press box during games and could be overheard second @-@ guessing Paul Brown 's play @-@ calling , which drove a deeper wedge between the two men . At that time , Brown was the only coach who insisted on calling every offensive play . When Plum openly questioned Paul Brown 's absolute control over play @-@ calling , he was traded to Detroit . 
 The conflict between Paul Brown and Modell reached a breaking point when Brown traded star halfback Bobby Mitchell for the rights to Ernie Davis , a Heisman Trophy @-@ winning running back who broke all of Jim Brown 's rushing records at Syracuse . Paul Brown did not inform Modell of the move , and Modell only heard about it after getting a call from Washington Redskins owner George Preston Marshall . Davis , however , was diagnosed with leukemia before the 1962 season . He came to Cleveland to train after the cancer went into remission , but Brown would not allow him to play . Modell , however , wanted to give Davis a chance to play before he succumbed to the disease . Ultimately , the relationship between coach and owner was never repaired , and Ernie Davis never played in a professional game , dying on May 18 , 1963 . 
 = = = Departure from Cleveland = = = 
 As the rift between the players and Brown and between Modell and Brown grew , Modell fired Brown on January 7 , 1963 . A controversy developed over the timing of the decision amid a local newspaper strike , which limited discussion of the move . A printing company executive , however , got together a group of sportswriters and published a 32 @-@ page magazine fielding players ' views on the firing . Opinions were mixed ; Modell came in for his share of criticism , but tackle and team captain Mike McCormack said he did not think the team could win under Brown . Blanton Collier , Brown 's longtime assistant , was named the team 's new head coach , and Brown began to plan his next move as he continued to receive an $ 82 @,@ 500 salary under his eight @-@ year contract . 
 In exile after more than 30 years of coaching , Brown spent the next five years away from the sidelines , never once attending a Browns contest . While he was secure financially , Brown 's frustration grew with each passing year . " It was terrible , " he later recalled . " I had everything a man could want : leisure , enough money , a wonderful family . Yet with all that , I was eating my heart out . " Because Brown was still receiving his annual salary and liked to golf , it was said that the only two people who made more money playing golf were Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus . 
 Brown explored coaching possibilities , but he was mindful not to put himself in a position where his control might be challenged as it had been in Cleveland . In the mid @-@ 1960s , the American Football League ( AFL ) , which had formed to compete against the NFL , put a new franchise in Cincinnati . Brown was the third @-@ largest investor in the team and was given the title of coach and general manager . He was also given the right to represent the team in all league matters , a key element of control for Brown . 
 = = = Cincinnati Bengals = = = 
 Brown called his new franchise the Bengals because Cincinnati had a team of that name in the 1930s and he thought it would provide a link to the past . Brown 's son Mike joined the front office and became his father 's top assistant and right @-@ hand man . Brown brought in other assistants including Bill Johnson , Rick Forzano and Bill Walsh . In their first two seasons in 1968 and 1969 , the Bengals fared poorly , but the team appeared to be on the upswing as Brown built up a core group of players through the draft , including quarterback Greg Cook . 
 The Bengals entered the NFL in 1970 as a result of the AFL @-@ NFL merger , and were placed in the newly formed American Football Conference alongside the Browns . A career @-@ ending injury to Cook before the 1970 season forced the Bengals to rely on Virgil Carter , an emergency backup who could make accurate short passes but could not heave the ball like Cook once could . So Brown and Walsh went to work designing an offense around Carter 's limitations , a scheme that was the genesis of the West Coast offense Walsh later used to great effect when he became coach of the San Francisco 49ers . 
 The Bengals lost their first meeting with the Browns 30 – 27 in 1970 , and Brown was booed when he did not come on the field to shake Collier 's hand after the game . " I haven 't shaken the other coach 's hands after a game for years , " Brown explained . " ... I went up to him before the game , and we did our socializing then . " But the Bengals came back to beat the Browns later in the season . Brown called it " my greatest victory . " 
 In his years as the Bengals ' head coach , Brown took the team to the playoffs three times , including in 1970 . Yet despite finding a franchise quarterback in Ken Anderson , Brown 's team never got past the first round of the postseason tournament . Four days after the Bengals were eliminated from the playoffs in 1975 , Brown announced he was retiring after 45 years of coaching . The game had changed dramatically during his time in the NFL , growing from America 's second sport to the country 's biggest and most lucrative pastime . Brown was 67 years old . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Walsh was passed over in favor of Bill " Tiger " Johnson for the head coaching job when Brown retired . In a 2006 interview , Walsh said Brown worked against his candidacy to be a head coach anywhere in the league . " All the way through I had opportunities , and I never knew about them , " Walsh said . " And then when I left him , he called whoever he thought was necessary to keep me out of the NFL . " Brown stayed on as team president following his retirement , and the Bengals later made two trips to the Super Bowl , losing both games to Walsh and the 49ers . He rarely appeared in public , however . He died on August 5 , 1991 at home of complications from pneumonia . He and Katie had three sons : Robin , Mike and Pete . Following Katie 's death of a heart attack in 1969 , he married his former secretary Mary <unk> in 1973 . His son Robin died of cancer in 1978 . Brown is buried at Rose Hill Cemetery in Massillon . 
 Brown was succeeded by his son Mike as Bengals ' team president . Subsequently , in 2000 , Cincinnati opened a new football facility on the Ohio River , naming it Paul Brown Stadium . Brown was elected in 1967 to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton , Ohio . " I feel he 's as fine a coach as the game ever has had , " Otto Graham said at the induction ceremony . " I used to cuss him out and complain but now I 'm happy that I played under him . " In 2009 , Sporting News named Brown as the 12th greatest coach of all time ; only two other NFL coaches were listed above him . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Brown coached dozens of successful teams at the high school , college and professional levels , his controlling personality and sharp criticisms made him unpopular with many players . Brown was a methodical and disciplined coach who tolerated no deviation from his system . His professional teams ' planes did not wait for players who were late ; anyone who missed the flight was forced to find one on his own and pay a fine to Brown . When the Browns practiced twice in a day in training camp , each session was exactly 55 minutes . Regular practices during the season lasted an hour and 12 minutes . Players who made mistakes in games were held up for ridicule during film review sessions . " There got to be a saying , " longtime Browns safety Ken <unk> said years later . " ' There 's a right way , a wrong way and the Paul Brown way . ' If you did it the Paul Brown way , you were right . He was a very strict coach , and he expected you to toe the line . " 
 Brown was also a tough negotiator over salaries , often refusing to give players raises despite strong performance . He was called " cold and brutal " by sportswriters , and told players to be " ready to fight for your financial lives " . " When I signed with Paul , he felt that $ 1 @,@ 000 was $ 10 million , " said Gene Hickerson , a guard who played for the Browns in the late 1950s and 1960s . Brown 's stingy approach to salaries frustrated his players and was a motivating force behind the formation of the National Football League Players Association , which represents players ' interests in dealings with the league . Browns players including Dante Lavelli and Abe Gibron helped found the union in 1956 along with lawyer and former Browns assistant coach Creighton Miller . Brown was so annoyed by the union that he had a 1946 team photo in his office touched up to remove Miller . 
 Brown 's acrimonious departure from Cleveland was another source of criticism . His teams ' winning ways had helped obscure his harsh methods and need for control , but Modell 's active involvement in the team exposed them . Despite that Modell owned the team , Brown refused to cede any authority or be diplomatic in his relationship with Modell . Modell felt Brown was unwilling to adapt to the way football was played in the early 1960s . Many players from that time agreed . " Paul didn 't adjust to the changes in the game , " former Browns cornerback Bernie Parrish said in 1997 . " By 1962 , he was more worried about protecting his reputation as the Greatest Coach Who Ever Lived than he was about winning a title . ... By the end of the 1962 season , a lot of us wanted to be traded because we were convinced that we 'd never win a title with Paul Brown – and we never believed Paul Brown was going anywhere . " After his firing , Brown held a grudge against Modell for the rest of his life . He never forgave Collier for taking over as coach when he left , even though Collier had asked for and received his blessing . 
 Although he was criticized for his autocratic coaching style and strained relationships , Brown played a significant role in the evolution and modernization of football . The draw play he invented – a formation in which the quarterback drops back to pass but then hands off the ball to a running back – is still in wide use . In his autobiography , Brown said the play came about by accident in 1946 when Graham botched a play and improvised by making a late handoff to Marion Motley , who ran past the onrushing defenders for a large gain . He developed detailed pass patterns that were designed to exploit vulnerabilities in the defense . Brown is also credited with the creation of the passer 's pocket , an offensive line protection scheme that is designed to buy a quarterback a few extra precious seconds to find the open receiver . 
 Brown 's main contribution to the game , however , was not to the development of new plays but to the organization and administration of teams . Before Brown , football was seen as a chaotic affair where winning was a product mostly of physical prowess . Few coaches took strategy and preparation seriously . Brown , by contrast , hired a full @-@ time staff of assistants , tested his players on their intelligence and their knowledge of plays , instituted strict organization of practices and analyzed game film to get an edge on opponents . Brown created a detailed system for scouting college talent as a means to improve the Browns ' college draft . 
 The success of this systematic approach forced other teams to follow . Most of Brown 's organizational innovations are still in use today . " No one , I mean no one , has ever had total command and respect like Paul Brown , " Paul Wiggin , a former Browns defensive end , said in 1997 . " I believe that Paul Brown could have been a general in the Army ... you put Paul Brown in charge of anything and he would have been one of those special people who could organize and lead . " 
 Brown 's approach influenced future generations of coaches down to the present day . Men he worked directly with , including Don Shula , Weeb Ewbank , Chuck Noll and Bill Walsh , all adopted his system to some degree . 
 Brown was more than just a coach . He was a student of the game who had much to do with making professional football the attraction it is today . He made coaching a full @-@ time job for himself and all his assistants . Others had to follow suit or fall behind . So they did the logical thing — they copied his methods , both as a coach and innovator . ... " Paul Brown didn 't invent the game of football . He was just the first to take it seriously , " declared Sport Magazine in a December 1986 story ... Sid Gillman , Brown 's coaching contemporary for many years in the NFL , told the magazine he always felt that " before Paul Brown pro football was a ' daisy chain . ' He brought a system into pro football . He brought a practice routine . He broke down practice into individual areas . He had position coaches . He was an organizational genius . Before Paul Brown , coaches just rolled the ball out on the practice field . " 
 While Brown 's tenure in Cleveland ended in bitterness , the coach was a prolific innovator with the team . One factor in Brown 's success was his decision to hire a full @-@ time staff of dedicated position coaches , a break from the norm in an era when most assistants took second jobs in the offseason to make ends meet . Brown also invented the " taxi squad " , a group of promising players who did not make the roster but were kept on reserve . Team owner Mickey McBride put them on the payroll of his taxi company , although they did not drive cabs . 
 Brown sat his players down in classrooms and relentlessly tested them on their knowledge of the playbook , requiring them to copy down every play in a separate notebook for better retention . He was a terse man , and his criticisms of players were often withering and ruthless . He prohibited players from drinking , told them not to smoke in public and made coats and ties mandatory on road trips . They were not to have sex after Tuesday night during the season . 
 He was the first coach to use intelligence tests to evaluate players , scout opponents using game films and call plays for his quarterback using guards as messengers . He invented the draw play and helped develop the modern face mask after Len Ford and Otto Graham suffered facial injuries . Although critical of Brown 's coaching , Jim Brown said he integrated football in the right way : 
 Paul Brown integrated pro football without uttering a single word about integration . He just went out , signed a bunch of great black athletes , and started kicking butt . That 's how you do it . You don 't talk about it . Paul never said one word about race . But this was a time in sports when you 'd play in some cities and the white players could stay at the nice hotel , but the blacks had to stay in the homes of some black families in town . But not with Paul . We always stayed in hotels that took the entire team . Again , he never said a word . But in his own way , the man integrated football the right way – and no one was going to stop him . 
 = = Coaching tree = = 
 The following coaches are considered to be in Brown 's coaching tree , a grouping of people on whom his approach to the game is thought to have had an influence , either directly or indirectly . This is an excerpt of Brown 's tree , which is so large it is sometimes called a " forest " . Many of Brown 's coaching " descendants " have won NFL titles as head coaches , both before and after the creation of the Super Bowl . 
 A larger and more extended version of Paul Brown 's coaching tree , which could sometimes be called a forest , can be found here . However , this version completely omits any mention of Bill Walsh , or his tree . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = = High School = = = 
 1930 Severn School ( Maryland ) 7 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State Champion 
 1931 Severn School ( Maryland ) 5 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 
 1932 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 1 
 1933 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 8 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 
 1934 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 0 
 1935 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State & National Champion 
 1936 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State & National Champion 
 1937 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 8 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 
 1938 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State Champion 
 1939 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State & National Champion 
 1940 Massillon Washington ( Ohio ) 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 State & National Champion 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = John Treloar ( museum administrator ) = 
 John Linton Treloar , OBE ( 10 December 1894 – 28 January 1952 ) was an Australian archivist and the second director of the Australian War Memorial ( AWM ) . During World War I he served in several staff roles and later headed the First Australian Imperial Force 's ( AIF ) record @-@ keeping unit . From 1920 Treloar played an important role in establishing the AWM as its director . He headed an Australian Government department during the first years of World War II , and spent the remainder of the war in charge of the Australian military 's history section . Treloar returned to the AWM in 1946 , and continued as its director until his death . 
 Treloar 's career was focussed on the Australian military and its history . Prior to World War I he worked as a clerk in the Department of Defence and , after volunteering for the AIF in 1914 , formed part of the Australian Army officer Brudenell White 's staff for most of the war 's first years . He was appointed commander of the Australian War Records Section ( AWRS ) in 1917 . In this position , he improved the AIF 's records and collected a large number of artefacts for later display in Australia . Treloar was appointed the director of what eventually became the AWM in 1920 , and was a key figure in establishing the Memorial and raising funds for its permanent building in Canberra . He left the AWM at the outbreak of World War II to lead the Australian Government 's Department of Information , but was effectively sidelined for much of 1940 . In early 1941 he was appointed to command the Australian military 's Military History and Information Section with similar responsibilities to those he had held during World War I. He attempted to intervene in the management of the AWM during his absence , however , to the increasing frustration of its acting director . Treloar worked intensely in all his roles and suffered periods of ill @-@ health as a result . Following the war , he returned to the Memorial in 1946 but his performance deteriorated over time , possibly due to exhaustion . He died in January 1952 . 
 Treloar continues to be regarded as an important figure in Australian military history . His principal achievements are seen as gathering and classifying Australia 's records of the world wars and successfully establishing the AWM . The street behind the Memorial and its main storage annex were named in Treloar 's honour following his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Treloar was born in Melbourne on 10 December 1894 . His father was a sales representative for Carlton & United Breweries and his mother was a strict Methodist . Treloar was educated at Albert Park State School and became a trained Sunday school teacher . He was not able to attend university , but sought self @-@ education in Melbourne 's museums and libraries . Treloar also participated in his school 's cadet unit , and believed that the military offered a means to follow his ambition for a career in a field other than small business . He was also a capable footballer , cricket player , and athlete and was invited to train with the South Melbourne Football Club . He took his father 's advice to wait until he was 21 before playing senior games , however , and instead took a job with the Department of Defence after he left school in 1911 . In this position he worked as a clerk for Brudenell White , who was later a leading Australian staff officer of World War I and the commander of the Australian Army during the early months of World War II . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On 16 August 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I , Treloar enlisted in the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) and became a staff sergeant working for White in the headquarters of the 1st Division . He landed at Anzac Cove with the rest of the 1st Division 's Headquarters during the morning of 25 April 1915 , and subsequently participated in the Gallipoli Campaign . Treloar 's duties were mainly clerical , and included typing reports , orders and dispatches from senior officers . He frequently worked from 7 am to midnight , and this took a toll on his health . He contracted typhoid in late August , and was evacuated to Egypt on 4 September . Treloar came close to dying from this disease , and was returned to Australia to recuperate . He arrived in Melbourne on 4 December 1915 . During his convalescence , Treloar resumed a pre @-@ war friendship with Clarissa Aldridge and the couple became engaged . 
 When he recovered his health , Treloar returned to the military . An attempt to rejoin Brudenell White 's staff was unsuccessful , and he instead was posted to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) with the rank of lieutenant . In February 1916 , Treloar was assigned to No. 1 Squadron AFC in Egypt and served as its equipment officer until July 1916 , when he was transferred to France to become White 's confidential clerk in the headquarters of I Anzac Corps . At the time of the Battle of Pozières in late July Treloar was in charge of the corps headquarters ' Central Registry , which was responsible for communications within the headquarters as well as distributing orders to its subordinate units . During his staff roles Treloar gained a good understanding of military record @-@ keeping . In May 1917 , he was selected by White to command the newly established Australian War Records Section ( AWRS ) , and was promoted to the rank of captain . At the time he knew nothing of the Section 's role , and was unable to find any information about it . 
 Treloar assumed command of the AWRS on 16 May 1917 . At this time the Section comprised four enlisted soldiers and occupied two rooms in the British Public Record Office 's ( PRO ) building in London . Established upon the urging of the official Australian war correspondent Charles Bean , the unit was responsible for gathering records to serve as source material for the official histories that were to be written after the war . At this stage Australia did not have a national archive or public records office , and the AWRS was the first organisation set up to preserve any Commonwealth Government records . 
 Treloar 's first challenge was to improve the quality of the war diaries kept by AIF units . These diaries were meant to be maintained by each element of the AIF as a record of its activities for later use by historians , but at the time most units recorded few details . To this end , Treloar met with many of the officers responsible for units ' war diaries and frequently provided written advice and feedback on the quality of the records submitted to the Section ; these methods had previously been used by the Canadian military . Treloar also sought to motivate relevant personnel by demonstrating that the diaries were valued and would be important in ensuring that their unit received recognition for its achievements after the war . In August 1917 the AWRS expanded its activities to include collecting artefacts from the French battlefields . Its tasks increased further in September when it took over responsibility for supervising the official war artists as well as producing and keeping records of non @-@ official publications such as regimental magazines . Individual soldiers were encouraged to contribute artefacts and records , and the AWRS provided museum labels to combat units to encourage them to record the significance and origins of items they submitted . The AWRS established field offices in France and Egypt , and reached a strength of about 600 soldiers and civilians in November 1918 . From November 1917 until August 1918 the war correspondent Henry Gullett commanded the AWRS subsection in Cairo ; in this role he reported directly to Treloar . As a result of the AWRS ' expansion , in March 1918 its headquarters moved from the PRO building to a larger office on <unk> Road opposite the main offices of the AIF Administrative Headquarters . 
 As commander of the AWRS , Treloar worked enthusiastically and at times had to be ordered to take holidays . He told Bean that he was motivated " to do something really worthwhile for Australia " by bringing together the records covering Australia 's role in the war . He actively pursued records and artefacts covering a wide range of the AIF 's activities . While Bean was impressed by Treloar 's achievements , he believed that the young man was pushing himself too hard and was in danger of a breakdown . Although they shared accommodations in London for a period in 1918 , the two men were not close . Treloar was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) on 3 June 1918 for " services in connection with the war " and was promoted to major in December 1918 . While this promotion recognised his achievements as commander of the AWRS , it was mainly intended to improve his status when he attended meetings of the War Trophies Commission ; the British representative on this commission was a major general . Treloar arranged for Clarissa Aldridge to travel to Britain in 1918 , and they were married in London on 5 November . The couple eventually had two daughters and two sons . 
 Following the war , Treloar continued to organise the records the AWRS had collected . In the months after the war the Section was assigned a large number of soldiers to assist with this task . The AWRS also continued to gather artefacts , and by February 1919 it had a collection of over 25 @,@ 000 items ; Treloar regarded this as " a good collection " but still not sufficient . He sought to collect records and memorabilia relevant to all aspects of Australia 's experience in World War I , including material concerning the worst aspects of the Australian military . In doing so , Treloar deliberately did not make judgments on the historical value of the records and items submitted to the AWRS as he believed that this task should be left to others . On 3 June 1919 he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) , for " valuable services rendered in connexion with the war " . Treloar arrived back in Australia on 18 July 1919 . 
 The large quantity of artefacts and records which the AWRS had gathered were also returned to Australia in 1919 , though work on organising them into an archive was not completed until 1932 . The Australian War Museum was formed in 1919 on the basis of the Section 's collection , and Treloar joined the Museum at some stage during the year . Henry Gullett was appointed the War Museum 's first director on 11 August 1919 after Bean turned down the position so that he could focus on editing and writing the Official History of Australia in the War of 1914 – 1918 . Treloar was appointed the Museum 's deputy director on the same date . Bean , Gullet and Treloar were subsequently the key figures in the establishment of the AWM . 
 = = Establishing the War Memorial = = 
 Treloar became the acting director of the Australian War Museum in 1920 after Gullett resigned from the position and became head of the Australian Immigration Bureau . Gullet later wrote the official history of Australia 's involvement in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . Treloar was 26 years of age at the time he became director of the Museum and was responsible for the difficult task of establishing the institution . Between 1920 and 1922 he personally undertook much of the work associated with developing the Museum 's first major exhibition , which opened in Melbourne 's Royal Exhibition Building on Anzac Day 1922 . During this period the staff of the Australian War Museum were also responsible for providing administrative support for a program to distribute captured German equipment as war trophies to the Australian states . Treloar was a member of the committee overseeing this effort , and the associated administrative load came close to overwhelming him . 
 Treloar continued to expand the Australian War Museum 's collections during the 1920s . For instance , in 1921 he wrote to all the Australian Victoria Cross recipients of World War I or their families to ask that they donate their wartime diaries or other personal items . The Museum also actively sought the wartime diaries and letters written by other members of the AIF ; Treloar hoped that these records would allow a psychological study to be conducted on the men who had joined the AIF . Taking up an idea of Bean 's , Treloar also oversaw the development of several dioramas depicting key Australian battles of the war and engaged professional artists to make the models . Several of the dioramas produced in the 1920s remain on display in the AWM and are among its most popular exhibits . Treloar also oversaw the completion of the artworks which had been commissioned from the official war artists during World War I and , in collaboration with Bean , ordered additional works . 
 During its early years the AWM existed in a parlous state , and Treloar raised funds and advocated construction of a permanent building to house its records and collection of artefacts . Treloar and Bean convinced the Museum 's governing committee that it needed to raise funds so that the Museum was not entirely dependent on Government funding for its permanent building . To this end , Treloar established a sales section in the Museum in 1921 and recruited salesmen to sell books , reproductions of artworks and photographs as well as surplus items from the collection such as German helmets and rifle cartridges . The Government was slow to commit to building a permanent home for the Museum 's collection , however , and Treloar considered resigning in July 1922 to take up a position in the Department of Immigration . He ultimately decided against doing so , however . In mid @-@ 1923 he was temporarily released from the Museum and travelled to London as the secretary of Australia 's contribution to the British Empire Exhibition . He returned to Australia in early 1925 . During Treloar 's absence the Museum moved to Sydney , where its collection was housed in the Sydney Exhibition Building from April 1925 . The institution was renamed the Australian War Memorial during this year , and following the passage of the Australian War Memorial Act by the Parliament of Australia in September was formally established as the national memorial to the Australians killed during World War I. This act specified that the Memorial would be overseen by a twelve @-@ person Board of Management whose members were appointed by the Governor General of Australia . <unk> reported to this board , but it generally allowed him to run the Memorial as he saw fit . Treloar travelled to London again in 1927 to work on the British Empire Exhibition scheduled for that year , but returned after a few months when it was cancelled . On 8 December 1927 Treloar and the rest of the War Memorial 's staff were appointed permanently to their positions ; prior to this date they had been employed under temporary arrangements and Treloar had technically been a member of the Army 's headquarters . Treloar took a brief leave of absence in 1931 to help organise the Empire Exhibition that was planned for Sydney . 
 The construction of a permanent building for the Memorial was delayed by the Great Depression . In January 1924 the Commonwealth Government 's Cabinet approved a proposal to construct the War Memorial at the foot of Mount Ainslie in Canberra . An architectural competition was subsequently held , and Treloar was responsible for selecting the final designs to be considered after the judging panel had reduced the number of entries from 69 to 29 . None of these designs met all the necessary criteria , but two of the architects responsible for highly placed designs agreed to collaborate to produce a final design . Plans for the Memorial building were approved by the Commonwealth Parliament in 1928 , but funds for construction work were not available due to the impact of the Great Depression . Work finally began on the building in 1933 , and it was completed in 1941 . Until 1935 , Treloar and the Memorial 's administrative staff were located in Melbourne while the collection was split between Sydney and Melbourne . In that year , Treloar , along with 24 other Memorial staff , moved into the uncompleted building in Canberra and the Memorial in Sydney was closed to enable the collection to be relocated . 
 Treloar continued to seek commercial opportunities to raise funds for the Memorial during the 1920s and 1930s . As well as selling guidebooks , reproductions of artworks and surplus items , the Memorial raised substantial amounts of money from placing an admission fee on Will Longstaff 's painting Menin Gate at Midnight when it went on display in 1929 . This painting proved so popular that Treloar engaged ex @-@ servicemen to sell reproductions of it door to door . In 1931 Treloar ensured that the Memorial took over responsibility for the publication and distribution of the Official History of Australia in the War of 1914 – 1918 when the project suffered financial difficulties due to poor sales . As sales continued to be slow , Treloar actively promoted the series to RSL branches and members of the Australian Public Service ; a scheme he developed in which public servants purchased the books through regular pay deductions proved particularly successful . Treloar also engaged more salesmen to sell the series to households . These efforts led to a large increase in sales , and Bean remarked that not only had Treloar been more successful in selling the books than Angus & Robertson , its original publisher , but that " he would do better than [ the department store ] David Jones selling shirts " . This sales work was in addition to Treloar 's regular duties as the Memorial 's director , and he received an honorarium for it . 
 Treloar would typically work for six days each week , and normally stayed until late at night . In accordance with his Methodist beliefs , he did not work on Sundays . He continued to expand the Memorial 's collections by encouraging individuals to donate letters and diaries to supplement the official records . Treloar also placed an emphasis on safeguarding the collection ; in 1933 he personally investigated the theft of the German cruiser Emden 's bell from the Memorial in Sydney after the New South Wales Police broke off its investigation . With Treloar 's assistance the bell was recovered later that year . In May 1937 Treloar was among the senior public servants who were awarded a Coronation Medal to mark King George VI 's accession to the throne . Despite his enthusiasm , Treloar became frustrated by the repeated delays in opening the Memorial during the 1930s and believed that it would not be as successful as he had hoped . As a result , he began actively looking for a new career at the end of 1938 , starting by applying to be the secretary of the Melbourne Cricket Club . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Shortly before the outbreak of World War II Treloar wrote to the members of the AWM 's board to with proposals for how the Memorial should respond to another major war . This letter suggested that if hostilities occurred , the Memorial should suspend most of its activities and reorient its focus to become a memorial to all the wars in which Australia had taken part rather than just World War I. He further proposed that the Memorial building be used as a store and for government offices during the war , and that its staff establish a war records section similar to the AWRS . These proposals " ran counter to all that had been planned in the preceding years " and were rejected by the AWM board in October 1939 . The board did decide , however , to offer the Department of Defence assistance with collecting records and artefacts . Accordingly , work continued on the Memorial throughout World War II , though in February 1941 the board decided to extend its scope to include the new war . 
 Treloar left his position at the Memorial for the duration of World War II . In September 1939 Treloar 's close friend Henry Gullett , who at the time was the Minister for Information , appointed him the inaugural secretary of the Department of Information ( DOI ) . The DOI was the first of 17 new Australian Government departments to be established during the war , and was responsible for both censorship and disseminating government propaganda . Treloar ran the department in line with traditional Australian Public Service practices and took steps to prevent the its work from being politicised . To achieve this , he implemented tight internal controls over the DOI 's procedures and information dissemination functions and instructed subordinates to not defend the government from criticism . He remained the departmental secretary after Gullett was moved to a different ministry in March 1940 , but lost status when Keith Murdoch was appointed to the new position of Director @-@ General of Information in June that year . Murdoch 's appointment was part of a government campaign to generate public support for increased armaments production following the fall of France , and he placed a stronger emphasis on generating propaganda . Treloar was troubled by the use of the DOI 's photographers to produce publicity photographs instead of images with historical value . Gullet was killed in the Canberra air disaster on 13 August 1940 . Treloar regained full control of the DOI in December that year when Murdoch resigned , though its photographers were still mainly tasked with taking publicity photos . 
 At some point in 1940 or early 1941 , Treloar requested that he be appointed to command the War Records Section , which formed part of the Second Australian Imperial Force 's administrative headquarters . The Cabinet agreed to this during February 1941 . Treloar 's responsibilities in this role were to coordinate and control the collection of material to be included in the AWM as well as to supervise the official war artists and photographers ; these duties were similar to those he and Bean had undertaken during World War I. While Treloar was appointed to the rank of lieutenant colonel , he primarily worked for the AWM , which reimbursed the Army for his salary and allowances . This arrangement gave Treloar less influence with the Army than he had enjoyed as head of the AWRS during World War I. General Thomas Blamey , the commander of the AIF , subsequently redesignated the War Records Section the Military History and Information Section ( MHIS ) on the grounds that its original name had not adequately described the unit 's role . In contrast to the DOI 's propaganda activities , the MHIS focused on collecting records , images and items that would be useful to historians . 
 After assuming his new position , Treloar was sent to AIF Headquarters in the Middle East where Australian forces were engaged in the North African Campaign . While en route to the Middle East he visited Malaya . Conditions in North Africa proved more challenging than those in World War I , however , as the combat was fast @-@ moving and the Australian troops felt less motivation to collect artefacts than those of the First AIF . Treloar was supported by a small staff , but fell out with his second in command who questioned both how he administered the unit and his personal efficiency . He also lacked a patron in the AIF and was handicapped by his relatively junior rank . Due to his absence from the Memorial , Treloar had only limited input into the design of its galleries and he was unable to attend its official opening in November 1941 . 
 Following the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 , most elements of the AIF were returned to Australia . While MHIS teams accompanied the 6th and 7th Divisions when they departed the Middle East in early 1942 , Treloar remained in Egypt until May that year as he was initially unable to secure space on board ships for the Section 's extensive collections . He eventually reached Australia in mid @-@ 1942 and was based in Melbourne for the remainder of the war . At the time , the front line of the Pacific War was in the islands just to the north of Australia . As Treloar argued in a letter to Blamey , Australia had the " opportunity and responsibility to provide the world with the most nearly complete and authoritative ' source ' record " of the fighting . Blamey accepted this view , and in July 1942 , the MHIS was renamed the Military History Section ( MHS ) in recognition of its emphasis on military history rather than propaganda . On 26 June 1942 Treloar received a Mention in Despatches for his service in October 1941 . 
 The MHS continued the MHIS ' role of facilitating the production of high @-@ quality paper records and photographs of the war and collecting the resulting documents and images . The section had two field teams in April 1943 ( one in Australia and the other in New Guinea ) , and was expanded to nine teams by the end of 1944 . Treloar also focused on the official war artist program , and succeeded in fostering a high @-@ quality collection from a range of artistic styles . He placed a relatively low emphasis on collecting artefacts , however , and did not visit New Guinea even though it was the main Australian battlefield for most of the Pacific War . This concerned Bean , who wrote an unanswered letter to Treloar in July 1943 offering to help organise the collection of more items . In August 1943 Treloar 's son Ian was reported missing while serving as a Royal Australian Air Force warrant officer attached to the Royal Air Force . It was determined after the war that he had been killed in action . Treloar 's other son , Alan , served in the Second AIF and won a Rhodes Scholarship after the war . 
 By early 1944 Treloar was overworked and unhappy to be in Melbourne instead of at the Memorial . He was also uncomfortable with the way in which Bean and the AWM 's acting director Arthur Bazley were running the Memorial in his absence , and sought to intervene in its management . This degree of intervention frustrated Bazley , and led to increasing conflict between the two men who had worked together since 1917 . Their relationship worsened in 1945 , and the Memorial 's board was eventually forced to make a ruling on what Bazley and Treloar 's responsibilities were . In 1946 , Bazley left the Memorial to take a job in the Department of Immigration due to continuing tensions with Treloar . 
 One of Treloar 's duties throughout much of the war was to compile and edit service annual books , which were compilations of articles written by military personnel and published by the AWM . He first proposed this in mid @-@ 1941 as an equivalent of The Anzac Book , which was a collection of anecdotes written by Australian soldiers during the Gallipoli Campaign . The first of these books , entitled Active Service , was printed during late 1941 and early 1942 and eventually sold 138 @,@ 208 copies . Seventeen service annual books were produced during and after the war , with combined sales of 1 @,@ 907 @,@ 446 copies . These books were sold at a profit and earned the Memorial large amounts of money . Treloar 's editorial role came on top of his full @-@ time duties as head of the MHS and was one of the main causes of his exhaustion and anxiety in the final years of the war . 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 Treloar returned to the AWM on 2 September 1946 and was formally discharged from the Army in 1947 . At the time he believed he was suffering from bad health , but wanted to resume his work at the Memorial rather than enter hospital . While Clarissa Treloar remained in Melbourne , their daughter Dawn moved to Canberra and took up a position in the Memorial 's library . Treloar continued to work long hours in the years after the war . He lived in a <unk> hole next to his office and signed the attendance book while walking from bed to his desk . Bean later claimed that Treloar had personally managed all areas of the Memorial other than its library . While Dawn provided him with company , family members and AWM staff believed that Treloar was lonely and did not have a social life . His letters to the official artists engaged by the AWM were frequently relaxed , however , and he became friends with Leslie Bowles and William Dargie . While Treloar was a teetotaler and non @-@ smoker , he occasionally shared wine and cigarettes with Dargie . 
 The main challenges for the Memorial in the post @-@ war years were integrating the World War II collections with those from World War I and securing funding to expand its building . Treloar did not seek to increase the Memorial 's holdings of World War II artefacts beyond supporting the completion of works commissioned from the official war artists . As a result , the Memorial 's collection of World War II memorabilia was inferior to that assembled during and after World War I , and many of its best @-@ known items such as the bomber G for George were acquired as donations from the Government rather than through Treloar 's efforts . It was not until October 1948 that the Government agreed to fund an expansion of the AWM after lobbying by Treloar and the Memorial 's board . 
 Treloar experienced difficulties managing the Memorial and its staff in the years after World War II . While the AWM had few difficulties recruiting staff , it struggled to retain them due to housing shortages in Canberra and the way in which the Memorial was run . Treloar 's working style contributed to these problems ; although he was personally friendly and took an interest in the wellbeing of his employees , he did not delegate tasks and it was difficult for AWM staff to meet with him in person to discuss their responsibilities . This made it difficult for staff to complete urgent tasks , and contributed to delays in key projects such as the construction of the Memorial 's Hall of Memory . Tom Hungerford , who worked for the AWM between 1948 and 1949 , wrote in his memoirs that Treloar was " most dedicated , most incredibly hard @-@ working , most unfailingly kind and most ineffectual " . Treloar increasingly obsessed over relatively minor details and gained a reputation for indecisiveness . 
 Treloar 's work patterns took a toll on his health , and the deterioration in his performance after 1946 was possibly the result of exhaustion . Despite this , the Memorial 's board did not intervene in the institution 's management and allowed Treloar to remain in his position . In January 1952 , Dawn found him ill in bed after noticing that he had not signed the attendance book . Treloar was subsequently admitted to the Canberra Community Hospital where he died on 28 January as a result of an intestinal haemorrhage . His funeral was held two days later at Reid Methodist Church in Canberra , and he was subsequently buried in the returned soldiers section of Woden Cemetery . 
 Treloar 's death left the AWM in a state of crisis . Due to his close control over the Memorial , none of its staff knew what his plans had been and it was unclear how to continue key tasks such as completing the Roll of Honour , classifying and displaying items collected during World War II and managing the Memorial 's finances . In addition , two fifths of the AWM 's staff positions were vacant as Treloar had chosen to delay filling these vacancies . Jim McGrath , who had been the Memorial 's Assistant Director ( Administration ) since May 1951 , became acting director when Treloar was hospitalised and was confirmed in this position on 15 May 1952 ; Bazley had also applied for this job but lost to McGrath despite having Bean 's support . Under the direction of Bean , who had been appointed the Chairman of the Memorial 's Board in June 1951 , McGrath established a committee to develop strategies for both completing and further developing the Memorial . Bean also personally reviewed the Memorial 's collection of World War I artefacts during 1952 and 1953 , and found that the register of these items was inadequate and it was not possible to locate many of them . He attributed this to the movement of the collection between Melbourne , Sydney and Canberra and the changes of directorship during periods in which Treloar was absent . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following his death , Treloar was praised for the personal sacrifices he had made to establish the AWM , as well as for the high quality of the Memorial . The Memorial 's storage and display annex at Mitchell , Australian Capital Territory , was subsequently named in Treloar 's honour and a commemorative plaque was located outside the AWM 's archival research centre until 1985 . In 1956 the street behind the Memorial 's main building was named Treloar Crescent . In addition , the AWM named a grant it provided to researchers the ' John Treloar Grant ' . 
 Treloar continues to be regarded as an important figure in Australian military history . The Oxford Companion to Australian Military History states that " there is little doubt that the Australian War Memorial would have foundered had it not been for Treloar 's tireless and selfless labours , which almost certainly shortened his life " and that he was " Australia 's first great museum professional " . The collection of World War I records he organised is still used by historians and researchers , and is labelled an " archival record of remarkable detail and accessibility " in his Australian Dictionary of Biography entry . In 1993 Alan Treloar published the diary his father had kept during World War I. 
 = Østhorn ( station ) = 
 Østhorn ( until 1939 Korsvoll ) is a station on the Sognsvann Line ( line 6 ) of the Oslo Metro in Norway . It is located 7 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) from Stortinget station between Tåsen and Holstein stations . As one of the original stations on the line , Østhorn was opened on 10 October 1934 . Nordberg was formerly the next northbound station , but it was closed in 1992 , when the Sognsvann Line was upgraded to metro standard . Østhorn is located near a hill named Havnabakken , where local residents toboggan at winter 's time . 
 = = History = = 
 Korsvoll station opened on 10 October 1930 , when Akersbanerne had finished the <unk> Line from Majorstuen to Sognsvann station . The line was double @-@ tracked from Majorstuen to Korsvoll , and single @-@ tracked from there to Sognsvann . In 1939 , the section Korsvoll – Sognsvann was upgraded to double tracks , and the station Korsvoll had its name changed to Østhorn . The name " Østhorn " owes its origins to a crag by the same name that was demolished during the construction of the Sognsvann Line . The station is now positioned inside the remains of the crag , with metal nest put up to prevent any crumbling of the surrounding crag . 
 Østhorn was part of Holmenkolbanen 's operating network until 1975 , when the municipality of Oslo bought all the company 's stock . In 1993 , the stations on the Sognsvann Line were upgraded to metro standard , which involves a heightening and lengthening of the platforms , and installation of third rail power supply and a new signaling system . During the upgrade , Tåsen station was moved 150 metres ( 490 ft ) further north , and Nordberg station was closed . Many local residents opposed the new station upgrades , arguing that Nordberg had served the area well with its close connection to the elderly center <unk> . Many wanted to rather close Østhorn or Holstein than Nordberg , since the latter was the most used station in the area . Oslo Sporveier stated that the access roads to Nordberg were very steep and dangerous , and referred to a case in the 1950s where some local youth had been tobogganing over the rail intersection at Nordberg , and hit a truck near the station . They also argued that the 200 metres ( 660 ft ) distance between Nordberg and Holstein was too close for having two stations , and promised to build a walkway from Nordberg to Holstein . 
 = = Service = = 
 Østhorn is served by the line 3 on the Sognsvann Line , operated by Oslo T @-@ banedrift on contract with Ruter . The rapid transit serves the station every 15 minutes , except in the late evening and on weekend mornings , when there is a 30 @-@ minute headway . Travel time along the 7 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) portion to Stortinget in the city center is 13 minutes . 
 The station provides correspondence to the bus lines 22 and 25 on the top of Havnabakken , a five @-@ minute walk away . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Østhorn has two platforms , each with a wooden shed . The sheds are designed by Arne Henriksen in a minimalist and standardised style with constructions of wood and steel . Østhorn serves the residential areas Korsvoll and Nordberg . The station is located at the bottom of a small hill named Havnabakken , where local residents toboggan at winter 's time . 
 = Taurus ( constellation ) = 
 Taurus ( Latin for " the Bull " ; symbol : , Unicode : <unk> ) is one of the constellations of the zodiac , which means it is crossed by the plane of the ecliptic . Taurus is a large and prominent constellation in the northern hemisphere 's winter sky . It is one of the oldest constellations , dating back to at least the Early Bronze Age when it marked the location of the Sun during the spring equinox . Its importance to the agricultural calendar influenced various bull figures in the mythologies of Ancient Sumer , Akkad , Assyria , Babylon , Egypt , Greece , and Rome . 
 A number of features exist that are of interest to astronomers . Taurus hosts two of the nearest open clusters to Earth , the Pleiades and the Hyades , both of which are visible to the naked eye . At first magnitude , the red giant Aldebaran is the brightest star in the constellation . In the northwest part of Taurus is the supernova remnant Messier 1 , more commonly known as the Crab Nebula . One of the closest regions of active star formation , the Taurus @-@ Auriga complex , crosses into the northern part of the constellation . The variable star T Tauri is the prototype of a class of pre @-@ main @-@ sequence stars . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Taurus is a big and prominent constellation in the northern hemisphere 's winter sky , between Aries to the west and Gemini to the east ; to the north lie Perseus and Auriga , to the southeast Orion , to the south Eridanus , and to the southwest Cetus . In September and October , Taurus is visible in the evening along the eastern horizon . The most favorable time to observe Taurus in the night sky is during the months of December and January . By March and April , the constellation will appear to the west during the evening twilight . 
 This constellation forms part of the zodiac , and hence is intersected by the ecliptic . This circle across the celestial sphere forms the apparent path of the Sun as the Earth completes its annual orbit . As the orbital plane of the Moon and the planets lie near the ecliptic , they can usually be found in the constellation Taurus during some part of each year . The galactic plane of the Milky Way intersects the northeast corner of the constellation and the galactic anticenter is located near the border between Taurus and Auriga . Taurus is the only constellation crossed by all three of the galactic equator , celestial equator , and ecliptic . A ring @-@ like galactic structure known as the Gould 's Belt passes through the Taurus constellation . 
 The recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is " Tau " . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 26 segments . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between <unk> <unk> and 05h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between 31 @.@ 10 ° and − 1 @.@ 35 ° . Because a small part of the constellation lies to the south of the celestial equator , this can not be a completely circumpolar constellation at any latitude . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 During November , the Taurid meteor shower appears to radiate from the general direction of this constellation . The Beta Taurid meteor shower occurs during the months of June and July in the daytime , and is normally observed using radio techniques . In October , between the 18th and the 29th , both the Northern Taurids and the Southern Taurids are active ; though the latter stream is stronger . However , between November 1 and 10 , the two streams equalize . 
 The brightest member of this constellation is Aldebaran , an orange @-@ hued , spectral class K5 III giant star . Its name derives from <unk> al @-@ <unk> , Arabic for " the follower " , probably from the fact that it follows the Pleiades during the nightly motion of the celestial sphere across the sky . Forming the profile of a Bull 's face is a V or A @-@ shaped asterism of stars . This outline is created by prominent members of the Hyades , the nearest distinct open star cluster after the Ursa Major Moving Group . In this profile , Aldebaran forms the bull 's bloodshot eye , which has been described as " glaring menacingly at the hunter Orion " , a constellation that lies just to the southwest . The Hyades span about 5 ° of the sky , so that they can only be viewed in their entirety with binoculars or the unaided eye . It includes a naked eye double star , Theta Tauri , with a separation of 5 @.@ 6 arcminutes . 
 In the northeastern quadrant of the Taurus constellation lie the Pleiades ( M45 ) , one of the best known open clusters , easily visible to the naked eye . The seven most prominent stars in this cluster are at least visual magnitude six , and so the cluster is also named the " Seven Sisters " . However , many more stars are visible with even a modest telescope . Astronomers estimate that the cluster has approximately 500 @-@ 1 @,@ 000 stars , all of which are around 100 million years old . However , they vary considerably in type . The Pleiades themselves are represented by large , bright stars ; also many small brown dwarfs and white dwarfs exist . The cluster is estimated to dissipate in another 250 million years . The Pleiades cluster is classified as a Shapley class c and Trumpler class I 3 r n cluster , indicating that it is irregularly shaped and loose , though concentrated at its center and detached from the star field . 
 In the northern part of the constellation to the northwest of the Pleiades lies the Crystal Ball Nebula , known by its catalogue designation of NGC 1514 . This planetary nebula is of historical interest following its discovery by German @-@ born English astronomer William Herschel in 1790 . Prior to that time , astronomers had assumed that nebulae were simply unresolved groups of stars . However , Herschel could clearly resolve a star at the center of the nebula that was surrounded by a nebulous cloud of some type . In 1864 , English astronomer William Huggins used the spectrum of this nebula to deduce that the nebula is a luminous gas , rather than stars . 
 To the west , the two horns of the bull are formed by Beta ( β ) Tauri and Zeta ( ζ ) Tauri ; two star systems that are separated by 8 ° . Beta is a white , spectral class B7 III giant star known as El Nath , which comes from the Arabic phrase " the butting " , as in butting by the horns of the bull . At magnitude 1 @.@ 65 , it is the second brightest star in the constellation , and shares the border with the neighboring constellation of Auriga . As a result , it also bears the designation Gamma Aurigae . Zeta Tauri is an eclipsing binary star that completes an orbit every 133 days . 
 A degree to the northwest of ζ Tauri is the Crab Nebula ( M1 ) , a supernova remnant . This expanding nebula was created by a Type II supernova explosion , which was seen from Earth on July 4 , 1054 . It was bright enough to be observed during the day , and is mentioned in Chinese historical texts . At its peak the supernova reached magnitude − 4 , but the nebula is currently magnitude 8 @.@ 4 and requires a telescope to observe . North American peoples also observed the supernova , as evidenced from a painting on a New Mexican canyon and various pieces of pottery that depict the event . However , the remnant itself was not discovered until 1731 , when John Bevis found it . 
 The star Lambda ( λ ) Tauri is an eclipsing binary star . This system consists of a spectral class B3 star being orbited by a less massive class A4 star . The plane of their orbit lies almost along the line of sight to the Earth . Every 3 @.@ 953 days the system temporarily decreases in brightness by 1 @.@ 1 magnitudes as the brighter star is partially eclipsed by the dimmer companion . The two stars are separated by only 0 @.@ 1 astronomical units , so their shapes are modified by mutual tidal interaction . This results in a variation of their net magnitude throughout each orbit . 
 Located about 1 @.@ 8 ° west of Epsilon ( ε ) Tauri is T Tauri , the prototype of a class of variable stars called T Tauri stars . This star undergoes erratic changes in luminosity , varying between magnitude 9 to 13 over a period of weeks or months . This is a newly formed stellar object that is just emerging from its envelope of gas and dust , but has not yet become a main sequence star . The surrounding reflection nebula NGC 1555 is illuminated by T Tauri , and thus is also variable in luminosity . To the north lies Kappa Tauri , a visual double star consisting of two A7 @-@ type components . The pair have a separation of just 5 @.@ 6 arc minutes , making them a challenge to split with the naked eye . 
 This constellation includes part of the Taurus @-@ Auriga complex , or Taurus dark clouds , a star @-@ forming region containing sparse , filamentary clouds of gas and dust . This spans a diameter of 98 light @-@ years ( 30 parsecs ) and contains 35 @,@ 000 solar masses of material , which is both larger and less massive than the Orion Nebula . At a distance of 490 light @-@ years ( 150 parsecs ) , this is one of the nearest active star forming regions . Located in this region , about 10 ° to the northeast of Aldebaran , is an asterism NGC 1746 spanning a width of 45 arcminutes . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 The identification of the constellation of Taurus with a bull is very old , certainly dating to the Chalcolithic , and perhaps even to the Upper Paleolithic . Michael <unk> of the University of Munich believes that Taurus is represented in a cave painting at the Hall of the Bulls in the caves at Lascaux ( dated to roughly 15 @,@ 000 BC ) , which he believes is accompanied by a depiction of the Pleiades . The name " seven sisters " has been used for the Pleiades in the languages of many cultures , including indigenous groups of Australia , North America and Siberia . This suggests that the name may have a common ancient origin . 
 Taurus marked the point of vernal ( spring ) equinox in the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age , from about 4000 BC to 1700 BC , after which it moved into the neighboring constellation Aries . The Pleiades were closest to the Sun at vernal equinox around the 23rd century BC . In Babylonian astronomy , the constellation was listed in the MUL.APIN as <unk> , " The Bull of Heaven " . As this constellation marked the vernal equinox , it was also the first constellation in the Babylonian zodiac and they described it as " The Bull in Front " . The Akkadian name was <unk> . 
