 In the Mesopotamian Epic of Gilgamesh , one of the earliest works of literature , the goddess Ishtar sends Taurus , the Bull of Heaven , to kill Gilgamesh for spurning her advances . Some locate Gilgamesh as the neighboring constellation of Orion , facing Taurus as if in combat , while others identify him with the sun whose rising on the equinox vanquishes the constellation . In early Mesopotamian art , the Bull of Heaven was closely associated with Inanna , the Sumerian goddess of sexual love , fertility , and warfare . One of the oldest depictions shows the bull standing before the goddess ' standard ; since it has 3 stars depicted on its back ( the cuneiform sign for " star @-@ constellation " ) , there is good reason to regard this as the constellation later known as Taurus . 
 The same iconic representation of the Heavenly Bull was depicted in the Dendera zodiac , an Egyptian bas @-@ relief carving in a ceiling that depicted the celestial hemisphere using a planisphere . In these ancient cultures , the orientation of the horns was portrayed as upward or backward . This differed from the later Greek depiction where the horns pointed forward . To the Egyptians , the constellation Taurus was a sacred bull that was associated with the renewal of life in spring . When the spring equinox entered Taurus , the constellation would become covered by the Sun in the western sky as spring began . This " sacrifice " led to the renewal of the land . To the early Hebrews , Taurus was the first constellation in their zodiac and consequently it was represented by the first letter in their alphabet , Aleph . 
 In Greek mythology , Taurus was identified with Zeus , who assumed the form of a magnificent white bull to abduct Europa , a legendary Phoenician princess . In illustrations of Greek mythology , only the front portion of this constellation are depicted ; this was sometimes explained as Taurus being partly submerged as he carried Europa out to sea . A second Greek myth portrays Taurus as Io , a mistress of Zeus . To hide his lover from his wife Hera , Zeus changed Io into the form of a heifer . Greek mythographer <unk> marks the bull Taurus as the same that formed the myth of the Cretan Bull , one of The Twelve Labors of Heracles . 
 Taurus became an important object of worship among the Druids . Their <unk> religious festival was held while the Sun passed through the constellation . Among the arctic people known as the Inuit , the constellation is called <unk> and the Hyades is <unk> , with the latter representing the spirit of the polar bear . Aldebaran represents the bear , with the remainder of the stars in the Hyades being dogs that are holding the beast at bay . In Buddhism , legends hold that Gautama Buddha was born when the Full Moon was in <unk> , or Taurus . Buddha 's birthday is celebrated with the <unk> Festival , or <unk> , which occurs on the first or second Full Moon when the Sun is in Taurus . 
 = = = Astrology = = = 
 As of 2008 , the Sun appears in the constellation Taurus from May 13 to June 21 . In tropical astrology , the Sun is considered to be in the sign Taurus from April 20 to May 20 . 
 = = = Space exploration = = = 
 The space probe Pioneer 10 is moving in the direction of this constellation , though it will not be nearing any of the stars in this constellation for many thousands of years , by which time its batteries will be long dead . 
 = = = Solar eclipse of May 29 , 1919 = = = 
 Several stars in Hyades cluster include Kappa Tauri were photographed during Solar eclipse of May 29 , 1919 by the expedition of Arthur Eddington in Príncipe and others in Sobral , Brazil that confirmed Albert Einstein 's prediction of the bending of light around the Sun from his general theory of relativity which he published in 1915 . 
 = = Book references = = 
 = L 'incoronazione di Poppea = 
 L 'incoronazione di Poppea ( SV 308 , The Coronation of Poppaea ) is an Italian opera by Claudio Monteverdi , with a libretto by Giovanni Francesco Busenello , first performed at the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo in Venice during the 1643 carnival season . One of the first operas to use historical events and people , it describes how Poppaea , mistress of the Roman emperor Nero , is able to achieve her ambition and be crowned empress . The opera was revived in Naples in 1651 , but was then neglected until the rediscovery of the score in 1888 , after which it became the subject of scholarly attention in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Since the 1960s , the opera has been performed and recorded many times . 
 The original manuscript of the score does not exist ; two surviving copies from the 1650s show significant differences from each other , and each differs to some extent from the libretto . How much of the music is actually Monteverdi 's , and how much the product of others , is a matter of dispute . None of the existing versions of the libretto , printed or manuscript , can be definitively tied to the first performance at the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo , the precise date of which is unknown . Details of the original cast are few and largely speculative , and there is no record of the opera 's initial public reception . Despite these uncertainties , the work is generally accepted as part of the Monteverdi operatic canon , his last and perhaps his greatest work . 
 In a departure from traditional literary morality , it is the adulterous liaison of Poppea and Nerone which wins the day , although this triumph is demonstrated by history to have been transitory and hollow . In Busenello 's version of the story all the major characters are morally compromised . Written when the genre of opera was only a few decades old , the music for L 'incoronazione di Poppea has been praised for its originality , its melody , and for its reflection of the human attributes of its characters . The work helped to redefine the boundaries of theatrical music and established Monteverdi as the leading musical dramatist of his time . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Opera as a dramatic genre originated around the turn from the 16th to the 17th centuries , although the word itself was not in use before 1650 . Precursors of musical drama included pastoral plays with songs and choruses , and the madrigal comedies of the late 16th century . Monteverdi had already established himself as a leading composer of madrigals before writing his first full @-@ length operas in the years 1606 – 08 , while he was in the service of Vincenzo Gonzaga , Duke of Mantua . These works , L 'Orfeo and L 'Arianna , deal respectively with the Greek myths of Orpheus and Ariadne . After a disagreement in 1612 with Vincenzo 's successor , Duke Francesco Gonzaga , Monteverdi moved to Venice to take up the position of director of music at St Mark 's Basilica , where he remained until his death in 1643 . 
 Amid his official duties at Venice , Monteverdi maintained an interest in theatrical music and produced several stage works , including the substantial Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda ( The battle of Tancred and Clorinda ) for the 1624 – 25 carnival . When the first public opera house in the world opened in Venice in 1637 , Monteverdi , by then in his 70th year , returned to writing full @-@ scale opera . He may have been influenced by the solicitations of Giacomo Badoaro , an aristocratic poet and intellectual who sent the elderly composer the libretto for Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria ( The return of Ulysses ) . For the 1639 – 40 carnival season , Monteverdi revived L 'Arianna at the Teatro San Moisè and later produced his setting of Il ritorno at the Teatro San Cassiano . For the following season he wrote Le nozze d 'Enea in Lavinia ( The marriage of Aeneas to Lavinia ) , now lost , which was performed at the third of Venice 's new opera theatres , Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paulo . 
 Another wealthy poet @-@ librettist in the Venice milieu was Giovanni Francesco Busenello ( 1598 – 1659 ) , like Badoaro a member of the intellectual society Accademia degli Incogniti . This group of free @-@ thinking intellectuals had significant influence on the cultural and political life of Venice in the mid @-@ 17th century , and was particularly active in the promotion of musical theatre . Busenello had worked with Monteverdi 's younger contemporary Francesco Cavalli , providing the libretto for Didone ( 1641 ) , and according to theatre historian Mark Ringer was " among the greatest librettists in the history of opera " . It is unclear how and when Busenello met Monteverdi , though both had served in the Gonzaga court . Ringer speculates that they drew joint inspiration from their experiences of the Gonzaga style of rule , " a mixture of artistic cultivation and brutality " , and thus developed a shared artistic vision . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Libretto = = = 
 The main sources for the story told in Busenello 's libretto are the Annals of Tacitus ; book 6 of Suetonius 's history The Twelve Caesars ; books 61 – 62 of Dio Cassius 's Roman History ; and an anonymous play Octavia ( once attributed to the real life Seneca ) , from which the opera 's fictional nurse characters were derived . The main story is based on real people and events . According to the analyst Magnus Schneider , the character of Drusilla was taken from Girolamo <unk> 's 16th @-@ century comedy The Pilgrim Woman . 
 Busenello condensed historical events from a seven @-@ year period ( AD 58 to AD 65 ) into a single day 's action , and imposed his own sequence . He was open about his intention to adapt history for his own purposes , writing in the preface to his libretto that " here we represent these actions differently . " Thus he gave his characters different attributes from those of their historical counterparts : Nerone 's cruelty is downplayed ; the wronged wife Ottavia is presented as a murderous plotter ; Seneca , whose death in reality had nothing to do with Nerone 's liaison with Poppea , appears as more noble and virtuous than he was ; Poppea 's motives are represented as based on genuine love as much as on a lust for power ; the depiction of Lucano as a drunken carouser disguises the real life poet Lucan 's status as a major Roman poet with marked anti @-@ imperial and pro @-@ republican tendencies . 
 The libretto has survived in numerous forms — two printed versions , seven manuscript versions or fragments , and an anonymous scenario , or summary , related to the original production . One of the printed editions relates to the opera 's 1651 Naples revival ; the other is Busenello 's final version published in 1656 as part of a collection of his libretti . The manuscripts are all from the 17th century , though not all are specifically dated ; some are " literary " versions unrelated to performances . The most significant of the manuscript copies is that discovered in Udine , Northern Italy , in 1997 by Monteverdi scholar Paolo Fabbri . This manuscript , according to music historian Ellen Rosand , " bristles with the immediacy of a performance " , and is the only copy of the libretto that mentions Monteverdi by name . This , and other descriptive details missing from other copies , leads Rosand to speculate that the manuscript was copied during the course of a performance . This impression is reinforced , she says , by the inclusion of a paean of praise to the singer ( Anna di Valerio according to Schneider ) who played the role of Poppea . Although its dating is uncertain , the manuscript 's affinity with the original scenario has led to speculation that the Udine version may have been compiled from the first performance . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Two versions of the musical score of L 'incoronazione exist , both from the 1650s . The first was rediscovered in Venice in 1888 , the second in Naples in 1930 . The Naples score is linked to the revival of the opera in that city in 1651 . Both scores contain essentially the same music , though each differs from the printed libretto and has unique additions and omissions . In each score the vocal lines are shown with basso continuo accompaniment ; the instrumental sections are written in three parts in the Venice score , four parts in the Naples version , without in either case specifying the instruments . Conductor Nikolaus Harnoncourt , a leading Monteverdi interpreter , refers to the contemporary practice of leaving much of a score open , to allow for differing local performance conditions . Another convention made it unnecessary to write down detail that performers would take for granted . Neither Venice nor Naples score can be linked to the original performance ; although the Venice version is generally regarded as the more authentic , modern productions tend to use material from both . 
 The question of authorship — essentially of how much of the music is Monteverdi 's — is a contentious one , which Rosand acknowledges might never be entirely resolved . Virtually none of the contemporary documentation mentions Monteverdi , and music by other composers has been identified in the scores , including passages found in the score of Francesco Sacrati 's opera La finta pazza . A particular style of metric notation used in some passages of the L 'incoronazione scores suggests the work of younger composers . The most debated areas of authorship are parts of the prologue , Ottone 's music , the flirtation scene between <unk> and <unk> , and the coronation scene including the final " Pur ti <unk> " duet . 
 Modern scholarship inclines to the view that L 'incoronazione was the result of collaboration between Monteverdi and others , with the old composer playing a guiding role . Composers who may have assisted include Sacrati , Benedetto Ferrari and Francesco Cavalli . Ringer suggests that Monteverdi 's age and health may have prevented him from completing the opera without help from younger colleagues ; he speculates about an arrangement resembling " the workshop of Rubens , who might design a painting and handle the important details himself but leave the more mundane aspects ... to younger apprentice artists . " The musicologist Alan Curtis believes that only a single collaborator was involved , and published his 1989 edition of L 'incoronazione under the joint authorship of Monteverdi and Sacrati . The musical analyst Eric Chafe 's study of Monteverdi 's tonal language supports the collaboration theory and postulates that some of the sections in question , including the prologue , the coronation scene and the final duet , reflect Monteverdi 's intentions and may have been written under his direct supervision . 
 = = = Morality = = = 
 L 'incoronazione di Poppea is frequently described as a story in which virtue is punished and greed rewarded , running counter to the normal conventions of literary morality . The musicologist Tim Carter calls the opera 's characters and their actions " famously problematic " , and its messages " at best ambiguous and at worst perverted " , while Rosand refers to an " extraordinary glorification of lust and ambition " . The critic Edward B. Savage asserts that despite the lack of a moral compass in virtually all the main characters , Busenello 's plot is itself essentially moral , and that " this morality is sustained by the phenomenon of dramatic irony " . From their knowledge of Roman history , audiences in Venice would have recognised that the apparent triumph of love over virtue , celebrated by Nerone and Poppea in the closing duet , was in reality hollow , and that not long after this event Nerone kicked the pregnant Poppea to death . They would have known , too , that Nerone himself committed suicide a few years later , and that others — Ottavia , Lucano , Ottone — also met untimely deaths . 
 Seventeenth @-@ century Rome , under autocratic papal rule , was perceived by republican Venetians as a direct threat to their liberties . Rosand has suggested that Venetian audiences would have understood the Poppea story in the context of their own times as a moral lesson demonstrating the superiority of Venice , and that " such immorality was only possible in a decaying society , not [ in ] a civilized nation " . Rosand concludes that the opera 's broad moral compass places it first in a long tradition of operatic works that embraces Mozart 's Don Giovanni and Verdi 's Don Carlos . Music analyst Clifford Bartlett writes that " Monteverdi 's glorious music goes beyond Busenello 's cynical realism , and presents human behaviour in a better light " . 
 = = Roles = = 
 The score for L 'incoronazione features 28 singing characters , including 7 ensemble parts , of which the two <unk> may only have appeared in the 1651 Naples production . The original Venetian production evidently made use of extensive role @-@ doubling , allowing the opera to be staged with no more than 11 singers : two female sopranos , three male sopranos ( <unk> ) , two contraltos ( <unk> ) , two tenors and two basses . Schneider has suggested the following reconstruction of the cast and the doubling plan from the 1643 premiere on the basis of an examination of , first , contemporary casting and doubling practices , secondly , the recently discovered correspondence of the impresario Marquess Cornelio Bentivoglio , and finally the libretto for La finta <unk> , which preceded Poppea on the stage of the Santi Giovanni e Paolo in the 1643 Carnival and was written for the same cast . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The action takes place in Imperial Rome around AD 60 , in and around Poppea 's villa and in various locations within the imperial palace . 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 The goddesses of Fortune and Virtue dispute which of them has the most power over humankind . They are interrupted by the god of Love , who claims greater power than either : " I tell the virtues what to do , I govern the fortunes of men . " When they have heard his story , he says , they will admit his superior powers . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 Ottone arrives at Poppea 's villa , intent on pursuing his love . Seeing the house guarded by the Emperor Nerone 's soldiers he realises he has been supplanted , and his love song turns to a lament : " Ah , ah , perfidious Poppea ! " He leaves , and the waiting soldiers gossip about their master 's amorous affairs , his neglect of matters of state and his treatment of the Empress Ottavia . Nerone and Poppea enter and exchange words of love before Nerone departs . Poppea is warned by her nurse , Arnalta , to be careful of the empress 's wrath and to distrust Nerone 's apparent love for her , but Poppea is confident : " I fear no setback at all . " 
 The scene switches to the palace , where Ottavia bemoans her lot ; " Despised queen , wretched consort of the emperor ! " Her nurse suggests she take a lover of her own , advice which Ottavia angrily rejects . Seneca , Nerone 's former tutor , addresses the empress with flattering words , and is mocked by Ottavia 's page , <unk> , who threatens to set fire to the old man 's beard . Left alone , Seneca receives a warning from the goddess Pallade that his life is in danger . Nerone enters and confides that he intends to displace Ottavia and marry Poppea . Seneca demurs ; such a move would be divisive and unpopular . " I care nothing for the senate and the people , " replies Nero , and when the sage persists he is furiously dismissed . Poppea joins Nerone , and tells him that Seneca claims to be the power behind the imperial throne . This so angers Nerone that he instructs his guards to order Seneca to commit suicide . 
 After Nero leaves , Ottone steps forward and after failing to persuade Poppea to reinstate him in her affections , privately resolves to kill her . He is then comforted by a noblewoman , Drusilla ; realising that he can never regain Poppea he offers to marry Drusilla , who joyfully accepts him . But Ottone admits to himself : " Drusilla is on my lips , Poppea is in my heart . " 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 In his garden , Seneca learns from the god Mercurio that he is soon to die . The order duly arrives from Nerone , and Seneca instructs his friends to prepare a suicide bath . His followers try to persuade him to remain alive , but he rejects their pleading . " The warm current of my guiltless blood shall carpet with royal purple my road to death . " At the palace Ottavia 's page flirts with a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , while Nerone and the poet Lucano celebrate the death of Seneca in a drunken , cavorting song contest , and compose love songs in honour of Poppea . Elsewhere in the palace Ottone , in a long soliloquy , ponders how he could have thought to kill Poppea with whom he remains hopelessly in love . He is interrupted by a summons from Ottavia , who to his dismay orders him to kill Poppea . Threatening to denounce him to Nerone unless he complies , she suggests that he disguise himself as a woman to commit the deed . Ottone agrees to do as she bids , privately calling on the gods to relieve him of his life . He then persuades Drusilla to lend him her clothes . 
 In the garden of Poppea 's villa , Arnalta sings her mistress to sleep while the god of Love looks on . Ottone , now disguised as Drusilla , enters the garden and raises his sword to kill Poppea . Before he can do so , Love strikes the sword from his hand , and he runs away . His fleeing figure is seen by Arnalta and the now awakened Poppea , who believe that he is Drusilla . They call on their servants to give chase , while Love sings triumphantly " I protected her ! " 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 Drusilla muses on the life of happiness before her , when Arnalta arrives with a <unk> . Arnalta accuses Drusilla of being Poppea 's assailant , and she is arrested . As Nerone enters , Arnalta denounces Drusilla , who protests her innocence . Threatened with torture unless she names her accomplices , Drusilla decides to protect Ottone by confessing her own guilt . Nerone commands her to suffer a painful death , at which point Ottone rushes in and reveals the truth : that he had acted alone , at the command of the Empress Ottavia , and that Drusilla was innocent of complicity . Nerone is impressed by Drusilla 's fortitude , and in an act of clemency spares Ottone 's life , ordering him banished . Drusilla chooses exile with him . Nerone now feels entitled to act against Ottavia and she is exiled , too . This leaves the way open for him to marry Poppea , who is overjoyed : " No delay , no obstacle can come between us now . " 
 Ottavia bids a quiet farewell to Rome , while in the throne room of the palace the coronation ceremony for Poppea is prepared . The Consuls and Tribunes enter , and after a brief eulogy place the crown on Poppea 's head . Watching over the proceedings is the god of Love with his mother , Venere and a divine chorus . Nerone and Poppea sing a rapturous love duet ( " I gaze at you , I possess you " ) as the opera ends . 
 = = Reception and performance history = = 
 = = = Early performances = = = 
 L 'incoronazione di Poppea was first performed at the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo , Venice , as part of the 1642 – 43 carnival season . The theatre , opened in 1639 , had earlier staged the première of Monteverdi 's opera Le <unk> d 'Enea in Lavinia , and a revival of the composer 's Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria . The theatre was later described by an observer : " ... marvellous scene changes , majestic and grand appearances [ of the performers ] ... and a magnificent flying machine ; you see , as if commonplace , glorious heavens , deities , seas , royal palaces , woods , forests ... " . The theatre held about 900 people , and the stage was much bigger than the auditorium . 
 The date of the first performance of L 'incoronazione and the number of times the work was performed are unknown ; the only date recorded is that of the beginning of the carnival , 26 December 1642 . A surviving scenario , or synopsis , prepared for the first performances , gives neither the date nor the composer 's name . The identity of only one of the première cast is known for certain : Anna Renzi , who played Ottavia . Renzi , in her early twenties , is described by Ringer as " opera 's first prima donna " and was , according to a contemporary source , " as skillful in acting as she [ was ] excellent in music " . On the basis of the casting of the opera which shared the theatre with L 'incoronazione during the 1642 – 43 season , it is possible that Poppea was played by Anna di Valerio , and Nerone by the castrato Stefano Costa . There are no surviving accounts of the opera 's public reception , unless the encomium to the singer playing Poppea , part of the libretto documentation discovered at Udine in 1997 , relates to the first performance . 
 There is only one documented early revival of L 'incoronazione , in Naples in 1651 . The fact that it was revived at all is noted by Carter as " remarkable , in an age where memories were short and large @-@ scale musical works often had limited currency beyond their immediate circumstance . " Thereafter there are no records of the work 's performance for more than 250 years . 
 = = = Rediscovery = = = 
 After two centuries in which Monteverdi had been largely forgotten as a composer of opera , interest in his theatrical works revived in the late 19th century . A shortened version of Orfeo was performed in Berlin in 1881 ; a few years later the Venice score of L 'incoronazione was rediscovered , leading to a surge of scholarly attention . In 1905 , in Paris , the French composer Vincent d 'Indy directed a concert performance of L 'incoronazione , limited to " the most beautiful and interesting parts of the work . " D 'Indy 's edition was published in 1908 , and his version was staged at the Théâtre des Arts , Paris , on 5 February 1913 , the first recorded theatrical performance of the work since 1651 . The work was not received uncritically ; the dramatist Romain Rolland , who had assisted d 'Indy , wrote that Monteverdi had " sacrifice [ d ] freedom and musical beauty to beauty of line . Here we no longer have the <unk> texture of musical poetry that we admire in Orfeo . " 
 In April 1926 the German @-@ born composer Werner <unk> directed the opera 's first American performance , at Smith College , Massachusetts where he was professor of music . His production was based on d 'Indy 's edition . The following year , on 27 October , L 'incoronazione received its British première , with a performance at Oxford Town Hall by members of the Oxford University Opera Club using a score edited by Jack Westrup . In the 1930s several editions of the opera were prepared by leading contemporary musicians , including Gustav Mahler 's son @-@ in @-@ law Ernst Krenek , Hans Redlich , Carl Orff ( who left his version incomplete ) , and Gian Francesco Malipiero . Malipiero 's edition was used to stage performances in Paris ( 1937 ) and Venice ( 1949 ) . The Redlich edition was performed at Morley College , London in 1948 , under the direction of Michael Tippett . 
 Richard Strauss made reference to L 'incoronazione in the Act III music lesson scene of his 1935 opera , Die <unk> Frau , completely <unk> the Act 2 , Scene 5 duet " <unk> un <unk> non so che " in his own florid and late @-@ Romantic idiom as one of many uses of preexisting musical material to set an appreciably antique atmosphere by the standards of the time . In that scene , the duet is used as an excuse for the title role to flirt with her husband , in disguise as a singing teacher . 
 Until the 1960s performances of L 'incoronazione were relatively rare in commercial opera theatres , but they became increasingly frequent in the decade that saw the quatercentenary of Monteverdi 's birth . The 1962 Glyndebourne Festival anticipated the quatercentenary with a lavish production using a new edition by Raymond Leppard . This version , controversially , was adapted for a large orchestra , and though it was enthusiastically received it has subsequently been described by Carter as a " travesty " , and its continuing use in some modern productions as indefensible . A version by Erich <unk> was conducted by Herbert von Karajan at the Vienna State Opera in 1963 ; the following decades saw performances at Lincoln Center in New York , Turin , Venice and a revival of the Leppard version at Glyndebourne . The Venice performance at La Fenice on 5 December 1980 was based on Alan Curtis 's new edition , described by Rosand as " the first to attempt a scholarly collation and rationalization of the sources " . The Curtis edition was used by Santa Fe Opera in August 1986 , in a production which according to The New York Times " gave music precedence over musicology " , resulting in a performance that was " rich and stunningly beautiful " . 
 = = = Recent revivals = = = 
 The 350th anniversary of Monteverdi 's death , celebrated in 1993 , brought a further wave of interest in his works , and since that time performances of L 'incoronazione have been given in opera houses and music festivals all over the world . In April 1994 the Juilliard School in New York presented a version based on Curtis 's edition , with an orchestra that mixed baroque and modern elements . The New York Times 's Allen Kozinn wrote that this production had done well to resolve daunting problems arising from Monteverdi 's having left instrumentation and scoring details open , and from the numerous competing versions of the score . In 2000 the work was chosen by Opéra de Montréal as the company 's first venture into baroque opera , with a performance directed by Renaud Doucet . Opera Canada reported that Doucet had found " a perfect rhetoric for a modern crowd , creating an atmosphere of moral ambivalence that the courtiers of Monteverdi 's day would have taken for granted . " Less successful , in the critics ' eyes , was the innovative English National Opera ( ENO ) production directed by Chen Shi @-@ Zheng in October 2007 . According to The London Evening Standard critic Fiona Maddocks the cast was strong , but they all seemed to be playing in the wrong roles . For unexplained reasons much of the action took place underwater ; at one point " a <unk> flip @-@ flops across the stage in a harness . " Seneca " wore green Wellington boots and pushed a lawnmower " . At the end of 2007 , in his opera review of the year , The Daily Telegraph 's Rupert Christiansen compared ENO 's production unfavourably with a punk musical version of the opera that had been staged during that year 's Edinburgh Festival . 
 In May 2008 L 'incoronazione returned to Glyndebourne in a new production by Robert <unk> , with Leppard 's large @-@ scale orchestration replaced by the period instruments of the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment under Emmanuelle Haïm . The Organ 's reviewer praised the vocal quality of the performers , found Haim 's handling of the orchestra " a joy throughout " and declared the whole production " a blessed relief " after the previous year 's ENO staging . On 19 August the Glyndebourne singers and the orchestra , led by Haim , presented a semi @-@ staged version of the opera at the 2008 BBC Proms , at the Royal Albert Hall . Elsewhere the French @-@ based ensemble Les Arts Florissants , under its director William Christie , presented the Monteverdi trilogy of operas ( L 'Orfeo , Il ritorno d 'Ulisse and L 'incoronazione ) in the period 2008 – 10 , with a series of performances at the Teatro Real in Madrid . 
 = = Music = = 
 Written early in the history of opera , L 'incoronazione di Poppea broke new ground in matching music to stage action , and in its musical reproductions of the natural inflections of the human voice . Monteverdi uses all the means for vocal expression available to a composer of his time — aria , arioso , arietta , ensemble , recitative — although Ringer comments that in this work the boundaries between these forms are more than usually porous . These elements are woven into a continuous fabric which ensures that the music always serves the drama , while maintaining a tonal and formal unity throughout . The characters have strong emotions , fears and desires which are reflected in their music . Thus Poppea 's and Nerone 's scenes are generally lyrical , sung mainly in the forms of arioso and aria , while Ottavia sings only in dramatic recitative . Seneca 's music is bold and compelling , while Ottone 's is hesitant and limited in range , " entirely inappropriate for anyone aspiring to be a man of action " according to Carter . Within this arrangement Monteverdi creates enough melodies to ensure that the opera is musically as well as dramatically memorable . 
 Monteverdi employs specific musical devices to signify moods and situations . For example , triple metre signifies the language of love for Nerone and Ottone ( unfulfilled in the latter case ) ; forceful arpeggios are used to represent conflict ; and the interlacing of texts , written as separate verses by Busenello , indicates sexual tension in the scenes with Nerone and Poppea , and escalates the discord between Nerone and Seneca . The technique of " concitato genere " — rapid semiquavers sung on one note — is used to represent rage . Secret truths may be hinted at as , for example , when Seneca 's friends plead with him to reconsider his suicide in a chromatic madrigal chorus which Monteverdi scholar Denis Arnold finds reminiscent of Monteverdi 's Mantuan days , carrying a tragic power rarely seen in 17th century opera . This is followed , however , by a cheerful diatonic section by the same singers which , says Rosand , suggests a lack of real sympathy with Seneca 's predicament . The descending <unk> ostinato on which the final duet of the opera is built has been anticipated in the scene in which Nerone and Lucano celebrate Seneca 's death , hinting at an ambivalence in the relationship between emperor and poet . According to Rosand : " in both cases it is surely the traditional association of that pattern with sexual love that is being evoked . " 
 Arnold asserts that the music of L 'incoronazione has greater variety than any other opera by Monteverdi , and that the purely solo music is intrinsically more interesting than that of Il ritorno . The musical peaks , according to commentators , include the final duet ( despite its doubtful authorship ) , Ottavia 's act 1 lament , Seneca 's farewell and the ensuing madrigal , and the drunken Nerone – Lucano singing competition , often performed with strong homoerotic overtones . Ringer describes this scene as arguably the most brilliant in the whole opera , with " florid , synchronous coloratura by both men creating thrilling , virtuosic music that seems to compel the listener to share in their joy . " Rosand finds Nerone 's solo aria that closes the scene something of an anticlimax , after such stimulation . 
 Despite continuing debates about authorship , the work is almost always treated as Monteverdi 's — although Rosand observes that some scholars attribute it to " Monteverdi " ( in quotation marks ) . Ringer calls the opera " Monteverdi 's last and arguably greatest work , " a unified masterpiece of " unprecedented depth and individuality " . Carter observes how Monteverdi 's operas redefined the boundaries of theatrical music , and calls his contribution to 17th @-@ century Venetian opera " remarkable by any standard " . Harnoncourt reflects thus : " What is difficult to understand ... is the mental freshness with which the 74 @-@ year @-@ old composer , two years before his death , was able to surpass his pupils in the most modern style and to set standards which were to apply to the music theatre of the succeeding centuries . " 
 = = List of musical items = = 
 The table uses the numberings from the 1656 printed version of Busenello 's libretto , and includes the two act 2 scenes for which no music exists in the surviving scores . Typically , " scenes " comprise recitative , arioso , aria and ensemble elements , with occasional instrumental ( sinfonia ) passages . The boundaries between these elements are often indistinct ; Denis Arnold , commenting on the musical continuity , writes that " with few exceptions it is impossible to extricate the arias and duets from the fabric of the opera . " 
 = = Recording history = = 
 The first recording of L 'incoronazione , with Walter Goehr conducting the Tonhalle @-@ Orchester Zürich in a live stage performance , was issued in 1954 . This LP version , which won a Grand Prix du Disque in 1954 , is the only recording of the opera that predates the revival of the piece that began with the 1962 Glyndebourne Festival production . In 1963 Herbert von Karajan and the Vienna Staatsoper issued a version described by Gramophone as " far from authentic " , while the following year John Pritchard and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra recorded an abridged version using Leppard 's Glyndebourne orchestration . Leppard conducted a Sadler 's Wells production , which was broadcast by the BBC and recorded on 27 November 1971 . This is the only recording of the opera in English . 
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt 's 1974 version , the first recording without cuts , used period instruments in an effort to achieve a more authentic sound , although Denis Arnold has criticised Harnoncourt 's " over @-@ ornamentation " of the score , particularly his use of oboe and trumpet flourishes . Arnold showed more enthusiasm for Alan Curtis 's 1980 recording , live from La Fenice in Venice . Curtis uses a small band of strings , recorders and continuo , with a trumpets reserved for the final coronation scene . Subsequent recordings have tended to follow the path of authenticity , with versions from baroque specialists including Richard Hickox and the City of London Baroque Sinfonia ( 1988 ) , René Jacobs and Concerto Vocale ( 1990 ) , and John Eliot Gardiner with the English Baroque Soloists . Sergio Vartolo 's production of the opera at Pigna , Corsica , was recorded for Brilliant Classics in 2004 . A feature of this recording is the casting of a soprano Nerone in acts I and III , and a tenor Nerone in act II , to allow for the differing vocal requirements of the role in these acts . Vartolo accepts that " a staged performance would almost certainly require a different approach " . 
 In more recent years , videotape and DVD versions have proliferated . The first was in 1979 , a version directed by Harnoncourt with the Zurich Opera and chorus . Leppard 's second Glyndebourne production , that of 1984 , was released in DVD form in 2004 . Since then , productions directed by Jacobs , Christophe Rousset and Marc Minkowski have all been released on DVD , along with Emmanuelle Haïm 's 2008 Glyndebourne production in which the Festival finally rejects Leppard 's big band version in favour of Haim 's period instruments , to give an experience closer to that of the original audience . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Since the beginning of the 20th century the score of L 'incoronazione has been edited frequently . Some editions , prepared for particular performances ( e.g. Westrup 's for the 1927 Oxford Town Hall performance ) have not been published . The following are the main published editions since 1904 . Years of publication often postdate the first performances from these editions . 
 = Apothecaries ' system = 
 The apothecaries ' system of weights is a historical system of mass units that were used by physicians and apothecaries for medical recipes , and also sometimes by scientists . The English version of the system is closely related with the English troy system of weights , the pound and grain being exactly the same in both . It divides a pound into 12 ounces , an ounce into 8 drachms , and a drachm into 3 scruples or 60 grains . This exact form of the system was used in the United Kingdom ; in some of its former colonies it survived well into the 20th century . The apothecaries ' system of measures is a similar system of volume units based on the fluid ounce . For a long time , medical recipes were written in Latin , often using special symbols to denote weights and measures . 
 The use of different measure and weight systems depending on the purpose was an almost universal phenomenon in Europe between the decline of the Roman Empire and metrication . This was connected with international commerce , especially with the need to use the standards of the target market and to compensate for a common weighing practice that caused a difference between actual and nominal weight . In the 19th century , most European countries or cities still had at least a " commercial " or " civil " system ( such as the English avoirdupois system ) for general trading , and a second system ( such as the troy system ) for precious metals such as gold and silver . The system for precious metals was usually divided in a different way from the commercial system , often using special units such as the carat . More significantly , it was often based on different weight standards . 
 The apothecaries ' system often used the same ounces as the precious metals system , although even then the number of ounces in a pound could be different . The apothecaries ' pound was divided into its own special units , which were inherited ( via influential treatises of Greek physicians such as Dioscorides and Galen , 1st and 2nd century ) from the general @-@ purpose weight system of the Romans . Where the apothecaries ' weights and the normal commercial weights were different , it was not always clear which of the two systems was used in trade between merchants and apothecaries , or by which system apothecaries weighed medicine when they actually sold it . In old merchants ' handbooks the former system is sometimes referred to as the pharmaceutical system , and distinguished from the apothecaries ' system . 
 = = English @-@ speaking countries = = 
 The traditional English apothecaries ' system of weights is as shown in the table , the pound , ounce and grain being identical to the troy pound , ounce and grain . In the United Kingdom , a reform in 1824 made the troy pound the primary weight unit ( a role in which it was superseded half a century later by the <unk> pound ) , but this had no effect on apothecaries ' weights . However , the <unk> Act of 1858 completely abolished the apothecaries ' system in favour of the standard <unk> system . The confusing variety of definitions and conversions for pounds and ounces is covered elsewhere in a table of pound definitions . In the United States , the apothecaries ' system remained official until it was abolished in 1971 in favour of the metric system . 
 From the pound down to the scruple , the English apothecaries ' system was a subset of the Roman weight system except that the troy pound and its subdivisions were slightly heavier than the Roman pound and its subdivisions . Similar systems were used all over Europe , but with considerable local variation described below under Variants . 
 The English @-@ speaking countries also used a system of units of fluid measure , or in modern terminology volume units , based on the apothecaries ' system . A volume of liquid that was approximately that of an apothecaries ' ounce of water was called a fluid ounce , and was divided into fluid drachms and sometimes also fluid scruples . The analogue of the grain was called a <unk> . 
 The Imperial and US systems differ in the size of the basic unit ( the gallon or the pint , one gallon being equal to eight pints ) , and in the number of fluid ounces per pint . Apothecaries ' systems for volumes were internationally much less common than those for weights . Before introduction of the Imperial Units in the UK , all apothecaries ' measures were based on the wine gallon , which survived in the US under the name liquid gallon or wet gallon . 
 The wine gallon was abolished in Britain in 1824 , and this system was replaced by a new one based on the newly introduced Imperial gallon . Since the Imperial gallon is 20 % more than the liquid gallon , the same is true for the Imperial pint in relation to the liquid pint . This explains why the number of fluid ounces per gallon had to be adjusted in the new system so that the fluid ounce was not changed too much by the reform . Even so , the modern UK fluid ounce is 4 % less than the US fluid ounce , and the same is true for the smaller units . For some years both systems were used concurrently in the UK . 
 Apothecaries ' measures eventually fell out of use in the UK and were officially abolished in 1971 . In the US , they are still occasionally used , for example with prescribed medicine being sold in four ounce ( <unk> iv ) bottles . 
 = = Medical recipes = = 
 Until around 1900 , medical recipes and most European pharmacopoeias were written in Latin . Here is a typical example from the middle of the 19th century . 
 The use of Latin ensured that the recipes could be read by an international audience . There was a technical reason why 3 ʒ was written <unk> , and 1 ⁄ 2 ʒ as <unk> or <unk> : The letters " ss " are an abbreviation for the Latin " semis " meaning " half " , which were sometimes written with a sharp S. In Apothecaries ' Latin , numbers were generally written , in Roman numerals , immediately following the symbol . Since only the units of the apothecaries ' system were used in this way , this made it clear that the civil weight system was not meant . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Diversity of local standards = = = 
 The basic form of the apothecaries ' system is essentially a subset of the Roman weight system . An apothecaries ' pound normally consisted of 12 ounces . ( In France this was changed to 16 ounces , and in Spain the customary unit was the <unk> , a mark of 8 ounces . ) In the south of Europe and in France , the scruple was generally divided into 24 grains , so that one ounce consisted of 576 grains . Nevertheless , the subdivision of an ounce was somewhat more uniform than that of a pound , and a common feature of all variants is that 12 ounces are roughly 100 drachms ( 96 – 128 drachms ) and a grain is roughly the weight of a physical grain . 
 It is most convenient to compare the various local weight standards by the metric weights of their ounces . The actual mass of an ounce varied by ± 17 % ( 5 g ) around the typical value of 30 g . The table only shows approximate values for the most important standards ; even the same nominal standard could vary slightly between one city and its neighbour . The range from 25 g to 31 g is filled with numerous variants , especially the Italian range up to 28 g . But there is a relatively large gap between the troy ounces of 31 g and the Habsburg ounce of 35 g . The latter is the product of an 18th @-@ century weight reform . 
 Even in Turkey a system of weights similar to the European apothecaries ' system was used for the same purpose . For medical purposes the <unk> ( approx . 320 g ) was divided in 100 drachms , and the drachm in ( 16 <unk> or ) 64 grains . This is close to the classical Greek weight system , where a <unk> ( corresponding roughly to a Roman libra ) was also divided into 100 drachms . 
 With the beginning of metrication , some countries standardized their apothecaries ' pound to an easily remembered multiple of the French gramme . E.g. in the Netherlands the Dutch troy pound of 369 @.@ 1 g was standardized in 1820 to 375 @.@ 000 g , to match a similar reform in France . The British troy pound retained its value of 373 @.@ 202 g until in 2000 it was legally defined in metric terms , as 373 @.@ <unk> g . ( At this time its use was already illegal for all purposes except trading precious metals . ) 
 = = = Basic variants = = = 
 In the Romance speaking part of Europe the scruple was divided in 24 grains , in the rest of Europe in 20 grains . Notable exceptions were Venice and Sicily , where the scruple was also divided in 20 grains . 
 The Sicilian apothecaries ' ounce was divided in 10 drachms . Since the scruple was divided in only 20 grains , like in the northern countries , an ounce consisted of 600 grains . This was not too different from the situation in most of the other mediterranean countries , where an ounce consisted of 576 grains . 
 In France , at some stage the apothecaries ' pound of 12 ounces was replaced by the larger civil pound of 16 ounces . The subdivisions of the apothecaries ' ounce were the same as in the other Romance countries , however , and were different from the subdivisions of the otherwise identical civil ounce . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Roman weight system = = = 
 The basic apothecaries ' system consists of the units pound , ounce and scruple from the classical Roman weight system , together with the originally Greek drachm and a new subdivision of the scruple into either 20 ( " barley " ) or 24 ( " wheat " ) grains ( Latin : grana ) . In some countries other units of the original system remained in use , for example in Spain the <unk> and siliqua . In some cases the apothecaries ' and civil weight systems had the same ounces ( " an ounce is an ounce " ) , but the civil pound consisted of 16 ounces . Siliqua is Latin for the seed of the carob tree . 
 Many attempts were made to reconstruct the exact mass of the Roman pound . One method for doing this consists in weighing old coins ; another uses the fact that Roman weight units were derived from Roman units of length similarly to the way the kilogramme was originally derived from the metre , i.e. by weighing a known volume of water . Nowadays the Roman pound is often given as 327 @.@ 45 g , but one should keep in mind that ( apart from the other uncertainties that come with such a reconstruction ) the Roman weight standard is unlikely to have remained constant to such a precision over the centuries , and that the provinces often had somewhat inexact copies of the standard . The weight and subdivision of the pound in the Holy Roman Empire was reformed by Charlemagne , but in the Byzantine Empire it remained essentially the same . Since Byzantine coins circulated up to Scandinavia , the old Roman standard continued to be influential through the Middle Ages . 
 = = = Weight system of Salerno = = = 
 The history of mediaeval medicine started roughly around the year 1000 with the school of medicine in Salerno , which combined elements of Latin , Greek , Arabic and Jewish medicine . Galen and Dioscorides ( who had used the Graeco @-@ Roman weight system ) were among the most important authorities , but also Arabic physicians , whose works were systematically translated into Latin . 
 According to De <unk> et <unk> , a famous 13th century text that exists in numerous variations and is often ascribed to Dino di Garbo , the system of weights used in Salerno was different from the systems used in Padua and Bologna . As can be seen from the table , it was also different from the Roman weight system used by <unk> and Dioscorides and from all modern apothecaries ' systems : The ounce was divided into 9 drachms , rather than 8 drachms . 
 Centuries later , the region around Salerno was the only exception to the rule that ( except for skipping units that had regionally fallen out of use ) the apothecaries ' ounce was subdivided down to the scruple in exactly the same way as in the Roman system : It divided the ounce into 10 drachms . 
 = = Romance countries = = 
 While there will naturally have been some changes throughout the centuries , this section only tries to give a general overview over the situation that was recorded in detail in numerous 19th century merchants ' handbooks . 
 Iberian Peninsula 
 On the Iberian Peninsula , apothecaries ' weights in the 19th century were relatively uniform , with 24 grains per scruple ( 576 grains per ounce ) , the standard in Romance countries . The weight of an apothecaries ' pound was 345 @.@ 1 g in Spain and 344 @.@ 2 g in Portugal . As in Italy , some of the additional subdivisions of the Roman system , such as the <unk> , were still in use there . It was standard to use the <unk> , defined as 8 ounces , instead of the pound . 
 France 
 In 18th century France , there was a national weight standard , the marc de Paris of 8 ounces . The civil pound of 16 ounces was equivalent to 2 marks , and it was also used as the apothecaries ' pound . With 30 @.@ 6 g , the ounces were considerably heavier than other apothecaries ' ounces in Romance countries , but otherwise the French system was not remarkable . Its history and connections to the English and Flemish standards are discussed below under Weight standards named after Troyes . 
 Italy 
 Due in part to the political conditions in what would become a united Kingdom of Italy only in 1861 , the variation of apothecaries ' systems and standard weights in this region was enormous . ( For background information , see History of Italy during foreign domination and the unification . ) The libbra ( pound ) generally consisted of the standard twelve ounces , however . 
 The civil weight systems were generally very similar to the apothecaries ' system , and since the libbra ( or the libbra <unk> , where different systems were in use for light and heavy goods ) generally had a suitable weight for an apothecaries ' pound it was often used for this purpose . Extreme cases were Rome and Genoa , where the same system was used for everything , including medicine . On the other hand , there were relatively large differences even between two cities in the same state . E.g. Bologna ( in the Papal States ) had an apothecaries ' pound that was less than the local civil pound , and 4 % lighter than the pound used in Rome . 
 The weight of an apothecaries ' pound ranged generally between 300 g and 320 g , slightly less than that of a pound in the Roman Empire . An important exception to this rule is that the Kingdom of Lombardy – Venetia was under rule of the Habsburg monarchy 1814 – 1859 and therefore had the extremely large Habsburg apothecaries ' pound of 420 g . ( See below under Habsburg standard . ) E.g. in the large city of Milan the apothecaries ' system based on a pound of 326 @.@ 8 g was officially replaced by the metric system as early as 1803 , because Milan was part of the Napoleonic Italian Republic . Since the successor of this little state , the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy , fell to Habsburg in 1814 ( at a time when even in France the système usuel had been introduced because the metric system was not accepted by the population ) , an apothecaries ' system was officially introduced again , but now based on the Habsburg apothecaries ' pound , which weighed almost 30 % more . 
 The apothecaries ' pound in Venice had exactly the same subdivisions as those in the non @-@ Romance countries , but its total weight of 301 g was at the bottom of the range . During the Habsburg reign of 1814 – 1859 an exception was made for Venice ; as a result the extreme weights of 301 g and 420 g coexisted within one state and in immediate proximity . The Venice standard was also used elsewhere , for example in Udine . In Dubrovnik ( called " Ragusa " until 1909 ) its use was partially continued for a long time in spite of the official Habsburg weight reform . 
 The measure and weight systems for the large mainland part of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies were unified in 1840 . The area consisted of the southern half of the Italian Peninsula and included Naples and Salerno . The subdivision of apothecaries ' weight in the unified system was essentially the same as that for gold , silver , coins and silk . It was the most <unk> variant in that the ounce was divided in 10 drachms , rather than the usual 8 . The scruple , like in Venice but unlike in the rest of the Romance region , was divided into 20 grains . The existence of a unit called <unk> , the equivalent of 1 ½ <unk> , is interesting because 6 <unk> were 9 <unk> . In the original Salerno weight system an ounce was divided into 9 drachms , and so an <unk> would have been <unk> of an ounce . 
 = = Troyes , Nuremberg and Habsburg = = 
 = = = Weight standards named after Troyes = = = 
 As early as 1147 in Troyes in Champagne ( in the Middle Ages an important trading town ) a unit of weight called marc de Troyes was used . 
 The national French standard until 1799 was based on a famous artefact called the Pile de Charlemagne , which probably dates back to the second half of the 15th century . It is an elaborate set of nesting weight pieces , with a total metric weight of 12 @.@ 238 kg . The set is now shown in the Musée des Arts et Métiers in Paris . The total nominal value of the set is 50 marcs de Troyes or marcs de Paris , a mark being 8 ounces . The ounce poids de marc had therefore a metric equivalent of 30 @.@ 59 g . The poids de marc was used as a national French standard for trading , for gold , silver and jewels , and for weighing medicine . It was also used in international communications between scientists . In the time before the French Revolution , the civil pound also played the role of the apothecaries ' pound in the French apothecaries ' system , which otherwise remained a standard system of the Romance ( 24 grains per scruple ) type . 
 In Bruges , Amsterdam , <unk> and other Flemish cities , a " troy " unit ( " trooisch pond " ) was also in use as a standard for valuable materials and medicine . As in France , the way in which the Flemish troy ounce was subdivided depended on what was weighed . Unlike the French , the Flemish apothecaries divided the scruple in 20 grains . The Flemish troy pound became the standard for the gold and apothecaries ' system in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands ; it was also used in this way in Lübeck . ( The London troy pound was referred to as the ' trooisch pond ' , after <unk> . ) 
 The Dutch troy mark consisted of 8 Flemish troy ounces , with each ounce of 20 <unk> , and each <unk> divided into 32 assen . The Amsterdam Pound of two marks , used in commerce , weighed 10 @,@ 280 assen , while the Amsterdam Troy pound weighed 10 @,@ 240 assen , i.e. exactly two troy marks . 
 In 1414 , six years before the Treaty of Troyes , a statute of Henry V of England gave directions to the goldsmiths in terms of the troy pound . ( In 1304 it had apparently not yet been introduced , since it did not appear in the statute of weights and measures . ) There is evidence from the 15th century that the troy pound was used for weighing metals and spices . After the abolishment of the Tower pound in 1527 by Henry VIII of England , the troy pound was the official basis for English coin weights . The British apothecaries ' system was based on the troy pound until metrication , and it survived in the United States and Australia well into the 20th century . 
 Since the modern ( English , American and Imperial ) troy ounces are roughly 1 @.@ 5 % heavier than the late Paris ounce , the exact historical relations between the original marc de Troyes , the French poids de marc , the Flemish trooisch pond and the English troy pound are unclear . It is known , however , that the numerical relation between the English and French troy ounces was exactly 64 : 63 in the 14th century . 
 = = = Nuremberg standard = = = 
 In the Middle Ages the Imperial Free City of Nuremberg , an important trading place in the south of Germany , produced large amounts of nesting weight pieces to various European standards . In the 1540s , the first pharmacopoeia in the modern sense was also printed there . In 1555 , a weight standard for the apothecaries ' pound of 12 ounces was set in Nuremberg . Under the name Nuremberg pharmaceutical weight ( German : <unk> <unk> ) it would become the standard for most of the north @-@ east of Europe . However , some cities kept local copies of the standard . 
 As of 1800 all German states and cities except Lübeck ( which had the Dutch troy standard ) followed the Nuremberg standard . It was also the standard for Denmark , Norway , the Russian Empire and most cantons of Switzerland . Poland and Sweden had their own variants of the standard , which differed from each other by 0 @.@ 6 % . 
 In 1811 , Bavaria legally defined the apothecaries ' pound as 360 @.@ 00 g ( an ounce of 30 @.@ 00 g ) . In 1815 , Nuremberg lost its status as a free city and became part of Bavaria . From now on the Nuremberg apothecaries ' pound was no longer the official apothecaries ' pound in Nuremberg ; but the difference was only 0 @.@ 6 % . In 1836 the Greek apothecaries ' pound was officially defined by this standard , four years after Otto , the son of the king of Bavaria , became the first king of Greece . But only few German states followed the example of Bavaria , and with a long delay . The apothecaries ' pound of 360 g was also adopted in Lübeck , where it was official as of 1861 . 
 Austria and the states of the Habsburg monarchy officially had a different standard since 1761 , and Prussia , followed by its neighbours Anhalt , Lippe and Mecklenburg , would diverge in the opposite direction with a reform in 1816 . But in both cases apothecaries continued to use the Nuremberg standard unofficially for a long time after it became illegal . 
 In Russia the apothecaries ' system survived well into the 20th century . The Soviet Union officially abolished it only in January 1927 . 
 = = = Habsburg standard = = = 
 Empress Maria Theresia of Austria reformed the measures and weights of the Habsburg monarchy in 1761 . The weight of an apothecaries ' pound of 12 ounces was increased to a value that was later ( after the kilogramme was defined ) found to be 420 @.@ 009 g ; this was called the libra medicinalis major . It was defined as 3 / 4 of the unusually heavy Habsburg civil pound ( defined as 6 / 5 of the civil pound of Cologne ) and corresponded to a record ounce weight of 35 g . 
 Before the reform , in the north of the empire the Nuremberg standard had been in effect , and in Italy the local standards had been even lighter . It is not surprising that an increase by 17 % and more met with some inertia . The 1770 edition of the pharmacopoeia <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> still used the Nuremberg standard libra medicinalis minor , indicating that even in the Austrian capital Vienna it took some time for the reform to become effective . In 1774 , the <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> used the new standard , and in 1783 all old apothecaries ' weight pieces that were still in use were directed to be destroyed . 
 Venice was not part of these reforms and kept its standard of approximately 25 g per ounce . 
 When Austria started producing scales and weight pieces to the new standard with an excellent quality / price ratio , these were occasionally used by German apothecaries as well . 
 = = Metrication = = 
 = = = Early metrication = = = 
 At the time of the Industrial Revolution , the fact that each state had its own system of weights and measures became increasingly problematic . Serious work on a " scientific " system was started in France under Louis XVI , and completed in 1799 ( after the French Revolution ) with its implementation . The French population , however , was initially unhappy with the new system . In 1812 , Napoleon Bonaparte reintroduced some of the old measures and weights , but in a modified form that was defined with respect to the metric system . This système usuel was finally abolished in 1837 and became illegal in 1840 . 
 Due to the large expansion of the First French Empire under Napoleon I , French metrication also affected what would be ( parts of ) France 's neighbour countries after the Congress of Vienna . 
 The Netherlands were partially <unk> when they were French , in the years 1810 – 1813 . With full metrication , effective January 1821 , the Netherlands reformed the trooisch pond . The apothecaries ' new pound was 375 @.@ 00 g . Apart from rounding issues concerning the subdivisions , this corresponded exactly to the French système usuel . ( The reform was not followed in the north German city of Lübeck , which continued to use the trooisch pond . ) In Belgium , apothecaries ' weight was <unk> effective 1856 . 
 Between 1803 and 1815 all German regions west of the River Rhine were French , organised in the départements Roer , Sarre , Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle , and Mont @-@ Tonnerre . As a result of the Congress of Vienna these became part of various German states . A large part of the Palatinate fell to Bavaria , but having the metric system it was excepted from the Bavarian reform of weights and measures . 
 = = = Prussia 's path to metrication = = = 
 In Prussia , a reform in 1816 defined the Prussian civil pound in terms of the Prussian foot and distilled water . It also redefined the apothecaries ' pound as 12 ounces , i.e. 3 / 4 , of the civil pound : 350 @.@ 78 g . This reform was not popular with apothecaries , because it broke the uniformity of the apothecaries ' pound in Germany at a time when a German national state was beginning to form . It seems that many apothecaries did not follow this reduction by 2 % . 
 Another reform in 1856 increased the civil pound from 467 @.@ 711 g to 500 @.@ 000 g ( the German civil pound defined by the Zollverein ) , as a first step towards metrication . As a consequence the official apothecaries ' pound was now 375 @.@ 000 g , i.e. it was increased by 7 % , and it was now very close to the troy standards . § 4 of the law that introduced this reform said : " Further , a pharmaceutical weight deviating from the civil weight does not take place . " But this paragraph was suspended until further notice . 
 The abolishment of the apothecaries ' system meant that doctors ' prescriptions had to take place in terms of the current civil weight : grammes and kilograms . This was considered unfeasible by many , and the state received numerous protests and asked for <unk> . Nevertheless , by 1868 § 4 of the earlier reform was finally put into force . 
 = = = Metrication in countries using the troy and avoirdupois systems = = = 
 Britain was initially involved in the development of the metric system , and the US was among the 17 initial signatories of the Metre Convention in 1875 . Yet in spite of enthusiastic support for the new system by intellectuals such as Charles Dickens , these two countries were particularly slow to implement it . 
 To unify all weight systems used by apothecaries , the Irish <unk> of 1850 introduced a new variant of the apothecaries ' system which subdivided a new apothecaries ' pound of 12 avoirdupois ounces instead of the troy pound . To allow effective use of the new system , new weight pieces were produced . Since an avoirdupois ounce corresponds to 28 @.@ 35 g , the proposed system was very similar to that in use in Portugal and Spain , and in some locations in Italy . But it would have doubled the value of the avoirdupois drachm ( an existing unit , but by then only used for weighing silk ) . Therefore , it conflicted with other non @-@ standard variations that were based on that nearly obsolete unit . 
 The Irish proposal was not widely adopted , but British legislation , in the form of the <unk> Act 1858 , was more radical : It prescribed the use of the avoirdupois system for the United Kingdom ( then including Ireland ) , with none of the traditional subdivisions . This innovation was first used in the united British <unk> of 1864 . In practice the old apothecaries ' system based on the troy pound was still widely used , however , until it was abolished by the Weights and Measures Act of 1976 . Since then it can only be used to measure precious metals and stones . ( The troy pound was already declared illegal for most other uses by the Weights and Measures Act of 1878 . ) 
 In the US , the metric system replaced the apothecaries ' system in the United States Pharmacopoeia of 1971 . 
 = First Ward Wardroom = 
 The First Ward Wardroom is a historic meeting hall at 171 Fountain Street in Pawtucket , Rhode Island . It is a single @-@ story red brick building , with a low @-@ pitch gable @-@ over @-@ hipped roof . Basically rectangular , an enclosed entry pavilion projects from the main block . The building , designed by William R. Walker & Son and built in 1886 , is one of only three ward halls ( structures built by the city and used as polling places and meeting halls ) to survive in the state . Since about 1920 it has been the Major Walter G. Gatchell Post No. 306 of the Veterans of Foreign Wars . The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Designed by William R. Walker & Son and constructed by S. Mason & H. A. Smith in 1886 , the one story red brick Queen Anne style building is basically rectangular with a low @-@ pitched gable @-@ over @-@ hipped roof . The red bricks are laid in dark red mortar and is contrasted by the granite sill course and the now painted grey brownstone stringcourse , window sills and lintels and the lintels of the doors . The enclosed entry pavilion projects from the main block with two porches oriented to face Fountain Street and Blake Street . Three arched double hung windows with two @-@ over @-@ two sash run along the sides of the building with three smaller windows are in the entry pavilion . At the time of the National Register of Historic Places nomination , these smaller windows were boarded up and the porch oriented to Fountain Street was bricked in with the buildings original materials . One original eight @-@ panel door remained on the Blake Street entry porch , but the rest of the exterior details were extant , including the boarded pavilion pediment with " 1st Ward " in raised lettering . 
 National Register of Historic Places nomination states that the interior of the building originally opened into a large meeting hall with some auxiliary service rooms at the rear of the building , but did not disclose any alterations made to the interior . 
 = = Use = = 
 The Fifth Ward Wardroom was constructed and used as a polling place and meeting hall in a critical time when Pawtucket was incorporated as a city before becoming the Major Walter G. Gatchell Post No. 306 of the Veterans of Foreign Wars . Since about 1920 , the Gatchell Post has occupied the First Ward Wardroom , but the property is owned by the City of Pawtucket . In 2013 , the building was in need of significant roof repairs and the Gatchell Post reached out to the community to help raise the necessary funds . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The First Ward Wardroom is significant as a historical reminder of the pivotal time in which Pawtucket was incorporated as a city and gave up its town @-@ meeting form of governance . The building is also architecturally significant as a rare type of building , wardrooms , and is one of three extant examples in Rhode Island . William R. Walker & Son constructed three such structures in Pawtucket with the Fifth Ward Wardroom being extant and the third example having been demolished . Though both constructed by William R. Walker & Son , the two Pawtucket wardrooms are related , but not identical in construction and show variations by the firm . Another wardroom , with a bungalow style , is located in the Cato Hill Historic District in Woonsocket , Rhode Island . The First Ward Wardroom was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on November 18 , 1983 . 
 = Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode One = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode One is a first @-@ person shooter video game , the first in a series of episodes that serve as the sequel to the 2004 Half @-@ Life 2 . It was developed by Valve Corporation and released on June 1 , 2006 . Originally called Half @-@ Life 2 : Aftermath , the game was later renamed to Episode One after Valve became confident in using an episodic structure for the game . Similar to Half @-@ Life 2 , Episode One also uses the Source game engine . The game debuted new lighting and animation technologies , as well as AI sidekick enhancements . 
 The game 's events take place immediately after those in Half @-@ Life 2 , in and around war @-@ torn City 17 . Episode One follows scientist Gordon Freeman and his companion Alyx Vance as they fight in humanity 's continuing struggle against the alien civilization known as the Combine . When the story begins , Gordon wakes up outside the enemy 's base of operations , the Citadel , after being left unconscious from the concluding events of Half @-@ Life 2 . During the course of the game , Gordon travels with Alyx as they attempt to evacuate the city . As the game comes to an end , Gordon and Alyx are caught in a major accident , and their fates are revealed in the sequel , Episode Two . 
 Valve views episodes One through Three as tantamount to a standalone release . Episode One is available as part of a bundle package known as The Orange Box , which also includes Half @-@ Life 2 , Episode Two , Team Fortress 2 , and Portal . Episode One received a generally positive critical reaction , and the co @-@ operative aspects of the gameplay received particular praise , although the game 's short length was criticized . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Episode One players make their way through a linear series of levels and encounter various enemies and allies . The gameplay is broken up between combat @-@ oriented challenges and physics @-@ based puzzles . Episode One integrates tutorial @-@ like tasks into the story to familiarize the player with new gameplay mechanics without breaking immersion . A head @-@ up display appears on the screen to display the character 's health , energy , and ammunition . Throughout the course of the game , the player accesses new weapons and ammunition that are used to defend the character from enemy forces . Unlike in Half @-@ Life 2 , where Gordon 's initial weapon is the crowbar , Gordon first acquires the Gravity Gun , which plays a crucial role in the game by allowing the player to use physics to manipulate objects at a distance in both combat and puzzle @-@ solving scenarios . 
 The AI for Alyx Vance , Gordon 's companion , was designed specifically for co @-@ operative play in Episode One to complement the player 's abilities . The developers described Alyx 's programming for Episode One as a " personality code " as opposed to an " AI code " , emphasizing the attention they gave to make Alyx a unique and believable companion . For part of the code , she was specifically programmed to avoid performing too many mechanical or repetitive actions , such as repeating lines of dialogue or performing certain routines in combat situations . Examples of this co @-@ operative gameplay include combat in underground levels . In this scenario , the player can conserve their ammunition by using a flashlight to help Alyx spot and kill oncoming enemies . Similarly , Alyx will often take up strategic positions and provide covering fire to keep the player safe while they travel to a certain area or perform certain actions . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The original Half @-@ Life takes place at a remote laboratory called the Black Mesa Research Facility . The player takes on the role of Gordon Freeman , a scientist involved in an accident that opens an inter @-@ dimensional portal to the world of Xen and floods the facility with hostile alien creatures . After the player guides him in an attempt to escape the facility and close the portal , the game ends with a mysterious figure who offers Freeman employment . The protagonist is subsequently put into stasis by this mysterious character known as the G @-@ Man . 
 Half @-@ Life 2 picks up the story , in which the G @-@ Man takes Freeman out of stasis and inserts him on a train en route to City 17 an indeterminate number of years after the events of the first game , with Earth now enslaved by the transhuman forces of the Combine . The player guides Gordon to aid in humanity 's struggle against the Combine and its human representative , Dr. Wallace Breen . He oversees the occupation from his base of operations in the Citadel , a monolithic building at the heart of City 17 . Fighting alongside Gordon is an underground resistance led by former colleague Dr. Eli Vance , as well other allies including Dr. Vance 's daughter Alyx Vance and the enigmatic Vortigaunts , an alien species . Half @-@ Life 2 ends with a climactic battle atop the Citadel that inflicts critical damage to its dark fusion reactor . When it seems as if Alyx and Gordon are to be engulfed by the explosion , the G @-@ Man appears once more . After giving a cryptic speech , he extracts Gordon from danger and places him in stasis once again . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 After the explosion of the Citadel reactor from which Gordon was extracted by the G @-@ Man and where Alyx Vance was left behind , time suddenly freezes . Several Vortigaunts appear and rescue Alyx from the blast . After she is rescued , the Vortigaunts appear before the G @-@ Man and stand between him and Gordon . They teleport Gordon away from the scene , much to the G @-@ Man 's displeasure . 
 D0g retrieves Gordon out from under some junk outside the Citadel , and Gordon reunites with Alyx , who is relieved to see him . Alyx contacts Eli Vance and Isaac Kleiner , who have escaped the city , and is informed the Citadel 's core is at risk of exploding at any moment . Kleiner states the explosion could be large enough to level the whole of City 17 , and the only way for them to survive is to re @-@ enter the Citadel and slow the core 's progression toward meltdown . Eli reluctantly agrees when he sees no other option . 
 Alyx and Gordon re @-@ enter the now @-@ decaying Citadel to try to stabilize the core ; Gordon is successful in re @-@ engaging the reactor 's containment field , which delays the explosion . Alyx discovers the Combine are deliberately accelerating the destruction of the Citadel to send a " transmission packet " to the Combine 's homeworld . She downloads a copy of the message , which causes the Combine to prioritize them as targets . Alyx also downloads a transmission from Dr. Judith Mossman , in which she mentions a " project " she has located , before she is cut off by a Combine attack . Afterwards , Alyx and Gordon board a train to escape the Citadel . 
 The train derails en route , forcing the duo to proceed on foot . As they fight through the disorganized Combine forces and rampant alien infestations , Kleiner appears on the screens Breen once used to pass out propaganda , and gives out useful updates to the evacuating citizens about the latest turn of events as well as reiterating the Citadel 's imminent collapse . Alyx and Gordon eventually meet up with Barney Calhoun and a group of other survivors who are preparing to move on a train station to escape City 17 . Alyx and Gordon provide cover for the passengers as they board . 
 To keep the survivors safe , Alyx and Gordon opt to take a different train . They manage to escape just as the reactor begins to detonate ; the energy sends out the Combine 's message . Several pods containing Combine Advisors are ejected from the Citadel as it detonates . The resulting shockwave catches the train , derailing it . 
 = = Development = = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode One is the first in a trilogy of episodes serving as the sequel of the 2004 first @-@ person shooter video game Half @-@ Life 2 . In February 2006 , Valve announced that they would be releasing a trilogy of episodes covering the same story arc . While the plots and dialogue of Half @-@ Life and Half @-@ Life 2 were written solely by Valve 's in @-@ house writer Marc Laidlaw , the Half @-@ Life 2 Episodes were collaboratively written by Laidlaw , Chet Faliszek , and Erik Wolpaw , with Laidlaw retaining overall leadership of the group . 
 Valve explained that the focus of Episode One was character development , in particular that of Gordon 's female sidekick and friend Alyx , because she accompanies the player for virtually the entire game . Project lead Robin Walker discussed the reasoning behind this approach in an article announcing the game in the May 2005 issue of PC Gamer UK , saying , " It 's kind of ironic that despite so much of the theme of Half @-@ Life 2 being about other characters and other people , you spent most of the game alone . " Lead writer Marc Laidlaw expanded further on the game 's premise , saying , 
 Episode One deals with the events and issues set in motion during Half @-@ Life 2 . You 've done critical damage to the Citadel . The whole place is going to go up , taking out City 17 and what 's in its immediate radius . You and Alyx are leading the flight from the city getting up close and personal with some of the creatures and sights from the end of the game . 
 It was later confirmed that players would reprise the role of Gordon Freeman , unlike the original Half @-@ Life expansion packs , which all dealt with different characters . Valve decided to develop Episode One in @-@ house , as opposed to working with outside contractors as with previous expansions , because the company was already comfortable with the technology and construction tools of Half @-@ Life 2 . 
 Because of Alyx 's significant involvement in the game , Valve made modifications to her AI that allowed her to react to the player 's actions . Modifications include commentating on objects the player manipulates or obstacles they have overcome . She also acts as an important device in both plot exposition and directing the player 's journey , often vocalizing what the player is required to do next to progress . The developers explained that a large part of their focus was creating not only a believable companion for the player , but also one that did not obstruct the player 's actions . They wanted to allow the player to dictate his / her own pace and method of overcoming any challenges faced without being hindered . This meant that Valve often had to scale back Alyx 's input and dialogue during the player 's journey so they would not feel pressured to progress and consequently object to her presence . The developers also placed what they described as hero moments throughout the game , which allow the player to single @-@ handedly overcome obstacles such as particularly challenging enemies , during which Alyx takes the role of an observer and gives the player praise and adulation for their heroic feats . Play testers were used extensively by the developers throughout the entirety of the game 's creation in order for Valve to continually gauge the effectiveness of in @-@ game scenarios as well as the difficulty . 
 The game runs on an upgraded version of Valve 's proprietary Source engine , and features both the engine 's advanced lighting effects , and a new version of its facial animation / expression technology . Upgrades to enemy AI allow Combine soldiers to utilize tactics previously unavailable to them . For example , Combine soldiers were given the ability to crouch while being fired upon in order to duck underneath the player 's line of fire . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Kelly Bailey . The music is used sparingly throughout ; it plays primarily during scenes of major plot developments or particularly important action sequences such as large battles or when encountering a new enemy . 
 While no new locales were introduced in Episode One , large alterations were made to the appearance of both City 17 where the game takes place and the Citadel from the end of Half @-@ Life 2 to reflect the changing shape of the world and remind the player that their actions have major effects on the story line . The Citadel has degenerated from the cold , alien , and imposing fortress of the previous game into an extremely unstable state . This provides a visual cue to the player of the catastrophic damage they inflicted , and it allows for the introduction of new gameplay elements that accentuate the dangers which come with the Citadel 's imminent collapse . In addition , it serves a thematic purpose by highlighting the weakening of the Combine 's dominance in City 17 . Likewise , City 17 has been altered to reflect the aftermath of the resistance 's open rebellion , with vast swathes of destroyed buildings , and the introduction of foes previously kept outside its confines in Half @-@ Life 2 to emphasize the scale of the uprising . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Upon release , Episode One was sold in both retail stores and Valve 's online Steam distribution system , where it was sold at a discount price . The game was also distributed by Electronic Arts as both a standalone release and as part of Half @-@ Life 2 : Platinum Collection . It was available for pre @-@ load and pre @-@ purchase through Steam on May 1 , 2006 , with Half @-@ Life Deathmatch : Source and Half @-@ Life 2 : Deathmatch immediately available for play as part of the package . Episode One is available as part of a bundle package known as The Orange Box , which also includes Half @-@ Life 2 , Episode Two , Team Fortress 2 , and Portal ; and is available for Mac , PC , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 . About 1 @.@ 4 million retail copies of Episode One were sold by 2008 . 
 Response to Episode One was generally positive , and reviewers praised the game for having more intricate , well @-@ paced gameplay than Half @-@ Life 2 . The game 's interactivity , particularly in the form of Alyx and her reactions to the player 's actions and the events of the game , was also singled out for praise . PC Gamer commented that " while this inaugural episode may not be the essential FPS that Half @-@ Life 2 is , I can 't imagine any shooter fan who 'd want to miss it . " In its review , PC Gamer UK directed particular praise to the balance between puzzle @-@ oriented and action @-@ oriented challenges throughout the game . In Australia , the magazine PC PowerPlay awarded the game 10 out of 10 . Edge praised the " deftness " with which the game was able to direct the player 's eyes , and the strength of Alyx as a companion , concluding , " In an interactive genre bound to the traditions of the pop @-@ up gun and invisible hero , it simply doesn 't get more sophisticated than this . " Episode One earned a scores of 87 / 100 and 85 @.@ 59 % on review aggregators Metacritic and GameRankings respectively . IGN awarded Episode One with the title of " Best PC FPS of 2006 " and described it as a " great bang for the buck using Valve 's new episodic plan " , although it did not offer " the complete experience that Half @-@ Life 2 was " . GameSpy ranked Episode One ninth on its 2006 " Games of the Year " list , and it also noted the implementation of Alyx as a believable and useful companion . 
 A common criticism of the game is its short length . Episode One takes roughly 4 – 6 hours to complete , which raises the issue of whether the game justifies its price . Computer Games Magazine argued the futility of reviewing the game due to its episodic nature ; as the first part of a three @-@ part story arc , it is difficult to judge it when divorced from the final product . Game Revolution expressed disappointment at a lack of new features such as environments and weapons . 
 = Pilot whale = 
 Pilot whales are cetaceans belonging to the genus Globicephala . The two extant species are the long @-@ finned pilot whale ( G. melas ) and the short @-@ finned pilot whale ( G. macrorhynchus ) . The two are not readily distinguished at sea , and analysis of the skulls is the best way to tell the difference between them . Between the two species , pilot whales range in waters nearly worldwide , with long @-@ finned pilot whales living in cold waters and short @-@ finned pilot whales living in tropical and subtropical waters . Pilot whales are among the largest of the oceanic dolphins , exceeded in size only by the killer whale . They and other large members of the dolphin family are also known as blackfish . 
 Pilot whales are primarily squid eaters , but will feed on fish , as well . They are also highly social , and studies suggest that both males and females remain in their mothers ' pods , an unusual trait among mammals , also found in certain killer whale communities . Short @-@ finned pilot whales are also one of the few mammal species where females go through menopause , and <unk> females may contribute to the survival of younger members of their pods . Pilot whales are notorious for stranding themselves on beaches , and are among the most common cetacean stranders . Several theories have been proposed to account for this behavior . The status of both species is not understood , and they have been subject to direct and indirect catches by fisheries . Whalers in a few countries continue to hunt pilot whales . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 Pilot whales are classified into two species : 
 Long @-@ finned pilot whale ( Globicephala melas ) 
 Short @-@ finned pilot whale ( Globicephala macrorhynchus ) . 
 The short @-@ finned pilot whale was described , from skeletal materials only , by John Edward Gray in 1846 . He presumed from the skeleton that the whale had a large beak . The long @-@ finned pilot whale was first classified by Thomas Stewart Traill in 1809 as Delphinus melas . Its scientific name was eventually changed to Globicephala <unk> . Since 1986 , the specific name of the long @-@ finned pilot whale was changed to its original form melas . Other species classifications have been proposed but only two have been accepted . There exist geographic forms of short @-@ finned pilot whales off the east coast of Japan , which comprise genetically isolated stocks . 
 Fossils of an extinct relative , Globicephala <unk> , have been found in Pleistocene deposits in Florida . Another Globicephala dolphin was discovered in Pliocene strata in Tuscany , Italy , and was named G. <unk> . The pilot whales were also close relatives of the extinct blunt @-@ snouted dolphin . Close living relatives of the pilot whales are the melon @-@ headed whale , the pygmy killer whale , the false killer whale , and Risso 's dolphin . 
 Evolution of Tappanaga , the endemic , larger form of short @-@ finned pilots found in northern Japan have been indicated that the <unk> of this form could be caused by the extinction of Long @-@ finned pilots in north Pacific in the 12th century where Magondou , the smaller , southern type possibly filled the former niches of Long @-@ finned pilots , adapting and colonizing into colder waters . Some claims that the Tappanaga , alternatively called <unk> are not adapted form of Short @-@ finned pilots but a distinctive species of their own . Today , Tappanaga and Magondou differentiate their respective distributions by the border at around the oceanic front off Chōshi , Chiba . 
 The animals were named " pilot whales " because pods were believed to be " piloted " by a leader . They are also called " pothead whales " and " blackfish " . The genus name is a combination of the Latin words globus ( " round ball " or " globe " ) and kephale ( " head " ) . Melas is Greek for " black " and macrorhynchus comes from the Greek words macro ( " enlarged " ) and <unk> ( " snout " or " beak " ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pilot whales are mostly dark grey , brown , or black , but have some light areas such as a grey saddle patch behind the dorsal fin . Other light areas are an anchor @-@ shaped patch under the chin , a faint blaze marking behind the eye , a large marking on the belly , and a genital patch . The dorsal fin is set forward on the back and sweeps backwards . A pilot whale is more robust than most dolphins , and has a distinctive large , bulbous melon . Pilot whales ' long , sickle @-@ shaped flippers and tail stocks are flattened from side to side . Male long @-@ finned pilot whales develop more circular melons than females , although this does not seem to be the case for short @-@ finned pilot whales off the Pacific coast of Japan . 
 Long - and short @-@ finned pilot whales are so similar , it is difficult to tell the two species apart . They were traditionally differentiated by the length of the pectoral flippers relative to total body length and the number of teeth . The long @-@ finned pilot whale was thought to have 9 – 12 teeth in each row and flippers one @-@ fifth of total body length , compared to the short @-@ finned pilot whale with its 7 – 9 teeth in each row and flippers one @-@ sixth of total body length . Studies of whales in the Atlantic showed much overlap in these characteristics between the species , making them <unk> instead of distinctive features . Thus , biologists have since used skull differences to distinguish the two species . The skull of the short @-@ finned pilot whale has a shorter and broader <unk> with a premaxilla that covers more of the maxilla . By contrast , the long @-@ finned pilot whale 's skull has a more elongated <unk> and a more exposed maxilla . 
 The size and weight depend on the species , as long @-@ finned pilot whales are generally larger than short @-@ finned pilot whales . Their lifespans are about 45 years in males and 60 years in females for both species . Both species exhibit sexual dimorphism . Adult long @-@ finned pilot whales reach a body length of approximately 6 @.@ 5 m , with males being 1 m longer than females . Their body mass reaches up to 1 @,@ 300 kg in females and up to 2 @,@ 300 kg in males . For short @-@ finned pilot whales , adult females reach a body length of about 5 @.@ 5 m , while males reach 7 @.@ 2 m and may weigh up to 3 @,@ 200 kg . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution and habitat = = = 
 Pilot whales can be found in oceans nearly worldwide , but data about current population sizes is deficient . The long @-@ finned pilot whale prefers slightly cooler waters than the short @-@ finned , and is divided into two populations . The smaller group is found in a circumpolar band in the Southern Ocean from about 20 to 65 ° S. It may be sighted off the coasts of Chile , Argentina , South Africa , Australia , and New Zealand . An estimated more than 200 @,@ 000 individuals were in this population in 2006 . The second , much larger , population inhabits the North Atlantic Ocean , in a band from South Carolina in the United States across to the Azores and Morocco at its southern edge and from Newfoundland to Greenland , Iceland , and northern Norway at its northern limit . This population was estimated at 778 @,@ 000 individuals in 1989 . It is also present in the western half of the Mediterranean Sea . 
 The short @-@ finned pilot whale is less populous . It is found in temperate and tropical waters of the Indian , Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . Its population overlaps slightly with the long @-@ finned pilot whale in the temperate waters of the North Atlantic and Southern Oceans . About 150 @,@ 000 individuals are found in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean . More than 30 @,@ 000 animals are estimated in the western Pacific , off the coast of Japan . Pilot whales are generally nomadic , but some populations stay year @-@ round in places such as Hawaii and parts of California . They prefer the waters of the shelf break and slope . Once commonly seen off of Southern California , short @-@ finned pilot whales disappeared from the area after a strong El Niño year in the early 1980s , according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . In October 2014 , crew and passengers on several boats spotted a pod of 50 @-@ 200 off Dana Point , California . 
 = = = Foraging and parasites = = = 
 Both species eat primarily squid . The whales make seasonal inshore and offshore movements in response to the dispersal of their prey . Fish that are consumed include Atlantic cod , Greenland turbot , Atlantic mackerel , Atlantic herring , hake , and spiny dogfish in the northwest Atlantic . In the Faroe Islands , whales mostly eat squid , but will also eat fish species such as greater <unk> and blue whiting . However , Faroe whales do not seem to feed on cod , herring , or mackerel even when they are abundant . 
 Pilot whales generally take several breaths before diving for a few minutes . Feeding dives may last over ten minutes . They are capable of diving to depths of 600 meters , but most dives are to a depth of 30 – 60 m . Shallow dives tend to take place during the day , while deeper ones take place at night . When making deep dives , pilot whales often make fast sprints to catch fast @-@ moving prey such as squid . Compared to sperm whales and beaked whales , foraging short @-@ finned pilot whales are more energetic at the same depth . When they reach the end of their dives , pilot whales will sprint , possibly to catch prey , and then make a few buzzes . This is unusual considering deep @-@ diving , breath @-@ holding animals would be expected to swim slowly to conserve oxygen . The animal 's high metabolism possibly allows it to sprint at deep depths , which would also give it shorter diving periods than some other marine mammals . This may also be the case for long @-@ finned pilot whales . 
 Pilot whales are often infested with whale lice , cestodes , and nematodes . They also can be hosts to various pathogenic bacteria and viruses , such as Streptococcus , Pseudomonas , Escherichia , Staphylococcus , and influenza . One sample of Newfoundland pilot whales found the most common illness was an upper respiratory tract infection . 
 = = = Social structure and life history = = = 
 Both species live in groups of 10 – 30 , but some groups may number 100 or more . Data suggest the social structures of pilot whale pods are similar to those of " resident " killer whales . The pods are highly stable and the members have close matrilineal relationships . Pod members are of various age and sex classes , although adult females tend to outnumber adult males . They have been observed making various kin @-@ directed behaviors , such as providing food . Numerous pods will temporarily gather , perhaps to allow individuals from different pods to interact and mate , as well as provide protection . 
 Both species are loosely polygynous . Data suggest both males and females remain in mother 's pod for life ; despite this , inbreeding within a pod does not seem to occur . During aggregations , males will temporarily leave their pods to mate with females from other pods . Male reproductive dominance or competition for mates does not seem to exist . After mating , a male pilot whale usually spends only a few months with a female , and an individual may sire several offspring in the same pod . Males return to their own pods when the aggregations disband , and their presence may contribute to the survival of the other pod members . No evidence of " bachelor " groups has been found . 
 Pilot whale pods off southern California have been observed in three different groups : traveling / hunting groups , feeding groups and loafing groups . In traveling / hunting groups , individuals position themselves in chorus lines stretching two miles long , with only a few whales underneath . Sexual and age @-@ class segregation apparently occurs in these groups . In feeding groups , individuals are very loosely associated , but may move in the same direction . In loafing groups , whales number between 12 and 30 individuals resting . Mating and other behavior may take place . 
 Pilot whales have one of the longest birth intervals of the cetaceans , calving once every three to five years . Most matings and <unk> occur during the summer for long @-@ finned pilot whales . For short @-@ finned pilot whales of the Southern Hemisphere , births are at their highest in spring and autumn , while in Northern Hemisphere , the time in which calving peaks can vary by population . For long @-@ finned pilot whales , gestation lasts 12 – 16 months , and short @-@ finned pilot whales have a 15 @-@ month gestation period . The calf nurses for three years , although lactation usually lasts longer , allowing for extensive mother @-@ calf bonds . Short @-@ finned pilot whale females will go though menopause , but this is not as common in females of long @-@ finned pilot whales . <unk> females possibly play important roles in the survival of the young . <unk> females will continue to lactate and nurse young . Since they can no longer bear young of their own , these females invest in the current young . Short @-@ finned pilot whales grow more slowly than long @-@ finned pilot whales . For the short @-@ finned pilot whale , females become sexually mature at 9 years old and males at about 13 – 16 years . For the long @-@ finned pilot whale , females reach maturity at around eight years and males at around 12 years . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 Pilot whales emit echolocation clicks for foraging and whistles and burst pulses as social signals ( e.g. to keep contact with members of their pod ) . With active behavior , vocalizations are more complex , while less @-@ active behavior is accompanied by simple vocalizations . Differences have been found in the calls of the two species . Compared with short @-@ finned pilot whales , long @-@ finned pilot whales have relatively low @-@ frequency calls with narrow frequency ranges . In one study of North Atlantic long @-@ finned pilot whales , certain vocalizations were heard to accompany certain behaviors . When resting or " milling " , simple whistles are emitted . Surfacing behavior is accompanied by more complex whistles and pulsed sounds . The number of whistles made increases with the number of subgroups and the distance in which the whales are spread apart . 
 A study of short @-@ finned pilot whales off the southwest coast of Tenerife in the Canary Islands has found the members of a pod maintained contact with each other through call repertoires unique to their pod . A later study found , when foraging at around 800 m deep , short @-@ finned pilot whales make tonal calls . The number and length of the calls seem to decrease with depth despite being farther away from conspecifics at the surface . As such , the surrounding water pressure affects the energy of the calls , but it does not appear to affect the frequency levels . 
 When in stressful situations , pilot whales produce " <unk> " or " plaintive cries " , which are variations of their whistles . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Of the cetaceans , pilot whales are among the most common stranders . Because of their strong social bonds , whole groups of pilot whales will strand . Single stranders have been recorded and these are usually diseased . Group stranding tends to be of mostly healthy individuals . Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain group strandings . When using magnetic fields for navigation , the whales have been suggested to get perplexed by geomagnetic anomalies or they may be following a sick member of their group that got stranded . The pod also may be following a member of high importance that got stranded and a secondary social response makes them keep returning . Researchers from New Zealand have successfully used secondary social responses to keep a stranding pod of long @-@ finned pilot whales from returning to the beach . In addition , the young members of the pod were taken offshore to buoys , and their distress calls lured the older whales back out to sea . 
 = = Human interaction = = 
 The IUCN lists both species as " Data Deficient " in the Red List of Threatened Species . Long @-@ finned pilot whales in the North and Baltic Seas are listed in Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals ( CMS ) . Those from northwest and northeast Atlantic may also need to be included to Appendix II of CMS . The short @-@ finned pilot whale is listed on Appendix II of CITES . 
 = = = Hunting = = = 
 The long @-@ finned pilot whale has traditionally been hunted by " driving " , which involves many hunters and boats gathering in a semicircle behind a pod of whales close to shore , and slowly driving them towards a bay , where they become stranded and are then slaughtered . This practice was common in both the 19th and 20th centuries . At the Faroe Islands , pilot whale hunting started at least in the 16th century , and continued into the modern times , as thousands were killed during the 1970s and 1980s . In other parts of the North Atlantic , such as Norway , West Greenland , Ireland and Cape Cod , pilot whales have also been hunted , but to a lesser extent . Iceland , . One fishery at Cape Cod harvested 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 whales per year during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Newfoundland 's long @-@ finned pilot whale fishery was at its highest in 1956 , but declined shortly after and is now defunct . In the Southern Hemisphere , exploitation of long @-@ finned pilot whales has been sporadic and low . Currently , long @-@ finned pilot whales are only hunted at the Faroe Islands and Greenland . 
 The short @-@ finned pilot whale has also been hunted for many centuries , particularly by Japanese whalers . Between 1948 and 1980 , hundreds of whales were exploited at Hokkaido and Sanriku in the north and Taiji , Izu , and Okinawa in the south . These fisheries were at their highest in the late 1940s and early 1950s ; 2 @,@ 326 short @-@ finned pilot whales were harvested in the mid- to late 1980s . This had decreased to about 400 per year by the 1990s . 
 Pilot whales have also fallen victim to <unk> . In one year , around 30 short @-@ finned pilot whales were caught by the squid round @-@ haul fishery in southern California . Likewise , California 's drift gill net fishery took around 20 whales a year in the mid @-@ 1990s . In 1988 , 141 whales caught on the east coast of the US were taken by the foreign Atlantic mackerel fishery , which forced it to be shut down . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 As with other marine mammals , pilot whales are susceptible to certain pollutants . Off the Faroes , France , the UK , and the eastern US , pilot whales were found to have been contaminated with high amounts of DDT and PCB . The Faroes whales have also been contaminated with cadmium and mercury . However , pilot whales from Newfoundland and Tasmania were found to have had very low levels of DDT . Short @-@ finned pilot whales off the west coast of the US have had high amounts of DDT and PCB in contrast to the low amounts found in whales from Japan and the Antilles . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Pilot whale meat is available for consumption in very few areas of Japan , mainly along the central Pacific coast , and also in other areas of the world , such as the Faroe Islands . The meat is high in protein ( higher than beef ) and low in fat . Because a whale 's fat is contained in the layer of blubber beneath the skin , and the muscle is high in myoglobin , the meat is a dark shade of red . In Japan , where pilot whale meat can be found in certain restaurants and <unk> , the meat is sometimes served raw , as sashimi , but just as often pilot whale steaks are marinated , cut into small chunks , and grilled . When grilled , the meat is slightly flaky and quite flavorful , <unk> , though similar to a quality cut of beef , with distinct yet subtle undertones recalling its marine origin . 
 = = = = Health concerns = = = = 
 In both Japan and the Faroe Islands , the meat is contaminated with mercury and cadmium , causing a health risk for those who frequently eat it , especially children and pregnant women . In November 2008 , an article in New Scientist reported that research done on the Faroe Islands resulted in two chief medical officers recommending against the consumption of pilot whale meat , considering it to be too toxic . In 2008 , the local authorities recommended that pilot whale meat should no longer be eaten due to the contamination . This has resulted in reduced consumption , according to a senior Faroese health official . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 Pilot whales , mostly short @-@ finned pilot whales , have been kept in captivity . Since 1973 , some long @-@ finned pilot whales from New England waters were taken and temporarily kept in captivity . Short @-@ finned pilot whales off southern California , Hawaii and Japan have been kept in aquariums and <unk> . Several pilot whales from southern California and Hawaii were taken into captivity during the 1960s and early 1970s , two of which were placed at SeaWorld in San Diego . During the 1970s and early 1980s , six pilot whales were captured alive by drive hunts and taken for public display . Pilot whales have historically had low survival rates in captivity , with the average annual survival being 0 @.@ 51 during the mid @-@ 1960s to early 1970s . 
 = Cook Islands at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 On behalf of the Cook Islands , the Cook Islands Sports and National Olympic Committee sent a team to the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China , marking its sixth consecutive appearance at the Olympics since its debut in the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea . The country sent four athletes to the Games across three sports and four distinct events ( Gordon Heather and <unk> Tapoki in track and field , <unk> Okotai in swimming , and Sam Pera , Jr. in weightlifting ) . No athlete of the Cook Islander delegation progressed past the first rounds in their events ( with the exception of weightlifting , where the first round was the only round ) and did not go on to win medals . Pera was the nation 's flag bearer at the ceremonies . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cook Islands are a collection of fifteen islands lying in the South Pacific Ocean that are governed under a single parliamentary entity . Some 10 @,@ 000 people live in the dependency . The country is in a free association with New Zealand , who handles the nation 's external affairs . The Cook Islands became self @-@ governing in 1965 . 23 years later , the Cook Islands sent their first delegation to the Olympics at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea . Between 1988 and 2008 , the Cook Islands sent delegations to all six Summer Olympic games . The size of the Cook Islander delegation was largest in 1988 , when it reached seven athletes . The size of the nation 's delegation has not risen past four since then as of the Beijing Olympics . 
 At Beijing , four athletes competed for the Cook Islands . Of those competitors , three were men ( Heather , Okotai , Pera ) and one was a woman ( Tapoki ) . They competed across three sports ( track and field , swimming and weightlifting ) and four distinct events ( men 's 100 meters and women 's discus throw in track and field , men 's 100 meters breaststroke in swimming , and men 's heavyweight in weightlifting ) . As of the 2008 Olympics , there had not been a Cook Islander who has won a medal at the Olympics . Sam Pera , Jr . , a weightlifter , was the flagbearer for the Cook Islands at the ceremonies . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 Gordon Heather was the sole male Cook Islander participating in a track event at the Beijing Olympics , marked by his competition in the men 's 100 meters dash . Born on Rarotonga , the most populous of the Cook Islands and the home to its capital city ( district ) , Heather was 18 years old when he participated in the Beijing Olympic . He had not previously competed in any Olympic games . During the 14 August qualification round , Heather participated in the ninth heat , which included eight athletes . He finished the dash in 11 @.@ 41 seconds , placing last in the heat . Micronesia 's Jack Howard placed ahead of Heather ( 11 @.@ 03 seconds ) in seventh place . Heather 's heat was led by Qatar 's Samuel <unk> Francis ( 10 @.@ 40 seconds ) and Trinidad and Tobago 's Marc Burns ( 10 @.@ 46 seconds ) . Overall , 80 athletes competed in the event 's qualification round , and the Cook Islander sprinter ranked 75th . He did not advance to further rounds . 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 <unk> Tapoki was the only female Cook Islander participating in a track and field event in Beijing , and was the only Cook Islander in her nation 's delegation during those games . Born in <unk> , a settlement on the island of Mauke , Tapoki 's debut at the Olympics was in the 2004 Athens games when she was 20 years old ; she represented the Cook Islands in the same event during those games . Tapoki was placed in the first heat during the 15 August qualification round , which included 19 athletes . The athletes were given three opportunities to throw the discus . During the first attempt , Tapoki threw the discus 46 @.@ 77 meters , placing 12th out of the 19 competitors in her heat . Her second attempt landed 44 @.@ 11 meters away , placing her 15th out of those who attempted the discus during that round . She marked her highest score , 48 @.@ 35 meters , on her third and final attempt . Of those in her heat , this placed her in 19th place . 37 athletes registered marks during the qualifying round , with Tapoki ranking last . She did not advance to later rounds . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Swimming = = 
 <unk> Okotai participated on the Cook Islands ' behalf in the men 's 100 meters breaststroke . He was the only Cook Islander participating in the event , or in any swimming event in general in Beijing . Okotai was 27 years old at the time of his participation at the 2008 Summer Olympics , and had not previously participated in any Olympic games . During the preliminary rounds , which took place on 9 August , the Cook Islander participated in the first heat , which included three people . Of those three , Okotai ranked third after finishing the event in 1 : 20 @.@ 20 . Oman 's Mohammed Al @-@ <unk> ranked ahead of Okotai ( 1 : 12 @.@ 28 ) , while Qatar 's Osama Mohammed Ye <unk> took first in the heat ( 1 : 10 @.@ 83 ) . Of the 63 athletes who finished the qualification heats , Okotai ranked last . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 = = Weightlifting = = 
 Sam Pera , Jr. was the only Cook Islander participating in weightlifting during the Beijing Olympics . Born on the island of Rarotonga , the most populous Cook Island , Pera is the son of Sam <unk> Pera , who competed for the Cook Islands in the same event in 1992 ( Barcelona ) , 1996 ( Atlanta ) and 2004 ( Athens ) . Sam Pera , Jr. participated in men 's _ <unk> ( heavyweight ) at age 19 , which marked the first time he competed in any Olympic games . The event occurred on 19 August , and included 14 competitors in all . The snatch phase of the event occurred first , and Pera was given three tries . On the first , he successfully lifted 148 kilograms ; on the second , he unsuccessfully attempted to lift 155 kilograms ; and on the third and final , he lifted the 155 kilograms with success . The clean and jerk phrase followed , and Pera was again given three attempts . He successfully lifted 188 kilograms on his first and second tries , and successfully lifted 195 kilograms on his third attempt . Because his highest score during the snatch round was 155 kilograms and his highest during clean and jerk was 195 kilograms , the total of the two equaled his total score of 350 points . Overall , Pera ranked twelfth of the thirteen finishing athletes . Tonga 's Maamaloa Lolohea ranked behind him ( 313 points ) , while Finland 's Antti <unk> ranked ahead ( 366 points ) . The year 's gold medalist , Matthias Steiner , earned 461 points . 
 = Some Enchanted Evening ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " Some Enchanted Evening " is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 13 , 1990 . Although it was the first episode produced , it aired as the season finale due to significant animation problems . The episode is the last to feature the original opening sequence starting from " Bart the Genius " . After resolving a marital dilemma , Homer and Marge want to spend a night on the town so they need a babysitter to look after their children , so they hire Ms. Botz ( voiced by former Laverne & Shirley star Penny Marshall ) through a babysitting service . Ms. Botz is later revealed to be the " Babysitter Bandit " and after restraining the eldest children , she robs the family . 
 The episode features cultural references to such films as The Night of the Hunter and Psycho as well as a musical reference to A Star Is Born . It received mixed reception : some critics deemed it the best episode of the season while others regarded it as the weakest . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marge is depressed that Homer takes her for granted . She calls Dr. Marvin Monroe 's radio call @-@ in therapy show and the doctor urges her to confront Homer , who hears the call on a radio at work , feels bad and wonders how to change the way Marge feels about him . He goes to Moe 's Tavern after work and , on Moe 's advice , brings home a single rose and a box of chocolates . Marge 's mood immediately softens , and Homer tells Marge he will take her to a dinner at a fancy restaurant , dancing , and spend a night at a motel . 
 Marge and Homer now need a babysitter and hire Ms. Botz through the local " Rubber Baby Buggy Bumper babysitting service " ( however , they have to call themselves the " <unk> " , since their kids have a rather bad reputation with the babysitting service , and are effectively blacklisted ) . On Marge 's advice , Ms. Botz puts Maggie to bed and has Bart and Lisa watch The Happy Little Elves . When Bart tries to suggest alternate viewing , Ms. Botz quickly puts him in his place because she dealt with troubled children like him before . After Ms. Botz leaves the room Bart tunes into a station airing America 's Most Armed and Dangerous ( a parody of America 's Most Wanted ) , which profiles a wanted burglar nicknamed " The Babysitter Bandit . " A mug shot of the suspect shows Bart and Lisa that Ms. Botz is " The Babysitter Bandit . " Ms. Botz enters the living room and realizes that her cover has been blown . Bart and Lisa try to hide , but she easily finds them , ties them up and forces them to watch The Happy Little Elves as she continues packing the family 's possessions into her suitcases . Maggie eventually wakes up and goes downstairs to discover that her siblings are tied up and watching TV . Maggie frees Bart and Lisa , and Bart is able to knock out Ms. Botz with a baseball bat . 
 After tying up Ms. Botz , the kids find all their telephones disabled ( which Ms. Botz had done earlier ) and go to a nearby payphone to alert the authorities . Meanwhile , Marge tries to call home to check up on the kids but because there is no answer , she and Homer decide to cancel their motel reservation and go home . They find Ms. Botz bound and gagged in front of the TV . Homer , thinking his children have gotten the best of another babysitter and unaware of her true identity , frees her and pays her handsomely . After advising Homer to keep both eyes on Bart , Ms. Botz makes a clean getaway , just seconds before the kids arrive with the police and news media to arrest her . As Bart tries to lead the police to the house , Homer attempts to berate him for his behavior towards Ms. Botz , only to be informed by a news reporter about Ms. Botz 's true identity and that he just freed her . Realizing his mistake , a humiliated Homer attempts to save face by claiming he fought Botz and she escaped , then warning her on camera never to show her face to him again . Later that night , Homer moans about his blunder on TV , but Marge cheers him up by saying that if he raised three children who can <unk> a perfect stranger , he must be doing something right . 
 = = Production = = 
 Even though this episode aired as the last episode of the first season , it was the first episode in production and was intended to be the first episode to air from the half @-@ hour show . The series is a spin @-@ off from The Tracey Ullman Show in which the family already appeared in a series of animated one @-@ minute shorts . The characters were already created , but had to be further developed in order to carry a half @-@ hour show . The episode was therefore meant as an introduction to the characters . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening and writer / producer Sam Simon ( of such television series as Cheers ) wrote the script for the episode . Both Groening and Simon are credited with developing the series along with executive producer James L. Brooks . The name of Ms. Botz was based on a real person that once babysat Matt Groening . 
 The episode was first directed by Kent Butterworth . Klasky @-@ Csupo , the animation studio that produced the earlier Simpsons shorts , was in charge of the animation , with one exception . During the years of producing the shorts , everything was created in @-@ house . As a budgetary consideration production was subcontracted to South Korean animation studio AKOM . While character and background layout was done in Los Angeles , inbetweening , coloring and filming is done by the overseas studio . A debacle erupted when this episode , the first to return from Korea , was screened in front of the production staff at the Gracie Films bungalow . Brooks ' initial reaction to the animation was " This is shit . " Afterwards the room almost cleared . A heated argument ensued between Brooks and Klasky @-@ Csupo animation studio head Gabor Csupo , who denied that there was anything wrong with the animation and suggested that the real problem was the quality of the show 's writing . 
 The producers felt the animation did not exhibit a distinct style envisioned for the show . At the time there were only a few choices for animation style . Usually , they would follow the style of either Disney , Warner Bros. , or Hanna @-@ Barbera . Disney and Warner Bros. cartoons had a universe that was <unk> and the characters seemed to be made of rubber . The producers wanted a realistic environment in which the characters and objects could not do anything that was not possible in the real world . One example with the early animation being cartoonish was that the doors behaved liked rubber when slammed . The style of Hanna @-@ Barbera featured the use of cartoon sounds , which they did not want either . 
 The producers considered aborting the series if the next episode , " Bart the Genius " , turned out as this episode , but fortunately it turned out to suffer only a few , easily fixable problems . Afterwards , the producers entreated Fox to postpone the series premiere for several months . The premiere then switched to " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , which had to be aired in December , being a Christmas special . This ensured that more time could be spent fixing the animation problems and rewriting much of this episode . Directorial retakes were handled by David Silverman , who already had considerable experience directing the shorts . Silverman estimates that about 70 % of everything had to be redone . Most of these retakes consisted of changing the backgrounds . The result is an episode where the animation is uneven , because it shifts between the early animation and the retakes . It is still possible to see the doors slam like they were made of rubber . The Fox censors wanted to replace the sentence " the blue thing with the things " , which they believed to be too sexual . Due to the fledgling position of the Fox network , Jim Brooks had obtained an unusual contractual provision that ensured the network could not interfere with the creative process by providing show notes , so the producers simply ignored the censors . 
 The episode featured a few early character designs . Moe Szyslak has black hair in this episode , which was later changed to grey . Barney Gumble has yellow hair , which was later changed to brown in order to differentiate the character 's hair color from that of his skin . Because of the delayed airing , there are also a few continuity errors . Santa 's Little Helper for example does not appear in this episode , despite being introduced in " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . Hank Azaria was at the time credited as a guest star for portraying Moe Szyslak . In this episode Moe was originally voiced by Christopher Collins , but when Azaria came with his version , they decided to overdub Collins ' voice . Azaria became a regular cast member in the second season . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Ms. Botz 's pursuit of Bart into the cellar is reminiscent of Robert Mitchum 's pursuit of a young boy in the film The Night of the Hunter . Moe 's Tavern plays " The Man That Got Away " from the 1954 remake of A Star Is Born directed by George Cukor and starring Judy Garland and James Mason . Homer hums a song from La Dolce Vita ( Patricia ) as he shaves . The song also plays as Homer and Marge dance in the French restaurant . The babysitting service 's name , " Rubber Baby Buggy Bumper " is a line from one of the Tom Slick series of cartoons produced by Jay Ward . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Some Enchanted Evening " finished 12th for the week in the Nielsen ratings with a rating of 15 @.@ 4 , being seen by approximately 14 @.@ 2 million homes . Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said : " It 's quite a shock to discover that this confident , fully rounded episode was the first to be made . The perfect template . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that he " thought “ Evening ” was a reasonably good episode . " and added that " Still , it ’ s an awkward piece , and not one I enjoyed a great deal . To be sure , “ Evening ” was generally entertaining , but it ’ s nothing special . " In a DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 1 @.@ 5 / 5 . Another DVD review from The Digital Bits calls the behind the scenes story more interesting than the actual episode . 
 According to Al Jean , viewers thought this episode was the best episode of the first season after the season ended . However in 2006 , IGN.com named " The Crepes of Wrath " the best episode of the first season . Penny Marshall , who played Ms. Botz , ranked on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . 
 = Standing Liberty quarter = 
 The Standing Liberty quarter was a 25 @-@ cent coin struck by the United States Mint from 1916 to 1930 . It succeeded the Barber quarter , which had been minted since 1892 . Featuring the goddess of Liberty on one side and an eagle in flight on the other , the coin was designed by sculptor Hermon Atkins MacNeil . 
 In 1915 , Director of the Mint Robert W. Woolley set in motion efforts to replace the Barber dime , quarter , and half dollar , as he mistakenly believed that the law required new designs . MacNeil submitted a militaristic design that showed Liberty on guard against attacks . The Mint required modifications to the initial design , and MacNeil 's revised version included dolphins to represent the oceans . In late 1916 , Mint officials made major changes to the design without consulting MacNeil . The sculptor complained about the changes after receiving the new issue in January 1917 . The Mint obtained special legislation to allow MacNeil to redesign the coin as he desired . One change made by the sculptor was the addition of a chain mail vest that covered Liberty 's formerly bare breast . 
 In circulation , the coin 's date wore away quickly , and Mint engravers modified the design to address the issue in 1925 . The Standing Liberty quarter was discontinued in 1931 , a year in which no quarters were struck . By Congressional act the Washington quarter , featuring the first president 's profile was introduced in 1932 to celebrate the bicentennial of his birth . 
 = = Inception = = 
 On September 26 , 1890 , the United States Congress passed an act providing : 
 The Director of the Mint shall have power , with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury , to cause new designs ... to be prepared and adopted ... But no change in the design or die of any coin shall be made oftener than once in twenty @-@ five years from and including the year of the first adoption of the design ... But the Director of the Mint shall nevertheless have power , with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury , to engage temporarily the services of one or more artists , distinguished in their respective departments of art , who shall be paid for such service from the contingent appropriation for the mint at Philadelphia . 
 The Barber coinage had been introduced in 1892 ; dimes , quarter dollars , and half dollars with similar designs by Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber . The Barber coinage , after its release , attracted considerable public dissatisfaction . Beginning in 1905 , successive presidential administrations had attempted to bring modern , beautiful designs to United States coins . Following the redesign of the double eagle , eagle , half eagle and quarter eagle in 1907 and 1908 , as well as the cent and nickel redesigns of 1909 and 1913 respectively , advocates of replacing the Barber coins began to push for the change when the coins ' minimum term expired in 1916 . As early as 1914 , Victor David Brenner , designer of the Lincoln cent , submitted unsolicited designs for the silver coins . He was told , in response , that Secretary of the Treasury William G. McAdoo was completely occupied with other matters . 
 On January 2 , 1915 , an interview with Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Adam M. Joyce appeared in the Michigan Manufacturer and Financial Record : 
 So far as I know ... there is no thought of issuing new coins of the 50 @-@ cent , 25 @-@ cent , and 10 @-@ cent values . If , however , a change is made we all hope that more serviceable and satisfactory coins are produced than the recent Saint @-@ Gaudens double eagle and eagle and the Pratt half and quarter eagle . The buffalo nickel and the Lincoln penny are also faulty from a practical standpoint . All resulted from the desire by the government to mint coins to the satisfaction of artists and not practical coiners . 
 In January 1915 , Assistant Secretary of the Treasury William P. Malburn sent McAdoo a memorandum about the silver subsidiary coinage , noting that " the present silver half dollar , quarter , and dime were changed in 1892 , and a new design may , therefore , be adopted in 1916 . This can be done any time in the year . " In reply , McAdoo wrote " [ l ] et the mint submit designs before we try anyone else . " on the memorandum . 
 In April 1915 , Robert W. Woolley took office as Mint Director . On April 14 , he asked Superintendent Joyce to request Chief Engraver Barber , then in his 36th year in office , to prepare new designs . The same day , Malburn requested the opinion of the Treasury Department 's Solicitor concerning the Mint view that it could strike new designs for the three denominations in 1916 . On April 17 , the Solicitor 's Office responded that the Mint could change the designs . At the time , the Mint was intensely busy producing the Panama @-@ Pacific commemorative coin issue , and immediate action was not taken . In October , Barber was summoned to Washington to discuss coin designs with Woolley , though it is uncertain whether or not he had already prepared sketches for the new coinage . 
 On December 3 , Woolley met with the Commission of Fine Arts . Woolley asked the Commission to view sketches produced by the Mint 's engraving department . Barber was present to explain the coinage process to the Commission members . Woolley suggested to the members that if they did not like the Mint 's work , they should select sculptors to submit designs for the new pieces . It was Woolley 's intent to have distinct designs for the dime , quarter and half dollar — previously , the three pieces had been nearly identical . The director informed the Commission that as the existing coinage had been in use for 25 years , it would have to be changed — something which numismatic historian David Lange calls a " misinterpretation of the coinage laws " . 
 The Commission disliked the sketches from the Mint ( submitted by Barber ) and selected sculptors Adolph Weinman , Hermon MacNeil and Albin Polasek to submit proposals for the new coins . The sculptors could submit multiple sketches . Although the Mint could decide to use a design on a denomination not intended by its sculptor , the designs were not fully interchangeable — by statute , an eagle had to appear on the reverse of the quarter and half dollar , but could not appear on the dime . Woolley hoped that each sculptor would be successful with one piece . 
 The three sculptors submitted design sketches in mid @-@ February , and on February 23 met with Woolley in New York so the artists could make presentations of the work to him and answer his questions . After discussions between Woolley and McAdoo , Weinman was notified on February 28 that five of his sketches had been selected — for the dime and half dollar , and the reverse of the quarter . The same day , Woolley wrote to MacNeil to tell him he would sculpt the quarter 's obverse , and to Polasek to inform him of his lack of success . Members of the Commission persuaded Woolley that so much should not be entrusted to a single artist , and MacNeil was allowed to design both sides of the quarter , subject to the sculptor producing a design satisfactory to Woolley . 
 On March 3 , the new coins were publicly announced , with the Treasury noting , " [ d ] esigns of these coins must be changed by law every 25 years and the present 25 year period ends with 1916 . " The press release indicated that the Treasury hoped production of the new coins would begin in about two months , once the designs were finalized . The same day , Woolley wrote to Mint Engraver Barber , telling him that his sketches were rejected , and that models from Weinman and MacNeil would arrive at the Philadelphia Mint no later than May 1 . According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , Barber became " sullen and totally uncooperative " . Lange notes that " numerous delays were encountered as the artists fine @-@ tuned their models while simultaneously avoiding obstacles thrown in their path by Barber . While his observations regarding many aspects of practical coinage were quite accurate , they clearly could have been presented in a more constructive manner . " In his book on Mercury dimes , Lange notes that Barber , by then aged 75 , had been " compelled over the past ten years to participate in the systematic undoing of a lifetime 's achievements " ; he had to participate in the process which resulted in coins designed by others replacing ones designed by him . 
 With the new pieces , all American coins would have had a recent change of design ( the Morgan dollar was not then being struck . ) According to a column in The Art World magazine later in 1916 @,@ 
 Since that day [ the 19th century ] much artistic progress has taken place in our coinage . Sculptors of reputation have been employed with admirable results ... And now we are to have a new half dollar and a new dime by Weinman and a new quarter by McNeill [ sic ] . Altogether , in the retrospect , it seems an incredible achievement . 
 = = Design = = 
 The identity of the model for the obverse of the quarter is uncertain . As early as May 1917 , the model for the depiction of Liberty was reported to be Doris Doscher , who would later become a silent film actress under the name Doris <unk> . This was accepted for many years . Doscher became well known as " the girl on the quarter " ; she died in 1970 at age 88 . In 1972 , however , a quarter @-@ century after MacNeil 's death , newspapers reported that the actual model was Broadway actress Irene MacDowell , then aged 92 ( she died the following year ) whose name was said to have been concealed because her husband ( one of MacNeil 's tennis partners ) disapproved . In an article in the December 2003 edition of The Numismatist , Timothy B. Benford Jr. suggests that the supposed deception was to fool MacNeil 's wife , who saw MacDowell as a potential romantic rival . In 1982 , however , Doscher 's widower stated that despite the MacDowell claim , his wife had posed for the quarter . 
 MacNeil submitted two designs for the obverse , the one which was successful and another , showing a standing Liberty facing right , which he would later resubmit in modified form in the Peace dollar design competition of 1921 , again unsuccessfully . In the rejected design , MacNeil 's Liberty leans forward , an olive branch extended in her left hand , but her right hand holding the hilt of a broadsword . According to Burdette , the design was intended to send a message to the belligerents in World War I that America wanted peace , but was ready to fight . 
 MacNeil 's accepted obverse is only slightly less militaristic ; his Liberty faces to the viewer 's right ( heraldic east ) in the direction of the European war , and her shield faces in that direction as well . She holds an olive branch as she strides through a gate in a wall which is inscribed , " In God We Trust " , with the " U " in " Trust " shaped as a V. MacNeil stated that the obverse depicted Liberty " stepping forward in ... the defense of peace as her ultimate goal " . According to art historian Cornelius Vermeule , " Liberty is presented as the Athena of the Parthenon pediments , a powerful woman striding forward " and states that , but for the Stars and Stripes on her shield , " everything else about this Amazon calls to mind Greek sculpture of the period between <unk> to <unk> , 450 to 350 BC . " 
 Vermeule suggested that the flying eagle on the reverse is simply that of the 1836 Gobrecht dollar , seen flying from left to right instead of the opposite way , as on the earlier piece . He applauded the 1917 change to the reverse , feeling that it made it less cluttered . Vermeule noted that the reverse marked the beginning of the end ( at least for that era ) for naturalistic depictions of eagles on US coins , stating in 1970 that those after 1921 tended to present a heraldic appearance instead . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In a letter to Woolley , MacNeil had promised to " try and produce something that shall be of use to you " . The sculptor had been awarded the reverse of the quarter only provisionally , and he prepared a series of studies for the reverse to show Woolley when he visited his studio in College Point , New York . At that time , Woolley selected a reverse similar to that eventually coined , showing an eagle in flight , wings extended and shown almost in full . Other designs which were shown to Woolley included similar eagle designs , but from different angles . 
 The Mint 's original schedule called for the designers of the three new coins to complete their models by April 15 , 1916 . This would allow production of the new pieces to begin about July 1 . However , the Mint quickly revised the submission deadline to May 1 ; this proved optimistic as MacNeil did not submit his models , in the form of bronze casts , until May 18 . Even so , he was faster than Weinman , who did not ship the last of his casts to the Mint until June 6 . Woolley formally approved the designs for the quarter by letter dated May 23 , 1916 . Despite the delays , the Mint attempted to meet the July 1 start date . 
 On June 21 , Woolley wrote to Superintendent Joyce , 
 The model of the obverse on the half dollar will have to be made over and Mr. Weinman informs me he is now at work on it . The same is true of the quarter dollar . The reverse of both the quarter dollar and the half dollar , as shown on the coins struck from the polished dies , are satisfactory ... Everyone to whom the coins have been shown here thinks they are beautiful . 
 No records of Woolley 's objections to the quarter 's obverse are known to exist , but numismatic author Roger Burdette suggests that his major concern was that when experimental pattern coins were struck in June , the obverse was indistinct , making even brand new coins appear worn . MacNeil was given permission to do further work on his design by Woolley in late June , and in mid @-@ August turned in a revised obverse different in detail from the original . " In God We Trust " was displayed on the sash which Liberty holds , a complex chain motif surrounded the design , and two dolphins , emblematic of the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans , lay at Liberty 's feet . Liberty 's shield bore an eagle , rather than the Stars and Stripes . Treasury Secretary McAdoo immediately approved the design changes , acting on August 19 . 
 On July 18 , Woolley wrote to a numismatic <unk> that the new quarters would begin to be struck about September 1 . By the time of that letter , he had resigned as Mint Director to become head of publicity for President Wilson 's reelection campaign ; Fred H. Chaffin became acting director . On August 18 , Wilson nominated Woolley 's successor , Friedrich Johannes Hugo von Engelken , who was promptly confirmed by the Senate . Von Engelken was supposed to be sworn in on the 21st ; his swearing in was delayed until September 1 by President Wilson 's failure to sign his commission . One of von Engelken 's first acts as Mint Director was to inform MacNeil of McAdoo 's acceptance of the design changes , telling him he could place his monogram ( a small " M " ) on the coin ; it appears on the wall , to the right of the two low steps which Liberty descends . The bronze casts were made by the Medallic Art Company ; on September 6 , MacNeil wrote to von Engelken that they would shortly be shipped to the Philadelphia Mint . 
 By this time , the Mint had experienced considerable difficulties in initiating production of both the dime and half dollar . In the hope of heading off similar problems with the quarter , Mint officials decided to reexamine MacNeil 's designs , and subsequently , to adjust them . A number of pattern coins were struck , and von Engelken decided to abandon the dolphins version . By mid @-@ October , patterns with a modified version of MacNeil 's original obverse were being struck . On the reverse , the eagle was lowered in position , and a pair of olive branches framing the eagle was replaced by stars . According to Burdette , by making major changes in the design without consulting the designer , Mint officials had " duplicated design versions already rejected by MacNeil , wasted government time , alienated one of the country 's best sculptors , and flagrantly bastardized artistic creativity . " 
 MacNeil , who had no idea the Mint was changing his designs , requested permission to visit the Mint on October 24 to discuss the conversion of his approved models into actual coins . Chaffin ( again briefly acting director in von Engelken 's absence ) declined to pay for his journey , and MacNeil did not come . According to Burdette , " the action saved the government less than $ 20 in October , but may have cost many times that amount before the revised quarter design was accepted the following year . " Von Engelken viewed sample coins about that time . He objected to two leaves of the olive branch on the obverse that lay within the angle of the " L " in " Liberty " and asked that they be removed ; this was done . The Mint Director then met with Secretary McAdoo to view coins struck from the modified dies . McAdoo felt that the figure of Liberty was indistinct , but von Engelken persuaded him that could not be changed without considerable delay . They did decide that the Mint could make the shield clearer , and approved the design with that instruction . Feeling it was impossible to make the change in time to strike coins in 1916 , von Engelken instructed Joyce that beginning in 1917 , the figure of Liberty should be sharpened . By the time dies were finally made , the year 1916 was almost over , and only 52 @,@ 000 quarters were struck . This was done as proof that the Barber design had been replaced in the 25th year , as Mint officials believed was required . 
 = = Modification = = 
 Throughout late 1916 , the Mint was intensely busy first sharpening the design to be used in 1917 , and then in large @-@ scale preparation of dies to begin striking the new quarters on a massive scale once the new year began . Small change was in great demand : Mint officials had hoped not to strike any Barber pieces in 1916 , but eventually had to do so in large quantities to satisfy the need . Once new quarters were struck , fearing the new pieces would be hoarded ( especially the low @-@ mintage 1916 coin ) , von Engelken instructed that no pieces be released without his order . Small quantities of the new quarters were available , however , to officials and to prominent numismatists . MacNeil , who had not heard from the Mint about his coins since the formal acceptance of his dolphin design , read in the newspaper in early January that the Mint was starting to strike his quarters . He wrote to von Engelken on January 6 , enclosing a $ 5 money order , and was sent 20 of the new pieces . After seeing what the Mint had done to his designs , MacNeil wrote again to von Engelken , criticizing the artistic nature of the changes in such strong terms that the Mint Director continued his embargo on the coins ' release . The sculptor pointed out , for example , that the lower position of the eagle made it appear about to land — with its talons in a position only assumed at great heights . Von Engelken feared that should the sculptor 's objections become public and not be addressed , the Mint would be exposed to ridicule . MacNeil visited the Philadelphia Mint and its engraving department on January 10 . No records of his visit are extant , but von Engelken telephoned from Washington to Philadelphia the same day to ensure that the new quarters did not leave the Mint . 
 After receiving MacNeil 's letter , von Engelken conferred with sculptor and Commission of Fine Arts member Herbert Adams , and with Commission Chairman Charles Moore . Von Engelken agreed that the design of the quarter could be modified to meet MacNeil 's wishes . Although no correspondence is known to exist , it appears that the Mint Director and sculptor spoke by telephone over the next several days , as on January 17 , von Engelken sent Secretary McAdoo a letter asking for discretion to allow MacNeil to modify the design . McAdoo summoned MacNeil to Washington for a meeting , and then ordered von Engelken to provide MacNeil with all the facilities and help he would need at the Philadelphia Mint — von Engelken had intended that the redesign take place at the sculptor 's expense . On January 17 , the Mint released the first Standing Liberty quarters , dated both 1916 and 1917 , into circulation . On January 30 , 1917 , von Engelken instructed Joyce to give MacNeil full facilities , and told the Mint Superintendent , " see that Mr. Barber keeps his objections to himself while Mr. MacNeil is there " . George T. Morgan , who had worked under Barber for the Engraver 's entire 37 @-@ year tenure , was assigned to assist MacNeil . 
 MacNeil hoped to take what he considered to be the best elements of the two versions of the obverse which had been accepted by the Mint the previous year . The figure of Liberty would be taken from the second version ; all other elements would come from the first . No change was to be made to Liberty 's bare right breast , but the dolphins would not regain their place . However , Morgan proved unable , given engraving technology at the time , to combine the two obverses , meaning the coin would have to be entirely redone by MacNeil . His new version , completed in mid @-@ February , for the first time covered Liberty 's breast , giving her a chain mail shirt . Burdette suggests that this change was not unusual for MacNeil , who was increasingly cladding female figures in garments which covered their breasts , as with his statue Intellectual Development , sculpted around that time , and also reflected the deterioration of the international situation in February 1917 , as the United States moved towards war with Germany . The reverse saw modifications to the eagle , which was raised in its position on the coin ; three of the thirteen stars on the reverse were placed between the bird and the words " Quarter Dollar " . Also a dot between the words " <unk> DOLLAR " and between the words " UNITED STATES " was removed . 
 The redesign of the obverse has led to an enduring myth that the breast was covered up out of prudishness , or in response to public outcry . Breen stated that " through their Society for the Suppression of Vice , the guardians of prudery at once began exerting political pressure on the Treasury Department to revoke authorization for these ' immoral ' coins " . Ron Guth and Jeff Garrett , in their book on US coins by type , <unk> that the covering up of Liberty was " a change never authorized by MacNeil " . Numismatic historian David Lange concedes that there is no evidence of outcry from the public , but suggests that the decision to change the coin was " more likely prompted by objections from the Treasury Department " . Numismatist Ray Young , in his 1979 article in Coins magazine about the quarter , suggested that the redesign " came from the symbolism . If Liberty was going to stand up to her foes , she should do so fully @-@ protected — not ' naked to her enemies . ' Thus the war probably had much more to do with the change than any alleged ' public indignation . ' " 
 Von Engelken had wanted to be president of the Federal Land Bank for the Third District . He was appointed to that post on February 8 , 1917 , but remained as Mint Director until February 20 ; his successor , Raymond T. Baker was nominated on February 10 . Work on the new quarter was briefly interrupted by the death of Chief Engraver Barber at the age of 77 on February 18 . One of von Engelken 's final acts in office was to recommend the appointment of Barber 's successor , Morgan , who was subsequently nominated by Wilson and confirmed by the Senate . 
 Upon taking office in February 1917 , Baker familiarized himself with the redesign of the quarter . After conferring with other Treasury officials , he decided that the redesign would be in violation of the 1890 act , and would require legislation from Congress . McAdoo concurred , and wrote to Representative William A. Ashbrook ( Democrat @-@ Ohio ) on April 16 , 1917 . Ashbrook was not only chairman of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures , he was a noted coin collector . McAdoo explained the need for the redesign , " since the original dies were made the artist has found that they are not true to the original design and that a great improvement can be made in the artistic value and appearance of the coin by making the slight changes the act contemplates " . 
 Legislation to authorize a change was debated in the Senate on April 30 , 1917 ; Oklahoma Senator Robert L. Owen represented that the change was needed because the coins would not stack . Wyoming Senator Francis E. Warren complained that the Mint had needed legislation to adjust coin designs in the past and it would be simpler if officials would ensure that coins would stack before releasing them into circulation . Nevertheless , the bill passed . The matter was brought up in the House of Representatives on June 25 , led by Congressman Ashbrook , who told his colleagues both that the issued design was not true to the artist 's concept , and that the coins would not stack well . Debate in the House focused on the fact that the legislation gave the Mint until July 1918 to effect the change as Ashbrook had stated that the Mint , having prepared the new design , was only waiting for the bill to pass to commence production . One congressman offered an amendment to change the date to 1917 , and others spoke in favor of that , but they desisted when they realized that making a change would require the Senate to act again . The bill passed the House , and became law on July 9 , 1917 . In August , MacNeil wrote to Joyce requesting samples of the revised coin and expressing his pleasure it was being struck according to his design . 
 = = Production and collecting = = 
 The Standing Liberty quarter was struck at the Philadelphia Mint from 1916 to 1930 with the exception only of 1922 , when no quarters were struck at any mint . It was produced less regularly at Denver and San Francisco beginning in 1917 . The mint mark " D " for Denver or " S " for San Francisco may be found at the base of the wall , just to the left of Liberty 's visible foot . While the key date in the series is the 1916 with a mintage of 52 @,@ 000 ( it catalogs for $ 3 @,@ 250 even in worn Good @-@ 4 condition ) , the 1921 issue from Philadelphia and the 1923 struck at San Francisco ( 1923 @-@ S ) are also expensive , with costs in the hundreds of dollars even for a circulated specimen . The Standing Liberty quarter is the only 20th @-@ century regular issue U.S. coin for which no proof coins were struck . However , a handful of specimen examples of the 1917 Type 1 issue ( that is , the coins struck early in 1917 before MacNeil revised the design ) exist . Breen reported six known , all with exceptionally sharp central details . 
 It had long been a practice at the Mint to recut unused dies at the end of the year to show the following year 's date . During the 18th and 19th centuries , die cutting was difficult and expensive . As making dies became cheaper and easier , the practice mostly died out around the turn of the 20th century . However , a 1917 @-@ S Type 2 die , unused by the San Francisco Mint , was recut and used to strike several thousand 1918 @-@ S quarters . Few are known , and the coins command prices in the low thousands even in well @-@ circulated conditions . 
 By late 1924 , Mint officials realized there was a problem with the quarter in circulation . Quarters were returning to the Mint with the date completely worn off . Unwilling to seek another act of Congress , Mint officials made the step on which the date appears recessed into the design , rather than raised from it . This change solved the problem ; quarters from 1925 and after are more common and cheaper in lower grades as they have survived with their dates intact . This action was among the last acts of the Engraver 's Department under Morgan , who died on January 4 , 1925 and was succeeded by John R. Sinnock . The modification meant that the 1927 @-@ S , with a mintage of 396 @,@ 000 is much cheaper in circulated grades than the 1923 @-@ S , with a mintage of 1 @,@ 360 @,@ 000 , though the 1927 @-@ S is more expensive in uncirculated grades . 
 No quarters were struck in 1931 ; there was no call for them in commerce due to the Depression . Since 1930 , there had been an effort among those organizing the commemoration of the bicentennial of George Washington 's 1732 birth to seek a Washington half dollar , to be struck as the regular issue for 1932 . When a bill for a Washington commemorative was introduced to Congress in February 1931 , it changed the quarter rather than the half dollar . While the reasons for the change were not recorded , the House Coinage Committee issued a memorandum stating that " the new design would replace the present type of quarter dollar " , was on " a popular denomination " and " would replace an unsatisfactory design now being issued " . Congress passed the act on March 4 , 1931 , and the new Washington quarter began to be struck in 1932 , ending the Standing Liberty series . Nevertheless , many Standing Liberty quarters remained in circulation until silver coins began to be hoarded by the public in 1964 , prompting the change to base @-@ metal pieces . 
 The United States Mint in 2015 announced plans to restrike for collectors , in gold , the three silver coins first issued in 1916 . The quarter will have its weight and fineness inscribed on the obverse . The quarter is to be the original 1916 , with the bared breast . 
 = Square Enix = 
 Square Enix Holdings Co . , Ltd . ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , Kabushiki @-@ gaisha <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a Japanese video game developer , publisher , and distribution company that is best known for its role @-@ playing video game franchises , which include Final Fantasy , Dragon Quest , and Kingdom Hearts . Several of its franchises have sold over 10 million copies , with the Final Fantasy franchise selling over 100 million , and the company as a whole made over ¥ 150 billion in revenue in fiscal year 2014 . The Square Enix headquarters are in the Shinjuku Eastside Square Building in Shinjuku , Tokyo , and the company employs over 3800 employees worldwide . 
 The original Square Enix Co . , Ltd. was formed as the result of a merger between Square Co . , Ltd. and Enix Corporation on April 1 , 2003 . Each share of Square 's common stock was exchanged for 0 @.@ 85 shares of Enix 's common stock . At the time , 80 % of Square Enix staff were made up of former Square employees . As part of the merger , former Square president Yoichi Wada was appointed president of the new corporation , while former Enix president Keiji Honda was named its vice president , and the founder of Enix , Yasuhiro Fukushima , the largest shareholder of the combined corporation , became its honorary chairman . 
 The company owns Taito , best known for arcade games such as Space Invaders , Bubble Bobble and Bust @-@ a @-@ Move , and game publisher Eidos Interactive , which has been absorbed into Square Enix Europe . Square Enix now publishes all of Eidos 's intellectual property and runs Eidos 's development studios . Eidos was most well known for publishing the Tomb Raider , Hitman , Deus Ex , Legacy of Kain , and Thief series of games . 
 = = Corporate history = = 
 = = = Square = = = 
 Square was founded in Yokohama in September 1983 by Masashi Miyamoto after he graduated from Waseda , one of Japan 's top universities . At that time , Square was a computer game software division of Den @-@ Yu @-@ Sha , a power line construction company owned by Miyamoto 's father . While at the time game development was usually conducted by only one programmer , Miyamoto believed that it would be more efficient to have graphic designers , programmers and professional story writers working together on common projects . In September 1986 , Square spun off from Den @-@ Yu @-@ Sha and became an independent company officially named Square Co . , Ltd . After releasing several unsuccessful games for the Famicom , Square relocated to Ueno , Tokyo in 1987 and developed a role @-@ playing video game titled Final Fantasy , which was inspired by Enix 's success in the genre with Dragon Quest ( released in North America as Dragon Warrior until 2005 ) . With 400 @,@ 000 copies sold , Final Fantasy spawned multiple sequels over the years and became Square 's main franchise . 
 Buoyed by the success of their Final Fantasy franchise , Square developed many other widely known games such as Chrono Trigger , Chrono Cross , Secret of Mana , Legend of Mana , Xenogears , Brave Fencer Musashi , Parasite Eve , Parasite Eve 2 , Saga Frontier , Romancing Saga , Vagrant Story , Kingdom Hearts ( done in collaboration with Disney Interactive ) , and Super Mario RPG ( done under the guidance of Shigeru Miyamoto ) . By late 1994 they had developed a reputation as a producer of high quality role @-@ playing video games ( RPGs ) . Square was one of the many companies that had planned to develop and publish their games for the Nintendo 64 , but with the cheaper costs associated with developing games on CD @-@ based consoles such as the Sega Saturn and the Sony PlayStation , Square decided to develop titles for the latter system . Final Fantasy VII was one of these games , and it sold 9 @.@ 8 million copies , making it the second @-@ best @-@ selling game for the PlayStation . 
 = = = Enix = = = 
 Enix was founded on September 22 , 1975 as <unk> <unk> Service Center by Japanese architect @-@ turned @-@ entrepreneur Yasuhiro Fukushima . Enix focused on publishing games , often by companies who exclusively partnered with the company , and is perhaps most famous for publishing the Dragon Quest series of console games developed by Chunsoft . Key members of the developer 's staff consisted of director Koichi Nakamura , writer Yuuji Horii , artist Akira Toriyama , and composer Koichi Sugiyama , among others . The first game in the Famicom @-@ based RPG series was released in 1986 , and would eventually sell 1 @.@ 5 million copies in Japan , establishing Dragon Quest as the company 's most profitable franchise . Despite the announcement that Enix 's long @-@ time competitor Square would develop exclusively for Sony PlayStation , Enix announced in January 1997 that it would release games for both Nintendo and Sony consoles . This caused a significant rise in stock for both Enix and Sony . By November 1999 , Enix was listed in the Tokyo Stock Exchange 's 1st section , indicating it as a " large company " . 
 = = = Merger = = = 
 A merger between Square and Enix was in consideration since at least 2000 ; however , the financial failure in 2001 of Square 's first movie , Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within , made Enix reluctant to proceed while Square was losing money . With the company facing its second year of financial losses , Square approached Sony for a capital injection and on October 8 , 2001 , Sony Corp purchased 18 @.@ 6 % stake in Square . Following the success of both Final Fantasy X and Kingdom Hearts , the company 's finances stabilized , and it recorded the highest operating margin in its history in fiscal year 2002 . It was announced on November 25 , 2002 , that Square and Enix 's previous plans to merge were to officially proceed , with the goal to mutually decrease development costs and to compete with foreign developers . As described by Yoichi Wada , Square 's president and CEO : " Square has also fully recovered , meaning this merger is occurring at a time when both companies are at their height . " 
 Some shareholders expressed concerns about the merger , notably Square 's original founder and largest shareholder , Masashi Miyamoto , who would find himself holding a significantly smaller percentage of the combined companies . Other criticism came from Takashi Oya of Deutsche Securities who expressed doubts about the benefits of such a merger : " Enix <unk> game development and has few in @-@ house creators , while Square does everything by itself . The combination of the two provides no negative factors but would bring little in the way of operational synergies . " Miyamoto 's concerns were eventually resolved by altering the exchange ratio of the merger so that each Square share would be exchanged for 0 @.@ 85 Enix shares rather than 0 @.@ 81 shares , and the merger was greenlit . The merger was set for April 1 , 2003 , on which date the newly merged entity Square Enix came into being . At the time of the merger , 80 % of Square Enix staff were made up of former Square employees . As part of the merger , former Square president Yoichi Wada was appointed president of the new corporation , while former Enix president Keiji Honda became its vice president . The founder of Enix and the largest shareholder of the newly combined corporation , Yasuhiro Fukushima , was made its honorary chairman . In July of that year , the Square Enix headquarters were moved to Yoyogi , Shibuya , Tokyo , as part of the process of combining the two companies . 
 = = = Acquisitions and subsidiaries = = = 
 Since its foundation , Square Enix has acquired a number of companies , as well as creating several subsidiary companies . To strengthen its wireless market , Square Enix acquired mobile application developer <unk> in March 2004 , though it was sold in December 2007 , and the company instead founded its own Square Enix <unk> in January 2008 to focus on mobile products . In January 2005 Square Enix founded Square Enix China , expanding their interests in the People 's Republic of China . In September of that year Square Enix bought the gaming developer and publisher Taito , renowned for their arcade hits such as Space Invaders and the Bubble Bobble series ; Taito 's home and portable console games divisions were merged into Square Enix itself by March 2010 . In August 2008 , Square Enix made plans for a similar expansion by way of a friendly takeover of video game developer Tecmo by purchasing shares at a 30 percent premium , but Tecmo rejected the proposed takeover . Instead , in February 2009 , Square Enix announced a takeover deal for Eidos plc , the holding company for Eidos Interactive , the UK @-@ based publisher of the Tomb Raider , Hitman , Deus Ex , Thief and Legacy of Kain franchises , along with its multiple subsidiary development studios which developed the games . The acquisition of Eidos was completed in April 2009 , and in November the publisher was merged with Square Enix 's European publishing organization to form Square Enix Europe . In March 2011 Square Enix founded another mobile development studio , Hippos Lab , followed by another in 2012 , Square Enix Montreal . A third mobile studio was founded in Indonesia in June 2013 , <unk> , but was closed in January 2015 . The latest <unk> company to be created was Shinra Technologies , a cloud gaming company , but it was only in existence from September 2014 to January 2016 . In 2015 , Square created a new studio known as Tokyo RPG Factory to develop what was then dubbed Project Setsuna . 
 = = Corporate structure = = 
 On October 1 , 2008 , Square Enix transformed into a holding company and was renamed to Square Enix Holdings . At the same time the gaming , contents and publishing businesses were transferred to a spin @-@ off named Square Enix , sharing the same corporate leadership and offices with the holding . The primary offices for Square Enix and Square Enix Holdings are in the Shinjuku Eastside Square Building in Shinjuku , Tokyo . 
 = = = Development organization = = = 
 After the merger in 2003 , Square Enix 's development department was organized into eight Square and two Enix Product Development Divisions ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , each focused on different groupings of games . The divisions were spread around different offices ; for example , Product Development Division 5 had offices both in Osaka and Tokyo . 
 According to Yoichi Wada , the development department was reorganized away from the Product Development Division System by March 2007 into a project @-@ based system . Until 2013 , the teams in charge of the Final Fantasy and Kingdom Hearts series were still collectively referred to as the 1st Production Department ( <unk> , dai @-@ ichi <unk> ) . The 1st Production Department was formed from the fall 2010 combination of Square Enix 's Tokyo and Osaka development studios , with Shinji Hashimoto as its corporate executive . 
 As of December 2013 , Square Enix 's development was restructured into several Business Divisions . The former Twitter account of the 1st Production Department is now used to distribute information on the games developed by Business Divisions 1 to 4 . Yoshinori Kitase is the Head of Business Division 1 , Hajime Tabata is the Head of Business Division 2 , Shinji Hashimoto is the Head of Business Division 3 , Ichiro <unk> is the Head of Business Division 4 and Naoki Yoshida is the Head of Business Division 5 @,@ 
 = = = Business model = = = 
 The business model of Square Enix is centered on the idea of " polymorphic content " , which consists of developing franchises on multiple potential hardware or media rather than being restricted by a single gaming platform . An early example of this strategy is Enix 's Fullmetal Alchemist manga series , which has been adapted into two anime TV series , two movies , and several novels and video games . Other polymorphic projects include Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , Code Age , World of Mana , Ivalice Alliance and as of 2016 the ongoing Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy series . According to Yoichi Wada , " It 's very difficult to hit the jackpot , as it were . Once we 've hit it , we have to get all the juice possible out of it " . Similar to Sony 's Greatest Hits program , Square Enix also re @-@ releases their best selling games at a reduced price under a label designated " Ultimate Hits " . 
 The standard game design model Square Enix employs is to establish the plot , characters and art of the game first . Battle systems , field maps and cutscenes are created next . According to Taku Murata , this process became the company 's model for development after the success of Square 's Final Fantasy VII in 1997 . The team size for Final Fantasy XIII in 2012 peaked at 180 artists , 30 programmers , and 36 game designers , but analysis and restructuring were done to outsource large scale development in the future . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Square Enix 's main concentration is on video gaming , and it is primarily known for its role @-@ playing video game franchises . Of its properties , the Final Fantasy franchise , begun in 1987 , is the best @-@ selling , with a total worldwide sales of over 110 million units as of June 2014 . The Dragon Quest franchise , begun in 1986 , is also high @-@ selling ; it is considered one of the most popular game series in Japan and new installments regularly outsell other games at the times of their release , with a total worldwide sales of over 64 million units as of June 2014 . More recently , the Kingdom Hearts series ( developed in collaboration with Disney 's Buena Vista Games beginning in 2002 ) has become popular , with over 20 million units sold as of March 2014 . Other popular series developed by Square Enix include the SaGa series with nearly 10 million copies sold since 1989 , the Mana series with over 6 million sales since 1991 , and the Chrono series with over 5 million sold since 1995 . In addition to their sales numbers , many Square Enix games have been highly reviewed ; 27 Square Enix games were included in Famitsu magazine 's 2006 " Top 100 Games Ever " , with 7 in the top 10 and Final Fantasy X claiming the number 1 position . The company also won IGN 's award for Best Developer of 2006 for the PlayStation 2 . 
 Square and Enix initially targeted Nintendo home consoles with their games , but Square Enix currently develops games for a wide variety of systems . In the seventh generation of video game consoles , Square Enix released new installments from its major series across all three systems , including Final Fantasy XIII on both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , and Dragon Quest X on the Wii . Square Enix has also developed titles for handheld game consoles , including the Game Boy Advance , Nintendo DS , PlayStation Portable , Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita . In addition , they have published games for Microsoft Windows @-@ based personal computers , and for various models of mobile phones and modern smartphones . Square Enix mobile phone games became available in 2004 on the Vodafone network in some European countries , including Germany , United Kingdom , Spain , and Italy . 
 Before its launch , <unk> Sasaki , senior vice president of Square Enix , spoke about the PlayStation 3 , saying " We don 't want the PlayStation 3 to be the overwhelming loser , so we want to support them , but we don 't want them to be the overwhelming winner either , so we can 't support them too much . " Square Enix continued to reiterate their devotion to multi @-@ platform publishing in 2007 , promising more support for the North American and European gaming markets where console pluralism is generally more prevalent than in Japan . Their interest in multi @-@ platform development was made clear in 2008 when the previously PlayStation 3 @-@ exclusive game Final Fantasy XIII was announced for release on the Xbox 360 . 
 In 2008 , Square Enix released their first game for the iPod , Song Summoner : The Unsung Heroes . Square Enix made a new brand for younger children gaming that same year , known as Pure Dreams . Pure Dreams ' first two games , Snoopy DS : Let 's Go Meet Snoopy and His Friends ! and <unk> 's Wonderful Carnival were released that year . After acquiring Eidos in 2009 , Square Enix combined it with its European publishing wing to create Square Enix Europe , which continues to publish Eidos franchises such as Tomb Raider ( 45 million sales ) , Hitman ( 15 million ) , Deus Ex ( 4 million ) , Thief ( 2 @.@ 5 million ) and Legacy of Kain ( 3 @.@ 5 million ) . Square Enix has also served as the Japanese publisher for Ubisoft games since 2009 . 
 = = = Game engines = = = 
 Square Enix does not usually use other companies ' game engines , preferring to code from scratch . Square Enix has developed two notable in @-@ house game engines . In 2004 , Square Enix began to work on a " common 3D format " which would allow the entire company to develop titles without being restricted to a specific platform : this led to the creation of a game engine named Crystal Tools , which is compatible with the PlayStation 3 , the Xbox 360 , Windows @-@ based PCs and to some extent the Wii . It was first shown off at a tech demo shown off at E3 2005 , and was later used for Final Fantasy XIII based on the demo 's reception . Crystal Tools was also used for Final Fantasy Versus XIII before its re @-@ branding as Final Fantasy XV and shift onto next @-@ gen platforms . Refinement of the engine continued through the development of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , and it underwent a major overhaul for Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII . No new titles have been announced for the engine , and it is believed that development of the engine has halted permanently in favor of the Square Enix Luminous Studio engine . 
 The second major in @-@ house engine is Luminous Studio , intended for eighth @-@ generation consoles , which was originally unveiled at E3 2012 through a tech demo titled Agni 's Philosophy . The first major console title to be developed with Luminous Studio was Final Fantasy XV ; the engine 's development was done in tandem with the game , and the game 's development helped the programming team optimize the engine . 
 In addition to their two major cross @-@ platform engines and the custom engines made for individual games and platforms before and since , Square Enix uses and continues to consider other companies ' engines and programming languages for their video game properties . Known examples are licensing Epic Games ' Unreal Engine in 2007 for use in The Last Remnant , and using the Squirrel language for the WiiWare title Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : My Life as a King . 
 = = = Online gaming = = = 
 Before the merger , Enix published its first online game Cross Gate in Japan , mainland China , and Taiwan in 2001 , and Square released Final Fantasy XI in Japan in 2002 for the PlayStation 2 and later the personal computer . With the huge success of Final Fantasy XI , the game was ported to the Xbox 360 two years later , and was the first MMORPG on the console . All versions of the game used PlayOnline , a cross @-@ platform internet gaming platform and internet service developed by Square Enix . The platform was used as the online service for many games Square Enix developed and published throughout the decade . Due to the success of their MMORPG , Square Enix began a new project called Fantasy Earth : The Ring of Dominion . <unk> , a Japanese game portal , got the license to publish Fantasy Earth in Japan and it was released in Japan as " Fantasy Earth ZERO . " In 2006 , however , Square Enix dropped the Fantasy Earth Zero project , and sold it to <unk> . Square Enix released Concerto Gate , the sequel to Cross Gate , in 2007 . 
 A next @-@ gen MMORPG code named Rapture was developed by the Final Fantasy XI team using the company 's Crystal Tools engine . It was unveiled at E3 2009 that the MMO , Final Fantasy XIV , for PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows , would be released on September 30 , 2010 . Dragon Quest X was announced in September 2011 as an MMORPG being developed for Nintendo 's Wii and Wii U consoles , which released on August 2 , 2012 , and March 30 , 2013 , respectively . Like XIV , it used Crystal Tools . 
 Square Enix also made browser games and Facebook games , like Legend World , Chocobo 's Crystal Tower and Knights of the Crystals , and online games for Yahoo ! Japan , such as Monster x Dragon , Sengoku <unk> , Bravely Default : Praying Brage , Star Galaxy and Crystal Conquest . 
 On May 8 , 2012 , Square Enix announced a collaboration with <unk> Games to create a free @-@ to @-@ play cloud gaming platform that " throws players into ' limitless game worlds ' directly through their web browser " . The service was launched under the name <unk> in August 2012 . Claiming " limited commercial take @-@ up " , the service was cancelled on November 29 , 2013 . Square Enix launched another online game service in Japan called Dive In on October 9 , 2014 that allowed players to stream console games to their iOS or Android devices . The service was monetized by the amount of time players spent playing , with each game offered for free for thirty minutes . The service was cancelled on September 13 , 2015 . 
 = = = Arcade = = = 
 With the merger of Taito businesses into Square Enix , the company gained possession of Taito 's arcade infrastructure and facilities , and entered the arcade market in 2005 . In 2010 Taito revealed <unk> , a cloud @-@ based system of storing games and changing them through the internet instead of acquiring physical copies . This system was added to its many arcade gaming locations . The company continues to cater to the arcade audience in Japan with arcade @-@ only titles , with game producers in 2015 stating that Square Enix as it has a loyal fan base that values the arcade gaming experience . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The company has made two forays into the film industry . The first , Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within ( 2001 ) , was produced by Square subsidiary Square Pictures prior to the merger with Enix ; Square Pictures is now a consolidated subsidiary of Square Enix . Its box @-@ office failure caused Enix to delay the merger , which was already under consideration before the creation of the film , until Square became profitable once again . In 2005 , Square Enix released Final Fantasy VII Advent Children , a CGI @-@ animation movie based on the PlayStation game Final Fantasy VII , set two years after the events of the game . A Deus Ex film is currently in pre @-@ production and as of 2014 is undergoing rewrites . In 2016 Square Enix revealed a new movie called Kingsglaive : Final Fantasy XV based in the world of Final Fantasy XV and a new web series released on YouTube and Crunchyroll entitled Brotherhood : Final Fantasy XV . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The company has a manga publishing division in Japan ( originally from Enix ) called Gangan Comics , which publishes content for the Japanese market only . However , in 2010 , Square Enix launched a digital manga store for North American audiences via its Members services , which contains several notable series published in Gangan anthologies . Titles published by Gangan Comics include Fullmetal Alchemist , Soul Eater , and many others . Other titles include manga adaptations of various Square Enix games , like Dragon Quest , Kingdom Hearts and Star Ocean . Some of these titles have also been adapted into anime series . Fullmetal Alchemist is the most successful title of Square Enix 's manga branch , with more than 64 million volumes sold worldwide . It is licensed in North America by Viz Media , while its two anime adaptations are licensed by Funimation Entertainment in the United States . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Square Enix has created merchandise for virtually all of their video game franchises , though many items are available only in Japan . Square Enix 's former online gaming portal PlayOnline sold merchandise from game franchises including Parasite Eve , Vagrant Story , Chocobo Racing , Front Mission , Chrono Cross , and Final Fantasy . Mascots from game franchises are a popular focus for merchandise , such as the Chocobo from Final Fantasy which has been seen as a rubber duck , a plush baby Chocobo , and on coffee mugs . Square Enix also designed a Chocobo character costume for the release of Chocobo Tales . The Slime character from Dragon Quest has also been frequently used in Square Enix merchandise , especially in Japan . On the Japanese Square Enix shopping website there is also a Smile @-@ focused section called " Smile Slime " . Slime merchandise includes plush toys , pencil cases , keychains , game controllers , a stylus , and several boardgames including one titled Dragon Quest Slime Racing . In Japan , pork filled steam buns shaped like slimes have been sold . For Dragon Quest 's 25th anniversary , special items were sold including business cards , tote bags , and crystal figurines . Rabites from the Mana series have appeared in several pieces of Square Enix merchandise , including plush dolls , cushions , lighters , mouse pads , straps , telephone cards , and T @-@ shirts . Square Enix has also made merchandise for series they do not own , including figures Mass Effect and Halo . 
 = = Subsidiaries = = 
 = English cuisine = 
 English cuisine encompasses the cooking styles , traditions and recipes associated with England . It has distinctive attributes of its own , but also shares much with wider British cuisine , partly through the importation of ingredients and ideas from North America , China , and India during the time of the British Empire and as a result of post @-@ war immigration . 
 Traditional meals have ancient origins , such as bread and cheese , roasted and stewed meats , meat and game pies , boiled vegetables and <unk> , and freshwater and saltwater fish . The 14th @-@ century English cookbook , the Forme of Cury , contains recipes for these , and dates from the royal court of Richard II . 
 English cooking has been influenced by foreign ingredients and cooking styles since the Middle Ages . Curry was introduced from the Indian subcontinent and adapted to English tastes from the eighteenth century with Hannah Glasse 's recipe for chicken " currey " . French cuisine influenced English recipes throughout the Victorian era . After the rationing of the Second World War , Elizabeth David 's 1950 A Book of Mediterranean Food had wide influence , bringing Italian cuisine to English homes . Her success encouraged other cookery writers to describe other styles , including Chinese and Thai cuisine . England continues to absorb culinary ideas from all over the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 English cookery has developed over many centuries since at least the time of The Forme of Cury , written in the Middle Ages around 1390 in the reign of King Richard II . The book offers imaginative and sophisticated recipes , with spicy sweet and sour sauces thickened with bread or quantities of almonds boiled , peeled , dried and ground , and often served in pastry . Foods such as gingerbread are described . It was not at all , emphasises Clarissa Dickson Wright in her A History of English Food , a matter of large lumps of roast meat at every meal as imagined in Hollywood films . 
 Instead , mediaeval dishes often had the texture of a <unk> , possibly containing small fragments of meat or fish : 48 % of the recipes in the Beinecke manuscript are for dishes similar to stews or <unk> . Such dishes could be broadly of three types : somewhat acid , with wine , vinegar , and spices in the sauce , thickened with bread ; sweet and sour , with sugar and vinegar ; and sweet , using then @-@ expensive sugar . An example of such a sweet <unk> dish for meat ( it could also be made with fish ) from the Beinecke manuscript is the rich , saffron @-@ yellow " <unk> " , thickened with egg : 
 Take brawn of <unk> & <unk> , <unk> & <unk> ; <unk> hit up with milk of <unk> drawn with the broth . Set hit on the fyre ; put to <unk> & <unk> . When hit <unk> , tak som of thy milk , <unk> , fro the fyre & <unk> hit up with <unk> of <unk> that hit be <unk> <unk> ; <unk> hit wel for quelling . Put <unk> that <unk> , & <unk> hem <unk> , & serve hem forth as <unk> ; and strew on <unk> of <unk> . 
 = = = Sixteenth century = = = 
 The early modern period saw the gradual arrival of printed cookery books , though the very first , the printer Richard Pynson 's 1500 Boke of <unk> was compiled from mediaeval texts . The next , A Proper <unk> Booke of <unk> , was published sometime after 1545 . The <unk> of the <unk> Maister Alexis of Piermont was published in 1558 , translated from a French translation of Alessio Piemontese 's original Italian work on confectionery . The number of titles expanded rapidly towards the end of the century to include Thomas Dawson 's The Good Huswifes Jewell in 1585 , the Book of <unk> by " A. W. " in 1591 , and John Partridge 's The Good <unk> @-@ wives <unk> in 1594 . These books were of two kinds : collections of so @-@ called secrets on confectionery and health remedies , aimed at aristocratic ladies ; and advice on cookery and how to manage a household , aimed at women from more ordinary backgrounds , most likely wives of minor aristocrats , clergymen , and professional men . 
 English tastes evolved during the sixteenth century in at least three ways . Firstly , recipes emphasise a balance of sweet and sour . Secondly , butter becomes an important ingredient in sauces , a trend which continued in later centuries . Thirdly , herbs , which could be grown locally but had been little used in the Middle Ages , started to replace spices as flavourings . In A. W. ' s Book of <unk> , 35 % of the recipes for meat stews and sauces include herbs , most commonly thyme . On the other hand , 76 % of those meat recipes still used the distinctly mediaeval combination of sugar and dried fruit , together or separately . New ingredients were arriving from distant countries , too : The Good Huswifes Jewell introduced sweet potatoes alongside familiar Medieval recipes . 
 Elinor <unk> 's Receipt Book , compiled in 1604 ( and first published in 1986 ) gives an intimate view of Elizabethan cookery . The book provides recipes for various forms of bread , such as buttered loaves ; for apple fritters ; preserves and pickles ; and a celebration cake for 100 people . New ingredients such as the sweet potato appear . A recipe for dressing a shoulder of mutton calls for the use of the newly @-@ available citrus fruits : 
 Take a <unk> of mutton and being halfe Roasted , Cut it in great slices and save the <unk> then take <unk> wine and <unk> & sugar with a little Cloves and mace <unk> and the peel of an <unk> Cut thin and minced very <unk> . Put the mutton the <unk> and these <unk> together and <unk> yt between two dishes , <unk> the juice of an <unk> into yt as yt <unk> , when yt is <unk> enough lay the bone of the mutton <unk> first <unk> in the dish with it then Cut slices of <unk> and lay on the mutton and so serve yt in . 
 Pies were important both as food and for show ; the nursery rhyme Sing a Song of Sixpence , with its lines " Four and Twenty blackbirds / Baked in a pie . / / When the pie was opened , The birds began to sing " refers to the conceit of placing live birds under a pie crust just before serving at a banquet . 
 = = = Seventeenth century = = = 
 The bestselling cookery book of the early seventeenth century was Gervase Markham 's The English Huswife , published in 1615 . It appears that his recipes were from the collection of a deceased noblewoman , and therefore dated back to Elizabethan times or earlier . Women were thus becoming both the authors of cookery books and their readers , though only about 10 % of women in England were literate by 1640 . Markham 's recipes are distinctively different from mediaeval ones ; three quarters of his sauces for meat and meat pies make use of a combination of sweet and sour , and he advises : 
 When a broth is too sweet , to sharpen it with verjuice , when too tart to sweet it with sugar , when flat and <unk> to quicken it with orenge and <unk> , and when too bitter to make it pleasant with <unk> and spices . 
 Robert May 's The <unk> Cook was published in 1660 when he was 72 years old . The book included a substantial number of recipes for soups and stews , 38 recipes for sturgeon , and a large number of pies variously containing fish ( including sturgeon ) , meat ( including battalia pie ) , and sweet fillings . 
 French influence is evident in Hannah Woolley 's The Cooks Guide , 1664 . Her recipes are designed to enable her non @-@ aristocratic readers to imitate the fashionable French style of cooking with elaborate sauces . She combined the use of " Claret wine " and anchovies with more traditional cooking ingredients such as sugar , dried fruit , and vinegar . 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 John Nott 's The Cooks and <unk> Dictionary ( 1723 ) , still with rather few precedents to go by , chose an alphabetical treatment for its recipes , from Al to <unk> . The book covered everything from soups and salads to meat and fish , as well as pastries of many kinds , confectionery , and the making of beer , cider , and wine . Bills of fare are given for each month of the year . 
 James Woodforde 's Diary of a Country Parson gives a good idea of the sort of food eaten in England in the eighteenth century by those who could afford to eat whatever they liked . To welcome some neighbours on 8 June 1781 , he gave them for dinner : 
 a Couple of Chicken boiled and a Tongue , a Leg of Mutton boiled and Capers and Batter Pudding for the first Course , Second , a couple of Ducks <unk> and green Peas , some <unk> , Tarts and Blancmange . After dinner , Almonds and Raisins , Oranges and Strawberries , Mountain and Port Wines . Peas and Strawberries the first gathered this year by me . We spent a very agreeable day . 
 Another country clergyman , Gilbert White , in The Natural History of Selborne ( 1789 ) recorded the increased consumption of vegetables by ordinary country people in the south of England , to which , he noted , potatoes had only been added during the reign of King George III : 
 Green @-@ stalls in cities now support multitudes in comfortable state , while gardeners get fortunes . Every decent labourer also has his garden , which is half his support ; and common farmers provide plenty of beans , peas , and greens , for their hinds to eat with their bacon . 
 Hannah Glasse 's The Art of Cookery made Plain and Easy was the best @-@ selling cookery book for a century from its publication in 1747 . It ran to at least 40 editions , and was widely pirated . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 English cooking was systematized and made available to the middle classes by a series of popular books , their authors becoming household names . One of the first was Mrs Rundell 's A New System of Domestic Cookery , 1806 ; it went through sixty @-@ seven editions by 1844 , selling hundreds of thousands of copies in Britain and America . This was followed by Eliza Acton 's Modern Cookery for Private Families 1845 , which has been called " the greatest cookery book in our language " , but " modern " only in a nineteenth @-@ century sense . 
 An example recipe from Acton 's Modern Cookery for Private Families is her " Quince Blanc @-@ Mange ( Delicious ) " : 
 Dissolve in a pint of prepared juice of quinces an ounce of the best isinglass ; next , add ten ounces of sugar , roughly pounded , and stir these together over a clear fire , from twenty to thirty minutes , or until the juice jellies in falling from the spoon . Remove the scum carefully , and pour the boiling jelly gradually to half a pint of thick cream , stirring them briskly together as they are mixed : they must be stirred until very nearly cold , and then poured into a mould which has been rubbed in every part with the smallest possible quantity of very pure salad oil , or if more convenient , into one that has been dipped into cold water . 
 Acton was supplanted by the most famous English cookery book of the Victorian era , Isabella Beeton 's Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management , 1861 , which sold nearly two million copies up to 1868 . Where Acton 's was a book to be read and enjoyed , Beeton 's , substantially written in later editions by other hands , was a manual of instructions and recipes , to be looked up as needed . Mrs Beeton was substantially plagiarized from authors including Elizabeth Raffald and Acton . The Anglo @-@ Italian cook Charles Elmé Francatelli became a celebrity , cooking for a series of aristocrats , London clubs , and royalty including Queen Victoria . His 1846 book The Modern Cook ran through 29 editions by 1896 , popularising an elaborate cuisine described throughout with French terminology , and offering bills of fare for up to 300 people . 
 Three of the major hot drinks popular in England , tea , coffee , and chocolate , originated from outside Europe and were already staple items by Victorian times . Catherine of Braganza brought the Portuguese habit of tea to England around 1660 . Initially , its expense restricted it to wealthy consumers , but the price gradually dropped , until by the 19th century its use was widespread . Introduced in the 16th century , coffee became popular by the 17th century , especially in the coffee houses , the first opening in Oxford in 1650 . Hot chocolate was a popular drink by the 17th century , long before it was used as a food . Chocolate bars were developed and marketed by three English Quaker @-@ founded businesses , Joseph Fry 's ( 1847 ) , Rowntree 's ( 1862 ) , and Cadbury 's ( 1868 ) . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 Rationing was introduced in 1940 to ensure that the supply of food , limited by the U @-@ boat blockade of Britain , was distributed fairly . Foods such as bananas , onions and chocolate became hard to find , while unfamiliar items such as dried egg , dried potato , whale meat , the tinned pork product spam , and the " disgusting " imported fish called <unk> appeared in the national diet . Since butter , sugar , eggs and flour were all rationed , English dishes such as pies and cakes became hard to make from traditional recipes . Instead , available foods such as carrots were used in many different dishes , their natural sugars providing sweetness in novel dishes like carrot fudge . The diet was less than enjoyable , but paradoxically , rationing meant that the population was healthier than ever before , and perhaps ever since . 
 Elizabeth David profoundly changed English cooking with her 1950 A Book of Mediterranean Food . Written at a time of food rationing and scarcity , her book began with " perhaps the most evocative and inspirational passage in the history of British cookery writing " : 
 The cooking of the Mediterranean shores , endowed with all the natural resources , the colour and flavour of the South , is a blend of tradition and brilliant improvisation . The Latin genius flashes from the kitchen pans . It is honest cooking too ; none of the sham Grand Cuisine of the International Palace Hotel 
 All five of David 's early books remained in print half a century later , and her reputation among cookery writers such as Nigel Slater and Clarissa Dickson Wright is of enormous influence . The historian of food Panikos Panayi suggests that this is because she consciously brought foreign cooking styles into the English kitchen ; she did this with fine writing , and with practical experience of living and cooking in the countries she wrote about . She deliberately destroyed the myths of restaurant cuisine with phrases like " the sham Grand Cuisine of the International Palace Hotel " , instead describing the home cooking of Mediterranean countries . Her books " opened the floodgates " for other cookery writers to use foreign recipes . Post @-@ David celebrity chefs , often ephemeral , included Philip Harben , Fanny Cradock , Graham Kerr ( " the galloping gourmet " ) , and Robert Carrier . 
 = = Stereotypes = = 
 In 1953 , Britain 's first celebrity chef , Philip Harben , published Traditional Dishes of Britain . Panayi observes that " The chapter titles simply list the stereotypical stalwarts of the British diet " , from Cornish pasty and Yorkshire pudding to shortbread , Lancashire hotpot , steak and kidney pudding , jellied eels , clotted cream and fish and chips . Panayi notes that Harben begins with contradictions and unsupported claims , naming Britain 's supposed reputation for the worst food in the world , but claiming that the country 's cooks were technically unmatched and that the repertoire of national dishes was the largest of any country 's . 
 The sociologist Bob Ashley observes that while people in Britain may agree that the core national diet consists of items such as the full English breakfast , roast beef with all the trimmings , tea with scones , and fish and chips , yet 
 it is highly probable that few British people have ever actually eaten the core diet in any recent single day and it may very well be the case that many Britons do not regularly eat any single item from the list . 
 In any case , Ashley notes , the national diet changes with time , and cookery books routinely include dishes of foreign origin . He remarks that a National Trust café whose manager remarked " We 're not allowed to do foreign food ... I can 't do lasagne or anything like that " in fact served curry , because " seemingly curry is English " . Anglo @-@ Indian cuisine has indeed been part of the national diet since the eighteenth century . 
 Many supposedly traditional English dishes are relatively new and can be dated to the century , and sometimes to the year , of their introduction . Thus <unk> was introduced from India in the 18th century , as recorded by Hannah Glasse who gave a recipe for it in 1758 . Conversely , dishes and sauces still considered foreign , such as fish in sweet and sour sauce , have been in English recipe books since the Middle Ages . Other dishes took their present form only gradually , as with the so @-@ called " Full English breakfast " . Breakfasts of this kind are indeed described in later editions of " Mrs Beeton " , but as one of many variations . Thus her list of " Family Breakfasts for a Week in Winter " has for Wednesday something that looks fairly modern : " bread , muffins , butter , brawn , grilled bacon , boiled eggs " ; but on other days less modern @-@ looking breakfasts include mince , mutton cutlets , grilled kidneys , baked fresh herrings , and hash of cold game or poultry , while suggestions for " Family Breakfasts for a Week in Summer " included sardine toast , cold tongue , <unk> and rissoles , and " Guests ' Breakfast ( Autumn ) " included cold pheasant , game pie , and pressed beef . 
 Stereotypes of English cuisine 
 = = Foreign influence = = 
 English cookery has been open to foreign ingredients and influence from as early as the thirteenth century , and in the case of a few foods like sausages from Roman times . The Countess of Leicester , daughter of King John purchased large amounts of cinnamon , while King Edward I ordered large quantities of spices such as pepper and ginger , as well as of what was then an expensive imported luxury , sugar . Dickson Wright refutes the popular idea that spices were used to disguise bad meat , pointing out that this would have been as fatal then as it would be today . She suggests instead that spices were used to hide the taste of salt , which was used to preserve food in the absence of refrigeration . 
 Panayi introduces his book <unk> Up Britain with the words of the English celebrity cook Fanny Cradock : " The English have never had a cuisine . Even Yorkshire pudding comes from Burgundy . " He cites Nicola Humble 's observation that in Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management , there are about the same number of recipes from India as from Wales , Scotland and Ireland together . Panayi created controversy by asserting , with evidence , that fish and chips had foreign origins : the fried fish from Jewish cooking , the potato chips from France ; the dish only became " an important signifier of national identity " from about 1930 . French cuisine powerfully influenced English cooking throughout the nineteenth century , and French celebrity chefs such as the Roux brothers and Raymond Blanc continue to do so in <unk> century England . 
 = = = The role of empire = = = 
 Curry was created by the arrival of the British in India in the seventeenth century , beginning as bowls of spicy sauce used , Lizzie <unk> writes , to add " bite to the rather bland flavours of boiled and roasted meats . " The 1758 edition of Hannah Glasse 's The Art of Cookery contains what Clarissa Dickson Wright calls a " famous recipe " which describes how " To make a currey the Indian way " ; it flavours chicken with onions fried in butter , the chicken being fried with turmeric , ginger and ground pepper , and stewed in its own stock with cream and lemon juice . Dickson Wright comments that she was " a bit sceptical " of this recipe , as it had few of the expected spices , but was " pleasantly surprised by the end result " which had " a very good and interesting flavour " . 
 The process of adapting Indian cooking continued for centuries . Anglo @-@ Indian recipes could completely ignore Indian rules of diet , such as by using pork or beef . Some dishes , such as " liver curry , with bacon " were simply ordinary recipes spiced up with ingredients such as curry powder . In other cases like <unk> , Indian dishes were adapted to British tastes ; <unk> was a " simple rice and lentil dish " . Curry was accepted in almost all Victorian era cookery books , such as Eliza Acton 's Modern Cookery for Private Families ( 1845 ) : she offered recipes for curried sweetbreads and curried macaroni , merging Indian and European foods into standard English cooking . By 1895 , curry was included in Dainty Dishes for Slender Incomes , aimed at the poorer classes . 
 Foreign influence was by no means limited to specific dishes . James Walvin , in his book Fruits of Empire , argues that potatoes , sugar ( entirely imported until around 1900 and the growing of sugar beet ) , tea , and coffee as well as increasing quantities of spices were " Fruits of Empire " that became established in Britain between 1660 and 1800 , so that by the nineteenth century " their exotic origins had been lost in the mists of time " and had become " part of the unquestioned fabric of local life " . 
 = = = Indian and Anglo @-@ Indian cuisine = = = 
 Indian cuisine is the most popular alternative to traditional cooking in Britain , followed by Chinese and Italian food . Chicken tikka masala is now considered one of Britain 's most popular dishes . 
 During the British Raj , Britain first started borrowing Indian dishes , creating Anglo @-@ Indian cuisine , with dishes such as <unk> ( 1790 ) and <unk> soup ( 1791 ) . 
 Indian food was served in coffee houses from 1809 , and cooked at home from a similar date as cookbooks of the time attest . The <unk> restaurant at 99 @-@ 101 Regent Street , London was opened in 1926 , at first serving Anglo @-@ Indian food , and is the oldest surviving Indian restaurant in Britain . There was a sharp increase in the number of curry houses in the 1940s , and again in the 1970s . 
 The Anglo @-@ Indian dish chicken tikka masala was apparently invented in Glasgow in the early 1970s , while <unk> cuisine was introduced to Britain in 1977 in Birmingham . 
 In 2003 , there were roughly 9000 restaurants serving Indian cuisine in Britain . The majority of Indian restaurants in Britain are run by entrepreneurs of Bangladeshi ( often Sylhet ) and Pakistani origin . According to Britain 's Food Standards Agency , the Indian food industry in the United Kingdom was worth £ 3 @.@ 2 billion in 2003 , accounting for two @-@ thirds of all eating out , and serving about 2 @.@ 5 million British customers every week . 
 Indian restaurants typically allow the diner to combine base ingredients — chicken , prawns or " meat " ( lamb or mutton ) — with curry sauces — from the mild <unk> to the scorching <unk> — without regard to the authenticity of the combination . The reference point for flavour and spice heat is the Madras curry sauce ( the name represents the area of India where restaurateurs obtained their spices , rather than an actual dish ) . Other sauces are sometimes variations on a basic curry sauce : for instance , vindaloo is often rendered as a fiery dish of lamb or chicken in a Madras sauce with extra chilli , rather than the Anglo @-@ Indian dish of pork marinated in wine vinegar and garlic , based on a Goan Portuguese dish carne de <unk> d <unk> . 
 Indian restaurants and their cuisine in Britain gradually improved from the stereotypical flock wallpaper and standardised menus . One of the pioneers was the Bombay Brasserie , which opened in Gloucester Road , London , in 1982 , serving the kind of food actually eaten in India , and has remained fully booked ever since . It was followed in 1990 by Chutney Mary in Chelsea . In 2001 , two Indian restaurants in London , Tamarind ( opened 1995 ) and <unk> ( opened 1999 ) gained Michelin stars for the quality of their cooking . In 2005 , <unk> , the only Indian restaurant in Britain when it opened in Regent Street , London in 1926 , was relaunched as a top @-@ end eatery . 
 = = = Other influences = = = 
 Chinese food became established in England by the 1970s , with large cities often having a Chinatown district ; the first , in London 's Soho , developed between the two world wars . Deriving from Cantonese cuisine , the food served by Chinese restaurants , named " Chinese Food Abroad " by Kenneth Lo , has been adapted to suit western taste . 
 From around 1980 , other South @-@ East Asian cuisines , especially Thai , began to join the established Asian cuisines of China and the Indian subcontinent . 
 Italian cuisine is the most popular Mediterranean cuisine in England . In its current form , with plenty of pizza and pasta , inspired by Elizabeth David , its rise began after 1945 . There were some Italian restaurants before World War II , but they mostly served a generalised haute cuisine . Soon after the war , Italian coffee bars appeared , the first places to trade on their <unk> ; they soon started to sell simple and cheap Italian food such as <unk> soup , spaghetti <unk> and pizza . From the early 1960s , the slightly more elegant <unk> restaurants offered " Italian specialities " such as lasagne verde al <unk> ( baked lasagne , coloured with spinach ) . 
 French cuisine is largely restricted to expensive restaurants , although there are some inexpensive French <unk> . 
 = = Food establishments = = 
 = = = Cafes and tea shops = = = 
 The English cafe is a small , inexpensive eating place . A working men 's cafe serves mainly fried or grilled food , such as fried eggs , bacon , bangers and mash ‚ black pudding , bubble and squeak , burgers , sausages , mushrooms and chips . These may be accompanied by baked beans , cooked tomatoes , and fried bread . These are referred to as " breakfast " even if they are available all day . Traditional cafes have declined with the rise of fast @-@ food chains , but remain numerous all over the UK . 
 A tea shop is a small restaurant that serves soft drinks and light meals , often in a sedate atmosphere . Customers may eat a cream tea or a Devonshire tea , served from a china set , and a <unk> with jam and clotted cream . 
 = = = Fish and chip shops = = = 
 Fish and chips is a hot dish consisting of battered fish , commonly Atlantic cod or haddock , and chips . It is a common take @-@ away food . 
 Both fried fish and fried chipped potatoes are of late Victorian origin . Panayi cites the Fish Trades Gazette of 29 July 1922 as stating " Later there was introduced into this country the frying and purveying of chip potatoes from France ... which had made the fried fish trade what it is today . " He also notes that The Times recorded that " potatoes chipped and fried in the French manner were introduced in Lancashire with great success about 1871 . " Panayi further observes that fish and chip shops in the 1920s were often run by Jews or Italians . A slightly earlier date is available for chips in London , however , as Dickens 's 1859 A Tale of Two Cities mentions " husky chips of potatoes , fried with some reluctant drops of oil " . 
 = = = Pub food = = = 
 The public house , or pub , is a famous English institution . In the mid @-@ 20th century , pubs were drinking establishments with little emphasis on the serving of food , other than " bar snacks " , such as pork scratchings , pickled eggs , salted crisps , and peanuts , which helped to increase beer sales . If a pub served meals these were usually basic cold dishes such as a ploughman 's lunch , invented in the 1950s . 
 In the 1950s some British pubs started to offer " a pie and a pint " , with hot individual steak and ale pies made easily on the premises by the landlord 's wife . In the 1960s this was developed into the then @-@ fashionable " chicken in a basket " , a portion of roast chicken with chips , served on a napkin , in a wicker basket , by the Mill pub at Withington . Quality dropped but variety increased with the introduction of microwave ovens and freezer food . " Pub grub " expanded to include British food items such as steak and ale pie , steak and kidney pudding , shepherd 's pie , fish and chips , bangers and mash , Sunday roast , and pasties . The gastropub movement of the 21st century , on the other hand , seeks to serve restaurant @-@ quality food , cooked to order from fresh ingredients , in a pub setting . In 1964 , pubs were serving 9 @.@ 1 % of meals eaten outside the home ; this rose rapidly to 37 @.@ 5 % by 1997 . 
 = = Vegetarianism = = 
 Modern western vegetarianism was founded in the United Kingdom in 1847 with the world 's first Vegetarian Society . It has increased markedly since the end of World War II , when there were around 100 @,@ 000 vegetarians in the country . By 2003 there were between 3 and 4 million vegetarians in the UK , one of the highest percentages in the Western world , while around 7 million people claim to eat no red meat . By 2015 , 11 of 22 restaurant chains studied by the Vegan Society had at least one vegetarian main course on their menu , though only 6 of these labelled vegan dishes . Top @-@ end vegetarian restaurants remain relatively few , though they are increasing rapidly : there were some 20 in Britain in 2007 , rising to 30 in 2010 . 
 = = Quality = = 
 English cuisine in the twentieth century suffered from a poor international reputation . Keith <unk> of Chawton House Library comments that " at one time people didn 't think the English knew how to cook and yet these [ eighteenth and nineteenth century ] female writers were at the forefront of modern day cooking . " English food was popularly supposed to be bland , but English cuisine has made extensive use of spices since the Middle Ages ; introduced curry to Europe ; and makes use of strong flavourings such as English mustard . It was similarly reputed to be dull , like roast beef : but that dish was highly prized both in Britain and abroad , and few people could afford it ; the " Roast Beef of Old England " lauded by William Hogarth in his 1748 painting celebrated the high quality of English cattle , which the French at the " Gate of Calais " ( the other name of his painting ) could only look at with envy . The years of wartime shortages and rationing certainly did impair the variety and flavour of English food during the twentieth century , but the nation 's cooking recovered from this with increasing prosperity and the availability of new ingredients from soon after the Second World War . 
 In 2005 , 600 food critics writing for the British Restaurant magazine named 14 British restaurants among the 50 best restaurants in the world , the number one being The Fat Duck in Bray , Berkshire and its chef Heston Blumenthal . The global reach of London has elevated it to the status of a leading centre of international cuisine . 
 Meanwhile , the list of United Kingdom food and drink products with protected status ( PDO ) under European Union law has increased rapidly , with 59 items including Cornish sardines , Yorkshire Wensleydale cheese and Yorkshire forced rhubarb , Fenland celery , West Country lamb and beef and traditional Cumberland sausage listed as registered in 2015 , and a further 13 including Birmingham Balti listed as applied for . By 2016 there were 12 cheeses from England with PDO status . 
 = Girl with Ball = 
 Girl with Ball is a 1961 painting by Roy Lichtenstein . It is an oil on canvas Pop art work that is now in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art , after being owned for several decades by Philip Johnson . It is one of Lichtenstein 's earliest Pop art works and is known for its source , which is a newspaper ad that ran for several decades and which was among Lichtenstein 's earliest works sourced from pop culture . 
 Girl with Ball was exhibited at Lichtenstein 's first solo exhibition and was displayed in Newsweek 's review of the show . This work significantly alters the original source and is considered exemplary of Lichtenstein 's works that exaggerate the mechanically produced appearance although the result of his painterly work . It is an enduring depiction of the contemporary beauty figure . 
 = = Background = = 
 Girl with Ball was inspired by a 1961 advertisement for the Mount Airy Lodge in the Pocono Mountains . The ad , which started running in 1955 , was widely published in the New York metropolitan area and elsewhere , including several prominent newspapers such as The New York Times and the Daily News . The advertisement was still running in newspapers more than twenty years after Lichtenstein produced the work . 
 According to the Lichtenstein Foundation website , in autumn 1961 , a fellow teacher at Rutgers University named Allan Kaprow made introductions between Lichtenstein and Leo Castelli Gallery director Ivan Karp . Lichtenstein showed Karp several paintings including Girl with Ball , which was the one that intrigued Karp . Karp agreed to represent Lichtenstein weeks later . After showing the painting to Andy Warhol , he sold it to architect Philip Johnson that November . The painting appeared in Newsweek 's 1962 review of Lichtenstein 's Castelli Gallery show . The work appeared in the April 3 , 1963 " Pop ! Goes the Easel " show at the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston along with his Brattata ( 1962 ) and Head @-@ Red and Yellow ( 1962 ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Girl with Ball depicts a woman wearing a bathing suit holding a beach ball with red stripes in the same color as her lips and tongue . Lichtenstein used a painter 's version of comic strip artist techniques to create his own rendition of the subject of a nostalgic photograph , resulting in a simplified work of art with its own appeal . He produced the work using Ben @-@ Day dots of primary colors . The process is described as exaggerating the " limitations of mechanical reproduction " to strip the photograph of its polish in a startling and intense form . In 1961 , this painting was groundbreaking . Facial features such as nose and mouth are depicted using " commercial shorthand " . 
 His process of reworking original artwork is described as " abstraction by subtraction " , in which all features of the original are reduced to simple graphic elements . Lichtenstein alters the planar position of the subject of the picture to position her " nearer to the picture plane " . He drew the picture more distorted than might be expected of a cartoonist by augmenting and focusing on her two @-@ dimensionality . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The image and technique were regarded as <unk> . However , the painting presented an allusion to printing technology , with its Ben @-@ Day dots , and to art history , with its " Art Nouveau forms " . Though " crude and simplistic " the work demonstrates artistic intellect . 
 Girl with Ball is described by Diane Waldman as " striking " in the simple and bold way it presents a vacation atmosphere . She notes it is " reminiscent of Picasso 's frolicking bather in one of his paintings on the subject , Bather with Beach Ball ( fig . 48 ) , 1932 , " especially in the way Lichtenstein has scaled down the representation and the way he depicts movement . 
 The newspaper ad source provided Lichtenstein with " one of the most common tropes of the day for the image of a woman . " The updated Betty Grable @-@ type subject , was a fashionable glamor figure that Lichtenstein used for a symbolic value that ranks her with " iconoclastic female figures , including Manet 's Olympia , 1863 , Picasso 's Les Demoiselles d 'Avignon , 1907 and de Kooning 's three series of Women " . 
 = St Edwen 's Church , Llanedwen = 
 St Edwen 's Church , Llanedwen is a 19th @-@ century parish church near the Menai Strait , in Anglesey , north Wales . The first church was founded here by St Edwen ( daughter of Edwin of Northumbria , king and saint ) in 640 , but the present structure dates from 1856 and was designed by Henry Kennedy , the architect of the Diocese of Bangor . It contains some memorials from the 17th and 18th centuries and a reading desk that reuses panel work from the 14th and 17th centuries . The 18th @-@ century historian Henry Rowlands was vicar here , and is buried in the churchyard . The church is on land that forms part of the Plas Newydd estate , home of the family of the Marquess of Anglesey since 1812 and owned by the National Trust . Some of the Marquesses of Anglesey , and some of their employees , are also buried in the churchyard . 
 The church is used for worship by the Church in Wales , one of seven in a combined parish . A service is held using the Book of Common Prayer each Sunday morning . St Edwen 's is one of the few churches in regular use in Wales to be lit entirely by candles . It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is regarded as " a good example of H Kennedy 's designs for a small @-@ scale rural church . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Edwen 's Church is in the south of Anglesey , north Wales , in a rural area known as Llanedwen . It is about 5 miles ( 8 km ) from the county town of Llangefni , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the <unk> road between <unk> and Brynsiencyn and about 250 metres ( 270 yds ) from the Menai Strait that separates Anglesey from the rest of Wales . The church is on land that forms part of the Plas Newydd estate , which has been the home of the family of the Marquess of Anglesey since 1812 ; some of the former marquesses and their employees are buried in the churchyard . Plas Newydd and its grounds are now owned by the National Trust . The area of Llanedwen takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " . 
 According to the 19th @-@ century Anglesey historian Angharad Llwyd , the first church in the area was established by St Edwen in 640 . Nothing is known of Edwen 's life , but according to the manuscript sources , she was the daughter – perhaps the illegitimate daughter – or the niece of Edwin of Northumbria , a king who converted to Christianity in 627 and who was venerated as a saint after his death in 633 . The 12th @-@ century writer Geoffrey of Monmouth said that Edwin was born whilst his mother was taking refuge in north Wales with Cadfan ap Iago . 
 Llwyd described the church in 1833 as " a small but neat edifice , of great antiquity " . In 1840 , the church was rebuilt by John Welch . Writing in 1847 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that St Edwen 's was in the Early Perpendicular style , although its windows had been replaced , and measured 52 by 16 feet ( 16 by 5 m ) . The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited in May 1850 . He said that it was " a very small church in a lovely situation " , which had " a beautiful view over the Menai " . 
 In 1856 , the church seen by Llwyd , Jones and Glynne was demolished and the present structure was erected , designed by Henry Kennedy , architect of the Diocese of Bangor . The only part of the old church to survive was some of the stonework at the base of the west wall . Some repair work was carried out in 1956 . 
 St Edwen 's , which is used for worship by the Church in Wales , is one of seven churches in the combined benefice ( churches grouped together under an incumbent priest ) of Bro Dwynwen . A service is held every Sunday morning using the 1662 Book of Common Prayer , either Holy Communion or Morning Prayer ; there are no midweek services . The parish is within the deanery of Synod Ynys Mon , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2016 , the priest in charge is the Reverend E Roberts and the associate priest is Canon Professor Leslie Francis . 
 People associated with the church include Henry Rowlands , vicar of St Nidan 's , Llanidan , and its associated churches ( including St Edwen 's ) in the first part of the 18th century . He wrote a history of Anglesey entitled Mona Antiqua Restaurata , published in 1723 . He is buried in the churchyard to the west of the door . His tombstone is inscribed in Latin with the words : " All things are nought save what he gave to needy ones . These have force when arts perish and writings fall to pieces . " William Bulkeley Hughes , who lived in the parish and died in 1882 , is also buried in the churchyard . He was a Member of Parliament for 40 years . The churchyard contains one Commonwealth war grave , of a First World War officer of the Westmorland and Cumberland Yeomanry . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Edwen 's is built from local red gritstone , formed into square blocks and dressed with sandstone . The roof is made from slate with stone edging . The church , which is in the Late Decorated style , has a tower topped with a broach spire at the north @-@ west corner of the nave , supported by buttresses . The church is entered through a porch with an arched doorway in the lowest of the three stages of the tower . Inside , the woodwork of the roof is exposed ; some of the nave timbers might be medieval beams reused in the 1856 rebuilding . The nave and chancel are divided by an arch and by three steps leading up from the nave . The chancel and sanctuary are separated by an altar rail set on top of some wooden panels . 
 There is a pair of windows in the west wall decorated with tracery ( stonework within the window frame forming a pattern ) . Scenes from the Bible and geometric patterns are shown in the stained glass , and birds ( phoenix and peacock ) are depicted at the top of the windows . The glass is dedicated to Rice Robert Hughes , a clergyman who died in 1801 . There are three arched windows in the south wall of the nave ; the stained glass of the easternmost ( dedicated to William Bulkeley Hughes ) shows biblical scenes . The easternmost window of the three in the north wall of the nave is dedicated to Thomas Bulkeley Hughes ( who died in 1836 ) , his wife and children . The chancel has one window in the east wall , which has three lights ( sections of window separated by stone mullions ) . 
 The pulpit has some 19th @-@ century oak panelling and reuses some ornate 17th @-@ century panel work that is decorated with pictures of cherubs , dragons , dogs and lions ' heads . The pews are made of pine ; the choir stalls also have some carved oak panels that may date from the 17th century . A reading desk from the 19th century reuses material from the 14th and 17th centuries , depicting a lion , a griffin and angels . The church also has an eight @-@ sided sandstone font decorated with a carved cross . 
 A survey in 1937 by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire recorded seven 17th and 18th century memorials within the church , the oldest in memory of a Thomas Owen who died in 1646 . The tombs in the churchyard include one of a Sidney Griffith ( died 1618 ) and more than 20 others from the 17th and 18th centuries . The survey also noted some oak dog tongs , likely to be from the 19th century , and three 17th @-@ century chairs . 
 A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded an engraved chalice dated 1842 and a paten dated 1776 – 77 ; both are made from silver and are decorated with foliage . A silver flagon bears an inscription to denote that it was given by William Bulkeley Hughes when the new church was consecrated in 1856 . The survey also noted a flagon from about 1700 and a dish , both made of pewter , but said that an 18th @-@ century silver chalice had been lost some time after 1811 . St Edwen 's is one of the few churches in regular use in Wales to be lit only by candles . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 St Edwen 's has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 23 April 1998 , and has been listed because it is seen as " a good example of H Kennedy 's designs for a small @-@ scale rural church " . Cadw ( the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes the fittings that incorporate " some fine carved work of the 14th and 17th centuries . " 
 Sabine Baring @-@ Gould , writing in 1908 , said that the rebuilt church was " wholly devoid of interest " . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region notes that the Incorporated Church Building Society ( active in the 19th century ) considered Kennedy 's design was " inconsistent with the gravity of feeling which pervades the ancient churches of Wales . " 
 Harry Longueville Jones wrote in 1847 that the churchyard was " one of the most interesting in Anglesey , from its picturesque appearance and situation . " A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes St Edwen 's as " a good example of an unspoilt 19th century country church " , adding that is " little changed since it was built . " It says that it is in a " tranquil spot " , and notes that it is a landmark " visible from a considerable distance " . 
 = 2014 Russian Grand Prix = 
 The 2014 Russian Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2014 Formula 1 Russian Grand Prix ; Russian : Гран @-@ при России 2014 года ) was a Formula One motor race held on 12 October 2014 . The fifty @-@ three lap race was held at the Sochi Autodrom , a brand new circuit built on the site of the 2014 Winter Olympics in the city of Sochi in Krasnodar Krai , Russia . 
 The race was the sixteenth round of the 2014 season , following on from the Japanese Grand Prix at Suzuka one week previously , and preceding the United States Grand Prix at the Circuit of the Americas . The race marked the first time that the Russian Grand Prix had been held in a century , and was also the first time the Russian Grand Prix was run as a round of the Formula One World Championship since the championship was formed in 1950 . 
 Lewis Hamilton in a Mercedes won the race after starting from pole position and leading every lap . His team @-@ mate Nico Rosberg finished second , after working his way up from the back of field after having to make an unscheduled pit stop on the first lap . Williams 's Valtteri Bottas completed the podium , having set the fastest lap — and a new lap record — on the final lap of the race . Following Jules Bianchi 's serious accident in the Japanese Grand Prix , Marussia entered a single car for Max Chilton , leaving the grid with twenty @-@ one cars . The race ultimately proved to be Marussia 's last of the season , as the team went into administration ahead of the next race in the United States . 
 The result secured the World Constructors ' Championship for Mercedes with three races remaining in the season , while Hamilton extended his World Drivers ' Championship lead over Rosberg to seventeen points . Bottas 's podium allowed him to overtake Fernando Alonso and Sebastian Vettel in the drivers ' standings . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 With the circuit being built on the site of the 2014 Winter Olympics , the International Olympic Committee voiced concerns that construction would interrupt preparations for the Olympics , and so were given the power to postpone the inaugural Russian Grand Prix until the 2015 season if preparations for the race interfered with the Winter Olympics . However , the Olympic Games started without interruption , and the IOC did not exercise their power . FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting inspected the circuit in the week before the 2014 Belgian Grand Prix and gave it the FIA 's final seal of approval , allowing the race to go ahead . 
 In September 2014 , the circuit hosted a round of the Russian Touring Car Championship as preparation for the Grand Prix . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Following the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine in July 2014 and amid allegations of Russian involvement in the incident and the Russian military intervention in the country , there were calls from the British Conservative Party for Formula One to abandon the race as part of sanctions placed on the Russian government , as the race was established with financial support from the government . Similar suggestions were made from British and German parliamentarians over Russia 's hosting of the 2018 FIFA World Cup . 
 When responding to questions about the race — and humanitarian concerns over the revival of the European Grand Prix in Azerbaijan given Azerbaijan 's human rights record — Red Bull Racing team principal Christian Horner refused to offer any kind of judgement , pointing out that it was the responsibility of the FIA to monitor the situation and act accordingly ; a position supported by Mercedes director Toto Wolff . Bernie Ecclestone , CEO of the sport 's commercial rights holder , publicly stated that he had " no doubts " about the race taking place in the wake of the crash , and distanced the sport from ongoing political debates . With Russia facing increased economic sanctions from the European Union and United States , deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Kozak noted that the Grand Prix would not be affected in the event such sanctions were implemented , and the race went ahead as scheduled . Both Vladimir Putin and Dmitry Kozak were in attendance , with Putin presenting the race winner 's trophy . 
 = = = Support events = = = 
 The GP2 and GP3 Series — a pair of feeder championships for drivers preparing for Formula One — also made their début at the circuit , racing in support of the Grand Prix as the penultimate round of the 2014 GP2 and GP3 championships . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ event = = = 
 = = = = Marussia entry = = = = 
 Marussia driver Jules Bianchi suffered serious head injuries at the Japanese Grand Prix when he crashed into a tractor trying to recover Adrian Sutil 's Sauber under yellow @-@ flag conditions , ruling him out of the Russian Grand Prix . Per FIA regulations , the team entered two cars , with Alexander Rossi , their testing and reserve driver , being named as Bianchi 's replacement for the event . However , before Friday 's practice sessions and with FIA approval , the team opted not to run the second Marussia <unk> car and Max Chilton was their sole representative , leaving the grid with twenty @-@ one cars . As a sign of respect to Bianchi and his family , the team built up and placed his car in his side of the garage and had his livery placed on the walls for duration of the weekend . 
 = = = = = Tributes to Jules Bianchi = = = = = 
 There were several tributes at this Grand Prix to show support for Bianchi : 
 Marussia adopted a " # JB17 " livery on the cockpit sides of its sole participating car ; 
 Drivers wore a sticker on their helmets saying " Tous avec Jules # 17 " , and held a one @-@ minute silence just before the race . 
 = = = = Penalties = = = = 
 Pastor Maldonado incurred a ten @-@ place penalty at the Japanese Grand Prix for exceeding his quota of five engine components for the season . However , as he qualified seventeenth , he was unable to take the full penalty as doing so would move him past twenty @-@ second and last place on the grid . Under new rules introduced for the 2014 season , the remainder of the penalty was carried over to the Russian Grand Prix , automatically giving him a five @-@ place penalty . 
 = = = = Tyres = = = = 
 Tyre supplier Pirelli announced that they would be providing teams with their medium @-@ compound tyre as a " prime " tyre and the soft @-@ compound as the " option " tyre for the Grand Prix to cope with the brand @-@ new surface and to tolerate the high lateral loads placed on the tyre , particularly through turn 4 , an elongated constant @-@ radius corner with estimated speeds of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) that stands out as the longest corner on the 2014 Formula One calendar . 
 = = = = Drag reduction system = = = = 
 Two drag reduction system ( DRS ) zones were introduced for the race . The detection point for the first was located on the entry to turn 1 , with the activation zone placed on the apex of the corner . The second detection point was positioned along the circuit 's back straight , with the activation zone encompassing turns 12 and 13 . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 In accordance with the 2014 regulations , three free practice sessions were held . Two one and a half @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session on Saturday morning . Per the regulations the teams were allowed to replace one of their regular drivers with a test and reserve driver during the first two sessions . Mercedes 's Nico Rosberg set the fastest time in the first free practice session , seven hundredths of a second ahead of team @-@ mate Lewis Hamilton , and two tenths of a second faster than McLaren 's Jenson Button . Elsewhere , Williams 's Valtteri Bottas carried out limited running after the tyre blankets designed to keep his tyres at the optimal operating temperature were found to have failed , damaging his tyres . Russian driver Sergey Sirotkin made his Formula One début , driving for Sauber in the place of Esteban Gutiérrez . He finished the session seventeenth overall , two and a half seconds slower than Rosberg and four tenths of a second behind Sauber teammate Adrian Sutil . Roberto Merhi also took part , driving in the place of Caterham 's Kamui Kobayashi in his third appearance of the season for the team . 
 Hamilton led the way in the second free practice session , finishing eight tenths of a second ahead of Kevin Magnussen and Ferrari 's Fernando Alonso . Rosberg finished fourth , though he made a mistake on his final flying lap . Hamilton was again fastest in the third practice session , three tenths of a second quicker than Rosberg , with Bottas in third . Several drivers encountered trouble whilst simulating a qualifying lap , most notably Magnussen , who damaged his suspension after running wide over a kerb ; and Hamilton , who spun at the penultimate corner , narrowly avoiding the wall . Pastor Maldonado was unable to set a lap time after his energy recovery system failed . Aided by practice and qualifying sessions from the GP2 and GP3 Series support categories , the track evolved to the point where drivers were setting lap times three and a half seconds quicker ahead of qualifying than they had been at the start of the weekend . 
 Following the first day 's running , officials made several changes to the circuit , including the installation of speed bumps in the turn 2 – 3 run @-@ off area to discourage drivers from deliberately running wide to carry more speed into turn 4 , a practice that had been observed during the free practice and qualifying sessions for the GP2 and GP3 races . The pit lane speed was also revised from 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) to 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) to address concerns over the narrow pit entry and its tight corners . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Normally qualifying consists of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with six drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . However , with Marussia 's permission to run a single car for the race , the qualifying procedure was revised , with five drivers — instead of the usual six — eliminated at the end of the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) . 
 Lewis Hamilton topped the first period , going under 1 : 39 @.@ 000 for the first time all weekend . Nico Rosberg was a close second , with Valtteri Bottas the only other driver within a second of Hamilton 's lap time . Marcus Ericsson was eliminated in seventeenth place , once again out @-@ qualifying team @-@ mate Kamui Kobayashi , who finished nineteenth . After struggling with another engine fault , Pastor Maldonado could only set a time good enough for twentieth , out @-@ qualifying the sole Marussia of Max Chilton . Williams driver Felipe Massa proved to be a shock elimination , struggling with a fuel flow issue that left him down on power ; he was recorded going through the speed trap on the approach to turn 2 some 23 km / h ( 14 mph ) slower than Bottas , the fastest driver through the speed trap , and qualified eighteenth for his first Q1 elimination since the British Grand Prix . 
 Hamilton , Rosberg and Bottas once again led the way in Q2 , which saw several drivers in a close fight to avoid elimination . Having struggled with a lack of pace over the course of the weekend , Sebastian Vettel missed out on a Q3 berth by a tenth of a second . He was followed by the Force Indias of Nico Hülkenberg in twelfth and Sergio Pérez in thirteenth , while Esteban Gutiérrez out @-@ qualified Adrian Sutil to give the Saubers fourteenth and fifteenth . Romain Grosjean was the final driver eliminated in Q2 despite having improved upon his Q1 time . 
 The Mercedes drivers continued to dominate in the final twelve @-@ minute period , but the rapid evolution of the circuit came to an abrupt halt after the first timed laps , and neither Hamilton nor Rosberg were able to improve their times , leaving Hamilton with provisional pole . Despite the lap times dropping off , Valtteri Bottas was able to best Hamilton 's time through the first two sectors , and maintained a pace that suggested he could steal a maiden pole position until he made an unforced error in the final corner . Jenson Button finished fourth , with Kevin Magnussen proving McLaren 's newfound performance was no accident in sixth . Daniil Kvyat secured a career @-@ best fifth place in his home Grand Prix , while Daniel Ricciardo out @-@ qualified team @-@ mate Vettel for the eleventh time in 2014 with seventh . Ferrari endured their most difficult qualifying session since the British Grand Prix , with Fernando Alonso and Kimi Räikkönen closely matched , but over two seconds behind Hamilton . Jean @-@ Éric Vergne finished tenth overall , ensuring two Toro Rossos in the top ten . 
 = = = = Post @-@ qualifying = = = = 
 Kevin Magnussen and Nico Hülkenberg received five @-@ place grid penalties for gearbox changes , demoting them to eleventh and seventeenth place respectively . Pastor Maldonado qualified in twentieth which became twenty @-@ first once his carry @-@ over penalty was applied . Maldonado and Max Chilton also received a five @-@ place penalty for a gearbox change . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start of the race , Nico Rosberg attempted to out @-@ brake Lewis Hamilton into turn 2 , but locked both of his front wheels , running wide and creating a flat spot on both tyres . After returning the position to Hamilton , he pitted at the end of the lap , as the flat spots would create a vibration in the car given the high speeds and lateral loading on the tyres . He immediately changed to the harder Prime compound , with the team switching to a strategy that called for him to do the next fifty @-@ two laps of the race on a single set of tyres . Rosberg took advantage of the pit strategies of other drivers and the straight @-@ line speed of his car to gradually work his way through the field . Behind him , Felipe Massa attempted to replicate his strategy , also pitting on the first lap , but switching to the softer Option compound . He was less successful that Rosberg , hampered by slower mid @-@ field drivers . 
 At the front of the field , Valtteri Bottas was able to keep up with Hamilton during the early stages of the race , but Hamilton was able to gradually build up a forty @-@ second lead by the time of the first — and only — round of pit stops , giving him enough of a buffer to pit without losing the lead , even when faced with the lowered speed limit and lengthy pit lane of the Sochi Autodrom . Hamilton was unchallenged throughout the race , ultimately winning by thirteen seconds ahead of Rosberg following his recovery and giving the team their ninth one @-@ two finish of the season . Bottas finished in third , his fifth podium of the season , having been overtaken by Rosberg on track . Despite having fresher tyres and setting a series of laps among the fastest in the race — including the fastest lap and the official lap record — he was unable to catch Rosberg in the final laps . 
 McLaren drivers Jenson Button and Kevin Magnussen finished fourth and fifth , giving Mercedes @-@ powered cars the top five places in the final standings . McLaren attempted to adjust Button 's strategy to place ahead of Rosberg after his pit stop , but were powerless to prevent Rosberg from overtaking . Magnussen spent the early phase of the race in a strategy battle with Fernando Alonso , Daniel Ricciardo and Sebastian Vettel , which he ultimately won . Alonso finished in sixth , the first non @-@ Mercedes @-@ powered driver across the line , having spent most of the race fending off Ricciardo . After spending most of the weekend struggling with an under @-@ powered and under @-@ performing car , Vettel secured four World Championship points with eighth place . Kimi Räikkönen and Sergio Pérez completed the top ten . 
 Felipe Massa 's attempt at replicating Rosberg 's strategy failed , leaving him outside the points in eleventh place , ahead of Nico Hülkenberg . Despite qualifying in fifth and tenth , Toro Rosso drivers Daniil Kvyat and Jean @-@ Éric Vergne finished in fourteenth and thirteenth place respectively , having been forced to race conservatively in the face of high fuel consumption and a predicted 12 ° C ( 22 ° F ) drop in temperature in the final stages of the race , which never eventuated . Esteban Gutiérrez led Sauber team @-@ mate Adrian Sutil across the line one lap down with the latter 's race having been disrupted by contact with Romain Grosjean at turn 2 for which Grosjean was punished with a five @-@ second stop / go penalty . Grosjean ultimately finished seventeenth ahead of Pastor Maldonado , with Marcus Ericsson the final classified finisher in nineteenth place , two laps behind Hamilton . 
 The race saw two retirements , with Kamui Kobayashi forced out on lap twenty @-@ one with what the team described as a brake issue , though Kobayashi later suggested that Caterham had deliberately retired the car to avoid damaging its power unit ahead of the next race . He also reported that the team had found damage to a suspension wishbone following free practice 3 , and that with no replacement part available , the team had repaired the damage by fusing the wishbone together with carbon , a solution that Kobayashi felt was unsafe . Marussia 's difficult race lasted just nine laps , with Max Chilton reporting an unusual vibration in his front @-@ left suspension , and the team elected to retire the car rather than risk a suspension failure . 
 = = = = Post @-@ race = = = = 
 With twenty @-@ five points for first place , Lewis Hamilton extended his World Drivers ' Championship lead over Nico Rosberg by seven points to carry a seventeen @-@ point margin into the United States Grand Prix . By out @-@ scoring title rivals Red Bull Racing , the result also secured the World Constructors ' Championship for Mercedes , their first title as a Formula One constructor . Hamilton dedicated the win to Jules Bianchi . 
 Valtteri Bottas 's podium finish elevated him from sixth to fourth in the drivers ' standings , overtaking Sebastian Vettel and Fernando Alonso . The result also allowed Williams to consolidate their hold on third place in the constructors ' standings , ahead of Ferrari . Further down the order , fourth and fifth places for McLaren and minor points placings for Force India saw the British team overtake their rivals for fifth place in the standings . 
 Both Marussia and Caterham went into administration after the race , citing financial difficulties . Although Caterham returned to compete in the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix , the team collapsed shortly thereafter . Marussia faced a similar fate before a last @-@ minute deal with an investor rescued the team , and they returned to the Formula One grid in 2015 , albeit registered as a British , rather than Russian competitor . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In December 2014 , the race was awarded with the Formula One Promotional Trophy . Dmitry Kozak received the award from Bernie Ecclestone in a special ceremony at the circuit . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 1 — Kevin Magnussen , Nico Hülkenberg and Max Chilton all received five @-@ place grid penalties for changing their gearboxes . 
 ^ 2 — Pastor Maldonado received a five @-@ place grid penalty to complete the penalty he received for exceeding his quota of five engine components for the season at the Japanese Grand Prix . He then received a further five @-@ place penalty after qualifying for a gearbox change . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Antonín Kinský = 
 Antonín Kinský ( born 31 May 1975 ) is a Czech former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper . He played club football in the Czech Republic for nine seasons , winning the national league in 2002 with FC Slovan Liberec . He subsequently moved to Russia , where he played for Saturn Ramenskoye . During his seven years in Russia , he played 200 competitive games and was recognised as the Russian Premier League 's best goalkeeper in the 2007 season . 
 Kinský played for his country on five occasions . He was part of the Czech Republic squad at UEFA Euro 2004 and the 2006 FIFA World Cup , although he played at neither tournament . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Kinský played for a number of clubs in his early career , including Dukla Prague , after which he moved to Bohemians 1905 . He later spent time on loan at <unk> Prague and <unk> <unk> . Kinský won promotion with FC Dukla to the Gambrinus Liga , where he played for one season . 
 = = = Liberec = = = 
 Kinský joined FC Slovan Liberec in 1998 , reaching the final of the 1998 – 99 Czech Cup in his first season . In the summer of 1999 Kinský broke his thumb , resultantly not playing for the autumn half of the 1999 – 2000 season and subsequently sharing goalkeeping duties with <unk> <unk> in the spring . Liberec finished the season by winning the 1999 – 2000 Czech Cup . 
 In July 2000 , Kinský was diagnosed with infectious mononucleosis , receiving treatment at the <unk> military hospital in Prague and resultantly being unable to play in the autumn part of the 2000 – 01 season . The following season , he recorded consecutive clean sheets at the beginning of the campaign . Liberec went on to reach the quarter finals of the 2001 – 02 UEFA Cup and won the 2001 – 02 Gambrinus liga . 
 During a UEFA Cup match in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi in October 2002 , Kinský was targeted by bottles thrown onto the pitch from the crowd as the home team was defeated 1 – 0 in the match and 4 – 2 on aggregate . Three policemen were injured in the incident . He played in goal in a 4 – 0 league defeat against Viktoria Žižkov in October 2002 , a game he described as " probably the worst match in my life . " November 2002 was more successful for Kinský as he saved two penalties in a UEFA Cup penalty shootout , after the second round tie against Ipswich Town had ended level after extra time . Resultantly Liberec qualified for the third round of the competition , although Kinský missed both matches against Panathinaikos due to injury . Kinský 's contract at Liberec was due to expire in the summer of 2004 and he failed to agree a contract extension with the club during the 2003 – 04 season . He left having made a total of 137 appearances in the top division of Czech football . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Kinský joined Russian side Saturn Ramenskoye in January 2004 , initially signing a three @-@ year contract . Kinský joined the team on 6 January in Turkey at their training camp ahead of the 2004 Russian Premier League . He started the first six matches of the 2004 season as a substitute , before becoming the club 's first @-@ choice goalkeeper . In 2005 he was vice captain for the team , captaining the side in the absence of captain Viktor <unk> . 
 Following the 2006 World Cup , Kinský signed a contract extension to stay at the club for another three years . He was named the best goalkeeper of the Russian Football Premier League in 2007 . He kept his 100th top division clean sheet in a match against Tomsk in September 2008 , becoming the 17th Czech goalkeeper to reach this figure . In October 2008 , Kinský was offered the chance to move to Chelsea to be the backup goalkeeper for Petr Čech , an offer which he rejected . In November 2010 Kinský played his 200th competitive match for the club . Before the last game of the 2010 season , he was presented with a football shirt with the number 201 on it , intended to represent the number of games he had played for the club . However , due to injury Kinský was unable to take part in the match , so 200 was his actual number of competitive appearances . He left Saturn upon the expiry of his contract in December 2010 . 
 = = = Post @-@ playing career = = = 
 Kinský became a goalkeeping coach for the youth team of FC Tempo Prague after finishing his playing career , stating his desire to work as a goalkeeping coach in professional football in the future , but not as a head coach . 
 = = International career = = 
 Kinský played for the under @-@ 17 team of Czechoslovakia in 1992 , making two appearances . He went on to make three appearances for the Czech Republic national under @-@ 21 football team in 1997 . 
 Kinský was called up to the Czech Republic national team by coach Karel Brückner before their participation in two friendly matches in Cyprus in February 2002 . He was one of three uncapped goalkeepers named in the squad , the others being Petr Čech and Martin <unk> . He made his debut in Cyprus on 13 February , playing the second half of the game against the host country in a 4 – 3 win . 
 Kinský was named in the Czech Republic squad for two major tournaments , UEFA Euro 2004 and the 2006 FIFA World Cup , but didn 't play in either competition . He played in a total of five matches for his national team between 2002 and 2004 . He also made one appearance for the " A2 " team of his country in 2006 , playing the second half of a match against Turkey B on 1 March . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kinský studied Russian at school . He and his wife , Martina , have two children , Tonda and Andrea , who both take part in sports . His son played youth football for FC Tempo Prague in 2012 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = International = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Slovan Liberec 
 Gambrinus Liga : 2001 – 02 
 Czech Cup : 1999 – 2000 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Czech Republic 
 UEFA European Championship semi @-@ finalist : 2004 
 = Pyxis = 
 Pyxis ( / <unk> / ; Greek : box ) is a small and faint constellation in the southern sky . Abbreviated from Pyxis Nautica , its name is Latin for a mariner 's compass ( contrasting with Circinus , which represents a draftsman 's compasses ) . Pyxis was introduced by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in the 18th century , and is counted among the 88 modern constellations . The constellation is located close to those forming the old constellation of the ship Argo Navis , and in the 19th century astronomer John Herschel suggested renaming Pyxis to Malus , the mast , but the suggestion was not followed . Pyxis is completely visible from latitudes south of 53 degrees north , with its best evening @-@ sky visibility in February and March . 
 The plane of the Milky Way passes through Pyxis . A faint constellation , its three brightest stars — Alpha , Beta and Gamma Pyxidis — are in a rough line . At magnitude 3 @.@ 68 , Alpha is the constellation 's brightest star . It is a blue @-@ white star around 22 @,@ 000 times as luminous as the Sun . Near Alpha is T Pyxidis , a recurrent nova that has flared up to magnitude 7 every few decades . Three star systems have planets , all discovered by doppler spectroscopy . 
 = = History = = 
 In ancient Chinese astronomy , Alpha , Beta and Gamma Pyxidis formed part of <unk> , a celestial temple honouring the ancestors of the emperor , along with stars from neighbouring Antlia . 
 The French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille first described the constellation in French as la <unk> ( the Marine Compass ) in 1752 , after he had observed and catalogued almost 10 @,@ 000 southern stars during a two @-@ year stay at the Cape of Good Hope . He devised fourteen new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe . All but one honoured instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment . Lacaille Latinised the name to Pixis [ sic ] Nautica on his 1763 chart . The Ancient Greeks identified the four main stars of Pyxis as the mast of the great ship Argo Navis . 
 German astronomer Johann Bode defined the constellation <unk> <unk> , the Log and Line — a nautical device once used for measuring speed and distance travelled at sea — around Pyxis in his 1801 star atlas , but the depiction did not survive . In 1844 John Herschel attempted to resurrect the classical configuration of Argo Navis by renaming it Malus the Mast , a suggestion followed by Francis Baily , but Benjamin Gould restored Lacaille 's nomenclature . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Covering 220 @.@ 8 square degrees and hence 0 @.@ 535 % of the sky , Pyxis ranks 65th of the 88 modern constellations by area . Its position in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere means that the whole constellation is visible to observers south of 52 ° N. It is most visible in the evening sky in February and March . A small constellation , it is bordered by Hydra to the north , Puppis to the west , Vela to the south , and Antlia to the east . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' <unk> ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of eight sides ( illustrated in infobox ) . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between <unk> <unk> and 9h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between − 17 @.@ 41 ° and − 37 @.@ 29 ° . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Lacaille gave Bayer designations to ten stars now named Alpha to Lambda Pyxidis , skipping the Greek letters iota and kappa . Although a nautical element , the constellation was not an integral part of the old Argo Navis and hence did not share in the original Bayer designations of that constellation , which were split between Carina , Vela and Puppis . Pyxis is a faint constellation , its three brightest stars — Alpha , Beta and Gamma Pyxidis — form a rough line . Overall , there are 41 stars within the constellation 's borders with apparent magnitudes brighter than or equal to 6 @.@ 5 . 
 With an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 68 , Alpha Pyxidis is the brightest star in the constellation . Located 880 ± 30 light @-@ years distant from Earth , it is a blue @-@ white giant star of spectral type <unk> that is around 22 @,@ 000 times as luminous as the Sun and has 9 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 7 times its diameter . It began life with a mass 12 @.@ 1 ± 0 @.@ 6 times that of the Sun , almost 15 million years ago . Its light is dimmed by 30 % due to interstellar dust , so would have a brighter magnitude of 3 @.@ 31 if not for this . The second brightest star at magnitude 3 @.@ 97 is Beta Pyxidis , a yellow bright giant or supergiant of spectral type <unk> @-@ II that is around 435 times as luminous as the Sun , lying 420 ± 10 light @-@ years distant away from Earth . It has a companion star of magnitude 12 @.@ 5 separated by 9 arcseconds . Gamma Pyxidis is a star of magnitude 4 @.@ 02 that lies 207 ± 2 light @-@ years distant . It is an orange giant of spectral type <unk> that has cooled and swollen to 3 @.@ 7 times the diameter of the Sun after exhausting its core hydrogen . 
 Kappa Pyxidis was catalogued but not given a Bayer designation by Lacaille , however Gould felt the star was bright enough to warrant a letter . Kappa has a magnitude of 4 @.@ 62 and is 560 ± 50 light @-@ years distant . An orange giant of spectral type K4 / K5III , Kappa has a luminosity approximately 965 times that of the Sun . It is separated by 2 @.@ 1 arcseconds from a magnitude 10 star . Theta Pyxidis is a red giant of spectral type M1III and semi @-@ regular variable with two measured periods of 13 and 98 @.@ 3 days , and an average magnitude of 4 @.@ 71 , and is 500 ± 30 light @-@ years distant from Earth . It has expanded to approximately 54 times the diameter of the Sun . 
 Located around 4 degrees northeast of Alpha is T Pyxidis , a binary star system composed of a white dwarf with around 0 @.@ 8 times the Sun 's mass and a red dwarf that orbit each other every 1 @.@ 8 hours . This system is located around 15 @,@ 500 light @-@ years away from Earth . A recurrent nova , it has brightened to the 7th magnitude in the years 1890 , 1902 , 1920 , 1944 , 1966 and 2011 from a baseline of around 14th magnitude . These outbursts are thought to be due to the white dwarf accreting material from its companion and ejecting periodically . 
 TY Pyxidis is an eclipsing binary star whose apparent magnitude ranges from 6 @.@ 85 to 7 @.@ 5 over 3 @.@ 2 days . The two components are both of spectral type <unk> with a diameter 2 @.@ 2 times , and mass 1 @.@ 2 times that of the Sun , and revolve around each other every 3 @.@ 2 days . The system is classified as a RS Canum Venaticorum variable , a binary system with prominent starspot activity , and lies 184 ± 5 light @-@ years away . The system emits X @-@ rays , and analysing the emission curve over time led researchers to conclude that there was a loop of material arcing between the two stars . RZ Pyxidis is another eclipsing binary system , made up of two young stars less than 200 @,@ 000 years old . Both are hot blue @-@ white stars of spectral type <unk> and are around 2 @.@ 5 times the size of the Sun . One is around five times as luminous as the Sun and the other around four times as luminous . The system is classified as a Beta Lyrae variable , the apparent magnitude varying from 8 @.@ 83 to 9 @.@ 72 over 0 @.@ 66 days . XX Pyxidis is one of the more @-@ studied members of a class of stars known as Delta Scuti variables — short period ( six hours at most ) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology . Astronomers made more sense of its pulsations when it became clear that it is also a binary star system . The main star is a white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> that is around 1 @.@ 85 ± 0 @.@ 05 times as massive as the Sun . Its companion is most likely a red dwarf of spectral type M3V , around 0 @.@ 3 times as massive as the Sun . The two are very close — possibly only 3 times the diameter of the Sun between them — and orbit each other every 1 @.@ 15 days . The brighter star is deformed into an egg shape . 
 AK Pyxidis is a red giant of spectral type M5III and semi @-@ regular variable that varies between magnitudes 6 @.@ 09 and 6 @.@ 51 . Its pulsations take place over multiple periods simultaneously of 55 @.@ 5 , 57 @.@ 9 , 86 @.@ 7 , 162 @.@ 9 and 232 @.@ 6 days . <unk> Pyxidis is another semi @-@ regular variable red giant , this time a carbon star , that is around 3560 times as luminous as the Sun with a surface temperature of <unk> K , located some 2116 light @-@ years away from Earth . It varies between magnitudes 6 @.@ 99 and 7 @.@ 83 over 159 days . VY Pyxidis is a BL Herculis variable ( type II Cepheid ) , ranging between apparent magnitudes 7 @.@ 13 and 7 @.@ 40 over a period of 1 @.@ 24 days . Located around 650 light @-@ years distant , it shines with a luminosity approximately 45 times that of the Sun . 
 The closest star to Earth in the constellation is Gliese 318 , a white dwarf of spectral class <unk> and magnitude 11 @.@ 85 . Its distance has been calculated to be 26 light @-@ years , or 28 @.@ 7 ± 0 @.@ 5 light @-@ years distant from Earth . It has around 45 % of the Sun 's mass , yet only 0 @.@ 15 % of its luminosity . <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> @.@ 2 is a brown dwarf of spectral type <unk> located around 72 light @-@ years from Earth . Discovered by infrared astronomy in 2011 , it has a magnitude of 18 @.@ 79 
 = = = Planetary systems = = = 
 Pyxis is home to three stars with confirmed planetary systems — all discovered by doppler spectroscopy . A hot Jupiter , HD <unk> b , that orbits HD <unk> every 2 @.@ 55 days , was discovered using the CORALIE spectrograph in 2003 . The host star is a yellow star of spectral type <unk> that has 69 % of our Sun 's luminosity , 89 % of its diameter and 105 % of its mass . Around 119 light @-@ years away , it shines with an apparent magnitude of 8 @.@ 08 and is around a billion years old . HD <unk> b was discovered with the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher ( HARPS ) in 2008 . It orbits HD <unk> every 1260 days , a 7 billion year @-@ old star of spectral type G5V that is around 89 % as massive as the Sun . A red dwarf of spectral type <unk> that has around 42 % the Sun 's mass , Gliese 317 is orbited by two gas giant planets . Around 50 light @-@ years distant from Earth , it is a good candidate for future searches for more terrestrial rocky planets . 
 = = = Deep sky objects = = = 
 Pyxis lies in the plane of the Milky Way , although part of the eastern edge is dark , with material obscuring our galaxy arm there . NGC <unk> is a planetary nebula that lies within a dim open cluster of magnitude 8 @.@ 2 . NGC <unk> is an open cluster that lies on line of sight with it . K 1 @-@ 2 is a planetary nebula whose central star is a spectroscopic binary composed of two stars in close orbit with jets emanating from the system . The surface temperature of one component has been estimated at as high as 85 @,@ 000 K. NGC 2627 is an open cluster of magnitude 8 @.@ 4 that is visible in binoculars . 
 Discovered in 1995 , the Pyxis globular cluster is a 13 @.@ 3 ± 1 @.@ 3 billion year @-@ old globular cluster situated around 130 @,@ 000 light @-@ years distant from Earth and around 133 @,@ 000 light @-@ years distant from the centre of the Milky Way — a region not previously thought to contain globular clusters . Located in the galactic halo , it was noted to lie on the same plane as the Large Magellanic Cloud and the possibility has been raised that it might be an escaped object from that galaxy . 
 NGC 2613 is a spiral galaxy of magnitude 10 @.@ 5 which appears spindle @-@ shaped as it is almost edge @-@ on to observers on Earth . Henize 2 @-@ 10 is a dwarf galaxy which lies some 30 million light @-@ years away . It is notable for having a black hole around a million solar masses at its centre . Known as a starburst galaxy due to very high rates of star formation , it has a bluish colour due to the huge numbers of young stars within it . 
 = Michael Laucke = 
 Michael Laucke ( born 29 January 1947 ) is a Canadian classical , new flamenco , and flamenco guitarist and composer , and a music industry businessman . Starting at the age of thirteen , Laucke gave professional snooker demonstrations and his winnings allowed him to take trips from Montreal to New York City to study the classical guitar with Rolando Valdés @-@ Blain . Still active in a career spanning five decades , Laucke began performing in 1965 , recording the first of 16 albums in 1969 , and has toured in 25 countries . In 1971 , he performed his first of many concerts at the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. His first concert in New York , where he also first met Senator Claiborne Pell , took place in 1972 . 
 Laucke was introduced to complex flamenco techniques by Spanish guitarist Paco de Lucía when the two shared a loft and performed together for the jet set in New York City in the early 1970s . In 1982 he was selected by Andrés Segovia to perform for the PBS network at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City . Laucke subsequently became Segovia 's pupil , and also studied with other classical guitar players , including Julian Bream and <unk> Díaz . He performed mainly on classical guitar until 1990 ; from then on , his concerts have consisted exclusively of flamenco and new flamenco works . 
 Laucke has broadened the guitar repertoire by creating over 100 transcriptions of classical and flamenco music . Several notable Canadian composers have written atonal works for him . SOCAN 's The Music Scene magazine considered Laucke to be one of " five of Canada 's best @-@ known soloists " . Music critic emeritus , historian , and musician Eric McLean of the Montreal Gazette avowed : " Laucke is the person who has done more for the guitar in this country than anyone else . " He has received many other awards and honours throughout his career , including the Grand Prix du Disque @-@ Canada for Best Canadian Recording . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Laucke was born in Montreal , Quebec , Canada on 29 January 1947 to parents of Russian and Polish @-@ Jewish heritage . After they separated when Laucke was six months old , he lived with his mother , brother , uncle , and grandmother . His grandmother raised and nurtured him ; she died at the age of 100 . 
 At the age of seven , Laucke appeared in the Montreal Star newspaper having designed and built a boat from 2 @,@ 000 toothpicks . A yo @-@ yo expert by age ten , he soon discovered that he loved performing and competing , eventually winning a C $ 60 bicycle as the champion among 2 @,@ 000 contestants in a Montreal yo @-@ yo competition . He discovered an interest in playing guitar , but his brother disapproved , so he practiced at friends ' homes . He also took up snooker , and became competent enough by the age of thirteen to gain a job as a demonstrator for the Brunswick Corporation , a snooker table manufacturer . Laucke learned billiards from George Chenier , a fellow Montrealer and the North American snooker champion . The two faced each again four years later at the North American snooker championships in Montreal , where Laucke won the championship . Laucke recalls : " Then I decided to leave snooker , I had done what I wanted to do ... My love for the guitar was overwhelming . There was a lot more money in snooker , but snooker was just a passion , and music was my love . " Laucke 's snooker winnings allowed him to finance 110 trips from Montreal to New York City to study the classical guitar with Franco @-@ Spaniard Rolando Valdés @-@ Blain . 
 = = Early career = = 
 With Frank Angelo as his manager since 1961 , Laucke performed his first guitar concert in Montreal in 1965 , a program of atonal music with the Société de musique contemporaine du Québec . In 1971 , following the first of his many concerts at the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , The Washington Post proclaimed that Laucke had displayed " the highest form of virtuosity " . His first concert in New York took place in 1972 at the Greenwich House Music School . Senator Claiborne Pell was in attendance and invited Laucke to perform his first concerts in Washington , DC , thus beginning a 15 @-@ year affiliation as Laucke 's active supporter in the U.S. Pell 's former campaign manager , Raymond Nelson , handled logistics for many of Laucke 's U.S. performances . In 1973 , Laucke starred in a documentary produced by Radio @-@ Québec called La <unk> , and he performed at Montreal 's Summer Olympic Games in 1976 . 
 Laucke studied with several classical guitar masters : Franco – Spaniard Rolando Valdès @-@ Blain from 1963 to 1977 , Julian Bream in 1969 as winner of the Julian Bream Master classes , <unk> Díaz from 1977 to 1979 and Andrés Segovia from 1982 to 1986 . Laucke was introduced to complex and advanced flamenco techniques by Spanish guitarist Paco de Lucía when the two shared a loft in New York City in the early 1970s . During this period , de Lucía and Laucke gave a concert in the Spanish Embassy , where Countess Elsa Peretti , jewelry designer at Tiffany 's , first heard the two guitarists . She immediately invited them to one of her parties at her New York penthouse , where the two guitarists performed in private for the New York City jet set , including fashion designer Calvin Klein , Andy Warhol , <unk> , and Giorgio di Sant 'Angelo . The Montreal Gazette noted that these artistic gatherings were : " the closest thing to the 18th century intellectual and artistic salon to be found anywhere these days " . Laucke was frequently hired to play at the launches of Giorgio di Sant ' Angelo 's new fashion lines and later those of Calvin Klein . " I was only 21 at the time , and it all seemed like a dream , " Laucke recalled . In 1977 , he founded Trio 3 with <unk> Abdul Al @-@ <unk> and Pauline Vaillancourt , and the D 'Addario strings @-@ manufacturing company became his sponsor . 
 His recording of works by William Walton , Richard Rodney Bennett , and François Morel on the Radio Canada International label ( <unk> 457 ) won the Canadian Music Council 's Grand Prix du Disque @-@ Canada in 1979 . The album included Morel 's new composition Me duele España , written for and dedicated to Laucke . The world premiere of the 21 @-@ minute piece took place at Place des Arts in Montreal , under the auspices of the Société de musique contemporaine du Québec . 
 Later that year , with an increasing number of concerts and recordings , and a busy travel schedule , Laucke became concerned that he would not have enough hours left for practising . He invented a " <unk> " : a small , wooden fingerboard with six strings stretched across a bridge . The device measured 8 by 4 inches ( 20 by 10 centimetres ) and allowed him to practice quietly during travel . Laucke found that : " Those extra hours of finger exercises pay off in handsome performance dividends . " 
 Laucke recorded his last classical album in 1981 with singer Riki <unk> and Guitar and Lute magazine declared it : " One of the best voice and guitar albums you will ever hear . " Although Laucke had played both classical and flamenco guitar music from an early age , he performed mainly classical guitar works until 1990 . From late 1990 onwards , his concerts have consisted exclusively of many flamenco and new flamenco works he learned from de Lucía . 
 = = = Teaching = = = 
 He was a professor of guitar at Concordia University in Montreal in 1976 , but left after two years to pursue a performing career , and has not taught guitar since . Ten years later , however , he released an eight @-@ tape instructional video series , to pass along the knowledge he had learned from his teachers . This video series was reviewed by Guitar Player magazine : " Laucke 's enthusiasm is infectious " and by Frets Magazine : " thoughtful and thorough instruction " . Laucke has also published articles on classical guitar . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
