 Throughout Newcastle United 's history , their home venue has been St James ' Park , the oldest and largest football stadium in North East England , as well as the sixth @-@ largest football stadium in the United Kingdom . It has hosted ten international football matches at senior level , the first in 1901 and the most recent in 2005 . It was used as a venue for both the 2012 Summer Olympics and the 2015 Rugby World Cup . 
 Football had been played at St James ' Park as early as 1880 , the ground being occupied by Newcastle Rangers , before becoming the home of Newcastle West End F.C. in 1886 . Its lease was then bought by Newcastle East End F.C. in 1892 , before they changed their name to Newcastle United . At the turn of the 19th century , the ground 's capacity was given as 30 @,@ 000 before being redeveloped between 1900 and 1905 , increasing the capacity to 60 @,@ 000 and making it the biggest stadium in England for a time . For most of the 20th century , the stadium changed very little , despite various plans for development of the ground . The old West Stand was replaced with the Milburn Stand in 1987 , the Sir John Hall Stand replacing the <unk> End in 1993 , and the rest of the ground renovated making the ground a 37 @,@ 000 capacity all @-@ seater stadium . Between 1998 and 2000 , double tiers were added to the Milburn and John Hall stands to bring the venue up to its current capacity of 52 @,@ 420 . There were plans to build a new 90 @,@ 000 seater stadium in <unk> park , just behind St James ' with Newcastle Falcons taking over St James ' Park , but due to protests the plans were dropped . St James ' Park currently seats 52 @,@ 420 people , but club owner Mike Ashley would consider taking the roof off The Gallowgate end and adding another 6 @,@ 000 seats making the total capacity to 58 @,@ 420 , but only if the team manage to finish in the top six places of the Premier League . 
 In October 2009 , Mike Ashley announced that he planned to lease the name of the ground in a bid to increase revenue , and in November the stadium was temporarily renamed <unk> @ St James ' Park Stadium . This name was only supposed to be used until the end of the 2009 – 10 season , but lasted until November 2011 . On 10 November 2011 , the club officially changed the name of the stadium to the Sports Direct Arena , although this will most likely be an interim name , as it is only being used to showcase the sponsorship capabilities of the stadium . The company , owned by Ashley , are not paying anything for the deal . However , if another company purchases the naming rights , they will be expected to pay between £ 8 million and £ 10 million . Many fans voiced their anger at the renaming , but Managing Director Derek Llambias has said that it is necessary to give Newcastle extra money so that they compete with the bigger clubs in the league . 
 Since 1982 , the stadium is served by St James Metro station on the Tyne and Wear Metro . The station is decorated in a black and white colour scheme , with archive photographs of the club 's players . 
 The club 's current training ground is located at <unk> Park , which is north of the city at Benton . The facility was opened in July 2003 and is also used by the Newcastle Falcons rugby team . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Newcastle United was set up as a private company limited by shares on 6 September 1895 . The club traded in this way for much of the 20th century , until April 1997 , when John Hall , who bought 72 @.@ 9 % of the club for £ 3 million in 1991 , floated the club on the stock exchange as a public limited company , with less than half the shares sold to the Hall family and the majority holding going to his business partner Freddy Shepherd . Later that year , Hall stepped down as chairman and was replaced by Shepherd , with the Hall family represented on the board by John 's son Douglas . In December 1998 , after buying a 6 @.@ 3 % stake in the club for £ 10 million , the media group NTL had considered a full takeover of the club . This was later dropped after the April 1999 Competition Commission , brought in due to government concerns about football clubs being owned by media companies . 
 In 2007 , businessman Mike Ashley purchased the combined stakes of both Douglas and John Hall , 41 % share in the club , through a holding company St James Holdings , with a view to buy the rest . Upon purchasing this share , he appointed Chris Mort as chairman , while gaining more shares , owning 93 @.@ 19 % of the club by 29 June 2007 . This figure reached 95 % on 11 July 2007 , forcing the remaining shareholders to sell their shares . 
 Since completing the purchase of the club , Ashley has twice announced that he planned to sell the club . The first occurred after fan protests over the resignation of Kevin Keegan on 14 September 2008 , when Ashley stated , " I have listened to you . You want me out . That is what I am now trying to do . " However , he took it off the market on 28 December 2008 after being unable to find a buyer . On 31 May 2009 , it was reported that Ashley was attempting to sell the club again . On 8 June 2009 , Ashley confirmed that the club was up for sale at an asking price of £ 100 million . By the end of August 2009 , the club was back off the market . 
 = = Social responsibility = = 
 Newcastle United established the Newcastle United Foundation in summer 2008 , which seeks to encourage learning and promote healthy living amongst disadvantaged children , young people and families in the North East region , as well as promoting equality and diversity . The Foundation 's manager Kate Bradley told charity news website The Third Sector , " Children look up to players as their heroes , and anything they say is instantly taken on board . If Newcastle defender Steven Taylor tells them not to eat a Mars bar for breakfast , they 'll listen . " In 2010 , the charity taught over 5 @,@ 000 children about healthy living . 
 The Foundation 's commitment , along with a similar foundation run by West Bromwich Albion , the unique relationship that Aston Villa has with Acorns Children 's Hospice and Tottenham Hotspur has with SOS Children 's Villages UK , are some leading examples of commitment in the highest level of football to responsibility and change in the communities in which they work and who enrich them through their support and ticket sales . The work of these clubs , and others , are changing the way professional sport interacts with their communities and supporters . 
 In December 2012 , the club announced that it had become the world ’ s first carbon positive football club . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 Supporters of Newcastle United are drawn from all over the North East and beyond , with supporters ' clubs all across the world . The club 's nickname is ' The Magpies ' , while the club 's supporters are also known as the Geordies or the Toon Army . The name Toon originates from the Geordie pronunciation of town . In a 2004 survey by Co @-@ operative Financial Services , it was found that Newcastle United topped the league table for the cost incurred and distance travelled by Newcastle @-@ based fans wishing to travel to every Premier League away game . The total distance travelled for a fan to attend every away game from Newcastle was found to be equivalent to a round @-@ the @-@ world trip . In the 2009 – 10 season , when the club were playing in English football 's second tier , the Football League Championship , the average attendance at St James ' Park was 43 @,@ 388 , the fourth @-@ highest for an English club that season . At the end of the 2011 – 12 Premier league season , Newcastle United held the third @-@ highest average attendance for the season , at 49 @,@ 935 . This figure was only surpassed by Arsenal and Manchester United , the only two clubs in the Premier League with larger stadiums . 
 The club 's supporters publish a number of fanzines including True Faith and The Mag , along with <unk> , which was established in 1996 . They set up Newcastle United Supporters Trust in September 2008 , aiming to " represent the broad church of Newcastle United 's support . " 
 In addition to the usual English football chants , Newcastle 's supporters sing the traditional Tyneside song " Blaydon Races . " 
 Traditionally , Newcastle 's main rivals are Sunderland , against whom the Tyne – Wear derby is competed . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 To date , inclusive of the 2015 – 16 season , Newcastle United have spent 85 seasons in the top @-@ flight . They are eighth in the All @-@ time FA Premier League table and have the ninth @-@ highest total of major honours won by an English club with 11 wins . The holder of the record for the most appearances is Jimmy Lawrence , having made 496 first team appearances between 1904 and 1921 . The club 's top goal scorer is Alan Shearer , who scored 206 goals in all competitions between 1996 and 2006 . Andy Cole holds the record for the most goals scored in a season : 41 in the 1993 – 94 season in the Premier League . Shay Given was the most capped international for the club , with 127 appearances for Republic of Ireland . 
 The club 's widest victory margin in the league was in the 13 – 0 win against Newport County in the Second Division in 1946 . Their heaviest defeat in the league was 9 – 0 against Burton Wanderers in the Second Division in 1895 . The club 's longest number of consecutive seasons in the top flight of English football was 36 from 1898 – 99 until 1933 – 34 . 
 Newcastle 's record home attendance is 68 @,@ 386 for a First Division match against Chelsea on 3 September 1930 . The club 's highest attendance in the Premier League is 52 @,@ 389 , in a match against Manchester City on 6 May 2012 . Newcastle lost the game 2 – 0 . The highest transfer fee received for a Newcastle player is £ 35 million , from Liverpool for Andy Carroll in January 2011 , while the most spent by the club on a player was £ 16 million for striker Michael Owen from Real Madrid in August 2005 . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 = = = = Domestic = = = = 
 Football League First Division : 
 Winners ( 4 ) – 1904 – 05 , 1906 – 07 , 1908 – 09 , 1926 – 27 
 Football League Championship : 
 Winners ( 3 ) – 1964 – 65 , 1992 – 93 , 2009 – 10 
 FA Cup : 
 Winners ( 6 ) – 1910 , 1924 , 1932 , 1951 , 1952 , 1955 
 FA Community Shield : 
 Winners ( 1 ) – 1909 
 = = = = European = = = = 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) − 1969 
 UEFA Intertoto Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) − 2006 
 = = = = Other honours = = = = 
 Texaco Cup : 
 Winners ( 2 ) − 1974 , 1975 
 Anglo @-@ Italian Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) − 1973 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 22 July 2016 . 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Players outside the First @-@ team squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserves and academy = = = 
 For reserve and academy squads , see Newcastle United F.C. Reserves and Academy 
 = = = Notable players = = = 
 For details on former players , see List of Newcastle United F.C. players and Category : Newcastle United F.C. players 
 = = Board of Directors = = 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Current backroom staff = = = 
 = = = = First Team = = = = 
 = = = = Reserves & Academy = = = = 
 = = = Notable managers = = = 
 = Dawn Marie Psaltis = 
 Dawn Marie Psaltis ( born November 3 , 1970 ) is an American retired professional wrestler and professional wrestling valet . She is perhaps best known for her appearances with Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) and the SmackDown ! brand of World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) under her ring name Dawn Marie , where she was a WWE Diva . 
 Before entering the sports entertainment industry , Psaltis made her living in real estate . After deciding to pursue a career in modeling or acting , Psaltis began managing wrestlers on the independent circuit after meeting a wrestling promoter . She signed a deal with ECW after what was supposed to be a three @-@ week stint . She managed The Impact Players and Simon and Swinger until ECW 's bankruptcy in 2001 . 
 Psaltis then joined WWE , where her most notable feud involved her marrying Al Wilson , the storyline father of her rival Torrie Wilson . She was released from her WWE contract in 2005 after revealing that she was pregnant , which resulted in her filing a lawsuit against her former employers . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Psaltis was raised by her father , a zoologist , and together , they spent their time camping and hunting . In her youth , she was a fan of the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , admiring wrestlers such as Bob Backlund , Jimmy Snuka , and Roddy Piper . Psaltis graduated from the New York University Stern School of Business at the age of 22 . She then went on to work for a real estate consultancy firm in Manhattan , New York , reaching the position of Director of International Real Estate . 
 After meeting an ex @-@ boyfriend who had aspired to play football professionally and finding out that he had been signed by the Chicago Bears , Psaltis decided that she wanted to pursue a career in entertainment . She resigned from the firm and moved into the entertainment industry with the goal of becoming either a model or an actress . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career and independent circuit = = = 
 While signing modeling posters for Jonathan Gold , a talent agent and professional wrestling promoter , Psaltis jokingly told Gold that she would be interested in pursuing a career in wrestling . Gold took her comment at face value and later contacted Psaltis , informing her that she was scheduled to appear at a wrestling show in New Jersey . With some trepidation , she went to the show and managed Tony Atlas in his match against Jimmy Snuka . Psaltis made her professional wrestling debut in January 1995 . She met her future fiancé Simon Diamond during her time in the independent wrestling promotions . She also met Buddy Landell and Devon Storm , both of whom helped train her . Psaltis spent four years working on the northeastern independent circuit , appearing with promotions such as Maryland Championship Wrestling and the Mid @-@ Eastern Wrestling Federation . 
 = = = Extreme Championship Wrestling ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In 1998 , Psaltis was informed that Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) employee Buh Buh Ray Dudley was interested in bringing her into ECW . At the behest of Dudley , Psaltis traveled to the ECW Arena in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where ECW promoter Paul Heyman told her that he would book her for several appearances in an angle with Lance Storm . She debuted in ECW on August 28 , 1998 as the manager of Storm , feuding with Chris Candido and his manager , Tammy Lynn Sytch . Although she was only supposed to have a three @-@ week role in the company , Heyman was impressed by the chemistry between Psaltis and Storm and offered her a contract , which she accepted . Psaltis created her character to be in love with Storm and clumsy rather than glamorous . 
 Storm and Psaltis feuded with Candido and Sytch for several months , during which time Psaltis was renamed " Tammy Lynn <unk> " to spite Candido and his manager . After the respective feuds ended , she used the ring name " Dawn Marie <unk> , " which was eventually shortened to simply Dawn Marie . After Storm formed a tag team with Justin Credible known as the Impact Players in the summer of 1999 , she managed both men , helping them win the ECW Tag Team Championship on two occasions . Psaltis continued to manage Storm until he left ECW for World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) in May 2000 . Psaltis was also offered a contract by WCW , but declined to leave ECW in order to remain with her fiancé , ECW wrestler Simon Diamond . She also had two years left on her ECW contract . 
 After Storm departed ECW , Psaltis became a color commentator on ECW pay @-@ per @-@ views and the television series ECW on TNN . On December 3 , 2000 at the Massacre on 34th Street pay @-@ per @-@ view , as part of a new angle , she announced that she would become the manager of the winner of the opening match pitting Simon Diamond and Swinger against Christian York and Joey Matthews . Although York and Matthews won the bout , Psaltis opted to join forces with Diamond and Swinger , whom she managed until ECW declared bankruptcy in April 2001 . 
 = = = Return to independent circuit ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Following the bankruptcy of ECW , Psaltis returned to the independent circuit , managing Diamond . The duo made several appearances alongside Swinger with the short lived X Wrestling Federation in November 2001 . During her time on the independent circuit , she trained as a wrestler under Simon Diamond and Mikey Whipwreck . Also in 2001 , Psaltis worked as a stock trader , and in 2002 , she co @-@ hosted a syndicated wrestling radio show known as the " Piledriver Rock and Wrestling Radio Show " . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Debut and Vince McMahon 's Legal Assistant ( 2002 ) = = = = 
 In April 2002 , Psaltis began negotiating with the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , eventually agreeing to a deal . She made her World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) television debut on the May 30 episode of SmackDown ! as Vince McMahon 's legal assistant . She debuted with the name " Dawn Marie Rinaldi " although it was quickly shortened to the original " Dawn Marie " . In her initial storyline , she briefly feuded with Stacy Keibler over McMahon 's affections until McMahon turned over the General Management position to his daughter , Stephanie McMahon , which was followed shortly by Keibler 's departure for the RAW brand . 
 = = = = Feud with Torrie Wilson ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 Psaltis would begin a controversial feud with Torrie Wilson in 2002 . On the October 17 episode of Smackdown ! , Marie picked up her first victory when she teamed up with Matt Hardy to defeat Rikishi and Torrie Wilson . In the angle , Psaltis attempted to marry Wilson 's real @-@ life father Al Wilson . She also revealed that she had developed feelings for Torrie , and the two shared an on @-@ screen kiss . Dawn Marie even offered to cancel the wedding if Torrie would go to a hotel with her for the night . Despite this , as part of the angle , she developed feelings for Al , and the two got married in Albuquerque , New Mexico on an episode of SmackDown ! in their underwear . Al then , in storyline , died from a heart attack after having rigorous sex numerous times in succession on their honeymoon . In response , Wilson defeated Psaltis at No Mercy in October . She defeated Psaltis again at the Royal Rumble in 2003 in what was billed as a Stepmother vs. Stepdaughter match . The feud lasted approximately nine months . 
 A year later , Psaltis began a second feud with Wilson . As part of the feud , the two had a match with Wilson 's career on the line when the SmackDown ! General Manager at the time , Kurt Angle , made the stipulation for the match at Judgment Day , which Wilson won . 
 = = = = Various feuds and release ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 After being on hiatus from SmackDown ! programming , Psaltis began a new storyline with Miss Jackie , involving whether she and Jackie 's fiancée , Charlie Haas , had an affair . This angle led up to a match between the two at Armageddon , with Haas as the guest referee . Psaltis won the match , but afterward , Haas confirmed their affair and broke off both relationships . 
 At the No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ view , on February 20 , Dawn Marie entered a feud with Michelle McCool after McCool attacked Marie during the Divas Contest where Marie and Torrie Wilson co @-@ hosted the contest . On the March 3 episode of Smackdown ! , Marie teamed up with Rene Dupree in losing effort to Big Show and McCool in a mixed tag team match . On the March 24 episode of Smackdown ! , Dawn Marie pinned McCool by using the ropes for leverage . On the April 14 episode of Smackdown ! , Dawn Marie was defeated by Torrie in a Divas Match , this would turn out to be Marie 's last match . 
 Her last appearance with the company was at ECW One Night Stand , managing Lance Storm for his match against Chris Jericho . Afterward , she was released from her WWE contract on July 6 , 2005 while on maternity leave , as she was pregnant . 
 = = = Other Promotions ( 2005 – present ) = = = 
 On November 5 , 2005 , a visibly pregnant Psaltis appeared at the ECW reunion event Hardcore Homecoming : November Reign , which is unaffiliated with World Wrestling Entertainment , holding the key for the main event steel cage match between Jerry Lynn and Justin Credible . The match was won by Justin Credible after Psaltis , Jason Knight , and Lance Storm interfered on his behalf . In June 2006 , she managed Johnny Candido in a match for the National Wrestling Superstars promotion . 
 In July 2009 , Psaltis signed with Dragon Gate USA as the " Live Event Hostess " , a role similar to that of the ring announcer . Marie made appearance for The <unk> at their pay @-@ per @-@ view Meltdown , on July 21 , 2012 , managing Kevin Murphy and Richie Nightmare against " The Thrill Seeker " Sage Strong and The Mercenary whom was managed by Tommy Dreamer . 
 Marie is currently taking part in World Wrestling Fan Xperience showcase . 
 = = = Women Superstars Uncensored ( 2008 , 2010 ) = = = 
 On March 8 , 2008 , Marie made her debut for Women Superstars Uncensored as a special guest referee for match between Alexa Thatcher and Cindy Rogers versus Nikki Roxx and <unk> Little Feather . Marie made her in @-@ ring debut , On the March 22 , 2008 episode of Women Superstars Uncensored , competing in the WSU / NWS ( Women 's J @-@ Cup ) losing to Becky Bayless in the first round . On the June 21 episode of Women Superstars Uncensored , Marie was defeated by Becky Bayless following the match it was then turned in a tag team match where she teamed up with Portia Perez in a winning effort defeating Bayless and Angelina Love . On the August 23 , 2008 episode of Women Superstars Uncensored , Marie 's final match was where she competed in a no @-@ contest with Trixie Lynn , Marie was scheduled to face Becky Bayless but was changed due to Bayless being signed to Total Nonstop Action Wrestling . 
 On the March 6 , 2010 episode of Women Superstars Uncensored , Marie was inducted into " Women Superstars Uncensored " Hall of Fame by Alicia . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Psaltis starred in The Vampire Carmilla , a 1999 independent film . In 2008 , she appeared in the second installment of Paul Heyman 's The Heyman Hustle video blog , which featured her and Heyman on the streets of New York City in winter , with Psaltis wearing only a bikini under a fur coat . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While wrestling in ECW , Psaltis took one college class a semester because of her love of learning and reading . She also took acting classes with the intention of becoming an actress after her career in professional wrestling was over . 
 Psaltis began dating Simon Diamond in October 1998 . Before dating , the two had been good friends for almost two years . They had planned to be married by the end of 2000 or into 2001 . They did not wed , but stayed engaged for several years afterwards . After seven years together , their relationship had come to an end . 
 Later , Psaltis met a man named Matthew , whom she married in June 2005 in Las Vegas . In December 2005 , Psaltis gave birth to her first child , a boy named Matthew . In January 2006 , she filed a complaint against WWE with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission , claiming that her contract had been wrongfully terminated as a result of her pregnancy and that she had suffered mental duress as a result of the release . The case was reportedly settled in late 2007 . Psaltis gave birth to her second child , a girl named Katelyn Marie in May 2009 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Corner slingshot splash 
 Sitout facebuster 
 Signature moves 
 Hair pull snapmare 
 Atomic drop 
 Fujiwara armbar 
 Slap 
 Drop toe hold 
 Headbutt 
 Two handed chokeslam 
 DDT 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Tony Atlas 
 Simon Diamond 
 Swinger 
 Lance Storm 
 The Impact Players ( Justin Credible and Lance Storm ) 
 Devon Storm 
 Buddy Landell 
 Steve Corino 
 Johnny Candido 
 Kevin Matthews 
 Richie Nightmare 
 Managers 
 Tammy Lynn Sytch 
 Entrance themes 
 " Hell on High Heels " by Mötley Crüe 
 " El <unk> and the Chicken @-@ Run Blast @-@ O @-@ Rama ( Wine , Women & Song Mix ) " by White Zombie 
 " <unk> " by Powerman 5000 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Women Superstars Uncensored 
 WSU Hall of Fame ( 2010 ) 
 = Pacific Rim ( film ) = 
 Pacific Rim is a 2013 American science fiction monster film directed by Guillermo del Toro , and starring Charlie Hunnam , Idris Elba , Rinko Kikuchi , Charlie Day , Robert Kazinsky , Max Martini , and Ron Perlman . The screenplay is by Travis Beacham and del Toro , with a story by Beacham . 
 The film is set in the future , when Earth is at war with the Kaiju , colossal monsters which have emerged from an interdimensional portal on the bottom of the Pacific Ocean . To combat the monsters , humanity unites to create the Jaegers , gigantic humanoid <unk> each controlled by at least two pilots , whose minds are joined by a neural bridge . Focusing on the war 's later days , the story follows Raleigh Becket , a washed @-@ up Jaeger pilot called out of retirement and teamed with rookie pilot Mako Mori as part of a last @-@ ditch effort to defeat the Kaiju . 
 Principal photography began on November 14 , 2011 in Toronto and lasted through April 2012 . The film was produced by Legendary Pictures and distributed by Warner Bros .. It was released on July 12 , 2013 including in 3D and IMAX 3D , receiving generally positive reviews ; the visual effects and action sequences were highly praised . While the film was a box @-@ office disappointment in the United States , it was highly successful in other territories . It earned a worldwide total of more than $ 411 million — $ 114 million in China alone , its largest market — becoming Del Toro 's most commercially successful film to date . 
 A sequel with the working title Maelstrom was announced in 2014 , and , following delays , is now to be directed by Steven S. DeKnight and produced by Del Toro , for a scheduled release of February 23 , 2018 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2013 , Earth is under attack by gigantic alien monsters ( called Kaiju ) emerging from an inter @-@ dimensional portal called " The Breach " at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean . Humanity unites to construct colossal robots , nicknamed Jaegers , to combat the alien threat . Each Jaeger is controlled by two or more pilots , who are mentally linked via a process called " drifting " to share the mental stress of piloting the machine . 
 In 2020 , Gipsy Danger , piloted by brothers Raleigh and Yancy Becket , is assigned to protect the Alaskan coastline from a Kaiju . The monster survives the initial assault and <unk> Gipsy Danger , then rips open her hull and kills Yancy . Raleigh takes control of Gipsy alone and kills the Kaiju . Traumatized by the loss of his brother , Raleigh quits the Jaeger program . 
 Five years later , Kaiju attacks have increased in both frequency and strength , to the point that Jaegers are being destroyed faster than they can be built . World leaders decide to cut funding for the Jaeger program in favor of anti @-@ Kaiju coastal walls . Marshal Stacker Pentecost , veteran Jaeger pilot and commanding officer of the program , summons the surviving Jaegers and pilots to a base in Hong Kong called <unk> . He finds Raleigh and convinces him to rejoin the program and make a last stand . 
 At <unk> , Raleigh and Pentecost are greeted by Mako Mori , the director of the Jaeger refurbishment . He sees the remaining Jaegers and their crews : Striker Eureka , Cherno Alpha , and Crimson Typhoon . The fourth Jaeger is Gipsy Danger , rebuilt and refurbished with additional weapons and a nuclear reactor . Pentecost tells Raleigh his plan is to use the four Jaegers to seal the Breach with a nuclear weapon . To find a new partner to pilot Gipsy , Raleigh holds a tryout with the base 's fighters , and finds his most " drift @-@ compatible " partner to be Mori , who is revealed to be Pentecost 's adopted daughter . In their test drift , Mako becomes lost in her memory of the Kaiju attack that orphaned her , and nearly discharges Gipsy Danger 's plasma caster . Pentecost grounds Mako , leaving Raleigh without a copilot . 
 Pentecost consults with Kaiju scientists Newton Geiszler and Hermann Gottlieb . Herman believes that the Breach is stabilizing , allowing increasing numbers of Kaiju to invade at a time , but allowing them to drop the weapon into the Breach . Newton , for his part , creates a device that allows him to drift with a Kaiju 's brain fragment , and discovers that the Kaiju are bioweapons created by extraterrestrial colonists to wipe out humanity and invade Earth . Pentecost instructs Newton to find black market dealer Hannibal Chau to obtain an intact Kaiju brain and acquire more information . At Hannibal 's place , Newton realizes that during his previous drift , the Kaiju 's hive mind gained access to his knowledge , just as he gained theirs . Two Kaiju , code @-@ named Otachi and Leatherback , are unleashed upon Hong Kong simultaneously to find him . 
 All Jaegers , except for Gipsy Danger , are dispatched . The Kaiju easily destroy Crimson Typhoon and Cherno Alpha , and immobilize Striker Eureka with an EMP blast . Out of options , Pentecost allows Raleigh and Mako to pilot Gipsy Danger . They kill Leatherback , then pursue Otachi , which is hunting for Newton . After a lengthy and destructive battle , Raleigh and Mako manage to kill Otachi . Newton and Hannibal rush to Otachi 's carcass , and discover that it is pregnant . The infant Kaiju bursts out and swallows Hannibal , before being asphyxiated by its own umbilical cord . Newton and Hermann drift with the infant Kaiju 's brain , and learn that the Breach only opens in the presence of Kaiju DNA . 
 Pentecost reveals to Raleigh he is terminally ill due to piloting a first generation Jaeger with no radiation shielding . The last time he piloted a Jaeger was during the Tokyo attack , during which he was forced to kill the Kaiju alone , making him and Raleigh the only pilots who have killed a Kaiju without a copilot ( known as solo combat ) . He has the remaining Jaegers proceed with the mission . With pilot Hercules Hansen injured during the previous fight , Pentecost and Chuck Hansen pilot Striker Eureka and carry the bomb ; Raleigh and Mako provide cover in Gipsy Danger . At the bottom of the Pacific Ocean , the two Jaegers are faced with three Kaiju , as Gottlieb predicted . Raleigh and Mako manage to kill the first , but Gipsy Danger is crippled by the second , and Striker Eureka takes critical damage fighting the third . Pentecost and Chuck detonate their nuclear bomb , killing another Kaiju and injuring the last one . Raleigh and Mako defeat the injured Kaiju , then , considering Newton 's discovery , they use the Kaiju corpse to drive Gipsy Danger into the Breach . Seeing Mako has passed out because her oxygen supply is depleted , Raleigh gives Mako his supply and ejects her via an escape pod . He then manually overloads the Jaeger 's nuclear reactor , just as it descends into the aliens ' homeworld , and ejects himself through the Breach . 
 Gipsy 's reactor explodes , killing the aliens and sealing the Breach . Mako and Raleigh 's pods surface in the Pacific Ocean , and the two embrace as rescue helicopters arrive . In a mid @-@ credits scene , Hannibal cuts his way out of the dead infant Kaiju . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Charlie Hunnam as Raleigh Becket : 
 A washed @-@ up former pilot called out of retirement by the Pan Pacific Defense Corps . On casting Hunnam , del Toro stated : " I saw him and I thought he had an earnest , really honest nature . And he was the kind of guy that I can relate to , as a male audience member I go , ' I like that guy . I would like to have a few beers with that guy ' … he has an earthy quality . " Describing the character , Hunnam stated : " When you meet me , in the beginning of the story , I 've suffered a giant loss . Not only has it killed my sense of self @-@ worth , but also my will to fight and keep on going . And then , Rinko and Idris , and a couple other people , bring me out of retirement to try to help with this grand push . I think that journey is a very relatable one . Everybody , at some point in their life , has fallen down and not felt like getting back up , but you have to , no matter how difficult it is . " Hunnam was also considered for the role of Prince <unk> in del Toro 's previous film , Hellboy II : The Golden Army . Paul Michael <unk> plays Raleigh as a child . 
 Idris Elba as Stacker Pentecost : 
 Raleigh 's commanding officer . On selecting Elba , del Toro stated : " This is a movie where I have had to deal with more dialogue than ever , and the way I cast the movie was — who do I want to hear say these things ? Who do I want Charlie Hunnam to go against ? Who can really tell Charlie Hunnam ' sit down and listen ' ? " In another interview , the director said : " I wanted to have Idris not be the blonde , square @-@ jawed , Anglo , super hip marine that knows [ everything ] . I wanted somebody that could bring a lot of authority , but that you could feel the weight of the world on his shoulders . When I watched Luther , that 's the essence of the character ... Luther is carrying literally the evils of the world on his shoulders . He 's doing penance for all humanity ... Idris is one of those actors that is capable of embodying humanity , in almost like a Rodin sculpture @-@ type , larger than life , almost like a Russian realism statue , you know , big hands , all the turmoil of humanity in his eyes . I wanted somebody that you could have doubts internally , and very few guys can do that . " To prepare for the role , Elba watched footage of politicians David Cameron and Barack Obama , as well as Russell Crowe in Gladiator and Mel Gibson in Braveheart . Del Toro initially offered the role to Tom Cruise , who declined because of scheduling conflicts . 
 Rinko Kikuchi as Mako Mori : 
 Raleigh 's co @-@ pilot who lost her family in a Kaiju attack . Though Mori possesses a strength and fury that should serve well against the Kaiju , Pentecost is reluctant to use her , partly because of a fatherly bond and partly because he knows she is still fighting the terror of her childhood . Del Toro stated : " I was very careful how I built the movie . One of the other things I decided was that I wanted a female lead who has the equal force as the male leads . She 's not going to be a sex kitten , she 's not going to come out in cutoff shorts and a tank top , and it 's going to be a real earnestly drawn character . " Noting that the other actors were exhausted and " destroyed physically " by filming in the intensive Jaeger cockpit harnesses , del Toro said : " The only one that didn 't break was Rinko Kikuchi , the girl . She never complained ... I asked Rinko her secret and she said ' I think of gummi bears and flowers . ' I try to do that in my life now . " Mana Ashida plays Mako as a child . 
 Charlie Day as Dr. Newton Geiszler : 
 A scientist studying the Kaiju . Day stated : " Certainly myself and Burn Gorman provide a little bit of much needed levity , it 's a break from the monsters and the guys fighting . But then the character gets thrust into the story in a way that his life is seriously at risk and it becomes a little more action oriented and a little more horror movie @-@ esque . So , he kinda bounces back between being humorous and also being real ... the rest of these guys , they look really good in their suits and they 've got abs , they can kick and fight and punch . Newt is sort of the ' everyman ' and he 's flawed and he 's arrogant . " Del Toro gave Geiszler the mentality of a celebrity chef , with tattoos and a " big personality " . According to the director , Day was cast based on his performance in an episode of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia : " He comes out with a stick , and he has a monologue about what it is to hunt the rats in the basement . It was very funny , but he was coming from character . He was not doing big stuff , he was , like , really mourning and lamenting his job , you know , how inhuman it is . And I thought , ' This guy is great at shading and comedy . ' There are moments in the movie where he delivers them both . " Trek <unk> portrays Geiszler as a child . 
 Max Martini as Herc Hansen : 
 Chuck 's father and co @-@ pilot . Kazinsky stated Martini hated the fact that he was cast as Chuck 's father , being only 13 years Kazinsky 's senior . However , Kazinsky said they developed a bond while filming , " Because we were working so tight together , we would finish and then we would go out for dinner every night and we would go to the gym together on days off we had ... The emotional scene toward the end with the father @-@ son parting , it was very easy for me to play because I had grown to actually genuinely love Max as a man and as a friend . " Kazinsky revealed that Herc and Chuck 's pet bulldog was del Toro 's idea and said , " The dog 's name was Max , ironically , and we ended up using Max for so many things . The story was that Herc and Chuck have difficulty communicating , that they communicated via the dog , and all the love that they couldn 't show each other they would show the dog . " The role was originally written for Ron Perlman , but del Toro decided the scenes between Perlman 's Herc and Hunnam 's Raleigh " might start to feel like Sons of Anarchy 2 @.@ 0 " . 
 Robert Kazinsky as Chuck Hansen : 
 An Australian Jaeger pilot considered the finest soldier left in the Resistance . He and his father pilot Striker Eureka , " the strongest and the fastest " Jaeger with eleven Kaiju kills , and make up the Resistance 's " go @-@ to team " . Kazinsky , a fan of science @-@ fiction , was initially drawn by the film 's concept , " My immediate reaction was ' Holy crap , that 's cool . ' In the hands of somebody else , you might sit there and go , ' Well , this might be terrible , ' but with del Toro doing it , you kind of go , ' This is going to be amazing . ' " . Reflecting on his experience in the film , Kazinsky said in an interview , " The most fun I have ever had in my entire life was Pacific Rim , playing Chuck was incredibly fun . " 
 Ron Perlman as Hannibal Chau : 
 A black marketeer who makes a living dealing Kaiju organs . Perlman stated , " I actually think this character was designed to be played by another ethnicity other than myself . And somewhere along the way , [ del Toro ] had the notion , ' Wouldn 't it be interesting to turn this guy into more of an invention . ' So , in other words , somebody takes on a persona that completely sounds like he 's someone else and acts like he 's someone else but he 's really , you know , as you see me . That added a dimension to the larger @-@ than @-@ life aspect of the character ... I 'm playing somebody very close to my own origins . But a completely made @-@ up persona ... which makes him even more full of shit . And I think that 's the charm of the guy — that he 's kind of elusive , hard to pin down . " Pacific Rim marks Perlman 's fifth appearance in a del Toro film . The director stated : " I think the moment you have a guy that is called Hannibal Chau and Ron shows up , and he 's from Brooklyn and he 's been selling black market organs , you know the whole story ... That 's all I need to know . If it 's any other actor , there 's a lot more explaining to do . But when Ron comes in with that look , you can make your own story and it 'll be as compelling as anything I can invent . You do a little weightlifting with the audience . " The bird tattoos on Chau 's fingers indicate his past as a gangster . In the film , Chau states he took the name from his favorite historical figure and his second @-@ favorite <unk> restaurant in Brooklyn . Del Toro drew inspiration from Burt Lancaster 's performance in Elmer Gantry when writing the character . 
 Clifton Collins , Jr. as Ops <unk> Choi : 
 A Chinese @-@ American Jaeger technician . Collins described his character as the " brains " behind the Jaegers . 
 Burn Gorman as Dr. Hermann Gottlieb : 
 A scientist studying the Kaiju alongside Geiszler . According to del Toro , Gottlieb is a " tweed @-@ wearing , English , phlegmatic introvert that never leaves the lab " . The modest Gottlieb resents Geiszler 's arrogance and radical behavior ; the duo echo the film 's theme of incompatible people functioning together when the time comes . Drew Adkins portrays Gottlieb as a child . 
 Diego Klattenhoff as Yancy Becket : 
 Raleigh 's older brother and co @-@ pilot . Klattenhoff joined the project to work with del Toro . Describing his character , <unk> stated : " This is a guy who is looking out for his very eager , younger brother and they were enabled with this gift that gave them the opportunity to kind of save the world . Or help , at least . " Tyler Stevenson plays Yancy as a child . 
 Ellen McLain as Gipsy Danger AI : 
 The voice of Gipsy Danger 's artificial intelligence system . Del Toro secured permission from Valve Corporation to cast McLain in homage to GLaDOS , her homicidal AI character in the Portal video games . The director stated : " It was clear to me that we needed something beautiful in that voice . My daughter is my wingman , we had done co @-@ op on Portal 2 for a long time and I did Portal 1 when it came out . It becomes ingrained in you , that voice . I didn 't want to use her as a negative force of evil . I called Valve and asked ' Can you give us the filter ? ' so we went full GLaDOS for the first commercial , but I thought it was too much . If you 're a gamer , it 's too distracting so we created our own GLaDOS 2 @.@ 0 filter that 's a little less full @-@ on . " 
 Additional Jaeger pilots include Charles Luu , Lance Luu and Mark Luu as the Wei Tang triplets ( China ) , and Robert Maillet and Heather <unk> as Sasha and <unk> <unk> ( Russia ) . Joe <unk> portrays Captain Merrit , the captain of a fishing boat caught in a battle between Jaeger and Kaiju . Santiago Segura plays an aide to Hannibal Chau . Brad William Henke and Larry Joe Campbell portray members of a construction team Raleigh joins after retiring from the Pan Pacific Defense Corps . Robin Thomas , Julian Barnes , and David Richmond @-@ Peck portray U.N. representatives from the United States , Great Britain , and Canada respectively . Sebastian Pigott appears as a Jaeger engineer and Joshua Peace appears as an officer , Jonathan <unk> appears as a frantic civilian . David Fox plays an old man on a beach , while Jane Watson portrays Raleigh and Yancy 's mother in a flashback sequence . Producer Thomas Tull makes a cameo appearance . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the film , a Jaeger 's neural load is too much for a single pilot to handle alone , meaning they must first be psychically linked to another pilot — a concept called " drifting " . When pilots drift , they quickly gain intimate knowledge of each other 's memories and feelings , and have no choice but to accept them ; del Toro found this concept 's dramatic potential compelling . The director expressed his intention that the empathy metaphors extend to real life : 
 The pilots ' smaller stories actually make a bigger point , which is that we 're all together in the same robot [ in life ] … Either we get along or we die . I didn 't want this to be a recruitment ad or anything jingoistic . The idea of the movie is just for us to trust each other , to cross over barriers of color , sex , beliefs , whatever , and just stick together . 
 Del Toro acknowledged this message 's simplicity , but said he would have liked to have seen adventure films with similar morals when he was a child . The film 's ten primary characters all have " little arcs " conducive to this idea ; del Toro stated : " I think that 's a great message to give kids ... ' That guy you were beating the shit out of ten minutes ago ? That 's the guy you have to work with five minutes later . ' That 's life ... We can only be complete when we work together . " The director noted that Hellboy and The Devil 's Backbone told the same message , though the latter conveyed it in a very different way . 
 The film centers on the relationship between Becket and Mori , but is not a love story in a conventional sense . Both are deeply damaged human beings who have decided to suppress their respective traumas . While learning to pilot their Jaeger , they undergo a process of " opening up " , gaining access to each other 's thoughts , memories and secrets . Their relationship is necessarily one of respect and " perfect trust " . Hunnam commented that the film is " a love story without a love story . It 's about all of the necessary elements of love without arriving at love itself " . Both Becket and Mori have suffered profound personal tragedies ; one of the script 's central ideas is that two damaged people can metaphorically " become one " , with their figurative missing pieces connecting almost like a puzzle . Del Toro emphasized the characters ' emotional intimacy by filming their training fight scene the way he would a sex scene . 
 Del Toro , a self @-@ described pacifist , avoided what he termed " car commercial aesthetics " or " army recruitment video aesthetics " , and gave the characters Western ranks including " marshal " and " ranger " rather than military ranks such as " captain " , " major " or " general " . The director stated : " I avoided making any kind of message that says war is good . We have enough firepower in the world . " Del Toro wanted to break from the mass death and destruction featured in contemporary blockbuster films , and made a point of showing the streets and buildings being evacuated before Kaiju attacks , ensuring that the destruction depicted is " completely remorseless " . The director stated : 
 I don 't want people being crushed . I want the joy that I used to get seeing Godzilla toss a tank without having to think there are guys in the tank … What I think is you could do nothing but echo the moment you 're in . There is a global anxiety about how fragile the status quo is and the safety of citizens , but in my mind — honestly — this film is in another realm . There is no correlation to the real world . There is no fear of a copycat Kaiju attack because a Kaiju saw it on the news and said , " I 'm going to destroy Seattle . " In my case , I 'm picking up a tradition . One that started right after World War II and was a coping mechanism , in a way , for Japan to heal the wounds of that war . And it 's integral for a Kaiju to rampage in the city . 
 Writing for the Los Angeles Review of Books , Wai Chee Dimock connected the film 's central theme of togetherness to its recurring image of missing shoes , stating the " utopian dream " driving the characters is 
 that puny humans like us could be " together " — not only in the specific neural melding that must take place between the two Jaeger co @-@ pilots but also , more generally speaking , in a fractal web of resemblance , filling the world with copies of ourselves at varying orders of magnitude and with varying degrees of re @-@ expression , beginning with the shoes on our feet . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In February 2006 , it was reported that Guillermo del Toro would direct Travis Beacham 's fantasy screenplay , Killing on Carnival Row , but the project never materialized . Beacham conceived Pacific Rim the following year . While walking on the beach near Santa Monica Pier , the screenwriter imagined a giant robot and a giant monster fighting to the death . " They just sort of materialized out of the fog , these vast , godlike things . " He later conceived the idea that each robot had two pilots , asking " what happens when one of those people dies ? " Deciding this would be " a story about loss , moving on after loss , and dealing with survivor 's guilt " , Beacham commenced writing the film . On May 28 , 2010 , it was reported that Legendary Pictures had purchased Beacham 's detailed 25 @-@ page film treatment , now titled Pacific Rim . 
 On July 28 , 2010 , it was reported that del Toro would next direct an adaptation of H. P. Lovecraft 's At the Mountains of Madness for Universal Studios , with James Cameron producing . When del Toro met with Legendary Pictures to discuss the possibility of collaborating with them on a film , he was intrigued by Beacham 's treatment — still a " very small pitch " at this point . Del Toro struck a deal with Legendary : while directing At the Mountains of Madness , he would produce and co @-@ write Pacific Rim ; because of the films ' conflicting production schedules , he would direct Pacific Rim only if At the Mountains of Madness were cancelled . Tom Cruise was attached to star in the Lovecraft adaptation . 
 On March 7 , 2011 , it was reported that Universal would not proceed with At the Mountains of Madness because del Toro was unwilling to compromise on the $ 150 million budget and R rating . The director later reflected , " When it happened , this has never happened to me , but I actually cried that weekend a lot . I don 't want to sound like a puny soul , but I really was devastated . I was weeping for the movie . " The project collapsed on a Friday , and del Toro signed to direct Pacific Rim the following Monday . 
 Del Toro spent a year working with Beacham on the screenplay , and is credited as co @-@ writer . He introduced ideas he had always wished to see in the genre , such as a Kaiju birth and a Kaiju attack seen from a child 's perspective . The script also received an uncredited rewrite from Neil Cross , who previously created the Idris Elba @-@ starring drama series Luther and wrote the del Toro @-@ produced horror film Mama . Patrick Melton and Marcus Dunstan were enlisted to perform uncredited rewrites when their spec script Monstropolis caught the filmmaker 's attention . Drew Pearce also carried out uncredited work on the script . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Filming began on November 14 , 2011 and continued in Toronto into April 2012 . Del Toro gave an update after the second week on filming finished . The film was referred to as Silent Seas and Still Seas during production . 
 Del Toro had never shot a film in less than 115 days , but had only 103 to shoot Pacific Rim . In order to achieve this , del Toro scheduled a splinter unit that he could direct early in the day , before main unit , and on his off @-@ days . The director worked 17 to 18 hours a day , seven days a week , for much of the schedule . Del Toro took a new approach to directing actors , allowing " looser " movements and improvisation ; the director maintained tight control over the production : " Everything , 100 % goes through me sooner or later . I do not delegate anything . Some people like it , some people don 't , but it has to be done that way . " 
 The film was shot using Red Epic cameras . At first Guillermo del Toro decided not to shoot or convert the film to 3D , as the effect would not work due to the sheer size of the film 's robots and monsters , explaining 
 I didn 't want to make the movie 3D because when you have things that big ... the thing that happens naturally , you 're looking at two buildings lets say at 300 feet [ away ] , if you move there is no parallax . They 're so big that , in 3D , you barely notice anything no matter how fast you move ... To force the 3D effects for robots and monsters that are supposed to be big you are making their [ perspective ] miniaturized , making them human scale . 
 It was later announced that the film would be converted to 3D , with the conversion taking 40 weeks longer than most . Del Toro said : " What can I tell you ? I changed my mind . I 'm not running for office . I can do a Romney . " 
 Del Toro cut approximately an hour of material from the film . The unused footage explored the characters and their arcs in greater detail , but the director felt it was necessary to strike a balance , stating : " We cannot pretend this is Ibsen with monsters and giant robots . I cannot pretend I 'm doing a profound reflection on mankind . " Each character 's arc was edited down to its minimal requirements . The director wanted to keep the film around two hours , particularly for younger viewers . Alejandro González Iñárritu and Alfonso Cuarón helped with the editing ; Iñárritu removed ten minutes of footage , while Cuarón removed " a few minutes " and rearranged several scenes . Iñárritu and Cuarón receive a " special thanks " in the film 's end credits , as do James Cameron and David Cronenberg . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Del Toro envisioned Pacific Rim as an earnest , colorful adventure story , with an " incredibly airy and light feel " , in contrast to the " super @-@ brooding , super @-@ dark , cynical summer movie " . The director focused on " big , beautiful , sophisticated visuals " and action that would satisfy an adult audience , but has stated his " real hope " is to introduce the Kaiju and mecha genres to a generation of children . While the film draws heavily on these genres , it avoids direct references to previous works . Del Toro intended to create something original but " madly in love " with its influences , instilled with " epic beauty " and " operatic grandeur " . The end credits dedicate the film to Ray Harryhausen and <unk> Honda , who helped to establish the giant monster genre with films such as The Beast from 20 @,@ 000 Fathoms and Godzilla respectively . 
 The film was to honor the Kaiju and mecha genres while creating an original stand @-@ alone film , something " conscious of the heritage , but not a pastiche or an homage or a greatest hits of everything " . The director made a point of starting from scratch , without emulating or referencing any previous examples of those genres . He cautioned his designers not to turn to films like Gamera , Godzilla , or The War of the <unk> for inspiration , stating : " I didn 't want to be postmodern , or referential , or just belong to a genre . I really wanted to create something new , something madly in love with those things . I tried to bring epic beauty to it , and drama and operatic grandeur . " Rather than popular culture , he drew inspiration from works of art such as The Colossus and George Bellows 's boxing paintings . The film 's designers include Wayne Barlowe , Oscar <unk> , monster sculptors David Meng and Simon Lee , and Hellboy II and The Hobbit designer Francisco Ruiz Velasco . Del Toro has acknowledged that some designs created for his cancelled At the Mountains of Madness adaptation may have been used in Pacific Rim . 
 Approximately one hundred Kaiju and one hundred Jaegers were designed , but only a fraction of these appear in the film ; every week the filmmakers would " do an American Idol " and vote for the best . In designing Kaiju , the film 's artists frequently drew inspiration from nature rather than other works . The director commented : " <unk> are essentially outlandish in a way , but on the other hand they come sort of in families : you 've got the reptilian Kaiju , the insect Kaiju , the sort of crustacean Kaiju ... So to take an outlandish design and then render it with an attention to real animal anatomy and detail is interesting . " Del Toro avoided making the Kaiju too similar to any Earth creatures , instead opting to make them otherworldly and alien . Del Toro called the film 's Kaiju " weapons " , stating that they are " the cleaning crew , the cats sent into the warehouse to clean out the mice . " Certain design elements are shared by all the Kaiju ; this is intended to suggest that they are connected and were designed for a similar purpose . Each Kaiju was given a vaguely humanoid silhouette to echo the man @-@ in @-@ suit aesthetic of early Japanese Kaiju films . While del Toro 's other films feature ancient or damaged monsters , the Kaiju lack scars or any evidence of prior culture , indicating that they are engineered creations rather than the result of an evolutionary system . 
 <unk> , the first Kaiju to appear in the film , is a tribute to the plodding kaiju of 1960s Japanese films , and is intended to look almost like a man in a rubber suit ; its head was inspired by that of a goblin shark . Leatherback , the bouncer @-@ like Kaiju which spews electro @-@ magnetic charges , is a favorite of del Toro , who conceived it as a " brawler with this sort of beer belly " ; the lumbering movements of gorillas were used as a reference . The Kaiju Otachi homages the dragons of Chinese mythology . The director called it a " Swiss army knife of a Kaiju " ; with almost 20 minutes of screen time , it was given numerous features so the audience would not tire of it . The creature moves like a Komodo dragon in water , sports multiple jaws and an acid @-@ filled neck sack , and unfurls wings when necessary . It is also more intelligent than the other Kaiju , employing eagle @-@ inspired strategies against the Jaegers . <unk> , the Kaiju that orphans Mako Mori , resembles a fusion of a Japanese temple and a crustacean . <unk> , the largest Kaiju , is distinguished by its extremely long neck and " half @-@ horn , half @-@ crown " head , which del Toro considered both demonic and majestic . 
 Gipsy Danger , the American Jaeger , was based on the shape of New York City 's Art Deco buildings , such as the Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building , but infused with John Wayne 's gunslinger gait and hip movements . Cherno Alpha , the Russian Jaeger , was based on the shape and paint patterns of a T @-@ series Russian tank , combined with a giant containment silo to give the appearance of a walking nuclear power plant with a cooling tower on its head . Crimson Typhoon , the three @-@ armed Chinese Jaeger , is piloted by triplets and resembles a " medieval little warrior " ; its texture evokes Chinese lacquered wood with golden edges . Striker Eureka , the Australian Jaeger , is likened by del Toro to a Land Rover ; the most elegant and masculine Jaeger , it has a jutting chest , a camouflage paint scheme recalling the Australian outback , and the bravado of its pilots . 
 The film 's costumes were designed by Shane Mahan and Kate Hawley , who spent several months on the costumes of the Jaeger pilots . The Russian pilot suits are old @-@ fashioned and echo cosmonaut space suits . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Industrial Light & Magic was chosen to the visual effects for Pacific Rim . Del Toro hired Oscar winners John Knoll and Hal T. Hickel , both known for their work on the Star Wars prequel trilogy and the Pirates of the Caribbean films . Legacy Effects co @-@ owner Shane Mahan , known for creating the armored suits for Iron Man , was tasked with building the suits , helmets and conn @-@ pods . Oscar winner Clay Pinney , known for his work on Independence Day and Star Trek , was also brought on board . <unk> Technologies , a division of Ubisoft , and Rodeo FX also contributed to the visual effects . 
 Del Toro conceived the film as an operatic work : 
 That was one of the first words I said to the entire team at ILM . I said , " This movie needs to be theatrical , operatic , romantic . " We used a lot of words not usually associated with high @-@ tech blockbusters ... We went for a very , very , very , very saturated color palette for the battle for Hong Kong . I kept asking John to tap into his inner Mexican and be able to saturate the greens and the purples and the pinks and the oranges . 
 The classic Japanese woodblock print The Great Wave off Kanagawa by Hokusai was a common motif in the ocean battles ; Del Toro recalled , " I would say ' Give me a Hokusai wave ' … we use the waves and weather in the movie very operatically . " The director asked that Knoll not necessarily match the lighting from shot to shot : " It 's pretty unorthodox to do that , but I think the results are really beautiful and very artistically free and powerful , not something you would associate with a big sci @-@ fi action movie . " Del Toro considers the film 's digital water its most exciting visual effect : " The water dynamics in this movie are technically beautiful , but also artistically incredibly expressive . We agreed on making the water become almost another character . We would time the water very precisely . I 'd say ' Get out of the wave [ on this frame ] . ' " 
 The film also features extensive miniature effect shots provided by 32TEN Studios , under the supervision of ILM VFX Producer Susan Greenhow and ILM VFX Supervisors John Knoll and Lindy <unk> . Shot using RED Epic cameras on 3D rigs , the scenes produced by 32TEN involved the creation of a ¼ scale office building interior which was destroyed by the fist of a Jaeger robot which was on a separate pneumatically controlled rig , as well as a sequence which depicted several rows of seats in a soccer stadium being blown apart as a Jaeger lands in the stadium , which was created by using ¼ -scale seats blown apart by air cannons . Additionally 32TEN provided several practical elements for ILM ’ s compositing team including dust clouds , breaking glass and water effects . 
 = = Video game = = 
 A single @-@ player fighting video game based on the film was announced by the Australian Classification Board for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . Published and developed by Yuke 's , Pacific Rim : The Video Game was released along with the film on July 12 , 2013 . The game received generally negative reviews . Reliance Games developed a Pacific Rim tie @-@ in game for smartphone platforms , such as iOS and Android devices ; this version also received negative reviews . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Ramin Djawadi . Del Toro selected Djawadi based on his works on Prison Break , Iron Man , and Game of Thrones , stating : " His scores have a grandeur , but they have also an incredible sort of human soul . " The director also stated that some Russian rap would be featured in the film . The soundtrack was released on digital download from Amazon on June 18 , 2013 and CD on June 25 , 2013 . The physical version of the soundtrack was released on July 9 , 2013 by WaterTower Music , three days before the theatrical release of the film itself . Guest musicians Tom Morello and Priscilla Ahn also feature as soloists on the score . Two songs appear in the film which are not included on the soundtrack are " Just Like Your Tenderness " by Luo <unk> , and the ending theme " Drift " , performed by Blake Perlman featuring <unk> . The OST received mostly positive reviews . The Action Elite rated the album with a perfect five stars , the Empire gave four , while MSN and Filmtracks also gave the soundtrack four out of five stars . On July 27 , 2013 , the soundtrack was appeared at peak position number 7 on " US Billboard Top Soundtracks . " 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 On November 28 , 2012 , the official film website premiered alongside two viral videos — one depicting the initial Kaiju attack as captured by a handheld camera . Blueprints depicting the designs for the Jaeger machines were also released online . On June 5 , 2013 , the graphic novel Pacific Rim : Tales from Year Zero was released . Written by Travis Beacham and featuring cover art by Alex Ross , Tales from Year Zero serves as an introductory prologue to the film , and is set twelve years before its events . On June 18 , Insight Editions published Pacific Rim : Man , Machines , and Monsters , an art book written by David S. Cohen . The book chronicles the film 's production with concept art , photography , the cast and crew 's accounts of the shoot , and a foreword by del Toro . On July 2 , a viral video was released in which Ron Perlman 's character , Hannibal Chau , advertises his fictional Kaiju organ dealership , Kaiju Remedies . 
 On the day of the film 's release , July 12 , 2013 , another viral video was released to promote the film . It involved the collaboration of the film studio ( including del Toro himself ) and the YouTube network Polaris ( also known as The Game Station ) . It featured members of the YouTube network ( such as the Game <unk> ) as Jaeger pilots fighting Kaiju . On July 16 , a novelization by Alex Irvine was released . NECA began selling action figures of the film 's Kaiju and Jaegers . 
 = = Release = = 
 Pacific Rim was initially expected to reach theaters in July 2012 . However , Warner Bros. decided to postpone the film 's release date to May 10 , 2013 . In March 2012 , it was announced that the film would be released on July 12 , 2013 . The film premiered in Mexico City on July 1 , 2013 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Pacific Rim grossed $ 101 @.@ 8 million in North America , and has had a favorable international release , grossing $ 309 @.@ 2 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 411 @,@ 002 @,@ 906 . 
 The film grossed $ 3 @.@ 6 million from Thursday night showings , 23 percent of which came from IMAX showings . It then faced competition from Grown Ups 2 and ultimately fell behind it on opening day , earning $ 14 @.@ 6 million . The film reached the # 3 spot during the opening weekend with $ 37 @.@ 2 million , behind Despicable Me 2 and Grown Ups 2 . This is the highest ever opening for a film by del Toro , surpassing Hellboy II : The Golden Army . Around 50 percent of tickets were in 3D , which makes it the second highest 3D share of 2013 , behind Gravity . During its second weekend , the film dropped a steep 57 % with a gross of $ 16 million , and during its third weekend , had dropped a further 52 % with a gross of $ 7 @.@ 7 million . 
 On July 22 , 2013 , it was reported that the film had reached # 1 at the international box office over the weekend . The film had a successful opening in China , grossing $ 45 @.@ 2 million , until overtaken by The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies the largest opening in China for a Warner Bros. title , and the sixth @-@ largest Chinese debut of all time for any Hollywood film . On August 19 , 2013 , its gross crossed $ 100 million in China alone , becoming the sixth @-@ highest grossing American film ever in China . It grossed a total of $ 114 @.@ 3 million in the country , making China the largest market for the film . In Japan , the film landed in the fifth position on opening weekend , with an initial earning of $ 3 million ( behind World War Z 's gross of $ 3 @.@ 4 million ) . 
 In September 2013 , Forbes highlighted Pacific Rim as " the rare English @-@ language film in history to cross $ 400 million while barely crossing $ 100 million domestic " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Pacific Rim received generally positive reviews from critics . Review aggregation website Metacritic gives a rating of 64 out of 100 based on reviews from 48 critics , which indicates " generally favorable " reviews . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 71 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 259 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " It may sport more style than substance , but Pacific Rim is a solid modern creature feature bolstered by fantastical imagery and an irresistible sense of fun . " 
 The Daily Telegraph 's Robbie Collin awarded the film five stars out of five , likening the experience of watching it to rediscovering a favorite childhood cartoon . He praised del Toro for investing his own affection for the genre and sense of artistry into the project in such a way that the viewer found themselves immersed in the film rather than watching from afar , noting the director had catered to younger and older audiences alike and expressed surprise that the film could rise above the sum of its parts . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave a positive review , describing the film as the sum of the potential every monster film had ever tried to fulfill . Lou Lumenick of The New York Post gave the film four stars out of four , and said it had " no shortage of brains , brawn , eye candy , wit and even some poetry " , praising the " clean and coherent " action sequences and the " terrific chemistry " between Hunnam and Kikuchi . Drew McWeeny of HitFix highlighted other aspects of the film , paying particular attention to the production and art design . He also praised the cinematography for " perfectly capturing " the film , and described the score as " ridiculously cool " . Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers called the film " the work of a humanist ready to banish cynicism for compassion " , saying that del Toro " drives the action with a heartbeat " . Keith Uhlich of Time Out called the film " pure , pleasurable comic @-@ book absurdity " , and noted that del Toro had lent the proceedings a " plausible humanity " lacking in most of summer 2013 's destruction @-@ heavy blockbusters . He said the <unk> ' civilian victims make a " palpably personal impression " , deeming one scene with Mako Mori " as <unk> moving as anything in the mecha anime , like Neon Genesis Evangelion , that the director emulates with expert aplomb . " The Village Voice 's Stephanie Zacharek called it " summer entertainment with a pulse " , praising its " <unk> brilliant " action and freedom from elitism , but noted the story is predictable and suggested del Toro 's time would be better spent on more visionary films . Angela Watercutter of Wired called it the " most awesome movie of the summer " , a " fist @-@ pumping , awe @-@ inspiring ride " , and opined that its focus on spectacle rather than characterization " simply does not matter " in the summer blockbuster context . Richard Roeper gave the film a B , commenting that either the Jaegers or Kaiju " can take down any of the Transformers . " Leonard Maltin gave the film two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , calling it " three @-@ quarters of a really good movie that doesn 't know when to quit . " 
 The Guardian 's Andrew Pulver was less enthusiastic , calling the film a mix of " wafer @-@ thin psychodrama " and " plot @-@ generator dialogue " . Time 's Richard Corliss said the action was let down by " inert " drama , describing the film as " 45 minutes of awesome encased in 90 minutes of <unk> . " Justin Chang of Variety criticized it as loud and lacking the nuance and subtlety of del Toro 's previous films . The New Yorker 's Anthony Lane 's verdict read as " It is possible to applaud Pacific Rim for the efficacy of its business model while deploring the tale that has been engendered — long , loud , dark , and very wet . You might as well watch the birth of an elephant . " The San Francisco Chronicle 's Mike LaSalle reacted extremely negatively by stating " If this is the best we can do in terms of movies - if something like this can speak to the soul of audiences - maybe we should just turn over the cameras and the equipment to the alien dinosaurs and see what they come up with ... Director Guillermo del Toro , who gave us Pan 's Labyrinth not too many years ago , used to be known as an artistic and discerning filmmaker , despite his affection for blockbuster action and grotesqueness . But too often he gets lost in his computer ... Why go to the movies to look at somebody else 's computer after looking at your own all week ? ... The actors can 't make Pacific Rim any better . They can only relieve some of the pain . " Slant Magazine 's Ed Gonzalez , who said the film lacked poignancy , compared it to a video game : " a stylish but programmatic ride toward an inevitable final boss battle " . The Wrap 's Alonso Duralde criticized the choice to set most battles at night or during the rain , feeling it detracted from the action , and said the comic relief actors — Day , Gorman , and Perlman — stole the film from the less interesting leads . Jordan Hoffman of Film.com identified Hunnam as the weak link in the cast , calling him a " charisma black hole " . Giles Hardie of The Sydney Morning Herald was particularly critical of the film , awarding the action sequences " five IQ points out of five " as he described the film as an hour and twenty minutes of fight sequences vaguely connected by ten minutes of story . 
 Director Rian Johnson praised the film , as did Japanese game director Hideo Kojima , who called it the " ultimate otaku film " and stated he " never imagined [ he ] would be fortunate enough to see a film like this in [ his ] life " . Go Nagai , who pioneered the idea of mecha piloted from an interior cockpit , praised the film 's fun and intense action , while game developer Fumito Ueda said its battle scenes surpassed memories of the tokusatsu films he saw as an impressionable child . Science fiction author William Gibson called the film " A ravishing display of intelligent , often wonderfully witty visual design , every frame alive with coherent language , in the service of what is at heart a children 's story ... A baroque that doesn 't <unk> , that never <unk> itself . " 
 The inclusion of only one female character of note resulted in Pacific Rim not passing the Bechdel test . This became a topic of discussion in the media and on the Internet . Opinions were divided between those pointing to the film as an example of Hollywood 's practice of <unk> women , and those noting that the film did not sexually objectify Mako Mori and gave her a narrative arc not revolving around a man . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Pacific Rim became available for download on the iTunes Store and Vudu on October 1 , 2013 . The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc in the USA on October 15 , 2013 , and in the UK and other countries on November 25 , 2013 . A collector 's edition was also available on the same date . To help promote the home media release , Bryan Harley and Roque Rodriguez of Fresno , California , produced a " <unk> " version of the film 's Gipsy Danger vs. Otachi battle scene , after del Toro was impressed by the duo 's " <unk> " trailer released on YouTube in March 2013 . As of March 2014 , Pacific Rim has sold 961 @,@ 845 DVDs along with 1 @,@ 427 @,@ 692 Blu @-@ ray discs in the United States for $ 10 @,@ 045 @,@ 530 and $ 24 @,@ 634 @,@ 992 in revenue respectively for a total of $ 37 @,@ 079 @,@ 122 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 In July 2012 , del Toro discussed the possibility of making a Pacific Rim sequel . " We always leave ideas that were in the first draft as you go along . You know , either a set piece that was great but too expensive , an idea that was really bright , but it couldn 't quite fit the structure ... so we have a little stash of stuff we wanted to do that we didn 't get to do . So if that 's a possibility , A ) I would be very happy to do a sequel , but B ) a lot of these ideas , set pieces and all that , actually have in them a really good seed for a sequel . " On December 4 , Legendary Pictures announced that it had selected Pacific Rim co @-@ writer Travis Beacham to write the sequel , along with del Toro , though there was no comment as to whether del Toro would return to direct the second film . At WonderCon 2013 , del Toro expressed enthusiasm for a potential crossover between Pacific Rim and Godzilla — another Legendary Pictures Kaiju film — but stressed that no such plans were in place . In July 2013 , del Toro discussed the sequel , stating : " The main idea that we 're bouncing off is the fact that Newt drifted with a Kaiju brain , and all Kaiju brains are connected . We say that . They are like a hive mentality . So , you know , draw your own conclusions . " The director has also stated the sequel will feature " Gipsy 2 @.@ 0 " , as well as a " merging of Kaiju and Jaeger " . In October 2013 , del Toro revealed that he and Beacham would return to write the sequel , despite the film not yet being greenlit at the time . 
 In June 2014 , when the sequel was still unconfirmed , del Toro stated that he had secretly been working on the script with Zak Penn for several months and confirmed that Raleigh and Mako would return . Beacham initially developed the storyline with del Toro , but dropped out to work on the TV series <unk> . Later in June 2014 , del Toro confirmed that he would direct the sequel , and that it would be released by Universal Studios , Legendary 's new financing and distribution partner , on April 7 , 2017 . A non @-@ episodic animated series connecting both films and a continuation of the graphic novel were also announced . On July 9 , del Toro announced that the design production for Pacific Rim 2 would start in August 2014 , and that scouting for the location would take place in July 2015 , with principal photography commencing in November that year . 
 In October 2014 , del Toro talked about beginning production for Pacific Rim 2 in late 2015 , and also mentioned the possibility of a third installment . The next month , del Toro confirmed that the sequel will not be an immediate follow @-@ up and will take place years after the first film , focusing on the aftermath of the Kaiju war and fate of the Jaeger technology . Del Toro additionally confirmed that the characters for Charlie Day and Burn Gorman will return , with the sequel set to feature " very different " types of Jaegers and Kaiju and that the film will be " quite a different adventure " . 
 In January 2015 , Penn revealed that film 's sequel will focus on the origins of Kaiju . In April 2015 , Legendary announced that the sequel film 's release date has been moved to August 4 , 2017 . Filming was expected to begin in November 2015 at Toronto 's Pinewood Studios with the working title Maelstrom . 
 On September 16 , 2015 , the sequel was reported to have been " halted indefinitely " due to conflicts between Legendary and Universal Studios ; however , Del Toro later clarified that the sequel was simply " moved further " and the film will continue to proceed , stating , " We are still turning in a screenplay and a budget in three weeks . As far as I ’ m concerned , it ’ s not gone . We ’ re still on it . " On September 29 , 2015 , Universal removed the sequel from their release calendar but confirmed that the sequel is still moving forward , stating that the extra time will be used to ensure the sequel is the " vanguard , fully @-@ immersive experience that the franchise deserves . " Del Toro expressed interest in casting Maisie Williams in the film . Del Toro later tweeted that the budget and the script of the film are finished . In February 2016 , it was announced that Steven S. DeKnight will direct the sequel , making it his feature film directorial debut , while del Toro will serve as a producer . They also announced that they are working on a possible Pacific Rim 3 script in the future . On June 6 , 2016 , John <unk> announced that he would serve as the lead for Pacific Rim 2 as the son of Stacker Pentecost , and that his own production company would co @-@ produce . At the end of the month , Deadline.com reported that Scott Eastwood was in early negotiations to join the cast in a key role . A new release date of February 23 , 2018 was confirmed by the studio on June 30 , 2016 . Ars Technica reported on July 20 , 2016 that the screenwriters for the new film were Emily Carmichael and Kira Snyder . 
 = USS Alabama ( BB @-@ 8 ) = 
 USS Alabama ( BB @-@ 8 ) was an Illinois @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the United States Navy . She was the second ship of her class , and the second to carry her name . Her keel was laid in December 1896 at the William Cramp and Sons shipyard , and she was launched in May 1898 . She was commissioned into the fleet in October 1900 . The ship was armed with a main battery of four 13 @-@ inch ( 330 mm ) guns and she had a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . 
 Alabama spent the first seven years of her career in the North Atlantic Fleet conducting peacetime training . In 1904 , she made a visit to Europe and toured the Mediterranean . She took part in the cruise of the Great White Fleet until damage to her machinery forced her to leave the cruise in San Francisco . She instead completed a shorter circumnavigation in company with the battleship Maine . The ship received an extensive modernization from 1909 to 1912 , after which she was used as a training ship in the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . She continued in this role during World War I. After the war , Alabama was stricken from the naval register and allocated to bombing tests that were conducted in September 1921 . She was sunk in the tests by US Army Air Service bombers and later sold for scrap in March 1924 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Alabama was 374 feet ( 114 m ) long overall and had a beam of 72 ft 3 in ( 22 @.@ 02 m ) and a draft of 23 ft 6 in ( 7 @.@ 16 m ) . She displaced 11 @,@ 565 long tons ( 11 @,@ 751 t ) as designed and up to 12 @,@ 250 long tons ( 12 @,@ 450 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 16 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) and eight coal @-@ fired fire @-@ tube boilers , generating a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . As built , she was fitted with heavy military masts , but these were replaced by cage masts in 1909 . She had a crew of 536 officers and enlisted men , which increased to 690 – 713 . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 13 in ( 330 mm ) / 35 caliber guns guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of fourteen 6 in ( 152 mm ) / 40 caliber Mark IV guns , which were placed in casemates in the hull . For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , she carried sixteen 6 @-@ pounder guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and six 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , Alabama carried four 18 in ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes in deck mounted launchers . 
 Alabama 's main armored belt was 16 @.@ 5 in ( 419 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 4 in ( 102 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets had 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had 15 in ( 381 mm ) of armor plating on their exposed sides . Armor that was 6 in thick protected the secondary battery . The conning tower had 10 in ( 254 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Alabama was laid down at the William Cramp & Sons shipyard in Philadelphia on 2 December 1896 and was launched on 18 May 1898 . She was commissioned on 16 October 1900 , the first member of her class to enter service . The ship 's first commander was Captain Willard H. Brownson . Alabama was assigned to the North Atlantic Squadron , though she remained at Philadelphia until 13 December , when she made a visit to New York , where she remained through January 1901 . On the 27th , Alabama steamed south for the Gulf of Mexico , where she joined the rest of the North Atlantic Squadron for training exercises off Pensacola , Florida . For the next six years , she followed a pattern of fleet training in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean during the winter , followed by repairs and then operations off the east coast of the United States from the middle of the year onward . The only interruption came in 1904 , when she , the battleships Kearsarge , Maine , and Iowa , and the protected cruisers Olympia , Baltimore , and Cleveland made a visit to southern Europe . During the trip , they stopped in Lisbon , Portugal , before touring the Mediterranean until mid @-@ August . They then recrossed the Atlantic , stopping in the Azores while en route , and arrived in Newport , Rhode Island on 29 August . Toward the end of September , Alabama went into dry dock at the League Island Navy Yard for repairs , which were completed by early December . On 31 July 1906 , the ship was involved in a collision with her sister Illinois . 
 Alabama 's next significant action was the cruise of the Great White Fleet around the world , which started with a naval review for President Theodore Roosevelt in Hampton Roads . On 17 December , the fleet steamed out of Hampton Roads and cruised south to the Caribbean and then to South America , making stops in Port of Spain , Rio de Janeiro , Punta Arenas , and Valparaíso , among other cities . After arriving in Mexico in March 1908 , the fleet spent three weeks conducting gunnery practice . The fleet then resumed its voyage up the Pacific coast of the Americas , stopping in San Francisco , where Alabama was detached from the rest of the fleet . The ship could not keep up with the fleet due to a cracked cylinder head , which necessitated repairs at the Mare Island Navy Yard . The battleship Maine also left the fleet , as her boilers had proved to be badly inefficient , requiring excessive amounts of coal . 
 On 8 June , Alabama and Maine began their crossing of the Pacific independently , via Honolulu , Hawaii , Guam , and Manila in the Philippines . They then cruised south to Singapore in August and crossed the Indian Ocean , stopping in Colombo , Ceylon , and Aden on the Arabian peninsula on the way . The ships then steamed through the Mediterranean , stopping only in Naples , Italy , before calling at Gibraltar and then proceeding across the Atlantic in early October . They stopped in the Azores before arriving off the east coast of the United States on 19 October ; the two ships then parted company , with Alabama steaming to New York , while Maine went to Portsmouth , New Hampshire . Both ships arrived the following day . Following her arrival , Alabama was reduced to reserve status on 3 November . She remained in New York , and on 17 August 1909 , she was decommissioned for a major overhaul that lasted until early 1912 . 
 Alabama returned to service on 17 April 1912 in the Atlantic Reserve Fleet , under Commander Charles F. Preston . The ships of the Atlantic Reserve Fleet — which included eight other battleships and three cruisers — were kept in service with reduced crews that could be fleshed out with naval militiamen and volunteers in the event of an emergency . There were enough officers and men in the Atlantic Reserve Fleet to fully man two or three ships , which allowed them to take them to sea in rotating groups to ensure that the ships were in good condition . On 25 July , Alabama was temporarily placed in full commission for service with the Atlantic Fleet during the summer training exercises , before returning to reserve status on 10 September . In mid @-@ 1913 , the Navy began to use the Atlantic Reserve Fleet to train naval militia units . Alabama operated off the east coast of the United States and made two training cruises to Bermuda that summer to train men from the naval militias of several states . These operations ended on 2 September , and on 31 October she was again laid up . 
 The ship remained largely inactive in Philadelphia for the next three years . On 22 January 1917 , she became a receiving ship for naval recruits . Alabama was transferred to the southern Chesapeake to begin training recruits in the middle of March . Shortly thereafter , on 6 April , the United States declared war on Germany . Two days later , Alabama became the flagship of the 1st Division , Atlantic Fleet , and for the rest of the war she continued her training mission of the east coast of the United States . During this period , she made one cruise to the Gulf of Mexico from late June to early July 1918 . On 11 November , Germany signed the Armistice that ended the fighting in Europe ; Alabama continued training naval recruits , though at a reduced level of intensity . She took part in fleet maneuvers in February and March 1919 in the West Indies before returning to Philadelphia in April for repairs . A summer training cruise for midshipmen from the US Naval Academy followed ; Alabama departed Philadelphia on 28 May bound for Annapolis , where she arrived the next day . After taking on a contingent of 184 midshipmen , she steamed out of Annapolis on 9 June . The cruise went to the West Indies and passed through the Panama Canal and back . By mid @-@ July , the ship was cruising off the coast of New England . She returned south in August for maneuvers , and at the end of the month she returned the midshipmen to Annapolis before docking in Philadelphia . 
 = = = Bombing tests = = = 
 Alabama was decommissioned for the final time on 7 May 1920 , having spent the previous nine months inactive at Philadelphia . The ship was transferred to the War Department for use as a target ship on 15 September 1921 , and she was stricken from the naval register . She was allocated to bombing tests conducted by the US Army Air Service on 27 September 1921 , under the supervision of General Billy Mitchell . In addition to Alabama , the old battleships New Jersey and Virginia were to be sunk in the tests . The first phase of the testing began on 23 September , and included tests with chemical bombs , including tear gas and white phosphorus , to demonstrate how such weapons could be used to disable command and control systems and kill exposed personnel . That night , another test with 300 @-@ pound ( 140 kg ) demolition bombs took place , the purpose of which was to determine whether flares could sufficiently illuminate a target for precise bombing . The second phase took place the next morning , and it was a much larger operation . The 1st Provisional Air Brigade took part in the tests , which were to simulate a combat scenario . A group of eight Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s , armed with 25 lb ( 11 kg ) bombs attacked first ; their bombs and machine gun fire were intended to simulate clearing the decks of anti @-@ aircraft gunners in preparation for the heavy bombers . Four Martin NBS @-@ 1 bombers attacked next , with 300 lb bombs at an altitude of 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) . Two of the bombs hit the deck toward the bow . Three more NBS @-@ 1s followed with 1 @,@ 100 lb ( 500 kg ) armor @-@ piercing bombs , though none of these hit . 
 On 25 September , the last round of tests took place . Seven more NBS @-@ 1s attacked the ship ; three carried 1 @,@ 100 lb bombs , while the other four carried one 2 @,@ 000 lb ( 910 kg ) bomb each . One of the 2 @,@ 000 lb bombs landed close to the ship on the port side ; the mining effect caused considerable damage , and Alabama began listing to port . The bombers scored two more near @-@ misses with the 2 @,@ 000 lb bombs , followed by a direct hit and two near misses with the 1 @,@ 100 lb bombs . The last bomb , a 2 @,@ 000 lb weapon , struck the ship at her stern . The blast broke her anchor chains , and the battered ship began to drift toward the wrecks of San Marcos and Indiana , the latter having been sunk in bombing tests earlier that year . The ship remained afloat for another two days before finally sinking in shallow water on 27 September . Mitchell attempted to use the sinking as evidence of the predominance of the bomber in his efforts to secure an independent Air Force , though the Navy pointed out that the ship was stationary , undefended , unmanned , and was not protected with the latest " all or nothing " armor scheme . The sunken wreck was sold for scrap on 19 March 1924 . 
 = Lobe den Herrn , meine Seele , BWV 143 = 
 Lobe den Herrn , meine Seele ( Praise the Lord , my soul ) , BWV 143 , is an early cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . It is not known if he composed the cantata for New Year 's Day in Mühlhausen or Weimar , as the date of composition is unclear . 
 An unknown librettist drew mainly from Psalm 146 and from Jakob Ebert 's hymn " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ " to develop seven movements , supplying only two of the movements himself . The text assembly is similar to Bach 's early cantatas . Bach 's authorship is doubted because the cantata has several features unusual for Bach 's later cantatas : it is the only Bach cantata to combine three corni da caccia with timpani . The cantata is in seven movements which combine the three major text sources : psalm , hymn and contemporary poetry . The opening chorus is based on a psalm verse , followed by the first hymn stanza and another psalm verse as a recitative . An aria on poetry is followed by a third psalm verse as an aria . It is followed by another aria on poetry , which simultaneously quotes the hymn tune instrumentally . The last movement combines elements of a chorale fantasia on the third stanza of the hymn , with vivid counterpoint of " Hallelujah " which closes the psalm . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach wrote the cantata for New Year 's Day , which is also the Feast of the Circumcision of Christ . The prescribed readings for the day were from the Epistle to the Galatians , " by faith we inherit " ( Galatians 3 : 23 – 29 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , the circumcision and naming of Jesus eight days after his birth . However , most of the text for the cantata was taken by the unknown librettist from Psalms 146 , and from Jakob Ebert 's hymn " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ " , written in 1601 . 
 The text is compiled from psalm verses ( verse 1 for movement 1 , verse 5 for movement 3 , and verse 10 for movement 5 ) , and two stanzas from the hymn , the first as movement 2 , the third as the final movement . Only movements 4 and 6 are free poetry , with the hymn tune sounding again instrumentally during movement 6 . Due to its text structure , the Bach scholar Christoph Wolff dates the work to around 1710 . 
 The oldest ( and also the only ) manuscript was written in 1762 , after Bach 's death . The provenance of the cantata is disputed : some suggest that it may not be a Bach work because of its " unpretentious " nature and the lack of authoritative original music , or perhaps it was a transposition of an earlier work . Alternatively , part of the cantata may have been written by Bach , while other parts ( likely the choruses and the bass aria ) were added or amended by other composers . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , remarks on the stylistic similarity of the text structure to Bach 's early cantatas written in Mühlhausen . He also sees similar musical expression to the cantata for the inauguration of a new town council there , Gott ist mein König , BWV 71 , written in 1708 . While some musicologists assume that it may have been composed for the same occasion one year later , Gardiner proposes that it could either be a still earlier work , or that it " was , at least in part , an apprentice piece written in Weimar under Bach 's direct tutelage . 
 Bach 's biographer Philipp Spitta had written that the cantata was first performed on New Year 's Day of 1735 . However , according to more recent research , it was not performed at all that day , but rather Part IV of the Christmas Oratorio . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata is scored festively for three vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , tenor ( T ) , and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of three corni da caccia ( Co ) , timpani ( Ti , listed with the winds ) , bassoon ( Fg ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . It is the only Bach cantata to combine three corni da caccia with timpani . 
 The cantata is structured in seven movements . It begins with a chorus on a verse from the psalm , followed by the first stanza from the hymn , sung by the soprano . Another psalm verse is rendered as a tenor recitative , followed by a tenor aria on free poetry . A third psalm verse is set as a bass aria , answered by another tenor aria on free poetry with an instrumental quotation of the hymn tune . The cantata is closed by a hybrid movement which combines like a chorale fantasia the third stanza of the hymn as cantus firmus with a vivid counterpoint of " Hallelujah " closing the psalm . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The opening chorus on the first verse of the psalm , " Lobe den Herrn , meine Seele " ( Praise the Lord , my soul . ) , is quite short , using imitative fanfare figures without much harmonic development . It employs a ritornello theme on the tonic and dominant chords , incorporating a descending @-@ third sequence . The voices sing mostly in homophony . 
 The soprano chorale , " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ " ( O Prince of peace , Lord Jesus Christ ) , is accompanied by a violin obbligato . Although the vocal line is mostly undecorated , it is accompanied by a rhythmically active violin counterpoint following the circle of fifths . The obbligato line reaches a double cadence before the soprano entrance . 
 The tenor recitative on another verse from the psalm , " Wohl dem , des <unk> der Gott Jakob ist " ( It is fortunate for him , whose help the God of Jacob is ) , is quite short and is considered unremarkable . 
 The fourth movement is a tenor aria in free verse , " <unk> <unk> , <unk> " ( Thousand @-@ fold misfortune , terror ) . The vocal line is " convoluted and angular " , reflecting the themes of misfortune , fear and death . The musicologist Julian Mincham suggests that these themes suggest that Salomon Franck may be the poet , as these were recurrent images in his texts , but also notes a lack of integration atypical of Franck 's oeuvre . 
 The bass aria on the tenth verse from the psalm , " Der Herr ist König <unk> " ( The Lord is King eternally ) , employs a triadic motif similar to that of Gott ist mein König , BWV 71 . It is short and has a limited range of tonal development or chromatic variation . The voice is accompanied by the horns and timpani , <unk> strings , illustrating God 's power . 
 The sixth movement is another tenor aria on free poetry , " Jesu , <unk> deiner <unk> " ( Jesus , saver of Your flock ) , characterized by the layered scale figuration in the instrumental accompaniment . The voice , bassoon and continuo perform as a trio , while the chorale tune is heard in the violins and organ with the Vox <unk> stop . 
 The closing chorus employs the third stanza of the chorale , " <unk> , Herr , <unk> an dein Amt " ( Think , Lord , at this time on Your office ) , as a cantus firmus in the soprano . It is not composed as the typical four @-@ part setting , but the lower voices sing lively contrasting Alleluia , derived from the psalm . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Frankfurter Kantorei / Bach @-@ Collegium Stuttgart . Die Bach Kantate . Hänssler , 1975 . 
 Thomanerchor / Neues <unk> Collegium Musicum . Kantaten Mit Corno da Caccia . Eterna , 1984 . 
 Monteverdi Choir / English Baroque Soloists . Bach Cantatas vol . 17 . Soli deo Gloria , 2000 . 
 Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir . J.S. Bach : Complete Cantatas . Antoine Marchand , 2001 . 
 = Off the Wall ( album ) = 
 Off the Wall is the fifth studio album by American singer Michael Jackson . It is his debut studio album released through Epic Records . It was released on August 10 , 1979 , following Jackson 's critically well @-@ received film performance in The Wiz . While working on that project , Jackson and Quincy Jones had become friends , and Jones agreed to work with Jackson on his next studio album . Recording sessions took place between December 1978 and June 1979 at Allen Zentz Recording , Westlake Recording Studios , and Cherokee Studios in Los Angeles , California . Jackson collaborated with a number of other writers and performers such as Paul McCartney , Stevie Wonder and Rod Temperton . Five singles were released from the album . Three of the singles had music videos released . Jackson wrote three of the songs himself , including the number @-@ one Grammy @-@ winning single " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . It was his first solo release under Epic Records , the label he would record on until his death roughly 30 years later . 
 The record was a departure from Jackson 's previous work for Motown . The lyrical themes on the record relate to escapism , liberation , loneliness , hedonism and romance . Several critics observed that Off the Wall was crafted from funk , disco , soft rock , jazz , broadway and pop ballads . Jackson received positive reviews for his vocal performance on the record . The record gained critical acclaim and recognition and won the singer his first Grammy Award . With Off the Wall , Jackson became the first solo artist to have four singles from the same album peak inside the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was an enormous commercial success ; as of 2014 it is certified eight times platinum in the United States and has reportedly sold more than 20 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best selling albums of all time . 
 On October 16 , 2001 , a special edition reissue of Off the Wall was released by Sony Records . It was re @-@ released on February 26 , 2016 . Recent reviews by AllMusic and Blender have continued to praise Off the Wall for its appeal in the 21st century . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 68 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The National Association of Recording Merchandisers listed it at number 80 of the Definitive 200 Albums of All Time . In 2008 , Off the Wall was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . 
 = = Background = = 
 Starting in 1972 , Michael Jackson released a total of four solo studio albums with Motown , among them Got to Be There and Ben . These were released as part of The Jackson 5 franchise , and produced successful singles such as " Got to Be There " , " Ben " and a remake of Bobby Day 's " Rockin ' Robin " . The Jackson 5 's sales , however , began declining in 1973 , and the band members chafed under Motown 's strict refusal to allow them creative control or input . Although the group scored several top 40 hits , including the top five disco single " Dancing Machine " and the top 20 hit " I Am Love " , The Jackson 5 ( minus Jermaine Jackson ) left Motown in 1975 . The Jackson 5 signed a new contract with CBS Records in June 1975 , first joining the Philadelphia International Records division and then Epic Records . As a result of legal proceedings , the group was renamed The Jacksons . After the name change , the band continued to tour internationally , releasing six more albums between 1976 and 1984 . From 1976 to 1984 , Michael Jackson was the lead songwriter of the group , writing or co @-@ writing such hits as " Shake Your Body ( Down to the Ground ) " , " This Place Hotel " and " Can You Feel It " . 
 In 1978 , Jackson starred as Scarecrow in the film musical The Wiz . The musical scores were arranged by Quincy Jones , who formed a partnership with Jackson during the film 's production and agreed to produce the singer 's solo album Off the Wall . Jackson was dedicated to the role , and watched videotapes of gazelles , cheetahs and panthers in order to learn graceful movements for his part . Jones recalled working with Jackson as one of his favorite experiences from The Wiz , and spoke of Jackson 's dedication to his role , comparing his acting style to Sammy Davis , Jr . Critics panned The Wiz upon its October 1978 release . Jackson 's performance as the Scarecrow was one of the only positively reviewed elements of the film , with critics noting that Jackson possessed " genuine acting talent " and " provided the only genuinely memorable moments . " Of the results of the film , Jackson stated : " I don 't think it could have been any better , I really don 't " . In 1980 , Jackson stated that his time working on The Wiz was " my greatest experience so far ... I 'll never forget that " . 
 = = Production = = 
 When Jackson began the Off the Wall project he was not sure what he wanted as the final result ; however , he did not want another record that sounded like The Jacksons , but rather he wanted more creative freedom , something he had not been allowed on prior albums . Jones produced " Off the Wall " , with co @-@ production credit given to Jackson on the songs he wrote for the album . Songwriters included Jackson , Heatwave 's Rod Temperton , Stevie Wonder and Paul McCartney . All sessions took place at Los Angeles County @-@ based recording studios . Rhythm tracks and vocals were recorded at Allen Zentz Recording , the horn section 's contributions took place at Westlake Audio , and string instrumentation was recorded at Cherokee Studios in West Hollywood . Following the initial sessions , audio mixing was handled by Grammy @-@ winning engineer Bruce Swedien at Westlake Audio , after which the original tapes went to the A & M Recording Studio , also located in L.A. , for mastering . Swedien would later mix the recording sessions for Jackson 's next album and his most well @-@ known work , 1982 's Thriller . Jones recalled that , at first , he found Jackson to be very introverted , shy and non @-@ assertive . 
 " She 's Out of My Life " was written for Jones by Tom Bahler three years prior . Jackson heard and enjoyed it , and Jones allowed him to use it on the record . Jones called in Heatwave 's keyboardist Rod Temperton to write three songs . The intention was for Jackson and Jones to select one of his songs , but Jackson , liking them all , included all of them in the final cut . Jackson stayed up all night to learn the lyrics to these songs instead of singing from a sheet . He finished the vocals to these three Temperton songs in two recording sessions . Temperton took a different approach to his song writing after spending some time researching the background to Jackson 's music style . Temperton mixed his traditional harmony segments with the idea of adding shorter note melodies to suit Jackson 's aggressive style . Jackson wrote " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " after humming a melody in his kitchen . After listening to hundreds of songs , Jackson and Jones decided upon a batch to record . In hindsight , Jones believed they took a lot of risks in the production of Off the Wall and the final choice of album tracks . Attention was also paid to the album cover , which shows Jackson smiling , wearing a tuxedo and trademark socks . His manager stated , " The tuxedo was the overall plan for the Off the Wall project and package . The tuxedo was our idea , the socks were Michael ' " . 
 = = Music and vocals = = 
 Music critics Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Stephen Holden of AllMusic observed that Off the Wall was crafted from funk , disco @-@ pop , soul , soft rock , jazz and pop ballads . Prominent examples include the ballad " She 's Out of My Life " , the funk tune " Workin ' Day and Night " , and the disco song " Get on the Floor " . " I Can 't Help It " is a jazz piece . In Quincy Jones ' autobiography , he compares Jackson to other jazz singers noting that Jackson " has some of the same qualities as the great jazz singers I 'd worked with : Ella , Sinatra , Sassy , Aretha , Ray Charles , Dinah . Each of them had that purity , that strong signature sound and that open wound that pushed them to greatness . " " She 's Out of My Life " is a melodic pop ballad . The end of the former song showed an " emotional " Jackson crying as the track concluded . Of the song R & B writer Nelson George proclaimed , " [ It ] became a Jackson signature similar to the way " My Way " served Frank Sinatra . The vulnerability , verging on fragility that would become embedded in Michael 's persona found , perhaps , its richest expression in this wistful ballad " . " Rock with You " is a romantic , mid @-@ tempo song . The album 's songs have a tempo ranging from 66 beats per minute on " She 's Out of My Life " , to 128 on " Workin ' Day and Night " . 
 With the arrival of Off the Wall in the late 1970s , Jackson 's abilities as a vocalist were well regarded ; AllMusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine described him as a " blindingly gifted vocalist " . At the time , Rolling Stone compared his vocals to the " breathless , dreamy stutter " of Stevie Wonder . Their analysis was also that " Jackson 's feathery @-@ timbered tenor is extraordinary beautiful . It slides smoothly into a startling falsetto that 's used very daringly " . Writer , journalist and biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli expressed the opinion that Jackson sings with " sexy falsetto " vocals in " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Taraborrelli stated , " Fans and industry peers alike were left with their mouths agape when Off the Wall was issued to the public . Fans proclaimed that they hadn 't heard him sing with such joy and abandon since the early Jackson 5 days " . On July 28 , 1979 , Off the Wall 's first single , " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " , was released . It peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100 and reached number three in the UK . On November 3 , 1979 the second single from the album , " Rock with You " was released , again it peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 In February , the album 's title track was released as a single and went to number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became a top 10 hit in four countries . " She 's Out of My Life " , also reaching number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in June . Thus Off the Wall became the first album by a solo artist to generate four US top 10 hits . Today , Off the Wall is certified 8 × Multi @-@ Platinum in the US for shipments of eight million units and sold over 20 million copies worldwide . The album 's success lead to the start of a 9 @-@ year partnership between Jackson and Jones ; their next collaboration would be Thriller , which is the world 's best selling album of all time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Off the Wall was hailed as a major breakthrough for Jackson , while receiving critical recognition , along with praises , from major music publications . In a 1979 review of the album , Rolling Stone magazine contributor Stephen Holden praised Jackson 's maturity and transition from his early Motown material , while calling the album a " slick , sophisticated R & B @-@ pop showcase with a definite disco slant " . Holden went on to compare Jackson to Stevie Wonder , another Motown performer who began recording at a young age and gained critical acclaim for his transition . 
 In The Village Voice , Robert Christgau hailed Off the Wall as " the dance groove of the year " and that Jackson 's vocal stylings were a reminder that he had grown up . In a review for Melody Maker Phil McNeill expressed the opinion that in Off the Wall Jackson sounded comfortable , confident and in control . He believed " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " had a " classy " introduction and that it was the best song on the album . He also praised " Rock with You " , describing it as " masterful " . The reviewer concurred with a colleague that Jackson was " probably the best singer in the world right now in terms of style and technique " . Giving the album a favorable review in Smash Hits , David Hepworth said that Jackson " sings like an angel " . Sounds shared the same point of view , qualifying Jackson 's voice as " <unk> agile " . The first side of Off the Wall is praised for its " clutch of dancers that must have even Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards watching their backs " . 
 In 1980 , Jackson won three awards at the American Music Awards for his solo efforts : Favorite Soul / R & B Album , Favorite Male Soul / R & B Artist and Favorite Soul / R & B Single ( for " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " ) . That year , he also won Billboard Music Awards for Top Black Artist and Top Black Album and a Grammy Award for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance ( for " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " ) . Despite its commercial success , Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a much bigger impact , and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release . In particular , Jackson was disappointed that he had won only a single Grammy Award at the 1980 Grammys , a Grammy Award for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance for " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . Jackson stated that " It was totally unfair that it didn 't get Record of the Year and it can never happen again " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On October 16 , 2001 , a special edition reissue of Off the Wall was released by Sony Records . The material found strong praise from critics more than 20 years after the original release . AllMusic gave the record a five star review , praising the record 's disco @-@ tinged funk and mainstream pop blend , along with Jackson 's songwriting and Jones ' crafty production . The publication believed , " [ Off the Wall ] is an enormously fresh record , one that remains vibrant and giddily exciting years after its release " . 
 In recent years Blender gave the record a full five star review stating that it was , " A blockbuster party LP that looked beyond funk to the future of dance music , and beyond soul ballads to the future of heart @-@ <unk> — in fact , beyond R & B to color @-@ blind pop . Hence , the forgivable Wings cover " . 
 In 2003 , the album was ranked number 68 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The National Association of Recording Merchandisers listed it at number 80 of the Definitive 200 Albums of All Time . In 2004 , Nelson George wrote of Jackson and his music , " the argument for his greatness in the recording studio begins with his arrangements of " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . The layers of percussion and the stacks of backing vocals , both artfully choreographed to create drama and ecstasy on the dance floor , still rock parties in the 21st century " . In 2008 , Off the Wall was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . 
 On January 7 , 2016 , Sony Music and The Estate of Michael Jackson announced that Off the Wall will be reissued and packaged with a new documentary directed by Spike Lee entitled Michael Jackson 's Journey from Motown to Off the Wall . The reissue and documentary was released on February 26 , 2016 . 
 Grammy Awards 
 Grammy Hall of Fame 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 The original LP , cassette pressings and first CD issue of this album contain the original mixes of " Rock with You " and " Get on the Floor " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Sales = = 
 = Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull = 
 Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull is a 2008 American science fiction adventure film . It is the fourth installment in the Indiana Jones series created by George Lucas and directed by Steven Spielberg . Released nineteen years after the previous film , the film acknowledges the age of its star Harrison Ford by being set in 1957 . It pays tribute to the science fiction B @-@ movies of the era , pitting Indiana Jones against Soviet agents — led by Irina Spalko ( Cate Blanchett ) — searching for a telepathic crystal skull . Indiana is aided by his former lover Marion Ravenwood ( Karen Allen ) and their son Mutt Williams ( Shia LaBeouf ) . Ray Winstone , John Hurt and Jim Broadbent are also part of the supporting cast . 
 Screenwriters Jeb Stuart , Jeffrey Boam , Frank Darabont , and Jeff Nathanson wrote drafts before David Koepp 's script satisfied the producers . Shooting began on June 18 , 2007 , and took place in various locations including New Mexico ; New Haven , Connecticut ; Hawaii ; and Fresno , California , as well as on sound stages in Los Angeles . To keep aesthetic continuity with the previous films , the crew relied on traditional stunt work instead of computer @-@ generated stunt doubles , and cinematographer Janusz Kamiński studied Douglas Slocombe 's style from the previous films . 
 The film premiered at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival on May 18 , 2008 , and was released worldwide on May 22 , 2008 to generally positive reviews from critics , although audience reception was more mixed . Significant praise was geared towards the performances , action scenes , John Williams ' musical score , and costume design . However , the main points of criticism were towards the dialogue , storyline , pacing , and overuse of CGI . It was also a financial success , grossing over $ 786 million worldwide , becoming the franchise 's highest @-@ grossing film when not adjusted for inflation , and the second highest @-@ grossing film of 2008 . Marketing relied heavily on the public 's nostalgia for the series , with products taking inspiration from all four films . Kingdom of the Crystal Skull is also the last film in the series to be distributed by Paramount Pictures , as Walt Disney Studios has become the distributor of its future films , since its parent company 's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1957 , nineteen years after The Last Crusade , Indiana Jones and his partner George " Mac " McHale are kidnapped in Nevada by Soviet agents under Colonel Dr. Irina Spalko . The Soviets infiltrate warehouse labeled " Warehouse 51 " and force Jones to locate an alien corpse with a crystal skull , recovered ten years earlier . Upon its discovery , Mac reveals he is a double agent working for the Soviets . Jones escapes , unsuccessfully attempts to retrieve the skull , and in a fight with Spalko 's sadistic henchman , Colonel Antonin Dovchenko , they both fall onto a rocket sled , which ignites and speeds them away . Jones staggers away and , still pursued , arrives in a model town at the Nevada Test Site , minutes before an atomic bomb test , and takes shelter in a lead @-@ lined refrigerator . Jones is rescued , decontaminated , and apprehended by FBI agents , who suspect him of working for the Soviets ; and though freed on the recommendation of General Ross , who vouches for him , he is put on indefinite leave of absence from Marshall College , also at the cost of the dean having to resign to keep Indiana 's job at the college . 
 Jones is approached by greaser Mutt Williams , who tells him that Harold Oxley had found a crystal skull in Peru , suffered a mental breakdown , and was later kidnapped . In return , Jones tells Mutt about the legend of crystal skulls found in Akator . Mutt gives Jones a letter from his mother , who is also held captive , containing a riddle written by Oxley in an ancient Native American language . KGB agents try to take the letter , but Jones and Mutt evade them and reach Peru . At the local psychiatric hospital , Oxley 's scribbles on the walls and floor of his cell lead them to the grave of Francisco de Orellana , a Conquistador searching for Akator . They discover the skull at the grave , with Jones reasoning that Oxley had returned it there . 
 On leaving the grave site , Jones and Mutt are captured by Mac and the Soviets and taken to their camp in the Amazon jungle , where they find Oxley and Mutt 's mother , Marion Ravenwood , who later reveals that Mutt is Jones ' son , Henry Jones III . Jones berates her for not convincing him to finish school . Mac tells Jones he is really a CIA double @-@ agent to regain Jones ' trust . Spalko believes that the crystal skull belongs to an alien life form and holds great psychic power , and that finding more skulls in Akator will grant the Soviets the advantage of psychic warfare . Spalko uses the skull on Jones to enable him to understand Oxley and identify a route to Akator . Jones and his four allies escape with the skull into the Amazon . They elude giant ants , and after Dovchenko loses a fight with Jones , he is devoured by the ants . Jones and his allies survive three waterfalls in a GAZ 46 amphibious vehicle ( which gets destroyed after the third drop ) , as many of the Soviets fall from a cliff while trying to pursue them . Jones and Oxley then identify a rock formation that leads them to Akator , unaware that Mac is still loyal to Spalko and has been dropping transceivers to allow the surviving Soviets to track them . 
 They escape the city 's guardians , gain access to the temple , and find it filled with artifacts from many ancient civilizations . Indy believes the aliens - in fact , inter @-@ dimensional beings - were " archaeologists " studying the different cultures of Earth , and Mac remarks that there 's not a museum in the world that wouldn 't sell its soul for the collection inside the temple . The five enter a chamber containing the crystal skeletons of thirteen enthroned skeletal crystal beings , one missing its skull . Spalko arrives and presents the skull to this skeleton . It suddenly flies from her hands to the skeleton and rejoins , whereupon the aliens reanimate and telepathically offer a reward in ancient Mayan through Oxley . A portal to their dimension becomes activated , and Spalko demands knowledge equal to the aliens ' . The thirteen beings fuse into one , and in the process of receiving the overwhelming knowledge , Spalko is disintegrated and sucked into the portal . Indy , Marion , Mutt , and Oxley - now released from the skull - escape , while the Soviets are also drawn into the portal . Mac is caught in the pull while trying to scrounge some of the treasure , and even though Indy offers him the whip to pull him to safety , he replies wink of his eye , " Jonesy , I 'm gonna be all right , " lets go and is pulled in . The survivors watch as the temple walls crumble , revealing a flying saucer rising from the debris , which vanishes into the " space between spaces " while the hollow in the valley floor left by its departure is flooded by the waters of the Amazon . 
 The following year , Indy is reinstated at Marshall College and made an associate dean . He and Marion are then married in a church . As the wedding party leaves the chapel , a gust of wind blows Indy 's brown fedora off the coat rack and deposits it at Mutt 's feet . Mutt picks it up and is about to don it before Indy takes it from him and puts it on with a grin . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Harrison Ford reprises the role of Dr. Henry " Indiana " Jones , Jr . To prepare for the role , the 64 @-@ year @-@ old Ford spent three hours a day at a gym , practiced with the bullwhip for two weeks , and relied on a high @-@ protein diet of fish and vegetables . Ford had kept fit during the series ' hiatus anyway , as he hoped for another film . He performed many of his own stunts because stunt technology had become safer since 1989 , and he also felt it improved his performance . It is also said that he still fit into his pants from Raiders of the Lost Ark . He argued , " The appeal of Indiana Jones isn 't his youth but his imagination , his resourcefulness . His physicality is a big part of it , especially the way he gets out of tight situations . But it 's not all hitting people and falling from high places . My ambition in action is to have the audience look straight in the face of character and not at the back of a capable stuntman 's head . I hope to continue that no matter how old I get . " Ford felt his return would reduce American ageism ( he refused to dye his hair for the role ) , because of the film 's family appeal : " This is a movie which is geared not to [ the young ] segment of the demographic , an age @-@ defined segment ... We 've got a great shot at breaking the movie demographic constraints . " He told Koepp to add more references to his age in the script . Spielberg said Ford was not too old to play Indiana : " When a guy gets to be that age and he still packs the same punch , and he still runs just as fast and climbs just as high , he 's gonna be breathing a little heavier at the end of the set piece . And I felt , ' Let 's have some fun with that . Let 's not hide that . ' " Spielberg recalled the line in Raiders that said , " It 's not the years , it 's the mileage , " and felt he could not tell the difference between Ford during the shoots for Last Crusade and Kingdom of the Crystal Skull . 
 Cate Blanchett plays Soviet agent Irina Spalko . Screenwriter David Koepp created the character . Frank Marshall said Spalko continued the tradition of Indiana having a love @-@ hate relationship " with every woman he ever comes in contact with . " Blanchett had wanted to play a villain for a " couple of years " , and enjoyed being part of the Indiana Jones legacy . Spielberg praised Blanchett as a " master of disguise " , and considers her his favorite Indiana Jones villain for inventing much of Spalko 's character . Spalko 's bob cut was her idea , with the character 's stern looks and behaviour recalling Rosa Klebb in From Russia with Love . Blanchett learned to fence for the character ; but during filming , Spielberg decided to give Spalko " karate chop " skills . LaBeouf recalled Blanchett was elusive on set , and Ford was surprised when he met her on set out of costume . He noted , " There 's no aspect of her behavior that was not consistent with this bizarre person she 's playing . " 
 Karen Allen reprises the role of Marion Ravenwood ( under the married name of Marion Williams ) , who previously appeared in Raiders of the Lost Ark . Frank Darabont 's script introduced the idea of Marion returning as Indiana 's love interest . Allen was not aware her character was in the script until Spielberg called her in January 2007 , saying , " It 's been announced ! We 're gonna make Indiana Jones 4 ! And guess what ? You 're in it ! " Ford found Allen " one of the easiest people to work with [ he 's ] ever known . She 's a completely self @-@ sufficient woman , and that 's part of the character she plays . A lot of her charm and the charm of the character is there . And again , it 's not an age @-@ dependent thing . It has to do with her spirit and her nature . " Allen found Ford easier to work with on this film , than in Raiders . 
 Shia LaBeouf plays Mutt Williams / Henry Jones III , Indiana 's sidekick and son . The concept of Indiana Jones having offspring was introduced in The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles ; in the episode " Princeton , February 1916 " , Indy and his high school sweetheart discuss having a child and naming him " Henry Jones III . " ( This scene was deleted from the VHS and DVD releases . ) ; additionally , in several episodes , an elderly Indy is shown to have a daughter . During the film 's development , the latter was incorporated into Frank Darabont 's script , with Indiana and Marion having a 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . Spielberg found this too similar to The Lost World : Jurassic Park , so a son was created instead . Koepp credited the character 's creation to Jeff Nathanson and Lucas . Koepp wanted to make Mutt more academic , but Lucas likened Mutt to Marlon Brando 's character in The Wild One : " he needs to be what Indiana Jones ' father thought of [ him ] – the curse returns in the form of his own son – he 's everything a father can 't stand . " LaBeouf was Spielberg 's first choice for the role , having been impressed by his performance in Holes . Excited at the prospect of being in an Indiana Jones film , LaBeouf agreed without reading the script and did not know what character he would play . He later gained fifteen pounds of muscle for the role , and also repeatedly watched the other films to acquire character . LaBeouf also watched Blackboard Jungle , Rebel Without a Cause , and The Wild One to develop his character 's personality , copying mannerisms and words including the use of a switchblade as a weapon . Lucas also consulted on the greaser look , joking that LaBeouf was " sent to the American Graffiti school of <unk> . " LaBeouf pulled his rotator cuff when filming Mutt 's duel with Spalko ; an injury that worsened throughout filming . He later pulled his groin . 
 Ray Winstone plays George " Mac " McHale , a British agent whom Jones worked alongside in World War II , but has now allied with the Russians to resolve financial problems . The character acts as a spin on Sallah and René Belloq – Jones 's friend and nemesis , respectively , in Raiders of the Lost Ark . Spielberg cast Winstone as he found him " one of the most brilliant actors around " , having seen Sexy Beast . Winstone tore his hamstring during filming . " I keep getting these action parts as I ’ m getting older " , he remarked . Like John Hurt , Winstone wished to see the script prior to committing to the film . In interviews on British TV Winstone explained that he was only able to read the script if it was delivered by courier , who waited while he read the script , and returned to the U.S. with the script once Winstone had read it . His reasoning for wanting to read the script was , " If I 'm gonna be in it , I want to be in it . " He gave suggestions to Spielberg , including the idea of Mac pretending to be a double agent . He also stated that once filming was completed he had to return the script , such was the secrecy about the film . He was later presented with a copy of the script to keep . 
 John Hurt plays Harold " Ox " Oxley , Mutt 's surrogate father and Indiana 's old friend . Frank Darabont had suggested Hurt while writing the screenplay . The character is inspired by Ben Gunn of Treasure Island . Hurt read the script before agreeing to his role , unlike other cast members who came on " because Steven — you know , ' God ' — was doing it . And I said , ' Well , I need to have a little bit of previous knowledge even if God is doing it . ' So they sent a courier over with the script from Los Angeles , gave it to me at three o 'clock in the afternoon in London , collected it again at eight o 'clock in the evening , and he returned the next day to Los Angeles . " 
 Jim Broadbent plays Charles <unk> , the dean of Marshall College and friend of Jones . Broadbent 's character stands in for Marcus Brody , whose actor , Denholm Elliott , died in 1992 . As a tribute to Elliott , the filmmakers put a portrait and a statue on the Marshall College location , and a picture on Jones ' desk , saying he died shortly after Indiana 's father . 
 Igor <unk> plays Russian Colonel Antonin Dovchenko , Spalko 's second @-@ in @-@ command . His character stands in for the heavily built henchmen that Pat Roach played in the three previous films , as Roach died in 2004 from throat cancer . 
 Joel <unk> and Neil Flynn have minor roles as FBI agents interrogating Indiana in a scene following the opening sequence . Alan Dale plays General Ross , who protests his innocence . Andrew Divoff and Pasha D. Lychnikoff play Russian soldiers . Spielberg cast Russian @-@ speaking actors as Russian soldiers so their accents would be authentic . Dimitri Diatchenko plays Spalko 's right @-@ hand man who battles Indiana at Marshall College . Diatchenko bulked up to 250 pounds to look menacing , and his role was originally minor with ten days of filming . When shooting the fight , Ford accidentally hit his chin , and Spielberg liked Diatchenko 's humorous looking reaction , so he expanded his role to three months of filming . Ernie Reyes , Jr. plays a cemetery guard . 
 Sean Connery turned down an offer to cameo as Henry Jones , Sr. , as he found retirement too enjoyable . Lucas stated that in hindsight it was good that Connery did not briefly appear , as it would disappoint the audience when his character would not join the film 's adventure . Ford joked , " I 'm old enough to play my own father in this one . " The film addresses Connery 's absence by Indiana implying that both Henry , Sr. and Marcus Brody died before the film 's events . Connery later stated that he liked the film , describing it as " rather good and rather long . " John Rhys @-@ Davies was asked to reprise his role as Sallah as a guest in the wedding scene . He turned it down as he felt his character deserved a more substantial role . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the late 1970s , George Lucas and Steven Spielberg made a deal with Paramount Pictures for five Indiana Jones films . Following the 1989 release of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade , Lucas let the series end as he felt he could not think of a good plot device to drive the next installment , and chose instead to produce The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles for TV , which explored the character in his early years . Harrison Ford played Indiana in one episode , narrating his adventures in 1920 Chicago . When Lucas shot Ford 's role in December 1992 , he realized the scene opened up the possibility of a film with an older Indiana set in the 1950s . The film could reflect a science fiction 1950s B @-@ movie , with aliens as the plot device . Meanwhile , Spielberg believed he was going to " mature " as a filmmaker after making the trilogy , and felt he would just produce any future installments . 
 Ford disliked the new angle , telling Lucas , " No way am I being in a Steven Spielberg movie like that . " Spielberg himself , who depicted aliens in Close Encounters of the Third Kind and E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , resisted it . Lucas came up with a story , which Jeb Stuart turned into a script from October 1993 to May 1994 . ( Stuart had previously written The Fugitive , which starred Ford . ) Lucas wanted Indiana to get married , which would allow Henry Jones , Sr. to return , expressing concern over whether his son is happy with what he has accomplished . After he learned that Joseph Stalin was interested in psychic warfare , he decided to have Russians as the villains and the aliens to have psychic powers . Following Stuart 's next draft , Lucas hired Last Crusade writer Jeffrey Boam to write the next three versions , the last of which was completed in March 1996 . Three months later , Independence Day was released , and Spielberg told Lucas he would not make another alien invasion film . Lucas decided to focus on the Star Wars prequels . 
 In 2000 , Spielberg 's son asked when the next Indiana Jones film would be released , which made him interested in reviving the project . The same year , Ford , Lucas , Spielberg , Frank Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy met during the American Film Institute 's tribute to Ford , and decided they wanted to enjoy the experience of making an Indiana Jones film again . Spielberg also found returning to the series a respite from his many dark films during this period , such as A.I. : Artificial Intelligence , Minority Report , and Munich . Lucas convinced Spielberg to use aliens in the plot by saying they were not " extraterrestrials " , but " interdimensional " , with this concept taking inspiration in the superstring theory . Spielberg and Lucas discussed the central idea of a B @-@ movie involving aliens , and Lucas suggested using the crystal skulls to ground the idea . Lucas found those artifacts as fascinating as the Ark of the Covenant , and had intended to feature them for a Young Indiana Jones episode before the show 's cancellation . M. Night Shyamalan was hired to write for an intended 2002 shoot , but he was overwhelmed writing a sequel to a film he loved like Raiders of the Lost Ark , and claimed it was difficult to get Ford , Spielberg and Lucas to focus . Stephen Gaghan and Tom Stoppard were also approached . 
 Frank Darabont , who wrote various Young Indiana Jones episodes , was hired to write in May 2002 . His script , entitled Indiana Jones and the City of Gods , was set in the 1950s , with ex @-@ Nazis pursuing Jones . Spielberg conceived the idea because of real life figures such as Juan Perón in Argentina , who protected Nazi war criminals . Darabont claimed Spielberg loved the script , but Lucas had issues with it , and decided to take over writing himself . Lucas and Spielberg acknowledged the 1950s setting could not ignore the Cold War , and the Russians were more plausible villains . Spielberg decided he could not satirize the Nazis after directing Schindler 's List , while Ford noted , " We plum [ b ] wore the Nazis out . " 
 Jeff Nathanson met with Spielberg and Lucas in August 2004 , and turned in the next drafts in October and November 2005 , titled The Atomic Ants . David Koepp continued on from there , giving his script the subtitle Destroyer of Worlds , based on the J. Robert Oppenheimer quote . It was changed to Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , as Spielberg found it more inviting a title and actually named the plot device of the crystal skulls . Lucas insisted on the Kingdom part . Koepp 's " bright [ title ] idea " was Indiana Jones and the Son of Indiana Jones , and Spielberg had also considered having the title name the aliens as The Mysterians , but dropped that when he remembered that was another film 's title . Koepp collaborated with Raiders of the Lost Ark screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan on the film 's " love dialogue . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Unlike the previous Indiana Jones films , Spielberg shot the entire film in the United States , stating he did not want to be away from his family . Shooting began on June 18 , 2007 , in Deming , New Mexico . An extensive chase scene set at the fictional Marshall College was filmed between June 28 and July 7 at Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut ( where Spielberg 's son Theo was studying ) . To keep in line with the fact the story takes place in the 1950s , several facades were changed , although signs were put up in between shots to tell the public what the store or restaurant actually was . 
 Afterwards , they filmed scenes set in the Peruvian jungles in Hilo , Hawaii until August . Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull was the biggest film shot in Hawaii since Waterworld , and was estimated to generate US $ 22 million to $ 45 million in the local economy . Because of an approaching hurricane , Spielberg was unable to shoot a fight at a waterfall , so he sent the second unit to film shots of Brazil 's and Argentina 's Iguazu Falls . These were digitally combined into the fight , which was shot at the Universal backlot . 
 Half the film was scheduled to shoot on five sound stages at Los Angeles : Downey , Sony , Warner Bros. , Paramount and Universal . Filming moved to Chandler Field in Fresno , California , substituting for Mexico City International Airport , on October 11 , 2007 . After shooting aerial shots of Chandler Airport and a DC @-@ 3 on the morning of October 12 , 2007 , filming wrapped . Although he originally found no need for re @-@ shoots after viewing his first cut of the film , Spielberg decided to add an establishing shot filmed on February 29 , 2008 , in Pasadena , California . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Spielberg and Janusz Kamiński , who has shot all of the director 's films since 1993 's Schindler 's List , reviewed the previous films to study Douglas Slocombe 's style . " I didn ’ t want Janusz to modernize and bring us into the 21st century " , Spielberg explained . " I still wanted the film to have a lighting style not dissimilar to the work Doug Slocombe had achieved , which meant that both Janusz and I had to swallow our pride . Janusz had to approximate another cinematographer 's look , and I had to approximate this younger director 's look that I thought I had moved away from after almost two decades . " Spielberg also hired production designer Guy Hendrix Dyas after admiring his design work for Superman Returns . Spielberg did not want to fast cut action scenes , relying on his script instead for a fast pace , and had confirmed in 2002 that he would not shoot the film digitally , a format Lucas had adopted . Lucas felt " it looks like it was shot three years after Last Crusade . The people , the look of it , everything . You ’ d never know there was 20 years between shooting . " Kamiński commented upon watching the three films back @-@ to @-@ back , he was amazed how each of them advanced technologically , but were all nevertheless consistent , neither too brightly or darkly lit . 
 While shooting War of the Worlds in late 2004 , Spielberg met with stunt coordinator Vic Armstrong , who doubled for Ford in the previous films , to discuss three action sequences he had envisioned . However , Armstrong was filming The Mummy : Tomb of the Dragon Emperor during shooting of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , so Dan Bradley was hired instead . Bradley and Spielberg used previsualization for all the action scenes , except the motorcycle chase at Marshall College , because that idea was conceived after the animators had left . Bradley drew traditional storyboards instead , and was given free rein to create dramatic moments , just as Raiders of the Lost Ark second unit director Michael D. Moore did when filming the truck chase . Spielberg improvised on set , changing the location of Mutt and Spalko 's duel from the ground to on top of vehicles . 
 The Ark of the Covenant is seen in a broken crate during the Hangar 51 opening sequence . Lucasfilm used the same prop from Raiders of the Lost Ark . Guards were hired to protect the highly sought after piece of film memorabilia during the day of its use . A replica of the staff carried by Charlton Heston in The Ten Commandments was also used to populate the set to illustrate the Hangar 's history . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Producer Frank Marshall stated in 2003 that the film would use traditional stunt work so as to be consistent with the previous films . CGI was used to remove the visible safety wires on the actors when they did their stunts ( such as when Indy swings on a lamp with his whip ) . Timed explosives were used for a scene where Indiana drives a truck through crates . During the take , an explosive failed to detonate and landed in the seat beside Ford . It did not go off and he was not injured . 
 Spielberg stated before production began that very few CGI effects would be used to maintain consistency with the other films . During filming significantly more CGI work was done than initially anticipated as in many cases it proved to be more practical . There ended up being a total of about 450 CGI shots in the film , with an estimated 30 percent of the film 's shots containing CG matte paintings . Spielberg initially wanted brushstrokes to be visible on the paintings for added consistency with the previous films , but decided against it . The script also required a non @-@ deforested jungle for a chase scene , but this would have been unsafe and much CGI work was done to create the jungle action sequence . Visual effects supervisor Pablo Helman ( who worked on Lucas ' Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace and Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones as well as Spielberg 's War of the Worlds and Munich ) traveled to Brazil and Argentina to photograph elements that were composited into the final images . Industrial Light and Magic then effectively created a virtual jungle with a geography like the real Amazon . 
 The appearance of a live alien and flying saucer was in flux . Spielberg wanted the alien to resemble a Grey alien , and also rejected early versions of the saucer that looked " too Close Encounters " . Art director Christian <unk> said the aesthetic was " looking at a lot of older B @-@ movie designs – but trying to make that look more real and gritty to fit in with the Indy universe . " Other reference for the visual effects work included government tapes of nuclear tests , and video reference of real prairie dogs shot in 1080p by Nathan Edward Denning . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams began composing the score in October 2007 ; ten days of recording sessions wrapped on March 6 , 2008 , at Sony Pictures Studios . Williams described composing for the Indiana Jones universe again as " like sitting down and finishing a letter that you started 25 years ago " . He reused Indiana 's theme ( Raiders March ) and also Marion 's from Raiders of the Lost Ark , and also composed five new motifs for Mutt , Spalko and the skull . Williams gave Mutt 's a swashbuckling feel , and homaged film noir and 1950s B @-@ movies for Spalko and the crystal skull respectively . As an in @-@ joke , Williams incorporated a measure and a half of Johannes Brahms ' " Academic Festival Overture " when Indiana and Mutt crash into the library . The soundtrack features a Continuum , an instrument often used for sound effects instead of music . The Concord Music Group released the soundtrack on May 20 , 2008 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on May 18 , 2008 , a couple of days ahead of its worldwide May 21 – 23 release . It was the first Spielberg film since 1982 's E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial to premiere at Cannes . The film was released in approximately 4 @,@ 000 theaters in the United States , and dubbed into 25 languages for its worldwide release . More than 12 @,@ 000 release prints were distributed , which is the largest in Paramount Pictures ' history . Although Spielberg insisted his films only be watched traditionally at theaters , Paramount chose to release the film in digital cinemas as part of a scheme to convert 10 @,@ 000 U.S. cinemas to the format . 
 = = = Secrecy = = = 
 Frank Marshall remarked , " In today 's information age , secrecy has been a real challenge . ... People actually said , ' No , we 're going to respect Steven 's vision . ' " Prior to release , moviegoers on the Internet scrutinized numerous photos and the film 's promotional LEGO sets in hope of understanding plot details ; Spielberg biographer Ian Freer wrote , " What Indy IV is actually about has been the great cultural guessing game of 2007 / 08 . Yet , it has to be said , there is something refreshing about being ten weeks away from a giant blockbuster and knowing next to nothing about it . " To distract investigative fans from the film 's title during filming , five fake titles were registered with the Motion Picture Association of America ; The City of Gods , The Destroyer of Worlds , The Fourth Corner of the Earth , The Lost City of Gold and The Quest for the Covenant . Lucas and Spielberg had also wanted to keep Karen Allen 's return a secret until the film 's release , but decided to confirm it at the 2007 Comic @-@ Con. 
 An extra in the film , Tyler Nelson , violated his nondisclosure agreement in an interview with The Edmond Sun on September 17 , 2007 , which was then picked up by the mainstream media . It is unknown if he remained in the final cut . At Nelson 's request , The Edmond Sun subsequently pulled the story from its website . On October 2 , 2007 , a Superior Court order was filed finding that Nelson knowingly violated the agreement . The terms of the settlement were not disclosed . A number of production photos and sensitive documents pertaining to the film 's production budget were also stolen from Spielberg 's production office . The Los Angeles County Sheriff 's Department set up a sting operation after being alerted by a webmaster that the thief might try to sell the photos . On October 4 , 2007 , the seller , 37 @-@ year @-@ old Roderick Eric Davis , was arrested . He pleaded guilty to two felony counts and was sentenced to two years and four months in prison . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Howard Roffman , President of Lucas Licensing , attributed the film 's large marketing campaign to it having been " nineteen years since the last film , and we are sensing a huge pent @-@ up demand for everything Indy " . Paramount spent at least $ 150 million to promote the film , whereas most film promotions range from $ 70 to 100 million . As well as fans , the film also needed to appeal to younger viewers . Licensing deals include Expedia , Dr Pepper , Burger King , M & M 's and <unk> . Paramount sponsored an Indiana Jones open wheel car for Marco Andretti in the 2008 Indianapolis 500 , and his racing suit was designed to resemble Indiana Jones 's outfit . The distributor also paired with M & M 's to sponsor the # 18 Joe Gibbs Racing Toyota , with NASCAR driver Kyle Busch behind the wheel , in the 2008 Dodge Challenger 500 at Darlington Raceway . Kyle Busch and the # 18 team won the race and visited victory lane with Indiana Jones on the car . With the film 's release , producer Frank Marshall and UNESCO worked together to promote conservation of World Heritage Sites around the world . Disneyland hosted " Indiana Jones Summer of Hidden Mysteries " to promote the film 's release . 
 The Boston @-@ based design studio Creative Pilot created the packaging style for the film 's merchandise , which merged Drew Struzan 's original illustrations " with a fresh new look , which showcases the whip , a map and exotic hieroglyphic patterns " . Hasbro , Lego , Sideshow Collectibles , Topps , Diamond Select , Hallmark Cards , and <unk> all sold products . A THQ mobile game based on the film was released , as was a Lego video game based on the past films . Lego also released a series of computer @-@ animated spoofs , Lego Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Brick , directed by Peder Pedersen . Stern Pinball released a new Indiana Jones pinball machine , designed by John Borg , based on all four films . From October 2007 to April 2008 , the reedited episodes of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles were released in three DVD box sets . 
 Random House , Dark Horse Comics , Diamond Comic Distributors , Scholastic and DK published books , including James Rollins ' novelization of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , a two @-@ issue comic book adaptation written by John Jackson Miller and drawn by Luke Ross ( Samurai : Heaven and Earth ) , children 's novelizations of all four films , the Indiana Jones Adventures comic book series aimed at children , and the official Indiana Jones Magazine . Scholastic featured Indiana and Mutt on the covers of Scholastic News and Scholastic Maths , to the concern of parents , though Jack <unk> , editor of the latter , felt the film would interest children in archaeology . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD in North America on October 14 , 2008 and in the U.K. on November 10 . This release includes a two @-@ disc edition Blu @-@ ray , a two @-@ disc Special Edition DVD , and a one @-@ disc edition DVD . The film made its worldwide television premiere on USA on December 9 , 2010 . On September 18 , 2012 , it was re @-@ released on Blu @-@ ray as part of Indiana Jones : The Complete Adventures . 
 Several collectible editions have also been released . For example : Best Buy 's gift set includes a replica crystal skull from Sideshow Collectibles and a $ 25 gift card to <unk> ; Kmart 's giveaway of four mini @-@ posters comprises LEGO replicas of the original Indiana Jones theatrical posters ; and Target Corporation 's DVD package includes an 80 @-@ page hardcover book of behind the scenes photographs . 
 As of October 16 , 2013 , the film has made $ 117 @,@ 239 @,@ 631 in revenue . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 The director of the Institute of Archeology of Belize , Dr. Jaime Awe , sued Lucasfilm , Disney and Paramount Pictures on behalf of the country Belize for using the Mitchell @-@ Hedges skull 's " likeness " in the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Indiana Jones is distributed by one entity , Paramount , but owned by another , Lucasfilm . The pre @-@ production arrangement between the two organizations granted Paramount 12 @.@ 5 % of the film 's revenue . As the $ 185 million budget was larger than the original $ 125 million estimate , Lucas , Spielberg and Ford turned down large upfront salaries so Paramount could cover the film 's costs . In order for Paramount to see a profit beyond its distribution fee , the film had to make over $ 400 million . At that point , Lucas , Spielberg , Ford and those with smaller profit @-@ sharing deals would also begin to collect their cut . 
 The film was released on Thursday , May 22 , 2008 in North America and grossed $ 25 million its opening day . In its opening weekend , the film grossed an estimated $ 101 million in 4 @,@ 260 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking # 1 at the box office , and making it the third widest opening of all time . Within its first five days of release , it grossed $ 311 million worldwide . The film 's total $ 151 million gross in the U.S. ranked it as the second biggest Memorial Day weekend release , behind Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End . It was the third most successful film of 2008 domestically , behind The Dark Knight and Iron Man respectively , and the year 's second highest @-@ grossing film internationally , behind The Dark Knight . In February 2010 , it was the 25th highest @-@ grossing film of all time domestically , and 44th highest @-@ grossing worldwide , as well as the most financially successful Indiana Jones film when not adjusted for inflation of ticket prices . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull received strongly polarized reviews , yet mostly positive ; as a result , it has been nominated both for numerous " best of " and " worst of " awards . Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 77 % based on 257 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 9 out 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Though the plot elements are certainly familiar , Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull still delivers the thrills and Harrison Ford 's return in the title role is more than welcome . " Another aggregator , Metacritic , gives the film a weighted average rating of 65 out of 100 , based on 40 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Surveys conducted by CinemaScore indicated a general " B " rating from audiences , on an A + to F scale . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , the same rating he gave The Last Crusade , finding it " same old , same old " , but what " I want it to be . " Leonard Maltin also gave the film 3 1 / 2 stars out of 4 , more than he gave Temple of Doom and Last Crusade , and wrote that " Indy returns with the same brand of high adventure that marked the original Raiders of the Lost Ark . " Empire 's Damon Wise criticised the use of CG but praised Ford 's performance and wrote that " It won 't change your life but , if you 're in the right frame of mind , it will change your mood : you might wince , you might groan , you might beg to differ on the big , silly climax , but you 'll never stop smiling . " 
 James Berardinelli gave the film 2 stars out of 4 , calling it " the most lifeless of the series " and " simply [ not ] a very good motion picture . " Margaret Pomeranz of At the Movies gave the film 2 1 / 2 stars out of 5 , saying that the filmmakers " had 19 years since the last Indiana Jones movie to come up with something truly exciting and fresh , but I feel there 's a certain laziness and cynicism in this latest adventure . " Associated Press reported that J. Sperling Reich , who writes for <unk> , said : " It really looked like they were going through the motions . It really looked like no one had their heart in it . " USA Today stated reviews were " mixed " and reviewers felt the " movie suffers from predictable plot points and cheesy special effects . " 
 The film was nominated for Best Action Movie at the 2009 Critics ' Choice Awards . The Visual Effects Society nominated it for Best Single Visual Effect of the Year ( the valley destruction ) , Best Outstanding Matte Paintings , Best Models and Miniatures , and Best Created Environment in a Feature Motion Picture ( the inside of the temple ) . The film ranks 453rd on Empire 's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time . It was nominated at the Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , Best Director , Best Actor , Best Supporting Actor , Best Costumes and Best Special Effects . It won Best Costumes . At the 51st Grammy Awards , John Williams won an award for the Mutt Williams theme . 
 In 2009 , the film won the Razzie Award for Worst Prequel , Remake , Rip @-@ off or Sequel . Comcast voted it the 11th worst film sequel of all time . Paste magazine ranked the movie 10th on its list " The 20 Worst Sequels to Good Movies " . <unk> ranked the film 8th on its list of the " Top 10 Worst Movie Sequels " . 
 = = = International reaction = = = 
 The Communist Party of the Russian Federation called for a ban on the film , accusing the production team of " demonizing " the Soviet Union . A party official said : " In 1957 the USSR was not sending terrorists to America but sending the Sputnik satellite into space ! " Spielberg responded : " When we decided the fourth installment would take place in 1957 , we had no choice but to make the Russians the enemies . World War II had just ended and the Cold War had begun . The U.S. didn 't have any other enemies at the time . " The film 's depiction of Peru also received criticism from the Peruvian and Spanish @-@ speaking public . 
 = = = Fan reception and legacy = = = 
 According to the Associated Press , Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull received a " respectful " but " far from glowing " reception from Indiana Jones fans , and that " some viewers at its first press screening loved it , some called it slick and enjoyable though formulaic , some said it was not worth the 19 @-@ year wait . " South Park parodied the film in the episode " The China Probrem " , broadcast five months after the film 's release . The episode parodied the negative fan reaction , with the characters filing a police report against Lucas and Spielberg for " raping Indiana Jones " . 
 Some disappointed Indiana Jones fans used the term " nuking the fridge " , based on a scene where Jones survives a nuclear blast by hiding in a refrigerator , to denote the point when a franchise passes its peak and crossed into the absurd , similar to " jumping the shark " . This phrase has appeared across the internet , and was chosen as # 5 on Time magazine 's list of " top ten buzzwords " of 2008 . Asked about the scene and phrase , Spielberg said : " Blame me . Don 't blame George . That was my silly idea ... I 'm proud of that . I 'm glad I was able to bring that into popular culture . " Lucas denied this , saying Spielberg was " protecting him " . According to Lucas , he had assembled a dossier of research data to convince Spielberg ; Lucas stated that his research claimed the odds of surviving in the refrigerator are about " 50 @-@ 50 . " 
 The mixed fanbase reaction did not surprise Lucas , who was familiar with mixed response to the Star Wars prequels , and predicted that " we 're all going to get people throwing tomatoes at us . " David Koepp said : " I knew I was going to get hammered from a number of quarters [ but ] what I liked about the way the movie ended up playing was it was popular with families . I like that families really embraced it . " Although Spielberg said " I 'm very happy with the movie . I always have been " , he also said " I sympathise with people who didn 't like the MacGuffin [ the interdimensional beings ] because I never liked the MacGuffin . " 
 At the 2010 Cannes Film Festival , LaBeouf told the Los Angeles Times he had " dropped the ball on the legacy that people loved and cherished " and felt that " the movie could have been updated ... we just misinterpreted what we were trying to satiate . " In 2011 , in response to LaBeouf 's comments , Harrison Ford said : " I think I told [ LaBeouf ] he was a fucking idiot ... As an actor , I think it 's my obligation to support the film without making a complete ass of myself . Shia is ambitious , attentive and talented — and he 's learning how to deal with a situation which is very unique and difficult . " LaBeouf later regretted his comments and their effect on his relationship with Spielberg : " He told me there 's a time to be a human being and have an opinion , and there 's a time to sell cars . It brought me freedom , but it also killed my spirits because this was a dude I looked up to like a sensei . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On March 15 , 2016 , it was announced that Spielberg and Ford are both set to return for a fifth Indiana Jones film , scheduled for release on July 19 , 2019 . Lucas will return as executive producer , while Kennedy and Marshall will serve as producers and Koepp as screenwriter . Williams will also return to compose the score . 
 = Force Majeure ( Millennium ) = 
 " Force Majeure " is the thirteenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on February 7 , 1997 . The episode was written by Chip Johannessen and directed by Winrich Kolbe . " Force Majeure " featured guest appearances by Brad Dourif , Morgan Woodward and C. C. H. Pounder . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) investigates a pair of suicides connected to a cult which has been experimenting with human cloning . Black is dogged on his travels by a strange man interested in both the Millennium Group and doomsday predictions . 
 " Force Majeure " features stock footage of the 1996 Saguenay Flood , and makes mention of a conjunction of planets which occurred in May 2000 . The episode was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 9 million households during its original broadcast , and has received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a hailstorm in Roseburg , Oregon university students run to find shelter . One girl , Lauren ( Kristi Angus ) , stands in the rain , lights a cigarette , and goes up in flames . Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) travels to the university to interview witnesses to the death . A teaching assistant tells Black that the dead girl was highly intelligent , pointing out an armillary sphere Lauren had constructed . She also tells Black that the previous Millennium Group contact had taken great interest in this sphere . Black did not realize the Group had sent another member , but on leaving , he meets the man in question — Dennis Hoffman ( Brad Dourif ) . Hoffman describes his theories to Black , detailing how when several planets achieve syzygy on May 5 , 2000 , a series of natural disasters will bring about the end of the world . Hoffman believes that this cataclysm will be preceded by strange events and weather patterns . 
 Black later contacts another Group member , Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , who tells him that Hoffman had attempted to join the Group years earlier , and although he was refused admission , has continued to track the Group 's activities harmlessly . Watts also finds that Lauren is not her parents ' biological child , but cannot find any record of her adoption . Group coroner Cheryl Andrews ( C. C. H. Pounder ) finds traces of accelerant on the body , and rules the death a suicide . She also finds an astrological symbol representing conjunction carved in the girl 's thigh . 
 At a waterfall , another girl commits suicide by drowning . The girl , Carlin , looks identical to Lauren . Andrews performs an autopsy on Carlin as well , finding the same astrological symbol . It also becomes clear that the two girls are related — identical twins , born seven years apart . The girls are clones , produced using a technique similar to that used to create identical cattle . Black believes that this is connected to Hoffman 's Earth Changes theory , that someone is breeding offspring destined to survive May 5 , 2000 . 
 Hoffman provides the Group with information leading them to Pocatello , Idaho , where a group of even more cloned girls is found living in a commune . The police fear that a cult @-@ involved suicide may be being planned , and they take the girls into protective custody . The girls are taken onto a bus as Black speaks to their biological father , a preacher confined to a negative pressure ventilator ( Morgan Woodward ) . The man reveals to Black that he attempted to create a caste of pure and innocent people who could repopulate society benevolently after the cataclysm . He contacted some of the girls to let them know he would die before the apocalyptic date , and they committed suicide shortly afterwards . That night , a power cut stops the man 's ventilator , killing him . 
 When Black leaves to meet with the girls in custody , he finds that the bus driver was another of the man in the ventilator 's offspring , and has escaped with the clones ; Hoffman has also disappeared . Black realizes that the building they found the girls in is located in an area of extreme geological stability , and is built on shock absorbing foundations — Black does not know where the cult has escaped to , but he does know where they will be on May 5 , 2000 . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Force Majeure " was the second of four episodes helmed by director Winrich Kolbe , who had previously worked on " Kingdom Come " , and would return later in the first season for " Lamentation " and " Broken World " . The episode also marks the second writing credit in the series for Chip Johannessen , after the earlier " Blood Relatives " . Johannessen would go on to write an additional eleven episodes across all three seasons , including the series ' final episode " Goodbye to All That " . After Millennium 's cancellation , Johannessen would also contribute an episode to its sister show The X @-@ Files , 1999 's " Orison " . Johannessen would also become one of the series ' executive producers during its third season , alongside Ken Horton . 
 Footage used in the episode to demonstrate cataclysmic flooding was taken from stock footage of the 1996 Saguenay Flood , a series of flash floods across the Saguenay @-@ Lac @-@ Saint @-@ Jean region in Quebec . The " little white house " visible in the footage has since been converted into a museum . The episode features the third appearance by C. C. H. Pounder as Millennium Group pathologist Cheryl Andrews . Pounder would appear in four other episodes as the character , appearing across all three seasons . 
 The conjunction of several planets which Brad Dourif 's character Dennis Hoffman speaks about was reliably predicted at the time of the episode 's broadcast . The effects of such an alignment had been debated for some time , with studies both linking conjunction to several major earthquakes and debunking the theory entirely . Several similar alignments have occurred in the past without resulting in any additional natural activity on Earth . The predicted conjunction did occur in May 2000 , with no consequence on Earth . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Force Majeure " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on February 7 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 1 during its original broadcast , meaning that 7 @.@ 1 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented 6 @.@ 9 million households , and left the episode the sixty @-@ third most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode an A − , describing it as " sort of kind of pretty much batshit insane " . Handlen felt that the episode " was a lot of fun to watch , though , even if it didn 't entirely come together . The script is Carter and company 's usual <unk> of crackpot theory and weird <unk> , but it 's a huge relief to shift away , even for a week , from the grind of heavy @-@ handed murder parties that define so much of the series " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , calling it " superb " and " very atmospheric " . Gibron praised Dourif 's guest role , and noted that the episode helped to lay the groundwork for the direction the series would take in its second season . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Force Majeure " five stars out of five , describing it as " rich and dark " . Shearman felt that the episode 's plot was " borrowed from The X @-@ Files " , and came across as " just a collection of ideas " . However , he praised Dourif 's " barnstorming performance " , comparing it to his role in The X @-@ Files episode " Beyond the Sea " , and noted that " Force Majeure " was " an episode which bravely redefines what [ Millennium ] is capable of " . 
 = Isabella Beeton = 
 Isabella Mary Beeton ( née Mayson ; 14 March 1836 – 6 February 1865 ) , also known as Mrs Beeton , was an English journalist , editor and writer . Her name is particularly associated with her first book , the 1861 work Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management . She was born in London and , after schooling in Islington , north London , and Heidelberg , Germany , she married Samuel Orchart Beeton , an ambitious publisher and magazine editor . 
 In 1857 , less than a year after the wedding , Isabella began writing for one of her husband 's publications , The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine . She translated French fiction and wrote the cookery column , though all the recipes were plagiarised from other works or sent in by the magazine 's readers . In 1859 the Beetons launched a series of 48 @-@ page monthly supplements to The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine ; the 24 instalments were published in one volume as Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management in October 1861 , which sold 60 @,@ 000 copies in the first year . Isabella was working on an abridged version of her book , which was to be titled The Dictionary of Every @-@ Day Cookery , when she died of puerperal fever in February 1865 at the age of 28 . She gave birth to four children , two of whom died in infancy , and had several miscarriages . Two of her biographers , Nancy Spain and Kathryn Hughes , posit the theory that Samuel had unknowingly contracted syphilis in a premarital liaison with a prostitute , and had unwittingly passed the disease on to his wife . 
 The Book of Household Management has been edited , revised and enlarged several times since Isabella 's death and is still in print as at 2016 . Food writers have stated that the subsequent editions of the work were far removed from and inferior to the original version . Several cookery writers , including Elizabeth David and Clarissa Dickson Wright , have criticised Isabella 's work , particularly her use of other people 's recipes . Others , such as the food writer Bee Wilson , consider the censure overstated , and that Beeton and her work should be thought extraordinary and admirable . Her name has become associated with knowledge and authority on Victorian cooking and home management , and the Oxford English Dictionary states that by 1891 the term Mrs Beeton had become used as a generic name for a domestic authority . She is also considered a strong influence in the building or shaping of a middle @-@ class identity of the Victorian era . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life , 1836 – 54 = = = 
 Isabella Mayson was born on 14 March 1836 in Marylebone , London . She was the eldest of three daughters to Benjamin Mayson , a linen factor ( merchant ) and his wife Elizabeth ( née <unk> ) . Shortly after Isabella 's birth the family moved to Milk Street , Cheapside , from where Benjamin traded . He died when Isabella was four years old , and Elizabeth , pregnant and unable to cope with raising the children on her own while maintaining Benjamin 's business , sent her two elder daughters to live with relatives . Isabella went to live with her recently widowed paternal grandfather in Great Orton , Cumberland , though she was back with her mother within the next two years . 
 Three years after Benjamin 's death Elizabeth married Henry Dorling , a widower with four children . Henry was the Clerk of Epsom Racecourse , and had been granted residence within the racecourse grounds . The family , including Elizabeth 's mother , moved to Surrey and over the next twenty years Henry and Elizabeth had a further thirteen children . Isabella was instrumental in her siblings ' upbringing , and collectively referred to them as a " living cargo of children " . The experience gave her much insight and experience in how to manage a family and its household . 
 After a brief education at a boarding school in Islington , in 1851 Isabella was sent to school in Heidelberg , Germany , accompanied by her stepsister Jane Dorling . Isabella became proficient in the piano and excelled in French and German ; she also gained knowledge and experience in making pastry . She had returned to Epsom by the summer of 1854 and took further lessons in pastry @-@ making from a local baker . 
 = = = Marriage and career , 1854 – 61 = = = 
 Around 1854 Isabella began a relationship with Samuel Orchart Beeton . His family had lived in Milk Street at the same time as the <unk> — Samuel 's father still ran the Dolphin Tavern there — and Samuel 's sisters had also attended the same Heidelberg school as Isabella . Samuel was the first British publisher of Harriet Beecher Stowe 's Uncle Tom 's Cabin in 1852 and had also released two innovative and pioneering journals : The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine in 1852 and the Boys ' Own magazine in 1855 . The couple entered into extensive correspondence in 1855 — in which Isabella signed her letters as " Fatty " — and they announced their engagement in June 1855 . The marriage took place at St Martin 's Church , Epsom , in July the following year , and was announced in The Times . Samuel was " a discreet but firm believer in the equality of women " and their relationship , both personal and professional , was an equal partnership . The couple went to Paris for a three @-@ week honeymoon , after which Samuel 's mother joined them in a visit to Heidelberg . They returned to Britain in August , when the newlyweds moved into 2 Chandos Villas , a large Italianate house in Pinner . 
 Within a month of returning from their honeymoon Isabella was pregnant . A few weeks before the birth , Samuel persuaded his wife to contribute to The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine , a publication that the food writers Mary Aylett and Olive Ordish consider was " designed to make women content with their lot inside the home , not to interest them in the world outside " . The magazine was affordable , aimed at young middle class women and was commercially successful , selling 50 @,@ 000 issues a month by 1856 . Isabella began by translating French fiction for publication as stories or serials . Shortly afterwards she started to work on the cookery column — which had been moribund for the previous six months following the departure of the previous correspondent — and the household article . The Beetons ' son , Samuel Orchart , was born towards the end of May 1857 , but died at the end of August that year . On the death certificate , the cause of death was given as diarrhoea and cholera , although Hughes hypothesises that Samuel senior had unknowingly contracted syphilis in a premarital liaison with a prostitute , and had unwittingly passed the condition on to his wife , which would have infected his son . 
 While coping with the loss of her child , Isabella continued to work at The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine . Although she was not a regular cook , she and Samuel obtained recipes from other sources . A request to receive the readers ' own recipes led to over 2 @,@ 000 being sent in , which were selected and edited by the Beetons . Published works were also copied , largely unattributed to any of the sources . These included Eliza Acton 's Modern Cookery for Private Families , Elizabeth Raffald 's The Experienced English Housekeeper , Marie @-@ Antoine Carême 's Le Pâtissier royal parisien , Louis Eustache Ude 's The French Cook , Alexis Soyer 's The Modern Housewife or , Ménagère and The Pantropheon , Hannah Glasse 's The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy , Maria Eliza Rundell 's A New System of Domestic Cookery , and the works of Charles Elmé Francatelli . Suzanne Daly and Ross G. Forman , in their examination of Victorian cooking culture , consider that the plagiarism makes it " an important index of mid @-@ Victorian and middle @-@ class society " because the production of the text from its own readers ensures that it is a reflection of what was actually being cooked and eaten at the time . In copying the recipes of others , Isabella was following the recommendation given to her by Henrietta English , a family friend , who wrote that " Cookery is a Science that is only learnt by Long Experience and years of study which of course you have not had . Therefore my advice would be compile a book from receipts from a Variety of the Best Books published on Cookery and Heaven knows there is a great variety for you to choose from . " 
 The Beetons partly followed the layout of Acton 's recipes , although with a major alteration : whereas the earlier writer provided the method of cooking followed by a list of the required ingredients , the recipes in The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine listed the components before the cooking process . Isabella 's standardised layout used for the recipes also showed the approximate costs of each serving , the seasonality of the ingredients and the number of portions per dish . According to the twentieth @-@ century British cookery writer Elizabeth David , one of the strengths of Isabella 's writing was in the " clarity and details of her general instructions , her brisk comments , her no @-@ nonsense asides " . Margaret Beetham , the historian , sees that one of the strengths of the book was the " consistent principle of organisation which made its heterogeneous contents look uniform and orderly " , and brought a consistent style in presentation and layout . Whereas Daly and Forman consider such an approach as " nothing if not formulaic " , Hughes sees it as " the thing most beloved by the mid Victorians , a system " . 
 During the particularly bitter winter of 1858 – 59 Isabella prepared her own soup that she served to the poor of Pinner , " Soup for benevolent purposes " ; her sister later recalled that Isabella " was busy making [ the ] soup for the poor , and the children used to call with their cans regularly to be refilled " . The recipe would become the only entry in her Book of Household Management that was her own . After two years of miscarriages , the couple 's second son was born in June 1859 ; he was also named Samuel Orchart Beeton . Hughes sees the miscarriages as further evidence of Samuel 's syphilis . 
 As early as 1857 the Beetons had considered using the magazine columns as the basis of a book of collected recipes and <unk> advice , Hughes believes , and in November 1859 they launched a series of 48 @-@ page monthly supplements with The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine . The print block for the whole series of the supplements was set from the beginning so the break between each edition was fixed at 48 pages , regardless of the text , and in several issues the text of a sentence or recipe is split between the end of one instalment and the beginning of the next . 
 The Beetons decided to revamp The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine , particularly the fashion column , which the historian Graham Nown describes as " a rather drab piece " . They travelled to Paris in March 1860 to meet Adolphe Goubaud , the publisher of the French magazine Le Moniteur de la Mode . The magazine carried a full @-@ sized dress pattern outlined on a fold @-@ out piece of paper for users to cut out and make their own dresses . The Beetons came to an agreement with Goubaud for the Frenchman to provide patterns and illustrations for their magazine . The first edition to carry the new feature appeared on 1 May , six weeks after the couple returned from Paris . For the redesigned magazine , Samuel was joined as editor by Isabella , who was described as " <unk> " . As well as being co @-@ editors , the couple were also equal partners . Isabella brought an efficiency and strong business acumen to Samuel 's normally disorganised and financially wasteful approach . She joined her husband at work , travelling daily by train to the office , where her presence caused a stir among commuters , most of whom were male . In June 1860 Isabella and Samuel travelled to Killarney , Ireland , for a fortnight 's holiday , leaving their son at home with his nurse . The Beetons enjoyed the sightseeing , although on the days it rained , they stayed inside their hotel and worked on the next edition of The Englishwoman 's Domestic Magazine . Isabella was impressed with the food they were served , and wrote in her diary that the dinners were " conducted in quite the French style " . 
 In September 1861 the Beetons released a new , weekly publication called The Queen , the Ladies ' Newspaper . With the Beetons busy running their other titles , they employed Frederick Greenwood as the editor . 
 = = = Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management and later , 1861 – 65 = = = 
 The complete version of Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management , consisting of the 24 collected monthly instalments , was published on 1 October 1861 ; it became one of the major publishing events of the nineteenth century . Isabella included an extensive 26 @-@ page " Analytical Index " in the book . Although not an innovation — it had been used in The Family Friend magazine since 1855 — Hughes considers the index in the Book of Household Management to be " fabulously detailed and exhaustively cross @-@ referenced " . Of the 1 @,@ 112 pages , over 900 contained recipes . The remainder provided advice on fashion , child care , animal husbandry , poisons , the management of servants , science , religion , first aid and the importance in the use of local and seasonal produce . In its first year of publication , the book sold 60 @,@ 000 copies . It reflected Victorian values , particularly hard work , thrift and cleanliness . Christopher Clausen , in his study of the British middle classes , sees that Isabella " reflected better than anyone else , and for a larger audience , the optimistic message that mid @-@ Victorian England was filled with opportunities for those who were willing to learn how to take advantage of them " . The food writer Annette Hope thinks that " one can understand its success . If ... young ladies knew nothing of domestic arrangements , no better book than this could have been devised for them . " 
 The reviews for Book of Household Management were positive . The critic for the London Evening Standard considered that Isabella had earned herself a household reputation , remarking that she had " succeeded in producing a volume which will be , for years to come , a treasure to be made much of in every English household " . The critic for the Saturday Review wrote that " for a really valuable repertory of hints on all sorts of household matters , we recommend Mrs Beeton with few misgivings " . The anonymous reviewer for The Bradford Observer considered that " the information afforded ... appears intelligible and explicit " ; the reviewer also praised the layout of the recipes , highlighting details relating to ingredients , seasonality and the times needed . Writing in The Morning Chronicle , an anonymous commentator opined that " Mrs Beeton has omitted nothing which tends to the comfort of housekeepers , or facilitates the many little troubles and cares that fall to the lot of every wife and mother . She may safely predict that this book will in future take precedence of every other on the same subject . " For the 1906 edition of the book , The Illustrated London News 's reviewer considered the work " a formidable body of domestic doctrine " , and thought that " the book is almost of the first magnitude " . 
 Samuel 's business decisions from 1861 were unproductive and included an ill @-@ advised investment in purchasing paper — in which he lost £ 1 @,@ 000 — and a court case over unpaid bills . His hubris in business affairs brought on financial difficulties and in early 1862 the couple had moved from their comfortable Pinner house to premises over their office . The air of central London was not conducive to the health of the Beetons ' son , and he began to ail . Three days after Christmas his health worsened and he died on New Year 's Eve 1862 at the age of three ; his death certificate gave the cause as " suppressed <unk> " and " laryngitis " . In March 1863 Isabella found that she was pregnant again , and in April the couple moved to a house in Greenhithe , Kent ; their son , who they named Orchart , was born on New Year 's Eve 1863 . Although the couple had been through financial problems , they enjoyed relative prosperity during 1863 , boosted by the sale of The Queen to Edward Cox in the middle of the year . 
 In the middle of 1864 the Beetons again visited the <unk> in Paris — the couple 's third visit to the city — and Isabella was pregnant during the visit , just as she had been the previous year . On her return to Britain she began working on an abridged version of the Book of Household Management , which was to be titled The Dictionary of Every @-@ Day Cookery . On 29 January 1865 , while working on the proofs of the dictionary , she went into labour ; the baby — Mayson Moss — was born that day . Isabella began to feel feverish the following day and died of puerperal fever on 6 February at the age of 28 . 
 Isabella was buried at West Norwood Cemetery on 11 February . When The Dictionary of Every @-@ Day Cookery was published in the same year , Samuel added a tribute to his wife at the end : 
 Her works speak for themselves ; and , although taken from this world in the very height and strength , and in the early days of womanhood , she felt satisfaction — so great to all who strive with good intent and warm will — of knowing herself regarded with respect and gratitude . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In May 1866 , following a severe downturn in his financial fortunes , Samuel sold the rights to the Book of Household Management to Ward , Lock and Tyler ( later Ward Lock & Co ) . The writer Nancy Spain , in her biography of Isabella , reports that , given the money the company made from the Beetons ' work , " surely no man ever made a worse or more impractical bargain " than Samuel did . In subsequent publications Ward Lock suppressed the details of the lives of the Beetons — especially the death of Isabella — in order to protect their investment by letting readers think she was still alive and creating recipes — what Hughes considers to be " intentional censorship " . Those later editions continued to make the connection to Isabella in what Beetham considers to be a " fairly ruthless marketing policy which was begun by Beeton but carried on vigorously by Ward , Lock , and Tyler " . Those subsequent volumes bearing Isabella 's name became less reflective of the original . Since its initial publication the Book of Household Management has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print . 
 Isabella and her main work have been subjected to criticism over the course of the twentieth century . Elizabeth David complains of recipes that are " sometimes slapdash and misleading " , although she acknowledges that Prosper Montagné 's Larousse Gastronomique also contains errors . The television cook Delia Smith admits she was puzzled " how on earth Mrs Beeton 's book managed to utterly eclipse ... [ Acton 's ] superior work " , while her fellow chef , Clarissa Dickson Wright , opines that " It would be unfair to blame any one person or one book for the decline of English cookery , but Isabella Beeton and her ubiquitous book do have a lot to answer for . " In comparison , the food writer Bee Wilson opines that disparaging Isabella 's work was only a " fashionable " stance to take and that the cook 's writing " simply makes you want to cook " . Christopher Driver , the journalist and food critic , suggests that the " relative stagnation and want of refinement in the indigenous cooking of Britain between 1880 and 1930 " may instead be explained by the " progressive debasement under successive editors , revises and <unk> " . David comments that " when plain English cooks " were active in their kitchens , " they followed plain English recipes and chiefly those from the Mrs Beeton books or their derivatives " . Dickson Wright considers Beeton to be a " fascinating source of information " from a social history viewpoint , and Aylett and Ordish consider the work to be " the best and most reliable guide for the scholar to the domestic history of the mid @-@ Victorian era " . 
 Despite the criticism , Clausen observes that " ' Mrs. Beeton ' has ... been for over a century the standard English cookbook , frequently outselling every other book but the Bible " . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the term Mrs Beeton became used as a generic name for " an authority on cooking and domestic subjects " as early as 1891 , and Beetham opines that " ' Mrs. Beeton ' became a trade mark , a brand name " . In a review by Gavin Koh published in a 2009 issue of The BMJ , Mrs Beeton 's Book of Household Management was labelled a medical classic . In Isabella 's " attempt to educate the average reader about common medical complaints and their management " , Koh argues , " she preceded the family health guides of today " . Robin Wensley , a professor of strategic management , believes that Isabella 's advice and guidance on household management can also be applied to business management , and her lessons on the subject have stood the test of time better than some of her advice on cooking or etiquette . 
 Following the radio broadcast of Meet Mrs. Beeton , a 1934 comedy in which Samuel was portrayed in an unflattering light , and Mrs Beeton , a 1937 documentary , <unk> Beeton worked with H. Montgomery Hyde to produce the biography Mr and Mrs Beeton , although completion and publication were delayed until 1951 . In the meantime Nancy Spain published Mrs Beeton and her Husband in 1948 , updated and retitled in 1956 to The Beeton Story . In the new edition Spain hinted at , but did not elucidate upon , on the possibility that Samuel contracted syphilis . Several other biographies followed , including from the historian Sarah Freeman , who wrote Isabella and Sam in 1977 ; Nown 's Mrs Beeton : 150 Years of Cookery and Household Management , published on the 150th anniversary of Isabella 's birthday , and Hughes 's The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton , published in 2006 . Isabella was ignored by the Dictionary of National Biography for many years : while Acton was included in the first published volume of 1885 , Isabella did not have an entry until 1993 . 
 There have been several television broadcasts about Isabella . In 1970 Margaret Tyzack portrayed her in a solo performance written by Rosemary Hill , in 2006 Anna Madeley played Isabella in a docudrama , and Sophie Dahl presented a documentary , The Marvellous Mrs Beeton , in the same year . 
 The literary historian Kate Thomas sees Isabella as " a powerful force in the making of middle @-@ class Victorian domesticity " , while the Oxford University Press , advertising an abridged edition of the Book of Household Management , considers Isabella 's work a " founding text " and " a force in shaping " the middle @-@ class identity of the Victorian era . Within that identity , the historian Sarah Richardson sees that one of Beeton 's achievements was the integration of different threads of domestic science into one volume , which " elevat [ ed ] the middle @-@ class female housekeeper 's role ... placing it in a broader and more public context " . Nown quotes an unnamed academic who thought that " Mrs <unk> has preserved the family as a social unit , and made social reforms a possibility " , while Nicola Humble , in her history of British food , sees The Book of Household Management as " an engine for social change " which led to a " new cult of domesticity that was to play such a major role in mid @-@ Victorian life " . Nown considers Isabella 
 ... a singular and remarkable woman , praised in her lifetime and later forgotten and ignored when a pride in light pastry ... were no longer considered prerequisites for womanhood . Yet in her lively , progressive way , she helped many women to overcome the loneliness of marriage and gave the family the importance it deserved . In the climate of her time she was brave , strong @-@ minded and a tireless champion of her sisters everywhere . 
 = Eastcote House Gardens = 
 Eastcote House Gardens is an area of public parkland in Eastcote , within the London Borough of Hillingdon . The site covers 3 @.@ 63 hectares ( 9 acres ) and incorporates the walled garden , dovecote and coach house of Eastcote House . The house was demolished in 1964 by the Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District Council ( RNUDC ) , the predecessor of the London Borough of Hillingdon . At the public 's request , the garden and outbuildings were retained and are now maintained by a group of volunteers , the Friends of Eastcote House Gardens , in partnership with the local authority . 
 Eastcote House was one of three largest in Eastcote , together with Highgrove House and Haydon Hall . All came to be owned by the RNUDC , but only Highgrove House remains in its original form ; Haydon Hall was demolished in 1967 by the RNUDC 's successor . 
 The coach house , dovecote , and garden walls received Grade II listed status on 6 September 1974 . Ecological surveys have found fifty types of trees in the gardens , and numerous species of birds , mammals and insects have been recorded . The gardens received the Green Flag Award in September 2011 following an earlier inspection . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Eastcote House = = = 
 Eastcote House is first recorded in 1507 , when it was known as " <unk> " , under the ownership of the <unk> family . In 1525 , Ralph Hawtrey married Winifred <unk> , and they made <unk> their marital home , renaming it Eastcote House . The house was extended by either Ralph Hawtrey or his son John , and the brick exterior added . The original timber framework was not revealed again until the house was demolished . John Hawtrey built the dovecote without applying for the required licence . After his death in 1593 , his nephew Ralph Hawtrey applied retrospectively , and the licence was granted . During the 18th century , the dovecote was substantially rebuilt , leaving only the original first few rows of bricks . The Hawtrey family , later the Hawtrey @-@ <unk> , continued to live in the house until Francis Deane moved to East View in Uxbridge in 1878 . Eastcote House was then let to tenants and parts of the estate sold for housing developments . 
 The Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District Council purchased the house and grounds , totalling 9 @.@ 1 acres ( 3 @.@ 7 ha ) , in 1931 after it became endangered by the proposed new housing development by the builders <unk> & <unk> . Eastcote House became a public building for the use of the Scouts , Guides , Women 's Institute and a welfare clinic , though under the ownership of the council , the condition of the house deteriorated . In 1962 the house was declared unsafe , and it was demolished two years later after the council ruled there were no features of the house worth retaining . 
 The Eastcote Billiards Club began using the coach house in 1938 . The club 's lease of the building expired in 2005 , but the club remained in residence , rent @-@ free . In 2013 , the club had moved to nearby Haydon Hall . 
 = = = Gardens = = = 
 The narrow bricks in the garden walls have been dated to around the 17th century . The walled garden would originally have been used predominantly for growing fruit , vegetables , and herbs for the household 's consumption , as well as flowers to exhibit at shows and for pleasure . 
 The walled garden , coach house , and dovecote were retained at the public 's request when the house was demolished . On 6 September 1974 , the garden walls and remaining buildings were awarded Grade II listed status . The herb garden was planted across the four centre beds in 1977 to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II . These included Artemisia , catmint , <unk> and curry plants . To keep the plants within the beds , each was lined by box in 1983 . 
 The eastern wall was rebuilt in 1981 , at which point the northern wall was reduced by seven layers of brick . An area of topiary with seven specimens was planted in 1983 with box , behind the coach house . Lilacs , weeping cherries and hibiscus were planted in 1984 along the garden wall near the coach house . A pergola covered with laburnum and wisteria was introduced in 1986 leading to the entrance into the walled garden . Between 1986 and 1988 , two iron gates and a sundial were added . In the 1990s , the orchard near the walled garden was supplemented by black mulberry , walnut and quince trees . 
 A footbridge crossing the River Pinn and leading to Long Meadow was replaced in 2007 ; the original had been built in 1977 . In 2008 , the Friends of Eastcote House Gardens was formed to care for the gardens and ensure they remain protected . The group received a £ 24 @,@ 000 grant from the Big Lottery Fund for the replanting of the gardens , which went ahead in April 2010 . The Mayor of Hillingdon officially reopened the gardens on 17 July 2010 . 
 A survey completed in November 2009 found 50 types of trees in the gardens . Bats were found in the coach house during an ecological survey , but were not believed to be nesting there long @-@ term . Species of birds observed in the gardens have included song thrush , jay , wren , robin , kingfisher and tawny owl . Mammals regularly observed include hedgehogs , grey squirrels and foxes . Butterflies including the holly blue and painted lady have been recorded . 
 Hillingdon Council provided a £ 150 @,@ 000 grant in September 2010 for the restoration of the buildings . In April 2011 , the council joined with the Friends to seek funding of up to £ 1 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund , to support restoration work . It is planned that the coach house could be converted into a tea room . 
 The gardens received the Green Flag Award in 2011 following an earlier inspection . The flag was raised in a ceremony on 14 September 2011 . 
 = Perseus ( constellation ) = 
 Perseus , named after the Greek mythological hero Perseus , is a constellation in the northern sky . It is one of the 48 listed by the 2nd @-@ century astronomer Ptolemy , and among the 88 modern constellations defined by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) . It is located in the northern celestial hemisphere near several other constellations named after ancient Greek legends surrounding Perseus , including Andromeda to the west and Cassiopeia to the north . Perseus is also bordered by Aries and Taurus to the south , Auriga to the east , Camelopardalis to the north , and Triangulum to the west . Some star atlases during the early 19th century also depicted Perseus holding onto the head of the Medusa , whose asterism was named together as Perseus et Caput Medusae , however , this never came into popular usage . 
 The galactic plane of the Milky Way passes through Perseus but is mostly obscured by molecular clouds . The constellation 's brightest star is the yellow @-@ white supergiant Alpha Persei ( also called Mirfak ) , which shines at magnitude 1 @.@ 79 . It and many of the surrounding stars are members of an open cluster known as the Alpha Persei Cluster . The best @-@ known star , however , is Algol ( Beta Persei ) , linked with ominous legends because of its variability , which is noticeable to the naked eye . Rather than being an intrinsically variable star , it is an eclipsing binary . Other notable star systems in Perseus include X Persei , a binary system containing a neutron star , and GK Persei , a nova that peaked at magnitude 0 @.@ 2 in 1901 . The Double Cluster , comprising two open clusters quite near each other in the sky , was known to the ancient Chinese . The constellation gives its name to the Perseus cluster ( Abell 426 ) , a massive galaxy cluster located 250 million light @-@ years from Earth . It hosts the radiant of the annual Perseids meteor shower — one of the most prominent meteor showers in the sky . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 The constellation of Perseus may be derived from the Babylonian Old Man ( <unk> ) constellation , then associated with East in the MUL.APIN — an astronomical compilation dating to around 1000 BCE . In Greek mythology , Perseus was the son of Danaë , who was sent by King Polydectes to bring the head of Medusa the Gorgon — whose visage caused all who gazed upon her to turn to stone — as a wedding gift . Perseus slew Medusa in her sleep , and Pegasus and <unk> appeared from her body . Perseus continued to the realm of Cepheus whose daughter Andromeda was to be sacrificed to Cetus the sea monster . 
 Perseus rescued the princess Andromeda from Cetus by turning it to stone with Medusa 's head . He turned Polydectes and his followers to stone and appointed Dictys the fisherman king . Perseus and Andromeda married and had six children . In the sky , Perseus lies near the constellations Andromeda , Cepheus , Cassiopeia ( Andromeda 's mother ) , Cetus , and Pegasus . 
 = = = In non @-@ Western astronomy = = = 
 Four Chinese constellations are contained in the area of the sky identified with Perseus in the West . <unk> ( <unk> ) , the Celestial Boat , was the third paranatellon ( A star or constellation which rises at the same time as another star or object . ) of the third house of the White Tiger of the West , representing the boats that Chinese people were reminded to build in case of a catastrophic flood season . Incorporating stars from the northern part of the constellation , it contained Mu , Delta , Psi , Alpha , Gamma and Eta Persei . <unk> ( <unk> ) , the Swollen Waters , was the fourth paranatellon of the aforementioned house , representing the potential of unusually high floods during the end of August and beginning of September at the beginning of the flood season . Lambda and possibly Mu Persei lay within it . <unk> ( <unk> ) , the Great Trench , was the fifth paranatellon of that house , representing the trenches where criminals executed en masse in August were interred . It was formed by Kappa , Omega , Rho , 24 , 17 and 15 Persei . The pile of corpses prior to their interment was represented by <unk> ( <unk> , Algol ) , the sixth paranatellon of the house . The Double Cluster , h and Chi Persei , had special significance in Chinese astronomy . Known as Hsi and Ho , the two clusters represented two astronomers who failed to predict a total solar eclipse and were subsequently beheaded . 
 In Polynesia , Perseus was not commonly recognized as a separate constellation ; the only people that named it were those of the Society Islands , who called it <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " Little Valley " . Algol may have been named <unk> by the Māori people , but the evidence for this identification is disputed . <unk> ( " Split " ) occasionally came into conflict with Tangaroa @-@ <unk> over which of them should appear in the sky , the outcome affecting the tides . It matches the Maori description of a blue @-@ white star near Aldebaran but does not disappear as the myth would indicate . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Perseus is bordered by Aries and Taurus to the south , Auriga to the east , Camelopardalis and Cassiopeia to the north , and Andromeda and Triangulum to the west . Covering 615 square degrees , it ranks twenty @-@ fourth of the 88 constellations in size . It appears prominently in the northern sky during the Northern Hemisphere 's spring . Its main asterism consists of 19 stars . The constellation 's boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a 26 @-@ sided polygon . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 01h <unk> and 04h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between 30 @.@ 92 ° and 59 @.@ 11 ° . The International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) adopted the three @-@ letter abbreviation " Per " for the constellation in 1922 . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Algol ( from the Arabic <unk> <unk> Ra 's al @-@ Ghul , which means The Demon 's Head ) , also known by its Bayer designation Beta Persei , is the best @-@ known star in Perseus . Representing the eye of the Gorgon Medusa in Greek mythology , it was called Horus in Egyptian mythology and Rosh ha Satan ( " Satan 's Head " ) in Hebrew . Located 92 @.@ 8 light @-@ years from Earth , it varies in apparent magnitude from a minimum of 3 @.@ 5 to a maximum of 2 @.@ 3 over a period of 2 @.@ 867 days . The star system is the prototype of a group of eclipsing binary stars named Algol variables , though it has a third member to make up what is actually a triple star system . The brightest component is a blue @-@ white main @-@ sequence star of spectral type B8V , which is 3 @.@ 5 times as massive and 180 times as luminous as the Sun . The secondary component is an orange subgiant star of type <unk> that has begun cooling and expanding to 3 @.@ 5 times the radius of the Sun , and has 4 @.@ 5 times the luminosity and 80 % of its mass . These two are separated by only 0 @.@ 05 astronomical units ( AU ) — five percent of the distance between the Earth and Sun ; the main dip in brightness arises when the larger fainter companion passes in front of the hotter brighter primary . The tertiary component is a main sequence star of type A7 , which is located on average 2 @.@ 69 AU from the other two stars . AG Persei is another Algol variable in Perseus , whose primary component is a B @-@ type main sequence star with an apparent magnitude of 6 @.@ 69 . Phi Persei is a double star , although the two components do not eclipse each other . The primary star is a Be star of spectral type <unk> , possibly a giant star , and the secondary companion is likely a stellar remnant . The secondary has a similar spectral type to O @-@ type <unk> . 
 With the historical name Mirfak ( Arabic for elbow ) or <unk> , Alpha Persei is the brightest star of this constellation with an apparent magnitude of 1 @.@ 79 . A supergiant of spectral type <unk> located around 590 light @-@ years away from Earth , Mirfak has 5 @,@ 000 times the luminosity and 42 times the diameter of our Sun . It is the brightest member of the Alpha Persei Cluster ( also known as <unk> 20 and <unk> 39 ) , which is an open cluster containing many luminous stars . Neighboring bright stars that are members include the Be stars Delta ( magnitude 3 @.@ 0 ) , Psi ( 4 @.@ 3 ) , and 48 Persei ( 4 @.@ 0 ) ; the Beta Cephei variable Epsilon Persei ( 2 @.@ 9 ) ; and the stars 29 ( 5 @.@ 2 ) , 30 ( 5 @.@ 5 ) , 31 ( 5 @.@ 0 ) , and 34 Persei ( 4 @.@ 7 ) . Of magnitude 4 @.@ 05 , nearby Iota Persei has been considered a member of the group , but is actually located a mere 34 light @-@ years distant . This star is very similar to our Sun , shining with 2 @.@ 2 times its luminosity . It is a yellow main sequence star of spectral type G0V . Extensive searches have failed to find evidence of it having a planetary system . 
 Zeta Persei is the third @-@ brightest star in the constellation at magnitude 2 @.@ 86 . Around 750 light @-@ years from Earth , it is a blue @-@ white supergiant 26 – 27 times the radius of the Sun and 47 @,@ 000 times its luminosity . It is the brightest star ( as seen from Earth ) of a moving group of bright blue @-@ white giant and supergiant stars , the Perseus OB2 Association or Zeta Persei Association . Zeta is a triple star system , with a companion blue @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type B8 and apparent magnitude 9 @.@ 16 around 3900 AU distant from the primary , and a white main sequence star of magnitude 9 @.@ 90 and spectral type A2 , some 50 @,@ 000 AU away , that may or may not be gravitationally bound to the other two . X Persei is a double system in this association ; one component is a hot , bright star and the other is a neutron star . With an apparent magnitude of 6 @.@ 72 , it is too dim to be seen with the naked eye even in perfectly dark conditions . The system is an X @-@ ray source and the primary star appears to be undergoing substantial mass loss . Once thought to be a member of the Perseus OB2 Association , Omicron Persei is a multiple star system with a combined visual magnitude of 3 @.@ 85 . It is composed of two blue @-@ white stars — a giant of spectral class <unk> and main sequence star of B3 — which orbit each other every 4 @.@ 5 days and are distorted into <unk> due to their small separation . The system has a third star about which little is known . At an estimated distance of 1475 light @-@ years from Earth , the system is now thought to lie too far from the center of the Zeta Persei group to belong to it . 
 <unk> <unk> + 32 ( <unk> Persei ) is another X @-@ ray binary in Perseus . One component is a red dwarf star of spectral type M4.5V , which orbits a mysterious dense and heavy object — possibly a black hole — every 5 @.@ 1 hours . The system is an X @-@ ray nova , meaning that it experiences periodic outbursts in the X @-@ ray band of the electromagnetic spectrum . If the system does indeed contain a black hole , it would be the smallest one ever recorded . Further analysis in 2012 calculated a mass of 2 @.@ 1 solar masses , which raises questions as to what the object actually is as it appears to be too small to be a black hole . 
 GK Persei , also known as Nova Persei 1901 , is a bright nova that appeared halfway between Algol and Delta Persei . Discovered on 21 February 1901 by Scottish amateur astronomer Thomas David Anderson , it peaked at magnitude 0 @.@ 2 — almost as bright as Capella and Vega . It faded to magnitude 13 around 30 years after its peak brightness . Xi Persei , traditionally known as <unk> , a blue giant of spectral type <unk> , is one of the hottest bright stars in the sky , with a surface temperature of 37 @,@ 500 K. It is one of the more massive stars , being between 26 and 32 solar masses , and is 330 @,@ 000 times as luminous as our Sun . 
 Named <unk> Tertia , Rho Persei varies in brightness like Algol , but is a pulsating rather than eclipsing star . At an advanced stage of stellar evolution , it is a red giant that has expanded for the second time to have a radius around 150 times that of our Sun . Its helium has been fused into heavier elements and its core is composed of carbon and oxygen . It is a semiregular variable star of the Mu Cephei type , whose apparent magnitude varies between 3 @.@ 3 and 4 @.@ 0 with periods of 50 , 120 and 250 days . The Double Cluster contains three even larger stars , each over 700 solar radii : S , RS , and SU Persei are all semiregular pulsating M @-@ type supergiants . The stars are not visible to the naked eye ; SU Persei , the brightest of the three , has an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 9 and thus is visible through binoculars . AX Persei is another binary star , the primary component is a red giant in an advanced phase of stellar evolution , which is transferring material onto an accretion disc around a smaller star . The star system is one of the few eclipsing symbiotic binaries , but is unusual because the secondary star is not a white dwarf , but an A @-@ type star . DY Persei is a variable star that is the prototype of DY Persei variables , which are carbon @-@ rich R Coronae Borealis variables that exhibit the variability of asymptotic giant branch stars . DY Persei itself is a carbon star that is too dim to see through binoculars , with an apparent magnitude of 10 @.@ 6 . 
 Seven stars in Perseus have been found to have planetary systems . <unk> Persei is a star in the young open cluster IC 348 that appears to be periodically eclipsed by a giant planet every 4 @.@ 7 years . This has been inferred to be an object with a maximum mass of 6 times that of Jupiter and an orbital radius of 3 @.@ 3 AU . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The galactic plane of the Milky Way passes through Perseus , but is much less obvious than elsewhere in the sky as it is mostly obscured by molecular clouds . The Perseus Arm is a spiral arm of the Milky Way galaxy and stretches across the sky from the constellation Cassiopeia through Perseus and Auriga to Gemini and Monoceros . This segment is towards the rim of the galaxy . 
 Within the Perseus Arm lie two open clusters ( NGC 869 and NGC 884 ) known as the Double Cluster . Sometimes known as h and Chi ( χ ) Persei respectively , they are easily visible through binoculars and small telescopes . Both lie more than 7 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from Earth and are several hundred light @-@ years apart . The Double Cluster was first recorded during the reign of the Chinese king Tsung @-@ K 'ang , who reigned during the Xia dynasty ( <unk> – <unk> BCE ) . Both clusters are of approximately magnitude 4 and 0 @.@ 5 degrees in diameter . The two are Trumpler class I 3 r clusters , though NGC 869 is a Shapley class f and NGC 884 is a Shapley class e cluster . These classifications indicate that they are both quite rich ( dense ) ; NGC 869 is the richer of the pair . The clusters are both distinct from the surrounding star field and are clearly concentrated at their centers . The constituent stars , numbering over 100 in each cluster , range widely in brightness . 
 <unk> is an open cluster that appears at magnitude 5 @.@ 5 , and is approximately 1 @,@ 500 light @-@ years from Earth . It contains about 100 stars scattered over a field of view larger than that of the full moon . <unk> can be resolved with good eyesight but is best viewed using a telescope at low magnifications . IC 348 is a somewhat young open cluster that is still contained within the nebula from which its stars formed . It is located about 1 @,@ 027 light @-@ years from Earth , is about 2 million years old , and contains many stars with circumstellar disks . Many brown dwarfs have been discovered in this cluster due to its age ; since brown dwarfs cool as they age , it is easier to find them in younger clusters . 
 There are many nebulae in Perseus . <unk> is a planetary nebula , also called the Little Dumbbell Nebula . It appears two arc @-@ minutes by one arc @-@ minute across and has an apparent brightness of magnitude 10 @.@ 1 . NGC 1499 , also known as the California Nebula , is an emission nebula that was discovered in 1884 – 85 by American astronomer Edward E. Barnard . It is very difficult to observe visually because its low surface brightness makes it appear dimmer than most other emission nebulae . NGC 1333 is a reflection nebula and a star @-@ forming region . Perseus also contains a giant molecular cloud , called the Perseus molecular cloud ; it belongs to the Orion Spur and is known for its low rate of star formation compared to similar clouds . 
 Perseus contains some notable galaxies . NGC 1023 is a barred spiral galaxy of magnitude 10 @.@ 35 , around 11 @.@ 6 million pc ( 38 million ly ) from Earth . It is the principal member of the NGC 1023 group of galaxies and is possibly interacting with another galaxy . NGC 1260 is either a lenticular or tightly @-@ wound spiral galaxy about 76 @.@ 7 million pc ( 250 million ly ) from Earth . It was the host galaxy of the supernova SN 2006gy , one of the brightest ever recorded . It is a member of the Perseus cluster ( Abell 426 ) , a massive galaxy cluster located 76 @.@ 6 million pc ( 250 million ly ) from Earth . With a redshift of 0 @.@ <unk> , Abell 426 is the closest major cluster to the Earth . NGC 1275 , a component of the cluster , is a Seyfert galaxy containing an active nucleus that produces jets of material , surrounding the galaxy with massive bubbles . These bubbles create sound waves that travel through the Perseus Cluster , sounding a B flat 57 octaves below middle C. This galaxy is a cD galaxy that has undergone many galactic mergers throughout its existence , as evidenced by the " high velocity system " — the remnants of a smaller galaxy — surrounding it . Its active nucleus is a strong source of radio waves . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 The Perseids are a prominent annual meteor shower that appear to radiate from Perseus from mid @-@ July , peaking in activity between 9 and 14 August each year . Associated with Comet Swift – Tuttle , they have been observed for about 2 @,@ 000 years . The September Epsilon Perseids , discovered in 2012 , are a meteor shower with an unknown parent body in the Oort cloud . 
 = <unk> = 
 The brolga ( Grus <unk> ) , formerly known as the native companion , is a bird in the crane family . It has also been given the name Australian crane , a term coined in 1865 by well @-@ known ornithological artist John Gould in his Birds of Australia . 
 The brolga is a common , gregarious wetland bird species of tropical and south @-@ eastern Australia and New Guinea . It is a tall , upright bird with a small head , long beak , slender neck and long legs . The plumage is mainly grey , with black wing tips , and it has an orange @-@ red band of colour on its head . It is well known for its intricate mating dance . The nest is built of sticks on an island in marshland and usually two eggs are laid . Incubation takes 32 days and the newly hatched young are precocial . The adult diet is mostly plant matter , but invertebrates and small vertebrates are also eaten . 
 Although the bird is not considered endangered over the majority of its range , populations are showing some decline , especially in southern Australia , and local action plans are being undertaken in some areas . It is the official bird emblem of the state of Queensland . 
 = = Description = = 
 The brolga is a tall bird with a large beak , long slender neck and stilt @-@ like legs . The sexes are indistinguishable in appearance though the females are usually a little smaller . The adult has a grey @-@ green , skin @-@ covered crown , and the face , cheeks and throat pouch are also featherless and are coral red . Other parts of the head are olive green and clothed in dark bristles . The gular pouch , which is particularly pendulous in adult males , is covered with such dense bristles as to make it appear black . The beak is greyish @-@ green , long and slender , and the iris is yellowish @-@ orange . The ear coverts appear as a grey patch of small feathers surrounded by red naked skin and the body plumage is silvery @-@ grey . The feathers on the back and the wing coverts have pale margins . The primary wing feathers are black and the secondaries grey . The legs and feet are greyish @-@ black . Juveniles lack the red band and have fully feathered heads with dark irises . A fully @-@ grown brolga can reach a height of 0 @.@ 7 to 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 2 ft 4 in to 4 ft 3 in ) and has a wingspan of 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 5 ft 7 in to 7 ft 10 in ) . Adult males average slightly less than 7 kilograms ( 15 lb ) with females averaging a little under 6 kilograms ( 13 lb ) . The weight can range from 3 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 7 kilograms ( 8 @.@ 2 to 19 @.@ 2 lb ) . 
 The brolga can easily be confused with the sarus crane , however the latter 's red head colouring extends partly down the neck while the brolga 's is confined to the head . The brolga is more silvery @-@ grey in colour than the sarus , the legs are blackish rather than pink and the trumpeting and grating calls it makes are at a lower pitch . Additionally , in Australia the range of the sarus is limited to a few scattered localities in northern Australia , compared to the more widespread distribution of the brolga . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Brolgas are widespread and often abundant in north and north @-@ east Australia , especially north @-@ east Queensland , and are common as far south as Victoria . They are also found in southern New Guinea and as rare vagrants in New Zealand and the northern part of Western Australia . The population in northern Australia is estimated at between 20 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 birds and in southern Australia , 1 @,@ 000 birds . The numbers of individuals in New Guinea are unknown . 
 Brolgas are non @-@ migratory but move to different areas in response to seasonal rains . In northern Australia , during the dry season ( June to November ) , populations of brolgas are gregarious and largely occupy a strip of freshwater marshland up to 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) wide , lying between the coastal hills and the saline mangrove swamps that fringe the sea . They also visit freshwater lagoons in the vicinity , river and tidal pools , the edges of lakes and irrigated farmland . In December , shortly before the start of the monsoon season , they disperse to their breeding areas . Some remain near the coast but others move up to 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) inland to similar habitats . Little is known of the movements and habitats of the New Guinea populations . 
 Further south , in Victoria and New South Wales , rainfall is spread more evenly throughout the year and the driest season lasts from December to May . At this time , southern populations congregate in inland flocking areas which include upland marshes , the edges of reservoirs and lakes , pastures and agricultural land . When rain arrives in June and July , they disperse to the coastal freshwater marshes , shallow lakes , wet meadows and other wetlands where they breed . 
 Queensland is the state in which the greatest numbers of brolgas are found , and sometimes flocks of over 1 @,@ 000 individuals are seen here . The bird is the official bird emblem for the state and also appears on its coat of arms . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Brolgas are gregarious creatures ; the basic social unit is a pair or small family group of about three or four birds , usually parents together with juvenile offspring , though some of such groups are unrelated . In the non @-@ breeding season , they gather into large flocks , which appear to be many self @-@ contained individual groups rather than a single social unit . Within the flock , families tend to remain separate and to coordinate their activities with one another rather than with the flock as a whole . 
 When taking off from the ground the flight is ungainly , with much flapping of wings . The bird 's black wingtips are visible while it is in the air and once it gathers speed , its flight is much more graceful and it often ascends to great heights . Here it may be barely discernible as it wheels in great circles , sometimes emitting its hoarse cry . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Brolgas are omnivorous and forage in wetlands and saltwater marshes . They tear up the ground with their powerful beaks in search of bulbs and edible roots . Northern populations mainly eat tubers of the <unk> sedge ( Eleocharis dulcis ) which they extract by digging holes in the mud , but these are not available south of Brisbane . They also eat the shoots and leaves of wetland and upland plants , cereal grains , seeds , insects , mollusks , crustaceans , frogs and lizards . In saltwater marshes they may drink saline water and they have glands near their eyes through which they can excrete excess salt . 
 = = = Mating and breeding = = = 
 Brolgas are monogamous and usually bond for life , though new pairings may follow a fatality of one individual . A feature of a bonded couple is the synchronous calling which the female usually initiates . She stands with her wings folded and beak pointed to the sky and emits a series of trumpeting calls . The male stands alongside in a similar posture but with his wings flared and primaries drooping . He emits one longer call for every two emitted by the female . 
 Brolgas are well known for their ritualised , intricate mating dances . The performance begins with a bird picking up some grass and tossing it into the air before catching it in its bill . The bird then jumps a metre ( yard ) into the air with outstretched wings and continues by stretching its neck , bowing , strutting around , calling and bobbing its head up and down . Sometimes just one brolga dances for its mate ; often they dance in pairs ; and sometimes a whole group of about a dozen dance together , lining up roughly opposite each other before they start . 
 The brolga breeds throughout its range in Australia and New Guinea . The start of the breeding season is largely determined by rainfall rather than the time of year ; thus the season is February to May after the rainy season in the monsoonal areas , and September to December in southern Australia . The flocks split up and pairs establish nesting territories in wetlands . In food @-@ rich habitats , nests can be quite close together , and are often found in the same area as those of the sarus crane . The nest , which is built by both sexes , is a raised mound of sticks , uprooted grass , and other plant material sited on a small island in shallow water , or occasionally floating . If no grasses are available , mud or roots unearthed from marsh beds are employed . Sometimes the birds make hardly any nest , take over a disused swan nest , or simply lay on bare ground . 
 There is a single brood produced per year . The clutch size is usually two , but occasionally one or three eggs are laid about two days apart . The dull white eggs are sparsely spotted or blotched with reddish brown , with the markings being denser at the larger end of the egg . They measure 95 by 61 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 7 by 2 @.@ 4 in ) . Both sexes incubate the eggs with the female sitting on the nest at night . Hatching is not synchronised , and occurs after about thirty @-@ two days of incubation . The newly hatched chicks are covered with grey down and weigh about 100 grams ( 3 @.@ 5 oz ) . They are precocial and are able to leave the nest within a day or two . Both parents feed and guard the young . The chicks fledge within four or five weeks , are fully feathered within three months and are able to fly about two weeks later . When threatened , they hide and stay quiet while the parents perform a broken @-@ wing display to distract the predator . The adults continue to protect the young for up to eleven months , or for nearly two years if they do not breed again in the interim . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species lists the brolga as being of " least concern " . This is because it has a large range and a population of more than 10 @,@ 000 individuals . Although the population may be declining slowly , this is not at a rate that would warrant the brolga being included in a more vulnerable category . <unk> are not listed as threatened on the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . However , their conservation status varies from state to state within Australia . For example , the brolga is listed as threatened under the Victorian Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act ( 1988 ) . Under this Act , an Action Statement for the recovery and future management of this species has been prepared . It is also included in the 2007 advisory list of threatened vertebrate fauna in Victoria where it is listed as vulnerable . 
 The chief threats faced by the brolga , particularly in the southern part of its range , are habitat destruction , the drainage of wetlands , collision with powerlines , and predation by the introduced red fox . It is more secure in its northern habitat as the land is mostly unsuitable for farming and much of it is in national parks or private ownership , but changes in vegetation cover , encouraged by the rooting activities of feral pigs , may reduce the abundance of <unk> sedge and may make the brolga more vulnerable by providing cover for predators . 
 Conservation measures being undertaken include international cooperation , legal protection , research , monitoring , habitat management , education and the maintenance of captive flocks for propagation and reintroduction . Although the bird breeds well in the wild , it has proved much more problematic to get it to breed while in captivity . The International Crane Foundation , a conservation organisation located in Baraboo , Wisconsin , began a captive breeding programme with three pairs of wild brolga captured in Australia in 1972 . In 1984 they imported twelve fertile eggs for further breeding . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 When first described by the naturalist George Perry in 1810 , the brolga was <unk> as a species of Ardea , the genus that includes the herons and egrets . It is in fact a member of the <unk> — the order that includes the crakes , rails , and cranes , and a member of the genus Grus . The ornithologist John Gould used the name Grus <unk> when he wrote about it and noted it to be widespread in the north and east of Australia . He also recorded that it was easy to tame , and that James Macarthur had kept a pair at his home in Camden . Calling it the Australian Crane , he mentioned that its early colonial name had been Native Companion . The Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union made brolga , a popular name derived from Gamilaraay <unk> , the official name for the bird in 1926 . 
 In 1976 , it was suggested that the brolga , sarus crane ( Grus antigone ) and white @-@ naped crane ( Grus <unk> ) formed a natural group on the basis of similarities in their calls . This was further confirmed by molecular studies of their DNA . These also showed that the brolga is more closely related to the white @-@ naped crane than it is to the morphologically more similar sarus crane . 
 There have traditionally been considered to be two subspecies ; <unk> argentea is the northern Australian crane and is found in Western Australia , the Northern Territory and western Queensland ; <unk> <unk> , the southern Australian crane , occurs in New Guinea , Queensland , New South Wales , Victoria and South Australia . The two subspecies intergrade where their ranges coincide . Some authorities now consider that there are no subspecies , merely two separate populations of the bird adapted to breed at different periods of the year . 
 = Steve Dodd = 
 Steve Dodd ( 1 June 1928 – 10 November 2014 ) was an Indigenous Australian actor , notable for playing indigenous characters across seven decades of Australian film . After beginning his working life as a stockman and rodeo rider , Dodd was given his first film roles by prominent Australian actor Chips Rafferty . His career was interrupted by six years in the Australian Army during the Korean War , and limited by typecasting . 
 Dodd performed in several major Australian movies , including Gallipoli and The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith , in which he played <unk> , the murdering uncle of the lead character . He also held minor parts in Australia @-@ based international film productions including The Coca @-@ Cola Kid , Quigley Down Under and The Matrix . He likewise appeared in minor roles in early Australian television series , such as Homicide and Rush , as well as later series including The Flying Doctors . In 2013 , Dodd was honoured with the Jimmy Little Lifetime Achievement Award at the 19th Deadly Awards at the Sydney Opera House . He died in November 2014 . 
 = = Life and career outside acting = = 
 Dodd , also known as <unk> or Mulla <unk> ( flying fish ) , was an Arunta or <unk> Indigenous man from central Australia . It is unclear if Dodd was from the Northern Territory or South Australia : one source states he was born in Alice Springs , and another states he was born at the Hermannsburg Mission , to the town 's south @-@ west . However a third source suggests <unk> , across the border in South Australia , while Dodd himself , in a 2011 interview , stated he was South Australian . A 1953 newspaper report states that he was from <unk> <unk> and had been resident at Colebrook Home , which housed Indigenous children from northern South Australia ; some residents subsequently identified as members of the Stolen Generation . The only record of a birth date is in the Department of Veterans ' Affairs ' Nominal Roll of Australian Veterans of the Korean War , which gives 1 June 1928 . 
 In 1966 he was reported to be a bachelor ; later sources shed no light on his marital status . In 1971 he remarked in an interview that his father and six brothers were living in the Northern Territory . 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , Indigenous Australian men played significant roles as stockmen in the Australian pastoral industry , and as entertainers participating in competitive demonstrations of stockmen 's skills , referred to as rough riding . Dodd worked as a stockman , horse breaker and rodeo rider prior to and during his acting career , including a period working for rider and entertainer Smoky Dawson . He was a member of the Rough Riders Association , and gave exhibition rides at the Calgary Stampede in 1964 . 
 Dodd served in Korea , during a six @-@ year stint in the Australian Army , with the 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ; his service number was <unk> . Interviewed in May 2011 he indicated that he " was the first Aboriginal to sign up from South Australia to go to Korea " . A photograph of him in uniform in Korea is amongst images on permanent display at the Australian War Memorial . From 1969 to at least 1973 Dodd worked as a guide for Airlines of New South Wales , escorting tours to Uluru and other locations in central Australia . Dodd has stated that he demonstrated boomerang and spear @-@ throwing at Expo 70 , and at an Olympic Games ( though which year is unknown ) . He was also a participant in a re @-@ enactment of Captain James Cook 's landing in Australia , as part of the Australian Bicentenary celebrations . 
 In 1985 , Dodd was living in Manly , New South Wales , having spent fifteen years in Sydney 's northern suburbs . For the last two decades of his life , Dodd lived at St Georges Basin on the south coast of New South Wales , where he died on 10 November 2014 , aged 86 . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Dodd 's first opportunity to act in Australian film came in 1946 , when actor Chips Rafferty noticed Dodd on the set of The Overlanders and gave him a small role . It was the first of three Rafferty movies in which Dodd secured a part , the second being Bitter Springs in 1950 . This film was notable for being " a serious study of the relations of white settlers and Aborigines " and " more honest than most Australian film @-@ makers ventured to be at that time " . 
 Film writer Bruce Molloy described the film as a " lucid and dramatically effective representation " of black – white conflict in colonial Australia , giving Indigenous Australians " a degree of justice long denied them in cinematic representation " . 
 Dodd was working on Bitter Springs as a tracker and interpreter for actor Michael Pate when Rafferty arranged for him to have an on @-@ screen role . There was a positive relationship between the Indigenous <unk> people and the cast and crew , particularly Rafferty , involved in the location filming for Bitter Springs in the area of Quorn in northern South Australia . Michael Pate said that Rafferty " wasn 't a prejudiced person ... Chips was a person who appreciated the Aborigine [ sic ] very much ... he got on very well with the people " . Dodd , meanwhile , appreciated Rafferty 's vision for an Australian film industry and its potential to provide opportunities for Indigenous Australians . 
 Rafferty was the star of the film that gave Dodd his third minor screen role , Kangaroo ( 1952 ) . 
 In 1957 , the J Arthur Rank Organisation , an English company , came to Australia to make a film adaptation of Robbery Under Arms , an Australian colonial novel by Rolf <unk> . Dodd travelled to Britain and the United States with the company for six months ; in what role is unknown . He said he worked with Rafferty on a fourth film , Wake in Fright , in 1971 , but Dodd 's name does not appear in published cast lists . In the same year , he was cast in the role of an Aboriginal caretaker for a film he said was called Sacrifice . 
 On stage , Dodd performed the role of <unk> Morris in a 1966 J.C. Williamson stage production of Desire of the Moth , with a season of nearly three months in Melbourne and Sydney . In 1971 , he appeared in an early Sydney production of Kevin Gilbert 's seminal work , The Cherry Pickers . 
 There were numerous small television roles for Dodd . His work for Smoky Dawson included appearing in a television production , Adventure with Smoky Dawson : Tim Goes Walkabout , broadcast in June 1966 . In other television work , Dodd participated in a Channel 7 documentary series about pioneering Australian transport company Cobb and Co , and also worked on several documentary programs for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Dodd had minor roles in many early Australian TV dramas of the 1960s and 1970s , including Skippy the Bush Kangaroo , Division 4 , Delta ( 1969 ) , Riptide ( 1969 ) , <unk> – Animal Doctor ( 1970 ) , <unk> ( 1972 – 73 ) , Homicide ( 1974 ) , and Rush ( 1976 ) . One of these , <unk> – Animal Doctor , marked the first appearance of an Indigenous Australian in a television series lead role – not by Dodd , but by a Bindi Williams , playing an adopted son of the show 's star . In 1973 it was reported that a television film Marra Marra featuring prominent Aboriginal actors David <unk> and Bob Maza , together with Dodd and Zac Martin , had been completed . 
 Although Dodd obtained small parts in several television series , for many years he and his fellow Aboriginal actors found themselves included in only minor and typecast roles in television productions . According to Indigenous actor , historian and activist Gary Foley , Dodd joked that " he was sick of roles where his total dialogue was , ' he went that way , Boss ! ' " Reflecting on this issue , a commentator remarked on the 1978 film Little Boy Lost : " There are many irrelevant scenes , the most obvious one being where Tracker Bindi ( Steve Dodd ) , an Aboriginal , is introduced – yet another tired reinforcement of a false stereotype . " 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Dodd contributed to several films in which issues facing Indigenous Australians , such as land rights and race relations , were the central subjects . These appearances included Bitter Springs ( mentioned above ) and The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith ( 1978 ) , the first of two films in which he appeared alongside Jack Thompson . Dodd played the character of <unk> , the uncle of the lead character , Aboriginal man Jimmie Blacksmith . In the film , Jimmie Blacksmith marries a white woman named Gilda Marshall ( played by Angela Punch McGregor ) . When they have a baby , Dodd 's character , " a tribal elder , ... is worried about Jimmie 's marriage to a white woman and has brought him a talisman to keep him safe " . Pauline Kael , writing in The New Yorker , described the performances of the two black professional actors ( Jack Charles and Dodd ) as " wonderful as <unk> : ... Steve Dodds [ sic ] , who is tried for murder and simply says , ' You 'd think it would take a good while to make up your mind to kill someone and then to kill them , but take my word for it , it only takes a second ' " . 
 Dodd 's career was busiest in the 1980s , and by 1985 it was reported that he had acted in 55 movies or television features . In 1981 he played Billy Snakeskin in the film Gallipoli , about the fate of young men who participated in the World War I Gallipoli Campaign of 1915 . This was followed by parts in Chase Through the Night and Essington , both in 1984 . In 1985 he played the role of Mr Joe in The Coca @-@ Cola Kid , an Australian romantic comedy with an international cast including Eric Roberts and Greta Scacchi . In 1986 he appeared in the film Short Changed , while through the mid @-@ 1980s he had minor parts in the popular television series The Flying Doctors ( 1985 – 1988 ) . 
 The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith was not the only film in which Dodd appeared that addressed topical Indigenous issues of the day . A decade after Jimmie Blacksmith , Dodd performed in Ground Zero , again with Jack Thompson in one of the lead roles . This film is a thriller based on claims that Indigenous Australians were used as human guinea pigs in the British nuclear tests at Maralinga . The film uses as its context the McClelland Royal Commission , which was investigating radioactive contamination at the site . In the film , Dodd plays a minor character named Freddy <unk> . 
 Sources differ on whether Dodd had a part in Evil Angels ( released as A Cry in the Dark outside of Australia and New Zealand ) , the 1988 film about the Azaria Chamberlain disappearance , with Dodd 's name not included in the cast list published by Australian Film 1978 – 1994 , but appearing in the longer cast listing provided by IMDb . In 1988 he played a minor role in <unk> , an unreleased horror film about a series of unexplained murders . In 1990 Dodd appeared in two films : Quigley Down Under , a western made in Australia but starring American Tom Selleck and Briton Alan Rickman ; and The Crossing , an Australian drama set in a country town . 
 Dodd 's career returned to politically contentious Indigenous issues when he played a minor role , of <unk> , in the 1991 film Deadly . This film is a police drama based around the death of an Indigenous man in police custody . As in Ground Zero , the subject was very topical : the movie was released at the same time as the report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody , which had for four years been examining why so many Indigenous Australians died in police detention . 
 In 1999 , Dodd was one of three actors in Wind , a short film portraying the pursuit of an old Aboriginal man ( Dodd ) by a young black tracker and a white police sergeant . That same year was marked by the most commercially successful film of his career , The Matrix . Later , Dodd played minor roles in an episode of television series The Alice ( 2006 ) and the movies My Country ( 2007 ) and Broken Sun ( 2008 ) ; by this time his career in film and television had lasted for over sixty years . 
 In 2013 , Dodd received the Jimmy Little Lifetime Achievement Award at the 19th Deadly Awards at the Sydney Opera House . Departing from tradition by presenting the award to someone who was not primarily a musician , the organisers described Dodd as " an actor that created a pathway for others across the entire arts and music sectors to follow , at a time when typecasting stereotypes and discrimination was the ' norm ' in Australia 's arts industry " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Society and culture of the Han dynasty = 
 The Han dynasty ( 206 BC – 220 AD ) was a period of ancient China divided into the Western Han ( 206 BC – 9 AD ) and Eastern Han ( 25 – 220 AD ) periods , when the capital cities were located at Chang 'an and Luoyang , respectively . It was founded by Emperor Gaozu of Han and briefly interrupted by the regime of Wang Mang ( r . 9 – 23 CE ) who usurped the throne from a child Han emperor . 
 The Han dynasty was an age of great economic , technological , cultural , and social progress in China . Its society was governed by an emperor who shared power with an official bureaucracy and semi @-@ feudal nobility . Its laws , customs , literature , and education were largely guided by the philosophy and ethical system of Confucianism , yet the influence of Legalism and Daoism ( from the previous Zhou dynasty ) could still be seen . Members of the scholarly @-@ gentry class who aspired to hold public office were required to receive a Confucian @-@ based education . A new synthetic ideology of Han Confucianism was created when the scholar Dong Zhongshu ( 179 – 104 BCE ) united the Confucian canon allegedly edited by Kongzi , or Confucius ( 551 – 479 BCE ) , with cosmological cycles of yin and yang and the Chinese five elements . 
 Although the social status of nobles , officials , farmers , and artisan @-@ craftsmen were considered above the station of the lowly registered merchant , wealthy and successful businessmen acquired huge fortunes which allowed them to rival the social prestige of even the most powerful nobles and highest officials . Slaves were at the bottom of the social order , yet they represented only a tiny portion of the overall population . Retainers attached themselves to the estates of wealthy landowners , while medical physicians and state @-@ employed religious occultists could make a decent living . People of all social classes believed in various deities , spirits , immortals , and demons . While Han Daoists were organized into small groups chiefly concerned with achieving immortality through various means , by the mid 2nd century CE they formed large hierarchical religious societies that challenged imperial authority and viewed Laozi ( fl . 6th century BCE ) as a holy prophet . 
 The typical Han @-@ era Chinese household contained a nuclear family with an average of four to five members , unlike in later dynasties when multiple generations and extended family members commonly lived in the same household . Families were patrilineal , which made the father the supreme head of the house . Arranged marriages were the norm , while a new wife was expected to join the clan of her husband . Having sons over daughters was considered extremely important for the sake of carrying on ancestor worship . Although girls and women were expected by custom and Confucian tradition to behave passively towards their male relatives , mothers were given a familial status above that of their sons . Women also engaged in various professions in and outside of the home and were given protection under the law . The empress was superior in status to the male relatives of her consort clan , while the mother of the emperor — the empress dowager — had the authority to override his decisions and choose his successor ( if one had not been appointed before his death ) . 
 = = Social class = = 
 = = = Royal family , regents , nobles , and eunuchs = = = 
 At the apex of Han society was the emperor , a member of the Liu family and thus a descendant of the founder Emperor Gaozu ( r . 202 – 195 BCE ) . His subjects were not allowed to address him by name ; instead they used indirect references such as " under the steps to the throne " ( <unk> <unk> ) or " superior one " ( shang 上 ) . If a commoner , government minister , or noble entered the palace without official permission , the punishment was execution . Although the Commandant of Justice — one of the central government 's Nine Ministers — was in charge of <unk> out sentences in court cases , the emperor not only had the ability to override the Commandant 's decision , but also had the sole ability to draft new laws or repeal old ones . An emperor could pardon anyone and grant general amnesties . Although the emperor often obeyed the majority consensus of his ministers in court conferences ( tingyi 廷議 ) , his approval was still needed for any state policy decision and he sometimes even rejected the majority opinion . 
 The emperor 's most powerful relative was the empress dowager , widow to the previous emperor and usually the natural mother of the emperor . If the grandmother of an emperor — the grand empress dowager — was still alive during his reign , she enjoyed a superior position over the empress dowager . Emperors often sought the approval of the empress dowager for their decisions . If an emperor was only a child , he acted merely as a figurehead while the empress dowager dominated court politics . She not only had the right to issue edicts and pardons , but if the emperor died without a designated heir , she had the sole right to appoint a new emperor . Below the empress dowager were the empress and imperial concubines . Although she was the wife of the emperor , the empress 's position at court was not secure and she could be removed by the emperor . However , the empress did enjoy the submission of concubines as her subordinates , who advocated the elevation of their sons over the empress 's at their own peril . 
 In the early Western Han , imperial relatives and some military officers who had served Emperor Gaozu were made kings who ruled over large semi @-@ autonomous fiefs , but once the non @-@ related kings had died off , an imperial edict outlawed all non @-@ Liu family members from becoming kings . The emperor 's brothers , paternal cousins , brother 's sons , and emperor 's sons — excluding the heir apparent — were made kings . The emperor 's sisters and daughters were made princesses with fiefs . Although the central government eventually stripped away the political power of the kings and appointed their administrative staffs , kings still had a right to collect a portion of the taxes in their territory as personal income and enjoyed a social status that ranked just below the emperor . Each king had a son designated to be heir apparent , while his other sons and brothers were given the rank of marquess and ruled over small marquessates where a portion of the taxes went to their private purse . Although kings and marquesses enjoyed many privileges , the imperial court was at times aggressive towards them to check their power . Starting with Emperor Gaozu 's reign , thousands of noble families , including those from the royal houses of Qi , Chu , Yan , Zhao , Han , and Wei from the Warring States period , were forcibly moved to the vicinity of the capital Chang 'an . In the first half of Western Han , resettlement could also be imposed on powerful and wealthy officials as well as individuals who owned property worth more than a million cash . 
 The position of regent ( officially known as General @-@ in @-@ Chief <unk> ) was created during Emperor Wu 's reign ( r . 141 – 87 BCE ) when he appointed three officials to form a triumvirate regency over the central government while the child Emperor Zhao ( r . 87 – 74 BCE ) sat on the throne . Regents were often relatives @-@ in @-@ law to the emperor through his empress 's family , but they could also be men of lowly means who depended on the emperor 's favor to advance their position at court . Eunuchs who maintained the harem of the palace could also gain a similar level of power . They often came from the middle class and had links to trade . In the Western Han , there are only a handful of examples where eunuchs rose to power since the official bureaucracy was strong enough to suppress them . After the eunuch Shi Xian ( <unk> ) became the Prefect of the Palace Masters of Writing ( <unk> ) , Emperor Yuan ( r . 48 – 33 BCE ) relinquished much of his authority to him , so that he was allowed to make vital policy decisions and was respected by officials . However , Shi Xian was expelled from office once Emperor Cheng ( 33 – 7 BCE ) took the throne . No palace eunuch would obtain comparable authority again until after 92 CE , when the eunuchs led by Zheng Zhong ( d . 107 CE ) sided with Emperor He ( r . 88 – 105 CE ) in a coup to overthrow the Dou <unk> clan of the empress dowager . Officials complained when eunuchs like Sun Cheng ( d . 132 CE ) were awarded by Emperor Shun ( r . 125 – 144 CE ) with marquessates , yet after the year 135 CE the eunuchs were given legal authority to pass on fiefs to adopted sons . Although Emperor Ling ( r . 168 – 189 CE ) relinquished a great deal of authority to eunuchs Zhao Zhong ( d . 189 CE ) and Zhang Rang ( d . 189 CE ) , the eunuchs were slaughtered in 189 CE when Yuan Shao ( d . 202 CE ) besieged and stormed the palaces of Luoyang . 
 = = = Gentry scholars and officials = = = 
 Those who served in government had a privileged position in Han society that was just one tier below the nobles ( yet some high officials were also ennobled and had fiefs ) . They could not be arrested for crimes unless permission was granted by the emperor . However , when officials were arrested , they were imprisoned and fettered like commoners . Their punishments in court also had to gain the approval of the emperor . Officials were not exempt from execution , yet they were often given a chance to commit suicide as a dignified alternative . The most senior posts were the Three Excellencies — excluding the Grand Tutor , a post that was irregularly occupied . The individual titles and functions of the Three Excellencies changed from Western to Eastern Han . However , their annual salaries remained at 10 @,@ 000 dan ( <unk> ) of grain , largely commuted to payments in coin cash and luxury items like silk . Below them were the Nine Ministers , each of whom headed a major government bureau and earned 2 @,@ 000 bushels a year . The lowest @-@ paid government employees made Equivalent to 100 bushels annually . It was thought that wealthy officials would be less tempted by bribes . Therefore , in the beginning of the dynasty , having a total assessed taxable wealth of one hundred thousand coins was a prerequisite for holding office . This was reduced to forty thousand coins in 142 BCE , yet from Emperor Wu 's reign onwards this policy was no longer enforced . 
 Starting in Western Han was a system of recommendation where local officials submitted proposals to the capital on which of their subordinates were worthy candidates for holding office ; this created a patron @-@ client relationship between former superiors and successful nominees to higher office . With the enhanced prestige of the consort clan under Empress Dowager Dou ( d . 97 CE ) , a succession of regents from her clan and others amassed a large amount of clients whose chances of promotion hinged on the political survival of the empress dowager 's clan , which was often short @-@ lived . Aside from patron @-@ client relationships , one could use family connections to secure office . Patricia Ebrey writes that in the Western Han , access to public office and promotion through social mobility were open to a larger segment of the populace than in Eastern Han . A third of the two hundred and fifty @-@ two Eastern Han government officials who had biographies in the Book of Later Han were sons or grandsons of officials , while a fifth came from prominent provincial families or had ancestors who had served as officials . For forty @-@ six of the one hundred and ten years between 86 and 196 CE , at least one post of the Three Excellencies was occupied by a member of either the Yuan or Yang clan . 
 Many central government officials also began their careers as subordinate officers for commandery @-@ level administrations . There are only rare cases ( i.e. involving military merit during rebellions of late Eastern Han ) when subordinate officers of county @-@ level administrations advanced to the level of central government . Even if one secured an office by these means , an official was still expected to be competent , thus a formal education became the hallmark of those aspiring to fill public office . In addition to private tutoring , the Imperial University was established in 124 BCE which then accommodated only fifty pupils , but by the 2nd century CE the student body had reached about thirty thousand . These students could be appointed by the emperor to various government posts according to their examination grades . 
 Despite a decline in social mobility for those of less prominent clans , the local elites became far more integrated into a nationwide upper class social structure during the Eastern Han period , thus expanding the classification of who belonged to the upper class . The emerging gentry class — which became fully consolidated during the Eastern Han — consisted of unemployed scholars , teachers , students , and government officials . These men , although geographically separated and mired in local activities , started to view themselves as participants in wider national affairs of politics and scholarship . They recognized shared values of filial piety , deference , and emphasizing study in the Five Classics over holding public office . Emperors Yuan and Cheng were forced to abandon their resettlement schemes for officials and their families around the royal tombs settlement in 40 BCE and 15 BCE , respectively ; unlike the days of Emperor Wu , historian Cho @-@ Yun Hsu asserts that at this point officials and scholars had so much influence in both local and national @-@ level politics that to forcibly relocate them became unthinkable . 
 In a show of solidarity against the eunuchs ' interference in court politics with the coup against the regent Liang Ji ( d . 159 CE ) , a widespread student protest broke out where Imperial University students took to the streets and chanted the names of the eunuchs they opposed . At the instigation of the eunuchs , Emperor Huan ( r . 146 – 168 CE ) initiated the Partisan Prohibitions in 166 CE , a wide @-@ scale proscription against Li Ying ( 李膺 ) and his associates in the Imperial University and in the provinces from holding office ( branded as partisans : <unk> ) . With the suicide of regent Dou Wu ( d . 168 CE ) in his confrontation with the eunuchs shortly after Emperor Ling ( r . 168 – 189 CE ) was placed on the throne , the eunuchs banned hundreds more from holding office while selling offices at the highest bidder . Repulsed by what they viewed as a corrupted government , many gentrymen considered a moral , scholarly life superior to holding office , and thus rejected nominations to serve at court . Until they were repealed in 184 CE ( to garner gentry support against the Yellow Turban Rebellion ) , the <unk> prohibitions created a large independent , disaffected portion of the gentry who did not simply return to a reclusive life in their hometowns , but maintained contacts with other gentry throughout China and actively engaged in the protest movement . Acknowledging that the gentry class was able to recruit and certify itself , the Chancellor Cao Cao ( 155 – 220 CE ) established the nine @-@ rank system where a distinguished gentry figure in each county and commandery would assign local gentlemen a rank that the government would use to evaluate nominees for office . 
 = = = Farmers and landowners = = = 
 Many scholars who needed additional funds for education or vied for political office found farming as a decent profession which , although humble , was not looked down upon by fellow gentrymen . Wealthy nobles , officials , and merchants could own land , but they often did not cultivate it themselves and merely acted as absentee landlords while living in the city . They mostly relied on poor tenant farmers ( <unk> <unk> ) who paid rent in the form of roughly fifty percent of their produce in exchange for land , tools , draft animals , and a small house . Wage laborers ( <unk> <unk> ) and slaves were also employed on the estates of the wealthy , although they were not as numerous as tenants . During Western Han , the small independent owner @-@ cultivator represented the majority of farming peasants , yet their economic struggle to remain independent during times of war , natural disaster and crisis drove many into debt , banditry , slavery , and dramatically increased the number of landless tenants by late Eastern Han . The social status of poor independent owner @-@ cultivators was above tenants and wage laborers , yet below that of wealthy landowners . While wealthy landowners employed tenants and wage laborers , landowners who managed small to medium @-@ sized estates often acted as managers over their sons who tilled the fields and daughters who weaved clothes and engaged in sericulture to produce silk for the home or sale at market . 
 During the Western Han , farming peasants formed the majority of those who were conscripted by the government to perform corvée labor or military duties . For the labor service ( <unk> <unk> ) , males aged fifteen to fifty @-@ six would be drafted for one month out of the year to work on construction projects and perform other duties in their commanderies and counties . For the military obligation ( zhengzu 正卒 ) , all males aged twenty @-@ three were to train for one year in one of three branches of the military : infantry , cavalry , or navy . Until they reached age fifty @-@ six , they were liable to perform one year of active service as troops sent to guard the frontiers from hostile nomads or to act as guards in the capital city . Significant changes were made to this system during Eastern Han ; a commuting tax could be paid by peasants if they wanted to avoid the one @-@ month labor obligation , since hired labor became more popular in construction and other projects . The military service obligation could even be avoided if a peasant paid a commuting tax , since the Eastern Han military became largely a volunteer force . Other commoners such as merchants were also able to join the army . 
 = = = Artisans and craftsmen = = = 
 Artisans and craftsmen during the Han had a socio @-@ economic status between that of farmers and merchants . Yet some were able to obtain a valuable income , such as one craftsman who made knives and swords and was able to eat food fit for nobles and officials . Artisans and craftsmen also enjoyed a legal status that was superior to merchants . Unlike lowly merchants , artisans were allowed by law to wear fancy silks , ride on horseback , and ride in carriages . There were also no laws which barred artisans from becoming officials . An artisan painter who worked at the Imperial Academy turned down many offers to become nominated for public office . In contrast , a bureaucrat who appointed a merchant as an official could suffer impeachment from office , while some even avoided nominations by claiming they were merchants . 
 Despite their legal privileges over that of merchants , the work of artisans was considered by Han Confucian scholars to be of secondary importance to that of farmers . This is perhaps largely because scholars and officials could not survive without the farmer 's product and taxes paid in grain . The government relied on taxed grain to fund its military campaigns and stored surplus grain to mitigate widespread famine during times of poor harvest . Despite the prominence given to farmers , Confucian scholars did accept that artisans performed a vital economic role . This view was only rejected by a small minority of <unk> , who advocated a society of only soldiers and farmers , and certain Daoists who wanted everyone to live in self @-@ sufficient villages and without commercial interests . 
 Artisans could be privately employed or they could work for the government . While government workshops employed convicts , corvée laborers , and state @-@ owned slaves to perform menial tasks , the master craftsman was paid a significant income for his work in producing luxury items such as bronze mirrors and lacquerwares . 
 = = = Merchants and industrialists = = = 
 With the exception of the bookseller and apothecary , the scholarly gentry class did not engage in trade professions , since scholars and government officials viewed the merchant class as lowly and contemptible . Sympathetic to the plight of farming peasants who had lost their land , a court edict of 94 CE stipulated that farming peasants who had been reduced to selling wares as street peddlers were not to be taxed as registered merchants , since the latter were heavily taxed by the state . Registered merchants , the majority being small urban shopkeepers , were obligated to pay commercial taxes in addition to the poll tax . 
 Registered merchants were forced by law to wear white @-@ colored clothes , an indication of their low status , and could be singled out for conscription into the armed forces and forced to resettle in lands to the deep south where malaria was known to be prevalent . In contrast , itinerant merchants were often richer due to their trade between a network of towns and cities and their ability to avoid registering as merchants . Starting with Emperor Gaozu 's reign , registered merchants were banned from wearing silk clothes , riding on horseback , or holding public office . This is in stark contrast to unregistered itinerant merchants who Chao Cuo ( d . 154 BCE ) states wore fine silks , rode in carriages pulled by fat horses , and whose wealth allowed them to associate with government officials . 
 Although these laws were relaxed over time , Emperor Wu renewed the state 's persecution of merchants when in 119 BCE he made it illegal for registered merchants to purchase land . If they violated this law , their land and slaves would be confiscated by the state . The effectiveness of this law is questionable , since contemporary Han writers mention merchants owning huge tracts of land . A merchant who owned property worth a thousand catties of gold — equivalent to ten million cash coins — was considered a great merchant . Such a fortune was one hundred times larger than the average income of a middle class landowner @-@ cultivator and dwarfed the annual 200 @,@ 000 cash @-@ coin income of a marquess who collected taxes from a thousand households . Some merchant families made fortunes worth over a hundred million cash , which was equivalent to the wealth acquired by the highest officials in government . 
 Merchants engaged in a multitude of private trades and industries . A single merchant often combined several trades to make greater profits , such as animal breeding , farming , manufacturing , trade , and money @-@ lending . Some of the most profitable commodities sold during the Han were salt and iron , since a wealthy salt or iron distributor could own properties worth as much as ten million cash . In the early Western Han period , powerful merchants could muster a workforce of over a thousand peasants to work in salt mines and marshes to evaporate brine to make salt , or at ironworks sites where they operated bellows and casted iron implements . To curb the influence of such wealthy industrialists , Emperor Wu nationalized these industries by 117 BCE and for the first time drafted former merchants with technical know @-@ how such as Sang Hongyang ( d . 80 BCE ) to head these government monopolies . However , by the Eastern Han period the central government abolished the state monopolies on salt and iron . Even before this , the state must have halted its employment of former merchants in the government salt and iron agencies , since an edict of 7 BCE restated the ban on merchants entering the bureaucracy . However , the usurper Wang Mang ( r . 9 – 23 CE ) did employ some merchants as low @-@ level officials with a salary @-@ rank of 600 bushels . Another profitable industry was brewing wine and liquor , which the state briefly monopolized from 98 to 81 BCE , yet relinquished its production to private merchants once again ( with alcohol taxes reinstalled ) . The official Cui Shi ( 催寔 ) ( d . 170 CE ) started a brewery business to help pay for his father 's costly funeral , an act which was heavily criticized by his fellow gentrymen who considered this sideline occupation a shameful one for any scholar . Cinnabar mining was also a very lucrative industry . 
 = = = Guests and retainers = = = 
 Commoners known as guests and retainers ( <unk> <unk> ) who lived on the property of a host in exchange for services had existed since the Warring States period . Retainers often originally belonged to other social groups , and sometimes they were fugitives seeking shelter from authorities . Hosts were often wealthy nobles and officials , yet they were sometimes wealthy commoners . In a typical relationship , a host provided lodging , food , clothing , and carriage transport for his retainers in return for occasional and non @-@ routine work or services such as an advisory role , a post as bodyguard , menial physical labor around the house , and sometimes more dangerous missions such as committing assassinations , fighting off roving bandits , or riding into battle to defend the host . Others could work as spies , scholarly protégés , or astrologers . 
 A host treated his retainers very well and showered them with luxury gifts if he wanted to boast his wealth and status . One retainer even received a sword scabbard decorated with jade and pearls , while others were given items like shoes decorated with pearls . However , not all retainers shared the same status , as those showered with gifts often provided highly skilled work or greater services ; retainers who were not as skilled were given lesser gifts and seated in less honorable positions when meeting the host . Regardless of status , any retainer was allowed to come and go from his host 's residence as he or she pleased , unlike a slave who was the property of his master and permanently attached to the estate . There was no official government policy on how to deal with retainers , but when they broke laws they were arrested , and when their master broke the law , sometimes the retainers were detained alongside him . 
 Retainers formed a large portion of the fighting forces amassed by the future Emperor Guangwu ( r . 25 – 57 CE ) during the civil war against Wang Mang 's failing regime . The military role of retainers became much more pronounced by the late 2nd century CE during the political turmoil that would eventually split the empire into three competing states . By then , hosts began to treat retainers as their personal troops ( <unk> <unk> ) , which undercut the freedoms of mobility and independence that earlier retainers had enjoyed . Whereas individual retainers had earlier joined a host by their own personal decision , by the late 2nd century CE the lives of the retainers ' entire families became heavily controlled by the host . 
 = = = Slaves = = = 
 Slaves ( <unk> <unk> ) comprised roughly 1 % of the population , a proportion far less than the contemporary Greco @-@ Roman world which relied on the labor of a large slave population . Slaves were classified into two categories : those who were privately owned , and those who were owned by the state . Privately owned slaves were often former peasants who fell into debt and sold themselves into slavery , while others were former government slaves bestowed to nobles and high officials as rewards for their services . State @-@ owned slaves were sometimes prisoners of war ( yet not all were made slaves ) . However , most slaves were tributary gifts given to the court by foreign states , families of criminals who committed treason against the state , and former private slaves who were either donated to authorities ( since this would exempt the former slaveholder from labor obligations ) or confiscated by the state if their master had broken a law . In both Western and Eastern Han , arrested criminals became convicts and it was only during the reign of Wang Mang that counterfeiting criminals were made into slaves . 
 State @-@ owned slaves were put to work in palaces , offices , workshops , stables , and sometimes state @-@ owned agricultural fields , while privately owned slaves were employed in domestic services and sometimes farming . However , the vast majority of non @-@ independent farmers working for wealthy landowners were not hired laborers or slaves , but were landless peasants who paid rent as tenants . It might have been more economically feasible to maintain tenants instead of slaves , since slave masters were obligated to pay an annual poll tax of 240 coins for each slave they owned ( the same rate merchants had to pay for their poll tax ) . Government slaves were not assigned to work in the government 's monopolized industries over iron and salt ( which lasted from Emperor Wu 's reign until the beginning of Eastern Han ) . Privately owned slaves were usually assigned to kitchen duty while others fulfilled roles as armed bodyguards , mounted escorts , acrobats , jugglers , dancers , singers , and musicians . 
 The children of both government and private slaves were born slaves . Government slaves could be granted freedom by the emperor if they were deemed too elderly , if the emperor pitied them , or if they committed a <unk> act worthy of a manumission . In one exceptional case , the former slave Jin Midi ( d . 86 BCE ) became one of the regents over the government . Private slaves could buy their freedom from their master , while some masters chose to free their slaves . Although slaves were subject to beatings if they did not obey their masters , it was against the law to murder a slave ; kings were stripped of their kingdoms after it was found that they had murdered slaves , while Wang Mang even forced one of his sons to commit suicide for murdering a slave . An edict of 35 CE repealed the death penalty for any slave who killed a commoner . 
 Not all slaves had the same social status . Some slaves of wealthy families lived better than commoners since they were allowed to wear luxurious clothes and consume quality food and wine . Slaves of high officials could even be feared and respected . The slaves of regent Huo Guang ( d . 68 BCE ) sometimes came armed to the marketplace and fought commoners , forced the Imperial Secretary to kowtow and apologize ( after a scuffle with his slaves over the right @-@ of @-@ way on the street ) , and were provided services by some officials who sought a promotion through Huo Guang 's influence . 
 = = = Other occupations = = = 
 In addition to officials , teachers , merchants , farmers , artisans , and retainers , there were many other occupations . The pig @-@ breeder was not seen as a lowly profession if it was merely utilized by a poor scholar to pay for a formal education . For example , the first chancellor in Han to lack either a military background or a title as marquess was the pig @-@ breeder Gongsun Hong ( <unk> ) of Emperor Wu 's reign . Physicians who practiced medicine and studied medical classics could not only make a decent income , but were also able to gain an education and become officials . The physician Hua Tuo ( d . 208 CE ) was nominated for office while another became Prefect of the Gentlemen of the Palace ( <unk> ) . Those who practiced occult arts of Chinese alchemy and mediumship were often employed by the government to conduct religious sacrifices , while on rare occasions — such as with Luan Da ( d . 112 BCE ) — an occultist might marry a princesses or be enfeoffed as a marquess . While it was socially acceptable for gentry scholars to engage in the occult arts of divination and Chinese astrology , career diviners were of a lower status and earned only a modest income . Other humble occultist professions included sorcery and physiognomy ; like merchants , those who practiced sorcery were banned from holding public office . Being a butcher was another lowly occupation , yet there is one case where a butcher became an official during Emperor Gaozu 's reign , while Empress He ( d . 189 CE ) and her brother , the regent He Jin ( d . 189 CE ) , came from a family of butchers . Runners and messengers who worked for the government were also considered to have a lowly status , yet some later became government officials . 
 = = = Twenty ranks = = = 
 The Han court upheld a socio @-@ economic ranking system for commoners and nobles , which was based on the twenty @-@ ranks system installed by the statesman Shang Yang ( d . 338 BCE ) of the State of Qin . All males above the age of 15 ( excluding slaves ) could be promoted in rank up to level eight . When a commoner was promoted in rank , he was granted a more honorable place in the seating arrangements of hamlet banquets , was given a greater portion of hunted game at the table , was punished less severely for certain crimes , and could become exempt from labor service obligations to the state . This system favored the elderly , since a longer lifespan meant more opportunities to become promoted . In addition to an increase in salary ( see table to the right ) , newly promoted men were granted wine and ox @-@ meat for a celebratory banquet . The 19th and 20th ranks were both marquess ranks , yet only a 20th rank allowed one to have a marquessate fief . 
 Promotions in rank were decided by the emperor and could occur on special occasions , such as installation of a new emperor , inauguration of a new reign title , the wedding of a new empress , or the selection of a royal heir apparent . The central government sometimes sold ranks to collect more revenues for the state . The official Chao Cuo ( d . 154 BCE ) once wrote that anyone who presented a substantial amount of agricultural grain to the government would also be promoted in rank . 
 = = Urban and rural life = = 
 During the Han , the empire was divided into large administrative units of kingdoms and commanderies ; within a commandery there were counties , and within counties there were districts that contained at least several hamlets . An average hamlet contained about a hundred families and usually was enclosed by a wall with two gates . At the center of social life in the hamlet was the religious altar ( built in honor of a local deity ) where festivities could be staged . Each district and county also had an official religious altar . The official reach of government extended no further than the district level , where county @-@ appointed officials included the chief of police who maintained law and order and the district tax collector . However , the government was able to control local society at the hamlet level with their bestowal of twenty ranks . 
 The government funded flood control projects involving the building of new canals , thus aiding the speed of waterborne transport and allowing undeveloped areas to become irrigated farmlands . These conscription labor projects allowed for the building of new hamlets which were dependent on the government for their livelihoods . When the authority of the central government declined in the late Eastern Han period , many commoners living in such hamlets were forced to flee their lands and work as tenants on large estates of wealthy landowners . The people of older hamlets which never had to rely on central government projects for their wellbeing or existence often sought support from powerful local families . 
 The Western Han capital at Chang 'an was divided into one hundred and sixty walled residential wards . Affairs of each ward were overseen by a low @-@ ranking official . Influential families within the wards usually maintained social order . Historians are still unsure as to how many government @-@ controlled marketplaces existed in Chang 'an . Although there are claims of nine markets , it is possible that seven of them were actually divisible parts of two main markets : the East Market and West Market . Both the East Market and West Market had a two @-@ story government office with a flag and drum placed on the roof . A market chief and deputy were headquartered in each of these buildings , yet not much is known about their involvement in the marketplace . In the Eastern Han capital of Luoyang , the market chief 's office employed thirty @-@ six sub @-@ officers who ventured into the marketplace daily to maintain law and order . They also collected taxes on commercial goods , assigned standard prices for specific commodities on the basis of monthly reviews , and authorized contracts between merchants and their customers or clients . Besides merchants engaging in marketplace violations , other crimes were committed by adolescent street gangs who often wore clothes distinguishing their gang . The maintenance of law and order outside the market and in slum areas was conducted by constables ; Han officials sometimes argued for increasing their salaries which they assumed would encourage them to reject bribes from criminals . 
 There were many amusements in the cities which could attract audiences rich and poor , such as trained animals performing tricks , cockfighting and caged animal fights between tigers , horse racing , puppet shows , musical performances with dancing , acrobatic feats , and juggling . Wealthy families could afford their own house choirs and five @-@ piece orchestras with bells , drums , flutes , and stringed instruments . Gambling and board games such as <unk> also provided entertainment . 
 = = Marriage , gender , and kinship = = 
 = = = <unk> , nuclear family = = = 
 Chinese kinship relations during the Han were influenced by Confucian mores and involved both immediate nuclear family and extended family members . The Chinese family was patrilineal , since a father 's sons did not consider a mother 's kin to be part of their clan ; instead , they were considered ' outside relatives ' . The Han dynasty law code inherited the Qin dynasty ( 221 – 206 BCE ) law that any family with more than two sons had to pay extra taxes . This was not repealed until the Cao Wei period ( 220 – 265 CE ) . The average Han family under one household typically had about four or five immediate family members , which was unlike the large extended families under one household in later dynasties . It was common during Han to send adult married sons away with a portion of the family fortune and visit them occasionally , yet in all dynasties during and after the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 CE ) , a son who moved away and lived separately from his living parents would be considered a criminal . Larger families appeared during the Eastern Han when some married brothers chose to live with each other 's families . However , a household with three generations living under its roof was incredibly rare . This is in contrast to the Jin dynasty ( 265 – 420 ) , when having three or more generations under one roof was commonplace . 
 = = = Clan and lineage = = = 
 The Chinese clan or lineage involved men who shared a common patrilineal ancestor , yet were divided into subgroups whose behavior towards each other was regulated according to Confucian mores which dictated what relative should be closer and more intimate . The four different subgroups were : ( 1 ) brother , brother 's sons , and brother 's grandsons ; ( 2 ) father 's brothers , father 's brother 's sons and grandsons ; ( 3 ) paternal grandfather 's brothers , their sons , and grandsons ; and ( 4 ) paternal great @-@ grandfather 's brothers , their sons , grandsons , and great @-@ grandsons . While one was expected to mourn for an entire year over the death of any relative in the first subgroup , one was expected to mourn for only five months when a relative in the second subgroup had died . No ritual mourning was expected at all for relatives in the third and fourth subgroups . While a son mourned three years for a father 's death , he only mourned one year for his mother 's . Since carrying on the patrilineal line meant the continuation of ancestor worship , it was important to have at least one son , even if he was adopted from another family ( although it was considered imperative that he share the same surname , otherwise his ancestral sacrifices could be considered null and void ) . 
 The majority of clan or lineage groups were not very influential in local society . However , prominent kinship groups could enjoy a great deal of ad hoc influence , especially if a member served as a government official . Wealthy scholars or officials often shared the same kinship group with poor commoners . Since clan members were expected to defend fellow members ( even to the point of murder ) , government authorities constantly struggled to suppress powerful kinship groups . Local lineage groups formed the backbone of rebel forces in the popular uprising against Wang Mang in the early 1st century CE . When central government authority broke down in the late Eastern Han , less @-@ developed areas of the country remained relatively stable due to entrenched kinship groups , while in heavily developed areas ( where kinship groups had been effectively broken down by the state ) there were many more peasants willing to turn to rebel movements for protection and survival . 
 = = = Marriage and divorce = = = 
 Although romantic love was not discouraged , marriages were arranged as agreements and bonds formed between two clans ( with property as the chief concern ) , not necessarily two individuals . A father 's input on who his sons and daughters should marry carried more weight than the mother , although a grandfather could override a father 's decision . Once a couple had married , the new wife was obligated to visit the family temple so she could become part of the husband 's clan and be properly worshipped by her descendants after death . However , she retained her natal surname . The vast majority of people during Han practiced monogamy , although wealthy officials and nobles could afford to support one or many concubines in addition to their legal wife . 
 Although the ideal ages for marriage were thirty for a man and twenty for a woman , it was common for a male to marry at age sixteen and a female at age fourteen . To encourage families to marry off their daughters , a law was introduced in 189 BCE that increased the poll tax rate fivefold for unmarried women between the ages of fifteen and thirty . People of the Han practiced a strict form of <unk> where one could not marry a person who had the same surname , even if both partners could not be traced back to a common ancestor ( however , this excluded the royal family , who sometimes married distant relatives for political reasons ) . Officials often married into families with officials of equal status and sometimes married royal princesses or had their daughters marry kings and even the emperor . 
 By custom there were seven conditions where a man could divorce his wife . These were : ( 1 ) disobedience to parents @-@ in @-@ law , ( 2 ) barrenness ( unable to continue family line ) , ( 3 ) adultery ( mixing another clan 's blood into the family ) , ( 4 ) jealousy ( of concubines ) , ( 5 ) incurable disease ( unable to continue family line ) , ( 6 ) loquacity ( not getting along with brothers @-@ in @-@ law or sisters @-@ in @-@ law ) , and ( 7 ) theft . However , a husband was not allowed to divorce his wife if she had completed three years of mourning for one of his deceased parents , if there were no living relatives in her father 's family to return to , or if the husband 's family was originally poor but became rich after marriage . Sometimes women were also able to initiate the divorce and remarry if the husband 's family was in poverty , he was diseased , or his in @-@ laws were too abusive . Although remarriage was frowned upon ( especially since divorce meant a wife took away her dowry wealth from her ex @-@ husband 's family ) , it was nonetheless common amongst divorcees and widowers in all social groups . 
 = = = Inheritance = = = 
 The two types of inheritance during Han included the common inheritance of property from the deceased , which all social groups ( except for slaves ) participated in , and the inheritance of titles , which only the people of twenty ranks , nobility , and royalty could enjoy . In the first form , officials and commoners bequeathed an equal share of property to each of their sons in their will . This excluded daughters , who married into other families and thus did not carry on the family name . However , daughters did receive a portion of the family property in the form of their marriage dowries , which were sometimes equal to a brother 's share of wealth in the will . The second type of inheritance involved the practice of primogeniture , where the official title was inherited by only one son . This was as true of the emperor as it was for any king , marquess , or commoner of the twenty ranks . However , to limit the power of the kings while still upholding primogeniture , an imperial edict of 127 BCE stated that kings had to divide the territories of their kingdoms between the chosen successor ( i.e. heir apparent ) and the kings ' brothers , who were made marquesses , thus establishing new marquessates and effectively reducing the size of every kingdom with each generation . 
 = = = Status and position of women = = = 
 Historian Ban Zhao ( 45 – 116 CE ) wrote in her Lessons for Women that , like the opposite and complementary forces of yin and yang , men 's great virtues were strength and rigidity , while a woman 's great virtues were respect and compliance . Throughout her life , a Han woman was to bend to the will of first her father , then her husband , and then her adult son ( <unk> ) . However , there are many recorded deviations from this rule , as some Han women are written to have engaged in heated arguments with their husbands over concubines ( sometimes beating concubines out of jealousy and to punish the husband ) , wrote essays and letters for husbands serving as government officials , and sometimes husbands turned to their wives for advice on political affairs of the court . When a father died , the eldest son was theoretically the senior member of the family , yet as hinted in various works of Han literature , they still had to obey the will of their mother and she could even force them to kowtow to her when apologizing for an offense . Deviations from common customs regarding gender were especially pronounced in the imperial family . The empress was able to give orders to her male relatives ( even her father ) and if they disobeyed her , she could publicly reprimand and humiliate them . 
 Certain occupations were traditionally reserved for women , while they were also exempted from corvée labor duties . Women were expected to rear children , weave clothes for the family , and perform domestic duties such as cooking ; although farming was considered men 's work , sometimes women tilled fields alongside their husbands and brothers . Some women formed communal spinning and weaving groups to pool resources together to pay for candles , lamp oil , and heat during night and winter . A successful textile business could employ hundreds of women . Singing and dancing to entertain wealthy patrons were other common professions open for women . When a husband died , sometimes the widow became the sole supporter of her children , and thus had to make a living weaving silk cloths or making straw sandals to sell in the market . Some women also turned to the humble profession of sorcery for income . Other more fortunate women could become renowned medical physicians who provided services to the families of high officials and nobility . Some wealthy women engaged in luxury trade , such as one who frequently sold pearls to a princess . Some even aided in their husband 's business decisions . Female merchants dressed in silk clothes which rivaled even female nobles ' attire were considered immoral compared to the ideal woman weaver . 
 = = Education , literature , and philosophy = = 
 = = = Competing ideologies = = = 
 The historian Sima Tan ( d . 110 BCE ) wrote that the Legalist tradition inherited by Han from the previous Qin dynasty taught that imposing severe man @-@ made laws which were short of kindness would produce a well @-@ ordered society , given that human nature was innately immoral and had to be checked . ' Legalism ' was the label created by Han scholars to describe the socio @-@ political philosophy formulated largely by Shen <unk> ( d . 340 BCE ) , Shang Yang ( d . 338 BCE ) , and Han Fei ( c . 280 – c . 233 BCE ) , a philosophy which stressed that government had to rely on a strict system of punishments and rewards to maintain law and order . Some early Western Han officials were influenced by the tenet of ' nonaction ' apparent in Han Fei 's work and the Daoist Laozi . By utilizing this concept , they argued that once laws and administrative systems were set in place , the government functioned smoothly and intervention on behalf of the ruler became unnecessary . This school of thought was known as ' Yellow Emperor and Laozi ' ( Huang @-@ Lao <unk> ) , which gained full acceptance at court under the patronage of Empress Dowager Dou ( d . 135 BCE ) . Its followers believed that the originator of ordered civilization was the mythical Yellow Emperor , a view that contradicted later Confucian scholars ' views that the mythological Yao and Shun were responsible for bringing man out of a state of anarchy . Works such as the Huainanzi ( presented in 139 BCE ) introduced new systematic ideas about the cosmos which undercut the message of Huang @-@ Lao thought . Scholars such as Shusun Tong ( <unk> ) began to express greater emphasis for ethical ideas espoused in ' Classicist ' philosophical works such as those of Kongzi ( i.e. Confucius , 551 – 479 BCE ) , an ideology anachronistically known as Confucianism . Emperor Gaozu found Shusun Tong 's Confucian reforms of court rituals useful so long as they further exalted his status , yet it was not until Emperor Wu 's reign that Confucianism gained exclusive patronage at court . 
 = = = Confucianism becomes paramount = = = 
 At the core of Confucian ethics were the selected virtues of filial piety , harmonious relationships , ritual , and righteousness . The amalgamation of these ideas into a theological system involving earlier cosmological theories of yin and yang as well as the five phases ( i.e. natural cycles which governed Heaven , Earth , and Man ) was first pioneered by the official Dong Zhongshu ( 179 – 104 BCE ) . Although full authenticity of Dong 's authorship of the <unk> Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals comes into question with hints that parts were rewritten around the time of Liu Xiang ( 79 – 8 BCE ) or Liu Xin ( d . 23 CE ) , three of his original memorials sent to the throne discussing his syncretic version of Confucianism were preserved in the 1st @-@ century @-@ CE Book of Han . 
 Since his model incorporated and justified the imperial government into the natural order of the universe , it appealed to Emperor Wu , who in 136 BCE abolished non @-@ Confucian academic chairs or <unk> ( 博士 ) not dealing with the Confucian Five Classics : the Classic of Poetry , the Classic of Changes , the Classic of Rites , the Classic of History , and the Spring and Autumn Annals . Expanding on the position of <unk> ( c . 372 – 289 BCE ) that human nature was innately good , Dong wrote that people needed external nourishment of education to become ' awakened ' and develop morality . To produce morally sound officials , Emperor Wu further sponsored Confucian education when he established the Imperial University in 124 BCE . Despite mainstream acceptance of Confucianism for the rest of Han ( and until the end of the Qing dynasty in 1911 ) , philosophers still defended some Legalist ideas while the state 's laws and policies reflect a compromise reached between Legalism and Han Confucianism . 
 There were varying regional traditions or ' schools ' within Confucianism assigned to certain texts . The two which caused most debate were New Texts and Old Texts traditions . The former represented works transmitted orally after the Qin book burning of 213 BCE , and the latter was newly discovered texts alleged by Kong Anguo , Liu Xin , and others to have been excavated from the walls of Kongzi 's home , displayed archaic written characters , and thus were more authentic versions . Although initially rejected , the Old Texts found acceptance at the courts of Emperor Ping ( r . 1 BCE – 5 CE ) and Wang Mang , were rejected by Emperor Guangwu , and accepted once more by Emperor Zhang only to be rejected a third time by the following rulers . 
 = = = Further philosophical synthesis = = = 
 In contrast to Dong 's certainty about innate goodness , the contemporary writer Jia Yi ( 201 – 169 BCE ) synthesized the opposing perspectives of <unk> and <unk> ( c . 312 – c . 230 BCE ) in the chapter " Protecting and Tutoring " ( Baofu <unk> ) of his book New Recommendations ( <unk> <unk> ) to argue that human nature was malleable and thus neither originally good or evil . Han Confucianism was transformed in the Eastern Han period when scholars struggled to understand how Wang Mang 's regime had failed despite its great sponsorship of Confucian reform . The transition from Western Han idealism to Eastern Han skepticism can be represented in part by the Exemplary Sayings ( <unk> <unk> ) of Yang Xiong ( 53 BCE – 18 CE ) , who argued that human nature was indeterminate , that one could cultivate good and escape negative situations by learning the valuable precepts of many schools of thought ( not just Confucianism ) , yet man had no control over his ultimate fate ( <unk> ) decided by Heaven . In his New Discussions ( <unk> <unk> ) , Huan Tan ( 43 BCE – 28 CE ) argued that although the Han court sponsored Confucian education , the government had become corrupt and thus undermined Dong Zhongshu 's cosmically ordained belief that Confucian education went hand @-@ in @-@ hand with political success . In his Balanced Discourse ( Lunheng ) , Wang Chong ( 27 – 100 CE ) argued that human life was not a coherent whole dictated by a unitary will of Heaven as in Dong 's synthesis , but rather was broken down into three planes : biological ( mental and physical ) , sociopolitical , and moral , elements which interacted with each other to produce different results and random fate . Eastern Han Confucians incorporated ideas of Legalism and Daoism to explain how society could be salvaged , such as Wang Fu ( 78 – 163 CE ) in his Comments of a Recluse ( Qian fu lun ) who argued that the evils accumulated by mankind over time could be rectified by direct engagement of the body @-@ politic ( the Legalist approach ) , but that the individual had to cultivate personal virtue in the meantime as a long @-@ term solution ( the Daoist approach ) . 
 = = = Public and private education = = = 
 In order to secure a position as a teacher , erudite in the capital , or government official , a student could choose one of several paths to become well educated . Perhaps the most prestigious path was enrollment in the Imperial University . Students had to be above the age of eighteen to enroll , and were selected by the Minister of Ceremonies from those recommended by local authorities . Other students could choose to enroll in a school sponsored by the local commandery government . A professional teacher who opened a private school in a small town or village could sometimes gather a following of several hundred to over a thousand students . Students were expected to pay tuition , thus a teacher enjoyed a significant salary . His standing in the local community was usually paramount , and was even sought as an arbiter in disputes . Although the size of the Imperial Academy was greatly expanded in Eastern Han , private schools grew in importance as the imperial government lost authority and its academy 's persecution of Old Text tradition drove many to pursue Old Text studies in private institutions . 
 = = = The Standard Histories = = = 
 Before the Records of the Grand Historian ( Shiji ) by Sima Qian ( 145 – 86 BCE ) , there existed terse chronicles of events such as the Spring and Autumn Annals and the chronicle found at Shuihudi covering events in the State of Qin and Qin dynasty from 306 to 217 BCE . There was also the Classic of History — part of the Confucian canon — which recorded the deeds of past rulers and political events ( sometimes mythological instead of historical ) . However , Sima 's work is considered the first of China 's Standard Histories , laid the groundwork for Chinese historiography by creating the first universal history of China . He divided his work of one hundred and thirty chapters into basic annals , chronological tables in grid format ( with year @-@ by @-@ year accounts since 841 BCE , the start of the <unk> Regency ) , treatises on general subjects ( such as the economy and the calendar ) , histories of hereditary houses and states , biographies on individuals arranged in roughly chronological order , and his own autobiography as the last chapter . Being a court archivist allowed Sima to utilize eighty textual sources in addition to memorials , edicts , and stone inscriptions . These sources enhanced the enormous scope of his work , which mentions roughly four thousand people by name . He also traveled extensively to interview witnesses for more recent accounts . 
 Unlike the Western historiographical tradition established by the Greek Herodotus ( c . 484 c . – 425 BCE ) , University of North Carolina associate professor Dr. Grant Hardy asserts that Sima 's work was intended to be a textual microcosm representing every aspect of the Universe , Earth , and Man in model form , in much the same way that the raised @-@ relief map in the tomb of Qin Shi Huang ( r . 221 – 210 BCE ) represented his empire . Hardy explains that this was not unique to Sima 's work , as Han scholars believed encoded secrets existed in the Spring and Autumn Annals , which was deemed " a microcosm incorporating all the essential moral and historical principles by which the world operated " and future events could be prognosticated . However , Hardy 's microcosm thesis as an explanation for the Shiji 's inconsistencies in ideological approach , organization , and literary characteristics has been criticized by Michael Loewe and David Schaberg . They express doubt about Hardy 's view that Sima intended his work to be a well @-@ planned , homogeneous model of reality , rather than a loosely connected collection of narratives which retains the original ideological biases of the various sources used . 
 The next Standard History was the Book of Han , compiled by Ban Biao ( 3 – 54 CE ) , his son Ban Gu ( 32 – 92 CE ) , and his daughter Ban Zhao ( 45 – 116 CE ) . Unlike Sima 's private and independent work , this history text was commissioned and sponsored by the Han court under Emperor Ming ( r . 57 – 75 CE ) , who let Ban Gu use the imperial archives . This set a significant precedent for the rest of the Standard Histories , since the historian was now virtually unable to criticize his ruling patron . The Book of Han covered the history of China left off from Sima 's work during Emperor Wu 's reign up until the middle Eastern Han . Although the Records of the Three Kingdoms included events in late Eastern Han , no history work focused exclusively on the Eastern Han period until the Book of Later Han was compiled by Fan Ye ( 398 – 445 CE ) . 
 = = = Treatises , dictionaries , manuals , and biographies = = = 
 The Ready Guide ( Erya ) is the oldest known Chinese dictionary and was compiled sometime in the 3rd century BCE before the Han . Dictionaries written during the Han dynasty include Yang Xiong 's Regional Speech ( Fangyan ) of 15 BCE and Xu Shen 's ( c . 58 – c . 147 CE ) Explaining Unitary Characters and Analyzing Compound Characters ( Shuowen Jiezi ) of 121 CE . Yang Xiong 's Fangyan was the first Chinese dialect vocabulary work ; the modern Chinese term for ' dialect ' is derived from the title of this book . In the Shuowen Jiezi , Xu Shen divided written characters between wen ( <unk> ) and zi ( 字 ) , where the former were original pictographs and the latter were characters derived from them . Listing 9 @,@ 353 characters with 1 @,@ 163 variant forms , Xu arranged these into 540 section headers according to their written radicals . This convenient and systematic approach of arranging characters by their radicals became the standard for all Chinese dictionaries to follow . 
 Handbooks , guides , manuals , and treatises for various subjects were written in the Han . The Western Han Book of Fan Shengzhi ( Fan Shengzhi shu 氾勝之書 ) written during Emperor Cheng 's reign is one of two manuals on agricultural techniques and processes that have survived from the Han . The other is the Eastern Han Monthly Instructions for the Four Classes of People ( Simin yueling 四民月令 ) written by Cui Shi ( 催寔 ) ( d . 170 CE ) . Mathematical treatises included the Book on Numbers and Computation ( Suan shu shu ) The Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven ( Zhoubi suanjing ) , and the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art ( Jiuzhang <unk> ) . There were also works on astronomy , such as the Miscellaneous Readings of Cosmic Patterns and Pneuma Images ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) from the 2nd @-@ century @-@ BCE Mawangdui Silk Texts and Zhang Heng 's ( 78 – 139 CE ) Spiritual Constitution of the Universe ( <unk> 靈憲 ) published in 120 CE . 
 Aside from the biographies found in the Standard Histories , it became popular amongst gentrymen to write stylistic essays and commission private biographies on other gentlemen . These privately published biographies focused either on gentrymen from one 's locality or more well known figures who held national prominence . 
 = = = Poetry and rhapsodies = = = 
 The rhapsody , known as fu in Chinese , was a new literary genre . The poet and official Sima Xiangru ( 179 – 117 BCE ) wrote several rhapsodies , yet his largest and most influential was the " Rhapsody on the Son of Heaven on a Leisurely Hunt " ( <unk> <unk> Fu <unk> ) written in debate form . Sima 's rhapsodies incorporated literary elements found in the Songs of Chu — an anthology of poems attributed to Qu Yuan ( 340 – 278 BCE ) and Song Yu ( fl . 3rd century BCE ) — such as flying with heavenly immortals . Yang Xiong was the other prominent fu writer of Western Han , and although he at first praised Sima 's work , he later criticized it as an example of the genre 's shortcomings . In Eastern Han , Ban Gu wrote a rhapsody comparing the capital cities Chang 'an and Luoyang , in which he concluded that Luoyang was the better of the two ( which was a subtle praise of the current emperor , hinting that his virtue surpassed the rulers of Western Han ) . The court astronomer and inventor Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 CE ) also wrote rhapsodies on the capital cities which were inspired by those of Ban Gu . Zhang also penned the rhapsody " Returning to the Fields " , which fused Daoist and Confucian ideals as well as laid the groundwork for later metaphysical nature poetry . 
 Zhang Heng also wrote " Lyric Poems on Four Sorrows " ( <unk> ) , which represent the earliest <unk> shi poems in Chinese literature . The government 's Music Bureau also produced folk songs and <unk> , a lyrical form of verse that became a standard subgenre of shi poetry . These poems focused largely on issues of morality that Confucian scholars found acceptable and in @-@ line with Zhou dynasty traditions . Poets of the Jian 'an ( <unk> ) period ( 196 – 220 CE ) usually attended the same social events to compose poems on a given topic in one another 's company . 
 = = Laws and customs = = 
 By the Han dynasty , written law had matured from its archaic form based largely on natural law and social customs into a rational corpus influenced by politics and based on positive law . However , the Han dynasty law code established by Chancellor Xiao He ( d . 193 BCE ) was largely an extension of an existing Qin dynasty law code . Evidence for this includes archaeological finds at Qin @-@ era Shuihudi and Han @-@ era Zhangjiashan . The nine chapters of the law code consisted of statutes which dealt with criminality , while two of these chapters dealt with court procedure . Although it survives only in small fragments , it was allegedly a massive written work on 960 written scrolls . The code had 26 @,@ 272 articles written in 7 @,@ 732 @,@ 200 words that outlined punishments . There were 490 articles on the death penalty alone which contained 1 @,@ 882 offenses and 3 @,@ 472 analogies or pieces of case law . 
 The county magistrate and commandery administrator were the official court judges of the county and commandery , respectively . Their jurisdictions overlapped , yet the commandery administrator only interfered in county court cases when necessary ; it was generally agreed that whoever arrested a criminal first would be the first to judge him or her . If a commandery @-@ level court case could not be resolved , the central government 's Commandant of Justice was the final authority of appeal before the emperor . Yet he most often dealt with cases of political rebels and regicide in regards to kings , marquesses , and high officials . Above the Commandant was the emperor , the supreme judge and lawgiver . 
 As with previous codes , Han law distinguished what should be considered murderous killings ( with malice and foresight ) , wittingly killing , killing by mistake , and killing by accident . Although a father was the undisputed head of the family , he was not allowed to mutilate or kill any of its members as punishment ; if he did , he would be tried for physical assault or murder , respectively . Yet not all murders were given the same sentence , since relation and circumstance were considered in the sentencing . For example , A father would be given a much less severe sentence for murdering a son than if a son murdered his father . Women had certain rights under Han law . It was against the law for husbands to physically abuse their wives . Rape cases were also commonly filed in court and were punished by Han law . Women could level charges against men in court , while it was commonly accepted in Han jurisprudence that women were capable of telling the truth in court . 
 Sometimes criminals were beaten with the bastinado to gain confessions , but Han scholars argued that torture was not the best means of gaining confession , while court conferences were called into session to decide how many strokes should be given and what size the stick should be so as not to cause permanent injury . Imprisonment was an unheard of form of punishment during Han ; common punishments were the death penalty by beheading , periods of forced hard labor for convicts , exile , or monetary fines . <unk> punishments also existed in early Han , borrowed from previous practice in Qin . This included tattooing the face , cutting off the nose , castration , and amputation of one or both feet , yet by 167 BCE these were abolished in favor of lengthy floggings with the bastinado . Further reforms were implemented by the first year of Emperor Jing 's ( r . 154 – 141 BCE ) reign which decreased the amount of strokes a prisoner could receive from the bastinado . Starting in 195 BCE , those aged seventy and older were exempt from mutilating punishments . Further reforms exempted those aged seventy and older from harsh interrogation methods in cases other than false accusation and murder . 
 Although modern scholars know of some surviving cases where Han law dealt with commerce and domestic affairs , the spheres of trade ( outside the monopolies ) and the family were still largely governed by age @-@ old social customs . Many ways in which family relations were conducted during the Han were already stipulated in the ancient Confucian canon , especially in the Book of Rites . This became accepted as the mainstream guide to ethics and custom . In terms of private commercial contracts , they usually entailed information on the goods transferred , the amount paid , the names of the buyer and seller , the date of transfer and the signatures of witnesses . 
 = = Arts and crafts = = 
 Artists were classified as artisans since they were <unk> laborers who manufactured and decorated objects . The philosopher Wang Fu argued that urban society exploited the contributions of food @-@ producing farmers while able @-@ bodied men in the cities wasted their time ( among other listed pursuits ) crafting miniature plaster carts , earthenware statues of dogs , horses , and human figures of singers and actors , and children 's toys . However , during Eastern Han some scholar @-@ officials began engaging in crafts originally reserved for artisans , such as mechanical engineering . Emperor Ling commissioned the official Cai Yong ( 132 – 192 CE ) to paint portraits and produce eulogies for five generations of the prominent Yang clan of officials and military officers . This is the first recorded instance in China where a scholar @-@ official was commissioned to write eulogies and paint portraits in conjunction , instead of relying on skilled artisans to do the painting . 
 Han luxury items furnished the homes of wealthy merchants , officials , nobles , and royalty . Such goods were often highly decorated by skilled artisans . These include red @-@ and @-@ black lacquerwares in various shapes and sizes , bronze items such as raised @-@ relief decorated mirrors , oil lamps in the shape of human figures , and gilded bronzewares , glazed ceramic wares with various incised designs , and ornaments and jewelry made of jade , opal , amber , quartz , gold , and silver . 
 Besides domestic decoration , Han artwork also served an important funerary function . Han artists and craftsmen decorated the wall bricks lining underground tombs of the deceased with mural paintings and carved reliefs ; the purpose of this artwork was to aid the deceased in traveling through their afterlife journey . Stamping artistic designs into tile and brick was also common . Human figurine sculptures found in Han tombs were placed there to perform various functions for the deceased in the afterlife , such as dancing and playing music for entertainment , as well as serving food . A common type of ceramic figurine found in Han tombs is a female entertainer sporting long , flowing silk sleeves that are flung about while dancing . Some ceramic human figures — both male and female — have been found naked , all with clearly distinguished genitalia and missing arms . This is because they once had wooden or cloth arms which were attached to holes in the shoulders by pegs , as well as miniature clothes made of perishable materials such as silk . 
 During the Western Han , grave goods were usually wares and pieces of art that were used by the tomb occupant when he or she was alive . By the Eastern Han , new stylistic goods , wares , and artwork found in tombs were usually made exclusively for burial and were not produced for previous use by the deceased when they were alive . These include miniature ceramic towers — usually watchtowers and urban residential towers — which provide historians clues about lost wooden architecture . In addition to towers , there are also miniature models of querns , water wells , <unk> , <unk> shops , and farm fields with pottery pigs , dogs , sheep , chickens , ducks . Although many items placed in tombs were commonly used wares and utensils , it was considered taboo to bring objects specified for burial into living quarters or the imperial palace . They could only be brought into living quarters once they were properly announced at funerary ceremonies , and were known as <unk> ( <unk> / <unk> ) ( " fearsome artifacts , " " objects for the dead , " or " brilliant artifacts " ) according to Cary Y. Liu ( Ph.D. from Princeton University , licensed architect and museum curator ) . 
 = = Clothing and cuisine = = 
 The most common agricultural food staples during Han were wheat , barley , rice , foxtail millet , proso millet , and beans . People of the Han also consumed sorghum , Job 's tears , taro , mallow , mustard green , melon , bottle gourd , bamboo shoot , the roots of lotus plants , and ginger . Some of the fruits the Han ate included the chestnut , jujube , pear , peach , plum ( including the plum of Prunus salicina and Prunus <unk> ) , melon , apricot , red <unk> , and strawberry . The Han Chinese domesticated and ate chickens , Mandarin ducks , geese , camels , cows , sheep , pigs , and dogs . The type of game animals hunted during the Han included rabbit , sika deer , turtle dove , goose , owl , Chinese bamboo partridge , magpie , common pheasant , and cranes , while fish and turtles were taken from streams and lakes . Beer — which could be an unfermented malt drink with low alcohol content or a stronger brew fermented with yeast — was commonly consumed alongside meat , but virtually never consumed alongside grains such as rice . Wine was also regularly consumed . 
 The 2nd @-@ century @-@ BCE tomb of the Lady Dai contained not only decayed remnants of actual food , such as rice , wheat , barley , two varieties of millet , and soybeans , but also a grave inventory with recipes on it . This included vegetable and meat stews cooked in pots , which had combinations such as beef and rice stew , dog meat and celery stew , and even deer , fish , and bamboo shoot stew . Seasonings mentioned in the recipes include sugar , honey , soy sauce , and salt . Recipes in the Han usually called for meat stuffed in cereals , cakes , and other wrappings . 
 Like their modern counterparts , the Han @-@ era Chinese used chopsticks as eating utensils . For drinking beverages , wealthy people during Han often used cups with golden handles and inlaid with silver . 
 For the poor , hemp was the common item used to make clothing , while the rich could afford silk clothes . Silk clothes found in Han tombs include padded robes , double @-@ layered robes , single @-@ layered robes , single @-@ layered skirts , shoes , socks , and mittens . The wealthy also wore fox and badger furs , wild duck plumes , and slippers with inlaid leather or silk lining ; those of more modest means could wear wool and ferret skins . Large bamboo @-@ matted suitcases found in Han tombs contained clothes and luxury items such as patterned fabric and embroidery , common silk , damask and brocade , and the <unk> ( or gauze ) weave , all with rich colors and designs . The Han also had tools for ironing clothes . 
 = = Religion , cosmology , and metaphysics = = 
 = = = Ancestor worship , deities , and the afterlife = = = 
 Families throughout Han China made ritual sacrifices ( usually involving animals and foodstuffs ) to various deities , spirits , and ancestors . Deceased ancestors were thought to require food and drink in the afterlife , so living family members were routinely obligated to offer food and wine to the ancestors in a family shrine or temple . Wealthy families who could afford to bury their dead in large tombs often placed the food items at the entrances of such complexes . 
 Han @-@ era Chinese believed that a person had two souls , the hun and po . The spirit @-@ soul ( hun 魂 ) was believed to travel to the paradise of the immortals ( xian <unk> ) while the body @-@ soul ( po 魄 ) remained on earth in its proper resting place so long as measures were taken to prevent it from wandering to the netherworld . The body @-@ soul could allegedly utilize items placed in the tomb of the deceased , such as domestic wares , clothes , food and utensils , and even money in the form of clay replicas . It was believed that the bipartite souls could also be temporarily reunited in a ceremony called " summoning the hun to return to the po " ( <unk> hun fu po <unk> ) . 
 However , Han beliefs in the afterlife were not uniform across the empire and changed over time . Not only were there many different burial customs and views on how one journeyed through the afterlife , but even the names hun and po for spirit @-@ soul and body @-@ soul could be substituted with demon ( gui <unk> ) and spirit ( shen 神 ) . Demons , or gui , were thought to be partial manifestations of the deceased which lacked their essential vital energy ( qi 氣 ) that had to be exorcised when they maliciously caused the living to become ill ; however , a demon could also be considered a neutral ' ghost ' . Spirits , or shen , were usually associated with the animalistic spirits embodying certain places , such as the Earl of the Yellow River ( He Bo <unk> ) . If proper sacrifices were made to these spirits , it was believed to bring good fortune ; if ritual sacrifices were neglected , the spirit could inflict bad fortune on individuals and local communities . In the Western Han , texts left behind in tombs illustrate that the living took a more sympathetic view towards the dead than in the Eastern Han , when spirits were generally more feared as dangers to the living . The Western Han ' letters informing the underground ' ( <unk> <unk> ) were written to ' inform the Ruler of the Underground ' <unk> about the deceased 's wants and needs for clothing , vessels , and implements . However , ' tomb @-@ quelling texts ' ( <unk> <unk> ) that appeared during the 1st century CE acted as passports for the dead so that they did not disturb or bring danger to the living . Both Western Han and Eastern Han tombs contained ' land contracts ' ( <unk> <unk> ) which stated that the deceased owned the land they were buried in . 
 Since the emperor fulfilled the role of the highest priest in the land , he was obligated to offer ritual sacrifices to Heaven , the supreme deities , and spirits of the mountains and rivers . The Qin court had made sacrifices to and worshipped four main deities , to which Emperor Gaozu added one in 205 BCE to make Five Powers ( Wudi <unk> ) . However , Emperor Cheng ( r . 33 – 7 BCE ) cancelled state worship of the Five Powers in favor of ceremonies dedicated to Heaven ( Tian <unk> ) and the supreme god ( <unk> <unk> ) , who the kings of the Zhou dynasty ( c . 1050 – 256 BCE ) had worshipped and traced their legitimacy to . One of the underlying reasons for this shift in state policy was Emperor Cheng 's desire to gain Heaven 's direct favor and thus become blessed with a male heir . The court 's exclusive worship of Heaven continued throughout the rest of Han . 
 = = = Yin @-@ yang and five phases = = = 
 The Han Chinese believed that three realms of Heaven , Earth , and Mankind were inextricably linked and subject to natural cycles ; if man could understand these cycles , they could understand the hidden secrets of the three realms . One cycle was yin and yang , which corresponded to yielding and hard , shade and sunlight , feminine and masculine , and the Moon and Sun , respectively , while it was thought to govern the three realms and changing of seasons . The five phases was another important cycle where the elements of wood ( mu 木 ) , fire ( huo 火 ) , earth ( tu 土 ) , metal ( jin 金 ) , and water ( shui 水 ) succeeded each other in rotation and each corresponded with certain traits of the three realms . For example , the five phases corresponded with other sets of five like the five organs ( i.e. liver , heart , spleen , lungs and kidneys ) and five tastes ( i.e. sour , bitter , sweet , spicy , and salty ) , or even things like feelings , musical notes , colors , planets , calendars and time periods . 
 It was accepted during the Qin dynasty that whoever defeated his rivals in battle would have legitimacy to rule the land . Yet by the time of Wang Mang 's usurpation it was commonly believed that Heaven , which was now given greater prominence in state worship , designated which individual and hereditary house had the right to rule , a concept known as the Mandate of Heaven . Michael Loewe ( retired professor from the University of Cambridge ) writes that this is consistent with the gradually higher level of emphasis given to the cosmic elements of Five Phases , which were linked with the future destiny of the dynasty and its protection . Dong Zhongshu stressed that a ruler who behaved immorally and did not adhere to proper conduct created a disruption in the natural cycles governing the three realms , which resulted in natural calamities such as earthquakes , floods , droughts , epidemics , and swarms of locusts . This idea became fully accepted at court ( and in later dynasties ) , as emperors often implemented reforms to the legal system or granted amnesties to restore nature 's balance . 
 At the beginning of the Han dynasty , the Liu family associated its dynasty with the water phase as the previous Qin dynasty had done . By 104 BCE , to accompany the installment of the new Taichu Calendar ( <unk> ) , the Han court aligned itself with the earth phase to legitimately supplant the Qin 's element . Yet by 26 CE ( shortly after the downfall of Wang Mang ) the new Eastern Han court made a retrospective argument that Han 's element had always been fire . 
 = = = Daoism and Buddhism = = = 
 After Huang @-@ Lao thought became eclipsed by other ideologies explaining the cosmos during the 2nd century BCE , the sage philosopher Laozi replaced the Yellow Emperor as the ancestor and originator of the teachings of Daoism . As written by Wang Chong in the 1st century CE , Daoists were chiefly concerned with obtaining immortality . Valerie Hansen writes that Han @-@ era Daoists were organized into small groups of people who believed that individual immortality could be obtained through " breathing exercises , sexual techniques , and medical potions . " However , these were the same practices of Daoists who followed Zhuangzi ( fl . 4th century BCE ) centuries before . The Han @-@ era Chinese believed that the Queen Mother of the West ruled over a mountainous realm of immortal semi @-@ human creatures who possessed elixirs of immortality that man could utilize to prolong his life . Besides the Queen Mother 's mountain to the west , Mount <unk> in the east was another mythological location where the Han @-@ era Chinese believed one could achieve immortality . Wang Chong stated that Daoists , organized into small groups of hermits largely unconcerned with the wider laity , believed they could attempt to fly to the lands of the immortals and become invincible pure men . His criticism of such groups is the best known source of his century to describe Daoist beliefs . However , a major transformation in Daoist beliefs occurred in the 2nd century CE , when large hierarchical religious societies formed and viewed Laozi as a deity and prophet who would usher in salvation for his followers . 
 The first mentioning of Buddhism in China occurred in 65 CE . This was in regards to Liu Ying ( d . 71 CE ) , a half @-@ brother of Emperor Ming , who allegedly paid homage to the Buddha . At this point , the Chinese heavily associated Buddhism with Huang @-@ Lao Daoism . Emperor Ming also had the first known Buddhist temple constructed in China , the White Horse Temple of Luoyang . It was allegedly built in honor of the foreign monks <unk> ( <unk> ) ( <unk> <unk> ) and Zhu <unk> ( <unk> ) ( <unk> the Indian ) . A popular myth asserted that these two monks were the first to translate the Sutra of Forty @-@ two Chapters into Chinese , although it is now known that this work was not translated into Chinese until the 2nd century CE . The Parthian monk An Shigao from the Parthian Empire came to Han China in 148 CE . He translated Buddhist works on the Hinayana into Chinese , as well as works on yoga that Han @-@ era Chinese associated with Daoist exercises . Another foreign monk , Lokaksema from Kushan @-@ era Gandhara , India , traveled and stayed in Han China from around 178 – 198 CE . He translated the Perfection of Wisdom , Shurangama Sutra , and Pratyutpanna Sutra , and introduced to China the concepts of Akshobhya Buddha , Amitābha Buddha ( of Pure Land Buddhism ) , and teachings about Manjusri . 
 = = = Religious societies and rebel movements = = = 
 The Daoist religious society of the Five Pecks of Rice was initiated by Zhang Daoling in 142 CE . Zhang was raised in what is now Jiangsu where he studied Daoist beliefs in immortality . He moved to what is now Sichuan province and claimed to have a revelation where the deified Laozi appointed him as his earthly representative and Celestial Master . The movement spread rapidly , particularly under Zhang 's sons , Zhang Heng and Zhang Lu . Instead of money , followers were asked to contribute five pecks of rice to the religious society and banned the worship of ' unclean ' gods who accepted sacrificial offerings of meat . Initiated members of the group were called ' <unk> ' , a title associated with village elders who took the first drink at feasts . The laity were told that if they obeyed the rules of the religious society , they would be rewarded with good health . Illness was thus seen as the result of violating religious rules and committing personal sins , which required confession to <unk> charged with overseeing the recovery of sinners . They believed that chanting parts of the Daodejing would bring about cures for illnesses . Zhang Daoling 's second successor Zhang Lu initiated a rebellion in 184 CE that allowed him to retain complete control over Ba and Hanzhong commanderies ( of modern Sichuan and southern Shanxi ) for three decades . He even modelled his ' charity houses ' after Han postal stations , yet his establishments offered grain and meat to followers . Although Zhang Lu surrendered to Chancellor Cao Cao ( 155 – 220 CE ) in 215 CE , Cao was still wary of his influence over the people , so he granted Zhang and his sons fiefs to placate them . 
 The widespread Yellow Turban Rebellion also occurred in 184 CE , its leaders claiming that they were destined to bring about a utopian era of peace . Like the Five Pecks of Rice society , the Yellow Turbans of the Huai and Yellow River valleys also believed that illness was a sign of wrongdoing that necessitated confession to church leaders and faith healers . However , the Yellow Turbans typically utilized holy water as a ramification for sickness ; if this did not cure the sick , the latter 's sins were deemed too great to be exculpated . Since the year 184 CE was the first ( and very auspicious ) year of a new <unk> cycle , the Yellow Turban 's supreme leader Zhang Jue ( d . 184 CE ) chose the third month of that year as the time to rebel ; when this was leaked to the Han court , Zhang was forced to initiate the rebellion prematurely . Although the Yellow Turbans were able to muster hundreds of thousands of troops , they were overpowered by the combined force of imperial troops and independent generals . By the end of the year their leadership — including Zhang Jue — had been killed and only scattered groups remained until they were amalgamated into the forces of Cao Cao in 192 CE . 
 = Boom Box ( No Doubt album ) = 
 Boom Box is a limited @-@ edition box set album by the American rock band No Doubt , released on November 25 , 2003 through Interscope Records . It compiled The Singles 1992 – 2003 , The Videos 1992 – 2003 , Everything in Time , and Live in the Tragic Kingdom . The Singles 1992 – 2003 was also released on a separate CD on the same date . Everything in Time was released as a separate CD later on October 12 , 2004 . The Videos 1992 – 2003 was released as a separate DVD on May 4 , 2004 . At the time of Boom Box 's release , Live in the Tragic Kingdom had already been released on VHS and it was re @-@ released on DVD on June 13 , 2006 . 
 The Singles 1992 – 2003 and The Videos 1992 – 2003 are compiled from the singles released from four of the band 's five studio albums , No Doubt , Tragic Kingdom , Return of Saturn and Rock Steady , with tracks from the last three heavily represented . Everything in Time is an album of B @-@ sides , rare songs and remixes , taken mainly from the recording sessions of Return of Saturn . Live in the Tragic Kingdom is a recording of a concert filmed during the band 's tour for Tragic Kingdom . 
 The release of Boom Box received very little coverage from music critics because it was not a studio album . The few reviews it received were positive . The album charted at number 206 on the Top Internet Albums . However , in its separate release , The Singles 1992 – 2003 was reviewed widely and positively , and it charted highly across North America and Europe , peaking at number 2 in the U.S. and number 5 in the UK . Everything in Time , in its separate release , charted on the U.S. Billboard 200 at number 182 . 
 = = Background = = 
