 No Doubt released five studio albums throughout its career before going into hiatus . Their debut album , No Doubt , was released on March 17 , 1992 . It sold only 30 @,@ 000 copies on its initial release , and the band 's record company , Interscope Records , refused to fund the release of a single from it . No Doubt therefore financed the production of a music video for the song " Trapped in a Box " , which was received local airplay in Orange County , California but did not attract mainstream attention . No Doubt recorded their second album , The Beacon Street Collection , in March 1995 . It was released independently , because No Doubt had recorded many songs that they knew would not make it onto Tragic Kingdom and were frustrated by a lack of attention from their label . They released two singles from it : " Squeal " and " Doghouse " . The Beacon Street Collection sold 100 @,@ 000 copies . No Doubt 's independence shocked their company representative and ensured that the label would finance a third album . 
 The band 's third album , Tragic Kingdom , was released shortly after The Beacon Street Collection , on October 10 , 1995 under Interscope Records . Work began on the album in 1993 but Interscope rejected most of the material , leading to the release of Beacon Street . The band was introduced to Paul Palmer , who had his own label Trauma Records , which was already associated with Interscope . Palmer mixed the record and was allowed to release Tragic Kingdom under Trauma Records . The album produced seven singles : " Just a Girl " , " Spiderwebs " , " Don 't Speak " , " Excuse Me Mr. " , " Happy Now ? " , " Sunday Morning " , and " Hey You ! " . In total , Tragic Kingdom sold over 16 million copies worldwide , and was certified diamond in the United States and Canada , and platinum in the United Kingdom . 
 No Doubt 's fourth studio album was Return of Saturn , released on April 11 , 2000 after two and a half years of touring to promote Tragic Kingdom . The album spawned four singles — " New " , a song from the soundtrack to the movie Go , " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , " Simple Kind of Life " , and " Bathwater " . Return of Saturn sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies upon its release . No Doubt released its fifth studio album , Rock Steady , in December 2001 . Four singles were released from it — " Hey Baby " , " Hella Good " , " Underneath It All " , and " Running " — between 2001 and 2003 . The album sold 3 million copies upon its release and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Later , in April 2003 , No Doubt went into hiatus to take a break to spend time with their families before starting to compile Everything in Time ; The Singles 1992 – 2003 ; The Videos 1992 – 2003 ; and Boom Box , containing all of the above and Live in the Tragic Kingdom , which was originally recorded in 1997 . They would all be released on the same date . The main reason to go into hiatus was that , in early 2003 , lead singer Gwen Stefani started work on her 1980s @-@ inspired new wave / dance @-@ pop music side project , under which she released two solo albums : Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on November 22 , 2004 and The Sweet Escape on December 4 , 2006 . 
 Live in the Tragic Kingdom had previous been released on VHS on November 11 , 1997 and was later released as a separate DVD on June 13 , 2006 . Everything in Time was later released as a separate CD on October 12 , 2004 . The Videos 1992 – 2003 was released on a separate DVD on May 4 , 2004 . 
 = = Music = = 
 Boom Box compiles four albums : Everything in Time , The Singles 1992 – 2003 , The Videos 1992 – 2003 , and Live in the Tragic Kingdom . The Singles 1992 – 2003 is a greatest hits collection of No Doubt 's singles , containing tracks from four of their five studio albums : No Doubt , Tragic Kingdom , Return of Saturn , and Rock Steady . Tracks from No Doubt 's second album , The Beacon Street Collection , were not included because the album was produced and released independently by the band . The Videos 1992 – 2003 is a DVD containing No Doubt 's music videos , including those of all the tracks on The Singles 1992 – 2003 as well as a video of the band 's cover of " Oi to the World ! " , a song originally by Californian punk rock band The Vandals from their album of the same name . Everything in Time is a CD collection of B @-@ sides , rare songs , and remixes . Live in the Tragic Kingdom is a DVD filmed at one of the concerts in No Doubt 's Tragic Kingdom tour and contains performances of the seven songs released as singles from Tragic Kingdom , along with other tracks from the album and cover versions of songs by other bands . 
 Boom Box spans mostly No Doubt 's later musical style . The two greatest hits discs , The Singles 1992 – 2003 and The Videos 1992 – 2003 , take 13 of their 15 or 16 tracks from Tragic Kingdom , Return of Saturn and Rock Steady . Their earlier musical style , in which the songs were written by keyboard player Eric Stefani , who left the band before Tragic Kingdom was recorded , is represented by only one song — " Trapped in a Box " from No Doubt . The band 's musical style changed later when Gwen Stefani started writing the songs ; the tracks on Tragic Kingdom , which are heavily represented on Boom Box , are built on the themes of Gwen Stefani 's femininity and the breakup of her relationship with fellow band member Tony Kanal . The B @-@ sides and rare songs on Everything in Time were mainly recorded in the sessions for the band 's fourth album , Return of Saturn , but two of the three remixes were of the song " Rock Steady " , from No Doubt 's album , Rock Steady . Boom Box was given a Parental Advisory : Explicit Content sticker in the United States because of the content in Live in the Tragic Kingdom , which also received the sticker upon its release . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Because Boom Box was not one of No Doubt 's official studio albums , it lacked much attention from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave the album four stars out of five , although criticizing the mix of songs , saying that only " hardcore No Doubt fans ... would want any of this material . " He called the set 's appearance of being " a generous gift to [ No Doubt 's ] fans " " deceiving " and the album not as " carefully assembled " as the standalone The Singles 1992 – 2003 . He said that the packaging " feels as if it was done on the cheap " and criticized the lack of special features on the DVDs . However , he praised The Singles 1992 – 2003 and Everything in Time , calling them " very good " and that they displayed what a " dynamic singles band No Doubt was " , summarizing the album as " something worthwhile for the fans " . 
 However , The Singles 1992 – 2003 and Everything in Time from Boom Box were released separately and were reviewed as separate albums . The Singles 1992 – 2003 was well received by critics and was described as " a real joy " and a " stellar collection " . Its mixture of styles was both praised as " sheer diversity " and criticised as having a " hotch @-@ potch feel " . The album charted well across Europe , Oceania and North America . In the United States , it sold 2 @.@ 2 million copies , peaked at number 2 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and was certified gold , platinum and 2 × platinum . It peaked in the top ten of the album charts of Canada , New Zealand , the United Kingdom , Denmark , the Netherlands , Finland , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland ; and in the top forty of the album charts of Germany , Australia , Belgium and Portugal . Everything in Time peaked at number 182 on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Disc one = = = 
 = = = Disc two = = = 
 = = = Disc three = = = 
 = = = Disc four = = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Dragon Quest VII = 
 Dragon Quest VII : Fragments of the Forgotten Past ( <unk> <unk> , Doragon Kuesuto Sebun Eden no Senshi @-@ tachi , lit . " Dragon Quest VII : Warriors of Eden " ) is a Japanese role @-@ playing video game developed by Heartbeat and ArtePiazza , and published by Enix for the PlayStation in 2000 . It was released in North America in 2001 under the title Dragon Warrior VII . The game received a remake on the Nintendo 3DS on February 7 , 2013 in Japan , and it was announced that the game would be released in North America and Europe for the Nintendo 3DS under the title Dragon Quest VII : Fragments of the Forgotten Past in 2016 . A version of the game for Android and iOS was also released in Japan on September 17 , 2015 . 
 Dragon Quest VII : Fragments of the Forgotten Past is the seventh installment of the popular Dragon Quest series of role playing games , and is the successor to 1995 's Dragon Quest VI for the Super Famicom . An immediate success upon release , Dragon Warrior VII 's sales have totalled 4 @.@ 06 million , making it the best @-@ selling PlayStation game in Japan by April 6 , 2001 , and is an Ultimate Hits title . It was the first main series Dragon Quest title to be released outside Japan since the release of Dragon Quest IV in North America in 1992 , and the last Dragon Quest title to be released in North America with the Dragon Warrior name . The game was produced by Yuji Horii , who has presided over the Dragon Quest series since its inception . Artwork and character designs were once again provided by Akira Toriyama , the artist responsible for all previous Dragon Quest games and a famous manga artist . 
 The game follows the Hero and his friends as they discover secrets about the mysterious islands surrounding their home of Estard . Through some ancient ruins , they are transported to the pasts of various islands and must defeat evil in each new location . Game mechanics are largely unchanged from previous games in the series , although an extensive Class system allows players to customize their characters . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dragon Warrior VII is best known for its huge size . Without completing the game 's side quests , a single game of Dragon Warrior VII can take a hundred hours or more . In terms of gameplay , not much has changed from previous installments ; battles are still fought in a turn @-@ based mode from a first person perspective . Although non @-@ battle sequences are rendered in 3D , battles themselves are still portrayed two dimensionally . The ability to talk with the party characters in and outside of battles was added to this game . They offer advice about battle strategies and plot points , or simply comment on how they feel at a given moment . There are four ways and means of locomotion : feet , boat , magic carpet , and <unk> . Each of these can move across different terrain . 
 The main flow of the game is different from the other Dragon Quest games ; instead of exploring one large world , the party goes to separate continents by placing stone shards into their appropriate pedestals in Estard Fane . Once all of the missing shards are located and placed for a particular pedestal , the party is transported to the trapped location in the past . After solving whatever problems plague the location , the party then travels back to Estard , the beginning island . From there , they can travel via boat , carpet , or <unk> to the modern version of the location they just saved . These saved lands appear on the main map , although the originals ( from the past ) can be revisited through the ruins . 
 Like most of the other Dragon Quest games , this game has several mini @-@ games to participate in . The Immigrant Town , similar to the one in Dragon Quest IV , lets the player recruit people from various towns . They then live in the town , which changes depending on the type of people living there ( e.g. several merchants will bring more stores to the town ) . A prominent feature in most Dragon Quest games is the casino . Poker , slot machines , and luck panel can all be played in Dragon Warrior VII . The Ranking Association allows the player to compete for the highest stats , like the Beauty Competition from Dragon Quest VI . The player can also catch monsters , although they are only displayed in the Monster Park , unlike in Dragon Quest V , where monsters fought in the party . Blueprints are found to add new environments to the park . 
 = = = Class system = = = 
 Dragon Warrior VII uses a class system for learning abilities , similar to that of Dragon Quest VI . Some available classes include Warrior , Fighter , Cleric , Mage , Bard , Dancer , Jester , Thief , Idol , Pirate , Ranger , Dragoon , Paladin , Summoner , God Hand , and Hero , some of which are unlocked by mastering other classes . The game also includes monster classes , which can be unlocked by using the appropriate monster heart or mastering pre @-@ requisite monster classes . 
 Characters generally stop learning character specific spells and skills around experience level 15 ; however , around this time in the game , players will reach Dharma Island , where they can give their characters certain classes . Each non @-@ monster class belongs to one of three tiers ( Basic , Intermediate , and Advanced ) , while monster classes have more tiers . Characters gain levels in classes by fighting a certain number of battles , as opposed to gaining experience points . Characters learn different spells and skills when they reach another class level and their stats are affected by what class they are . Once a character reaches the 8th and final level of a class , it is considered " mastered " , if a character masters certain classes , higher tier classes will become available to them . For example , if a character masters the Mage and Cleric classes , which are both Basic , then the Intermediate class Sage will be available to them . If that character was to then master the Teen Idol class , the Advanced Summoner class would open up . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The story begins when the father of the protagonist brings home a map fragment from a fishing trip ; this map suggests to the protagonist and his friend that the world had , at some point in its past , many continents , though now there is only the small island of Estard ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The two of them find a way to travel back to the past , when the continents still existed . The continents are facing serious problems that threaten their existence ; the protagonist and his growing party work to resolve the problems , and when they do , the continents reappear in the present . When all the continents are finally restored , the Demon Lord , who is responsible for the loss of many of the continents , appears and seals away many of the continents again . He then raises up his Dark Palace , where the party face the Demon Lord in a final showdown . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Hero ( <unk> , <unk> ) — The Hero has no default name ; as is traditional in the Dragon Quest series , the name is supplied by the player ( however , he is called Arus in the official manga and was given the name Auster in the 3DS English translation ) . The Hero is a lifelong native of the town of Fishbel on Estard Island . He is good friends with Maribel , daughter of the mayor of Fishbel , and Kiefer , prince of Estard Castle . In particular , he has a fondness for going out on impromptu " adventures " with Kiefer . It is one such adventure than begins the story of the game . 
 In terms of gameplay , the Hero is a well @-@ rounded character who is one of the strongest fighters in the game . He also lays claim to a variety of healing magics , and has fairly average statistical growth . 
 Kiefer ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) — Kiefer is a prince of Estard , and the presumptive heir to the throne . Far from anticipating his elevation to kingship , however , Kiefer seems to resent his royal blood , and is a source of endless worry and frustration to his family and advisors . Kiefer , for his part , spends much of his time in search of excitement and adventure , and has found a kindred spirit in the Hero , whom he considers his closest friend . 
 Kiefer is incredibly strong , with a high physical attack statistic and naturally high hit points ( HP ) . He is the most powerful character available early on in the game . On one trip to an ancient land , Kiefer falls in love , and remains behind . Upon returning to the present , the hero finds out that Kiefer became a famous guardian of the Dejan tribe , and is the biological ancestor of almost an entire culture / continent . Kiefer is also the main character of the game Dragon Quest Monsters : Caravan Heart . 
 Maribel ( <unk> , <unk> ) — A friend of both the Hero and Kiefer , Maribel is the daughter of the mayor of Fishbel . Unlike Kiefer , who has steadfastly refused to let his social status influence how he looks upon other people , Maribel tends to be a bit condescending , even bossy . Despite this , she gets along well with her friends , and occasionally accompanies them on their adventuring , even if she sometimes has to pressure them into letting her tag along . 
 Maribel is primarily a magic user : with low starting physical statistics , and an early lack of powerful weapons available for her use , it takes a good deal of time before she can do anything approaching the amount of physical damage inflicted by some of the other characters . On the other hand , Maribel has access to a variety of damaging attack spells relatively early on . Unlike Kiefer , she does rejoin the Hero after leaving . 
 Gabo ( <unk> ) known as Ruff in the 3DS English translation — Although he appears normal , Gabo is actually a white wolf pup who was irrevocably turned into a boy . As such , he retains a number of obvious lupine characteristics , and can be somewhat animalistic at times . He agrees to travel with the heroes hoping to protect his family , but remains with the group out of a sense of loyalty . 
 In contrast to Maribel , Gabo 's specialty is in physical combat . Despite his diminutive size , he can easily become as powerful as the Hero , Melvin , and Aira through mastery of the class system . 
 Melvin ( <unk> , <unk> ) known as Mervyn in the 3DS English translation — A skilled paladin of generations past , Melvin fought on the side of God against the Demon Lord many years ago . Melvin excelled at his work , and distinguished himself in both skill and honor . As such , Melvin was petrified in stone by God , so that , should the need arise , he could be reawakened to once again take up the fight against evil . The party finds Melvin , who joins their adventure , although his age and unfamiliarity with the present day often leave other characters somewhat befuddled . 
 Melvin is proficient at both magic and physical combat , though his magic casting abilities are slightly superior to his physical attack skills . 
 Aira ( <unk> ) known as <unk> in the 3DS English translation — Aira is the lead ritual dancer of the Deja tribe , an ancient race of people charged with the stewardship of a temple necessary in the act of calling forth God . Raised and trained at swordsmanship , Aira is a more than capable fighter , as well . But , for all her skills , Aira harbors a secret from her past that weighs heavily upon her soul . 
 Aira is a powerful fighter and magic user . Although capable of doing both significant physical and significant magical damage , Aira stands in contrast to Melvin , in that her magic skills tend to lag slightly behind her physical statistics . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Dragon Warrior VII was designed by series creator Yuji Horii and directed by Manabu <unk> . Shintaro Majima signed on as art director , while series veterans Akira Toriyama and Koichi Sugiyama designed the characters and composed the music respectively . The game was officially announced in 1996 and originally planned for the Nintendo 64DD . On January 15 , 1997 , it was announced that development had been moved to the PlayStation . By the next day , both stock in Sony and Enix rose significantly in Japan . By 2000 , Dragon Quest VII was predicted to be so successful in Japan that it would " create a 50 billion yen effect on the Japanese economy " , said research firm <unk> . Dragon Warrior VII would go on to be released on August 26 , 2000 and sold 4 @.@ 06 million games in Japan alone , becoming one of the highest selling games of all time . 
 The game was delayed numerous times before its actual release . Work on the game was extended because the development staff wanted to perfect the game due to high expectations from the fans and because the team only consisted of about 35 people . Before its release , it was ranked as the most wanted game in Japan and Square , knowing about Dragon Warrior VII 's release , moved Final Fantasy IX to come out on a later date . Horii stated in an interview that the team focused more on puzzle solving than the game 's story . Being the first game in the series to include 3D graphics , the team was also initially reluctant to include CG movies and cinematics due to letters written to Enix by fans fearing that doing so would change the overall feeling of the series . 
 The English language localization of Dragon Warrior VII began directly after the game 's Japanese release . Enix of America was tasked with translating over 70 @,@ 000 pages of text via 20 translators and 5 copy editors . No effort was made to edit or censor the context of the Japanese script . Weeks prior to the game 's US release , Enix released new information about the game 's different mechanics on their website weekly to introduce players to the game . Paul Handelman , president of Enix America , commented on the game that " All the talk this month about new systems with the latest technological wizardry doesn 't diminish the fact that at the end of the day , compelling game play is what it 's all about , and Dragon Warrior VII provides just that . " Dragon Warrior VII was released in the US on November 1 , 2001 and was the last game in the series to have Warrior in its title instead of Quest . In 2003 , Square Enix registered the Dragon Quest trademark in the US , with the intent to retire the Dragon Warrior name . Soon after the game 's release , developer Heartbeat went on hiatus . Justin Lucas , product manager of Enix America , commented on the hiatus , saying that the developer merely " worked their tails off on Dragon Warrior 7 and Dragon Warrior 4 . They decided to take a sabbatical for a while and rest up " , noting that it had nothing to do with the game 's US sales . 
 The back of the Dragon Warrior VII manual in North America contained an advertisement for Dragon Warrior IV , an enhanced remake for the PlayStation of a Nintendo game of the same name . The localization was later cancelled , due to Heartbeat 's closure . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 On October 30 , 2012 Square Enix announced that they were remaking Dragon Quest VII exclusively for the Nintendo 3DS and that it would be released in Japan in February 2013 . Later that day , Square Enix confirmed that the release date would be February 7 , 2013 for Japan . Similarly to Dragon Quest IX , the game features visible enemy encounters instead of random encounters , unique backgrounds and enemies that have individual attack characteristics . In the November 2015 Nintendo Direct , it was shown that Dragon Quest 7 will be coming outside Japan in 2016 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 As with nearly every Dragon Quest game , Koichi Sugiyama composed the musical score . As was done for Dragon Quest VI , the original sound version was bundled with the symphonic suite in a two @-@ disc set called Dragon Quest VII : Eden no <unk> Symphonic Suite + OST . The entire first disc and the opening track of the second disc consists of the symphonic suite , while the rest of the second disc is the original sound version . The Symphonic Suite was released alone on Super Audio CD later that year , and re @-@ released in 2009 . A disc titled Dragon Quest VII : Eden no <unk> on Piano was also released , and contained 27 piano @-@ arranged tracks . The Symphonic Suite was later re @-@ recorded in 2006 along with the rest of the music from the series . An original soundtrack for the 3DS remake was released on March 19 , 2014 , and features the original recordings by the Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra from the remake . 
 All songs written and composed by Koichi Sugiyama . 
 All songs written and composed by Koichi Sugiyama . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The manga adaptation of Dragon Quest VII was published by Enix 's Monthly Gangan in Japan . It was illustrated by Kamui Fujiwara , who also worked on another franchise @-@ related manga , Dragon Quest Retsuden : Roto no Monshō . Fourteen volumes were released between 2001 and 2006 , though the series is currently on hiatus . In this adaptation , the hero is given the name " Arus " . The manga follows the game story while adding in new characters and more detailed relationships , as the original hero was silent and a personality needed to be added for the comic version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dragon Warrior VII was very well received in Japan both commercially and critically . It was the best @-@ selling PlayStation game of 2000 in the region at 3 @.@ 78 million copies sold . As most of the units were sold mere weeks after the game 's release , the game established itself for having the largest annual shipment of any independently sold game for the original PlayStation . Shipment of Dragon Quest VII reached four million copies on January 5 , 2001 , and the game became the sixth best @-@ seller video game of all platforms at that time . Worldwide , sales of the game have surpassed 4 @.@ 1 million units as of February 2004 . Dragon Warrior VII won the grand prize in Digital ( Interactive ) Art Division at the 4th Japan Media Arts Festival in 2000 , where the game was praised for being " ... engaging without depending on a high degree of realism ... " and " ... well refined and artfully executed . " The game also won four awards from the 5th Japan Entertainment Software Awards by the Computer Entertainment Supplier 's Association ( CESA ) , including Best Prize , Scenario Prize , Sales Prize , and Popularity Prize . In 2006 , the readers of Famitsu magazine voted Dragon Warrior VII the 9th best video game of all time . 
 Sales of the North American version of Dragon Warrior VII reached about 200 @,@ 000 copies according to The Magic Box , which was not nearly as stellar as its Japanese counterpart . Enix of America still expressed their satisfaction with the sales figures . Dragon Warrior VII met with mostly positive reviews from North American critics . IGN noted that all " 100 + hours " of the game are enjoyable despite the dated visuals and clunky presentation . <unk> praised the game 's concept and nostalgia factor and cited it as " what role @-@ playing games were meant to be . " They also noted the game 's high difficulty , which , instead of making the game frustrating , they say , " make it that much more of an accomplishment when you complete a quest . " IGN described the game 's class system as " one of the best class systems seen outside a strategy RPG . " 
 Other critics were not as pleased with Dragon Warrior VII . <unk> described the first two hours of the game as " some of the most boring hours you will ever play in a video game . " <unk> also pointed out that in order to play the game , the player needs " the patience of a rock " . Game Informer even went as far as to say that " four million Japanese can be wrong " , referring to the game 's immense popularity in Japan . Because of the game 's delay in being developed , its release was after the PlayStation 2 's release , which created some negative feedback , particularly about the game 's graphics . IGN commented on this , calling the game " a game that makes only a bare minimum of concessions to advancing technology , but more than makes up for this with its deep gameplay , massive quest , and sheer variety . " GameSpot called the graphics " not good " and warned readers that if the " most rewarding things " they " got out of Final Fantasy VII were the full @-@ motion video interludes , you definitely won 't be wowed by anything you see in Dragon Warrior VII . " 
 Sales of the Nintendo 3DS remake exceeded 800 @,@ 000 copies the first week in Japan . As of March 17 , 2013 , the remake has sold 1 @,@ 174 @,@ 077 copies . Famitsu rated the remake a 35 / 40 , praising the new orchestrated score as well as the improved graphics , intro and first dungeon . 
 = Operation Goodwood ( naval ) = 
 Operation Goodwood was a series of unsuccessful British carrier air raids conducted against the German battleship Tirpitz at her anchorage in Kaafjord , Norway , during late August 1944 . It formed the last of several major attacks made by the Home Fleet during 1944 which sought to eliminate the potential threat Tirpitz posed to Allied shipping by badly damaging or sinking the warship . While each of the previous raids on Kaafjord conducted by Fleet Air Arm aircraft had involved only a single air strike , Operation Goodwood involved repeated attacks over a week . The Royal Navy hoped that these raids would wear down the formidable German defences . 
 The British fleet departed its base on 18 August , and launched the first raid against Kaafjord on the morning of the 22nd . This major attack was unsuccessful , and a small raid that evening inflicted little damage . Two further major strikes were conducted on 24 and 29 August , but without success . Tirpitz was struck by two bombs during the raid on 24 August , but neither caused significant damage . British losses during Operation Goodwood were 17 aircraft to all causes , and a frigate sunk by a submarine . An escort carrier was also badly damaged . German forces suffered the loss of 12 aircraft and damage to 7 ships . 
 Following Operation Goodwood , responsibility for attacking Tirpitz was transferred to the Royal Air Force in late August 1944 . In three heavy bomber raids conducted during September and October 1944 , the battleship was first crippled and then sunk . Historians regard Operation Goodwood as a significant failure for the Fleet Air Arm , and attribute its results to shortcomings with the force 's aircraft and their armament . 
 = = Background = = 
 From early 1942 , Tirpitz posed a significant threat to the Allied convoys transporting supplies through the Norwegian Sea to the Soviet Union . Stationed in fjords on the Norwegian coast , the battleship was capable of overwhelming the close @-@ escort forces assigned to the Arctic convoys or breaking out into the North Atlantic . To counter this threat , the Allies needed to keep a powerful force of warships with the British Home Fleet , and capital ships accompanied most convoys part of the way to the Soviet Union . 
 Several air and naval attacks were launched against Tirpitz in 1942 and 1943 . On 6 March 1942 , torpedo bombers flying from the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious attacked the battleship while she was attempting to intercept Convoy PQ 12 but did not achieve any hits . Bombers from the Royal Air Force and Soviet Air Forces also attempted to strike Tirpitz in her anchorages several times in 1942 and 1943 but failed to inflict any damage . On 23 September 1943 , two British X @-@ class midget submarines penetrated the defences around the battleship 's main anchorage at Kaafjord in northern Norway during Operation Source , and placed explosive charges in the water beneath her . This attack caused extensive damage to Tirpitz , putting her out of service for six months . 
 Following Operation Source , the task of attacking Tirpitz was assigned to the Home Fleet 's aircraft carriers . Following months of preparations , a successful attack ( Operation Tungsten ) involving two strike forces of 20 Fairey Barracuda dive bombers escorted by 40 fighters was conducted on 3 April 1944 . While Tirpitz 's crew suffered heavy casualties during this operation , the battleship was not badly damaged . Nevertheless , she was placed out of action for several additional months while repairs were completed . 
 The Home Fleet initiated a further four raids against Tirpitz between April and July 1944 , though the battleship was only attacked during the last of these operations . These attacks were hindered by the transfer of many of the Home Fleet 's airmen to other units following Operation Tungsten , as the replacement aircrew were less experienced . The first raid ( Operation Planet ) began on 21 April but cancelled three days later when agents stationed near Kaafjord reported bad weather over the target area . The Home Fleet put to sea to attack Tirpitz again in mid @-@ May in what was designated Operation Brawn . A strike force of 27 Barracudas escorted by Vought F4U Corsair and Supermarine Seafire fighters took off from the carriers HMS Furious and Victorious on 15 May , but returned to the ships without attacking after they encountered heavy cloud over Kaafjord . The next raid , Operation Tiger Claw , was initiated in late May but cancelled due to bad weather on the 28th of the month . The subsequent attack ( Operation Mascot ) was timed for mid @-@ July , before the resumption of the Arctic convoys , which had been suspended since April 1944 to free up ships for the Normandy landings . The strike force of 44 Barracudas and 40 fighters dispatched on 17 July reached the target area , but found Tirpitz cloaked in a protective smokescreen and the attack failed to inflict any damage on the battleship . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In the weeks after Operation Mascot , Tirpitz continued to prepare for potential combat operations . Following trials in the sheltered waters of Altafjord , she put to sea on 31 July and 1 August to train with her protective destroyers . Additional smoke generators were also installed around Kaafjord to improve the area 's already strong defences . These activities were reported by spies , and the British Admiralty interpreted them to mean that Tirpitz was being readied for a raid against Allied shipping . To defend against this threat , it was decided to conduct further attacks against the battleship at her anchorage in Kaafjord at the time of the next series of Arctic convoys . In reality , the German Navy was not planning to use Tirpitz offensively as she would be very vulnerable to the superior Allied naval and air forces if she put to sea . Instead , the battleship was being maintained in active service to tie down Allied warships and aircraft . 
 The failure of Operation Mascot convinced the commander of the Home Fleet , Admiral Sir Henry Moore , that the Fleet Air Arm 's main strike aircraft , the Fairey Barracuda dive bomber , was not suited to operations against Kaafjord . As the dive bombers ' slow speed gave the defenders of Kaafjord enough time to cover Tirpitz in a smoke screen between the time incoming raids were detected and their arrival over the target area , Moore concluded that further attacks using these aircraft would be futile . However , the Admiralty judged that repeatedly striking Kaafjord with Barracudas over a 48 @-@ hour period might wear down the German defences and exhaust the supply of fuel for Tirpitz 's protective smoke generators . Consideration was also given to flying fast and long @-@ ranged de Havilland Mosquito bombers off the carriers in an attempt to achieve surprise , but none of these land @-@ based aircraft could be spared from supporting the Allied bombing of Germany . Despite his misgivings , Moore agreed to make another attempt to strike Tirpitz . 
 As proposed by the Admiralty , Moore 's plans for the new attack on Kaafjord involved the Home Fleet 's aircraft attacking the region over several days . While the fighter aircraft involved in the previous raids had used only their machine guns to strafe German defences in order to reduce the threat they posed to the Barracudas , it was decided to use some of these aircraft as dive bombers during Operation Goodwood . In preparation , the two squadrons of Corsairs and single squadron of Grumman F6F Hellcats selected to participate in the attack received training in dive @-@ bombing tactics during the period between Operations Mascot and Goodwood . Another new element of the plans was a decision to use Fleet Air Arm aircraft to drop mines near Tirpitz and the entrance to Kaafjord . The mines dropped near the battleship were to be fitted with time @-@ delay fuses , and it was hoped that the explosions of these devices would cause Tirpitz 's captain to try to move the warship into safer waters and pass through the minefield at the fjord 's entrance . During the period before Operation Goodwood , the Home Fleet 's flying squadrons conducted training exercises using a target range at Loch Eriboll in northern Scotland ; the terrain in this area is comparable to that around Kaafjord , and the loch had also been used for this purpose as part of the preparations for Operation Tungsten . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 The Operation Goodwood attack fleet was divided into three groups . Admiral Moore embarked on board the battleship HMS Duke of York , which sailed with the fleet aircraft carriers HMS Indefatigable ( the flagship of Rear Admiral Rhoderick McGrigor , commander of the 1st Cruiser Squadron ) , Formidable and Furious as well as two cruisers and fourteen destroyers . The second force comprised the escort carriers HMS Nabob and Trumpeter , cruiser HMS Kent and a group of frigates . A pair of fleet oilers escorted by four corvettes sailed separately to support the two attack groups . 
 The aircraft carriers embarked the largest group of Fleet Air Arm aircraft assembled up to that point in the war . Their main striking element was the 35 Barracudas assigned to 820 , 826 , 827 , and 828 Naval Air Squadrons which operated from the three fleet carriers . The two units of 6 Naval Fighter Wing , 1841 and 1842 Squadrons , flew 30 Corsairs from Formidable . A total of 48 Seafires were assigned to 801 , 880 , 887 and 894 Squadrons on board Indefatigable and Furious . In addition , 1770 and 1840 Squadrons operated 12 Fairey Firefly and 12 Hellcat fighters respectively from Indefatigable . The two escort carriers embarked a total of 20 Grumman TBF Avengers ( which had responsibility for the mine @-@ dropping element of Operation Goodwood ) and 8 Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters ; these aircraft were split between 846 Squadron on board Trumpeter and 852 Squadron on Nabob . 
 Tirpitz 's anchorage at Kaafjord was heavily defended . Prior to Operation Tungsten , eleven batteries of anti @-@ aircraft guns , several anti @-@ aircraft warships and a system of smoke generators capable of hiding Tirpitz from aircraft were located around the fjord . After the attack , additional radar stations and observation posts were established and the number of smoke generators was increased . Tirpitz 's air defences were strengthened by fitting her with additional 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannons , modifying the 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns so they could be used to attack aircraft , and supplying anti @-@ aircraft shells for her 380 @-@ millimetre ( 15 in ) main guns . The German Air Force ( Luftwaffe ) had few fighters stationed at airfields near Kaafjord , and their operations were constrained by a lack of fuel . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 = = = 22 August = = = 
 The Operation Goodwood attack force sailed on 18 August . The timing of the operation was set to allow the Home Fleet to also protect Convoy JW 59 , which had departed from Scotland on 15 August bound for the Soviet Union . After an uneventful journey north , the attack forces arrived off Norway on 20 August . While the first attack against Kaafjord had been planned to take place on 21 August , weather conditions that day were unsuitable for flying operations , and Moore decided upon a 24 @-@ hour postponement . The Germans were first alerted to the presence of the British fleet on 21 August when radio messages from the carriers were detected . 
 The first strike against Kaafjord was launched on 22 August . While flying conditions were poor due to low cloud , Moore decided to attack that day as some of his ships were starting to run low on fuel and would soon need to move away from Norway to refuel . At 11 : 00 am a force comprising 32 Barracudas , 24 Corsairs , 11 Fireflies , 9 Hellcats and 8 Seafires was launched from the three fleet carriers . No Avengers were dispatched as the cloudy conditions were unsuitable for the execution of their task . Because few mines were available and the Avengers could not safely land while still carrying these weapons , the mine @-@ dropping element of the plan would fail if the aircraft were unable to locate Tirpitz and had to dump their loads into the sea . 
 As the strike force neared the coast , heavy cloud was sighted covering the hills near Kaafjord . Because the clouds prevented accurate bombing , the Barracudas and Corsairs returned to the carriers without attacking . The Hellcat and Firefly fighters continued on , and approached the fjord below the cloud base . These aircraft achieved surprise , and Tirpitz was not obscured by smoke when they arrived over Kaafjord . The Fireflies initiated the attack at 12 : 49 pm by strafing German anti @-@ aircraft guns on and around Tirpitz . Two minutes later nine Hellcats attacked the battleship with 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs but did not achieve any hits . As the strike force returned to the carriers it destroyed two of Tirpitz 's seaplanes in Bukta harbour and badly damaged the submarine U @-@ 965 at Hammerfest . At <unk> , north of Hammerfest , three Hellcats strafed a German radio station . The attack set the station 's buildings ablaze and damaged the aerials . The eight Seafires made diversionary attacks on the Banak area and a nearby seaplane base , destroying five German seaplanes . Three British aircraft were lost during the attack on the morning of 22 August ; one Hellcat and a Seafire were shot down , and one of the Barracudas was forced to ditch into the sea during its return flight . 
 After the strike force was recovered , much of the Home Fleet sailed away from the Norwegian coast to refuel . A group comprising Formidable , Furious , two cruisers and several destroyers set a course for the two fleet oilers , and the escort carrier group withdrew so that the carriers could refuel their escorts . At 5 : 25 pm , Nabob was struck by a torpedo fired from U @-@ 354 . The carrier suffered serious damage and 21 fatalities but was able to continue limited flight operations . Shortly afterwards U @-@ 354 torpedoed the frigate HMS Bickerton as the latter searched for Nabob 's attacker . Nabob was forced to return to the Home Fleet 's base at Scapa Flow that evening , escorted by Trumpeter , a cruiser and several destroyers . Formidable and Furious covered their withdrawal ; during this period Furious also refuelled from the Home Fleet 's tankers . The departure of both escort carriers meant that the mine @-@ dropping component of Operation Goodwood had to be cancelled . Bickerton 's stern was wrecked by the torpedo , and she could have potentially been salvaged . However , the force 's commander did not want to have to protect two crippled ships , and the frigate was scuttled at around 8 : 30 pm on 22 August . Shortly after the attacks on Nabob and Bickerton , Seafires from 894 Naval Air Squadron shot down two German Blohm & Voss BV 138 reconnaissance aircraft . 
 During the evening of 22 August , a force of eight Fireflies and six bomb @-@ armed Hellcats from Indefatigable raided Kaafjord again . This was the first in what was intended to be a series of small harassing attacks conducted to wear down the German defences . German forces did not detect the aircraft before they arrived over Kaafjord at 7 : 10 pm , and the Fireflies ' strafing attacks on German gun positions killed one member of Tirpitz 's crew and wounded ten . However , the Hellcats ' bombs failed to inflict any damage on the battleship . The British fighters also attacked German ships and radar stations on their return flight , damaging two tankers , a supply ship and a patrol boat . No British aircraft were lost during this raid . 
 = = = 24 August = = = 
 Fog cancelled Indefatigable 's flying operations on 23 August , including a planned diversionary attack against German shipping in <unk> . The other two carriers and their escorts rejoined Moore and Indefatigable off Norway during the morning of 24 August . While conditions that day were initially foggy , the weather cleared enough in the afternoon to permit a strike against Kaafjord . The attacking force comprised 33 Barracudas carrying 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound ( 730 kg ) armour @-@ piecing bombs , 24 Corsairs ( including 5 armed with a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound [ 450 kg ] bomb ) , 10 Hellcats , 10 Fireflies and 8 Seafires . In an attempt to achieve surprise , the aircraft flew off from the carriers from a point further to the south of those used in previous raids . The strike aircraft then flew parallel to the coast , before making landfall and approaching Kaafjord from the south . A German radar station detected the force at 3 : 41 pm , and immediately alerted Tirpitz . 
 The British attack began at 4 : 00 pm . It was initiated with attacks on German gun positions by the Hellcats and Fireflies , which were flying five minutes ahead of the Barracudas and Corsairs . Tirpitz 's protective smokescreen was not fully in place at the start of the raid , but by the time the Barracudas and Corsairs arrived she was completely covered by smoke . As a result , these aircraft had to blind bomb the ship , releasing their weapons from altitudes between 5 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 and 1 @,@ 200 m ) . Only two bombs hit Tirpitz . The first was a 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) weapon dropped by a Hellcat that exploded on the roof of her " Bruno " main gun turret . The explosion destroyed the quadruple 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun mount located on top of the turret , but did not cause any significant damage to the turret itself . The second bomb to strike the ship was a 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound ( 730 kg ) armour @-@ piercing weapon which penetrated through five decks , killed a sailor in a radio room and lodged near an electrical switch room . This bomb failed to explode , and German bomb disposal experts later determined that it had been only partially filled with explosives . The German report on the attack judged that if the bomb had gone off it would have caused " immeasurable " damage . British fighters also attacked other German ships and facilities in the Kaafjord area , damaging two patrol boats , a minesweeper and a radar station , as well as destroying an ammunition dump and three guns of an anti @-@ aircraft battery . Tirpitz 's last remaining Arado Ar 196 seaplane was attacked in Bukta harbour and damaged beyond repair . Four Corsairs and two Hellcats were shot down during the raid , and the battleship 's crew suffered 8 fatalities and 18 men wounded . Casualties among the anti @-@ aircraft units stationed around Kaafjord were heavy . 
 At 7 : 30 pm on 24 August , a pair of Fireflies conducted a photo @-@ reconnaissance sortie over Kaafjord to gather intelligence on the results of the attack ; their presence caused the Germans to generate a smoke screen over the fjord and fire an intensive anti @-@ aircraft barrage . In a separate action that day , U @-@ 354 was sunk off Bear Island by Fairey Swordfish operating from the escort carrier HMS Vindex which was escorting Convoy <unk> . 
 The German command at Kaafjord judged that the attacks on 24 August had been " undoubtedly the heaviest and most determined so far " , and requested that fighter units be transferred from northern Finland to bolster the area 's defences . Due to the other demands on Germany 's fighter force at this time , the request was turned down on 26 August by the Luftwaffe 's headquarters . 
 Gales and fog prevented the British from conducting further attacks between 25 and 28 August . On 25 August Indefatigable , Formidable , two cruisers and seven destroyers refuelled from the oilers . Both of the cruisers later detached from the force and returned to Scapa Flow . Duke of York , Furious , a cruiser and five destroyers also sailed to the Faroe Islands to load supplies . Before leaving the fleet , Furious transferred two Barracudas and a pair of Hellcats to Indefatigable . As the elderly Furious was judged to be no longer capable of combat operations , she proceeded from the Faroe Islands to Scapa Flow with the cruiser and several destroyers . On 29 August Duke of York and the remaining destroyers rejoined the main body of the Home Fleet off north Norway . During this period , the flying squadrons ' maintenance personnel worked to repair aircraft which had been damaged during the 24 August attacks . 
 Convoy <unk> completed its journey on 25 August , with most of its ships docking at Kola in northern Russia . The convoy had been repeatedly attacked by U @-@ boats from 20 to 24 August , and its escorting warships and aircraft sank two submarines . All of the merchant vessels arrived safely , with the only Allied loss being the sloop HMS Kite which was torpedoed and sunk by U @-@ 344 on 21 August . 
 = = = 29 August = = = 
 The final attack of Operation Goodwood was made on 29 August . The strike force comprised 26 Barracudas , 17 Corsairs ( of which 2 were armed with 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound [ 450 kg ] bombs ) , 10 Fireflies and 7 Hellcats . Seven Seafires also conducted a diversionary raid on Hammerfest . In an attempt to give the bombers accurate aiming points once the artificial smokescreen was generated around Tirpitz , four of the Hellcats were armed with target indicator bombs . The aircraft began launching at 3 : 30 pm . 
 The British aircraft failed to achieve surprise . German radar stations had been tracking the Home Fleet 's routine anti @-@ submarine and fighter patrols , and the Seafires were detected at 4 : 40 pm when they were 54 miles ( 87 km ) from Kaafjord . In response to this report , the smoke generators around Kaafjord were activated and the fjord 's defenders went to their battle positions . The arrival of the main body of British aircraft over Kaafjord was delayed by stronger than expected winds and a navigational error , and they did not reach the target area until 5 : 25 pm . By this time Tirpitz was covered in a very thick smokescreen , and none of the British airmen sighted the ship . The Barracudas and Corsairs were forced to blind @-@ bomb Kaafjord , and while no hits were achieved on the battleship , six members of her crew were wounded by bomb fragments from near misses . German ships and gun positions were once again strafed by the fighters , but no significant damage was inflicted . Heavy anti @-@ aircraft gunfire from Tirpitz , which was directed by a party of observers stationed on a mountain near Kaafjord , shot down a Corsair and a Firefly . 
 Following the raid on 29 August , the Home Fleet sailed west to cover Convoy <unk> which had sailed from northern Russia on 28 August bound from the UK . Due to fuel shortages , Indefatigable and three destroyers detached later that day to return to Scapa Flow and Formidable with two destroyers followed 24 hours later . Duke of York and six destroyers remained on station in the Arctic Sea until 11 : 00 am on 1 September when the convoy was judged to be safe from attack . 
 Overall , Fleet Air Arm casualties during Operation Goodwood were 40 airmen killed and 17 aircraft destroyed . Nabob was also judged to be beyond economical repair , and was withdrawn from service . On the German side , Tirpitz suffered only superficial damage . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the 29 August raid , the British learned from Ultra signals intelligence that Tirpitz had not sustained any significant damage during Operation Goodwood . In public statements the Royal Navy claimed to have damaged or sunk 19 German warships during the attacks on Kaafjord , but did not report damage to Tirpitz . 
 During the final days of Operation Goodwood Royal Navy planners decided not to order further Fleet Air Arm operations against Kaafjord . The planners accepted that the Germans were now able to cover Tirpitz in smoke before Barracudas could reach the battleship , and these aircraft could not carry bombs large enough to inflict heavy damage . Further consideration was given to attacking Kaafjord using Mosquitos launched from aircraft carriers , but the light bombers continued to be in short supply and it was judged that they were not well suited to the task . Moreover , there was a growing need to transfer the carriers to the Pacific to strengthen Britain 's contribution to the war against Japan . 
 As Tirpitz was still considered a threat to shipping , the British Chiefs of Staff Committee and the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force General Dwight D. Eisenhower decided in late August to conduct further attacks against her using Royal Air Force heavy bombers . On 15 September , a force of Avro Lancasters attacked Kaafjord after refuelling at bases in northern Russia and inflicted irreparable damage on the battleship . Following this raid she was towed to an anchorage near Tromsø to be used as an immobile coastal defence battery . Another heavy bomber attack on 29 October caused only minor damage , but in a third raid mounted on 12 November , Tirpitz was struck by several Tallboy bombs and capsized , sinking with heavy loss of life . 
 Historians have judged Operation Goodwood to have been a failure . Writing in 1961 , the British official historian Stephen Roskill stated that the attacks marked the end of a " series of operations whose results can only be classed as intensely disappointing " , and concluded that the possibility of sinking Tirpitz had been " remote " due to the shortcomings of the Barracudas and their armament . Similarly , Norman Polmar argued in 1969 that Operation Goodwood was " perhaps the most striking failure of the <unk> [ Fleet Air Arm ] during World War II and can be directly attributed to the lack of effective aircraft – the Barracudas were too slow and could not carry large enough bombs to make effective attacks " . More recently , Mark Llewellyn Evans judged the results of Operation Goodwood to have been " pathetic " , and Mark Bishop concluded that " the Fleet Air Arm 's greatest operation of the war ... ended in failure " . 
 = Jenny Morris ( musician ) = 
 Jennifer " Jenny " Patricia Morris ( born 29 September 1956 in <unk> ) OAM is a New Zealand @-@ born Australian pop , rock singer @-@ songwriter . Her first success came with New Zealand band The Crocodiles , who had a top 20 hit single with " Tears " . Re @-@ locating to Sydney , Australia in February 1981 , she was a backing vocalist for various groups and formed a trio , QED , in 1983 . 
 Morris provided backing vocals for INXS on their 1983 album , The Swing . She then recorded a duet with lead singer , Michael Hutchence , on a cover of Nancy Sinatra and Lee Hazlewood 's hit " Jackson " ; it was included as a bonus track on the April 1984 ( cassette only ) INXS EP , <unk> , which reached number two on the Australian Kent Music Report Albums Chart . Morris worked on their 1985 – 1986 Listen Like Thieves World Tour . 
 Her solo career includes top five Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Albums with Shiver in 1989 and Honeychild in 1991 , and her top five ARIA Singles are " She Has to Be Loved " and " Break in the Weather " . These albums and singles also peaked in the top ten on the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) charts . 
 Morris has won two ARIA Music Awards for ' Best Female Artist ' in 1987 and 1988 and was nominated for the same award in 1992 . In 2003 , on Australia Day ( 26 January ) , Morris became an Australian citizen and in 2010 she received the Medal of the Order of Australia . 
 = = Life and music career = = 
 = = = Early years and The Crocodiles = = = 
 Jenny Morris was born in <unk> , New Zealand and grew up in Hamilton with three brothers ( Alistair , Rhys and Tam ) and four sisters ( Maxine , Bronte , Joanne and Shanley ) . Morris wrote a poem on the Vietnam War when she was 12 and used her sister 's guitar to put it to music . Morris has stated that her influences include Aretha Franklin and Dusty Springfield . Her first professional performance was at age fifteen , at Andersons Theatre Restaurant , in Hamilton . In 1976 she became a singer with How 's Your Father , who were finalists in the ' National Battle of the Bands ' . She began working as a Home Economics teacher for two years at a high school near Wellington . Late in 1978 Morris joined an all @-@ girl group , Wide <unk> Frogs in Wellington , performing lead vocals . Fellow members were Kate Brockie on lead vocals , Andrea <unk> on guitar , Tina Matthews on bass guitar , Bronwyn Murray on keyboards and Sally <unk> on drums . In 1979 they released the track , " Some Day " for the compilation album , Home Grown Volume One ; " Some Day " was cowritten with Tony Backhouse , guitarist of fellow Wellington band , The Spats , which also had a track , " Young Ladies in Hot Cars " , on the compilation . 
 Wide <unk> Frogs worked with The Spats ' members : drummer Bruno Lawrence sometimes played saxophone for them and keyboardist Peter Dasent became their musical director . By 1980 , The Spats had evolved into The Crocodiles , under the mentorship of US producer Kim Fowley , and featured Backhouse , Dasent , Fane Flaws ( guitar , vocals ) , Mark Hornibrook ( bass guitar ) , Lawrence , and songwriter Arthur <unk> . Morris was asked to join and soon after , Hornibrook departed and was replaced by Matthews . The Crocodiles were managed by Mike Chunn ( ex @-@ Split Enz bassist ) and regularly performed in Auckland . In January 1980 they played the high profile <unk> Music Festival and in April that year , they released their debut album , Tears , produced by Glyn Tucker Jnr , and its lead single , " Tears " , both reached number 17 on the respective New Zealand albums and singles charts . 
 Lawrence left and was replaced on drums by Ian Gilroy ( ex @-@ <unk> Kids ) , then Flaws left , although he continued to write material for the second album . Released in November 1980 , Looking at Ourselves , was produced by Ian Morris . That year they won ' Best Group ' and ' Most Promising Group ' at the New Zealand Music Awards . The line @-@ up went through further changes , Gilroy left to join The Swingers , then Matthews and Dasent left . In February 1981 , following a repeat performance at the <unk> Festival , The Crocodiles moved to Sydney , at the behest of their manager , Chunn , with new band members , Barton Price ( drums ) , Rick ' Rikki ' Morris ( guitar ) and Jonathan <unk> ( bass ) only to disband in July . Price went on to join Models . Morris explained why The Crocodiles left : 
 New Zealand is not particularly supportive of its local music industry . [ Going to Australia ] was something people had done before and been successful , so we decided to do it too and maybe get some extra information from the trip . 
 = = = QED and " Jackson " = = = 
 Morris began her solo career with the single , " Puberty Blues " in December 1981 on Mushroom Records ; it was the title track from the 1981 film Puberty Blues , which was a local box @-@ office success . The song was written by Tim Finn and performed by Sharon O 'Neill in the film . The B @-@ side was " Adolescent Angst " , which Morris recorded with The Morris Majors . " Puberty Blues " reached the Australian Kent Music Report Singles Chart top 100 . The follow @-@ up single , " Little By Little " — a cover of The Springfields 1960 's song — was released in 1982 but failed to chart . 
 During 1982 – 1984 , Morris continued as a session backing vocalist , contributing to releases by ex @-@ manager Chunn 's brother Geoff ( also ex @-@ Split Enz ) ; ex @-@ band mate Flaws ' project and album , I Am Joe ’ s Music ; the 1983 Models ' album The Pleasure of Your Company ; and New Zealand outfit D.D. Smash ’ s 1984 album The Optimist , she went on to tour with D.D. Smash front man Dave Dobbyn , and the New Zealand version of The Party Boys . Morris was credited for <unk> ' 1984 mini @-@ LP , Untitled , before contributing backing vocals to INXS ' first number 1 album The Swing . 
 In late 1983 , Morris formed QED in Sydney with guitarist Rex Goh ( ex @-@ Air Supply ) and bassist Ian Belton ( ex @-@ Dave Dobbyn , Renée Geyer ) . The trio signed with EMI Australia and their recordings were produced by Mark Moffatt ( The Saints , Mondo Rock , Tim Finn ) and Ricky Fataar ( Geyer , Finn , Kids in the Kitchen ) . Morris was now managed by Chris Murphy , who also handled INXS . QED recorded their versions of The Crocodiles ' material including , " Everywhere I Go " , " Animal Magic " and " You 're So Hip " ; Morris also co @-@ wrote new songs with Goh . QED 's debut single , " Everywhere I Go " , was released in December , and performed on national television pop music show , Countdown , on 1 April 1984 ; it peaked at number 19 on the national chart . The follow @-@ up single " Solo and More " was issued in March , but failed to chart . The third single , " This One " , appeared in August and reached top 50 . Additional musicians for QED ’ s first album , Animal Magic , included keyboardist Amanda Vincent ( <unk> , later joined the Jenny Morris band ) , drummer Steve <unk> , saxophonist Tony Buchanan , and Fataar on drums . EMI released it in November , but sales remained low and the album did not chart . QED only released one album and disbanded by 1985 , Morris continued session and touring work with other artists , Belton went on to Mondo Rock , and Goh to <unk> . 
 Morris recorded a duet with INXS lead singer , Michael Hutchence , on a cover of Nancy Sinatra and Lee Hazlewood 's hit " Jackson " , it was included as a bonus track on the April 1984 ( cassette only ) INXS EP , <unk> , which reached number two on the charts . Morris and INXS performed " Jackson " live at the 1984 Countdown Music and Video Awards held on 19 May 1985 . At Murphy 's suggestion she teamed with INXS as a backing singer on their 1985 Australian tour — originally just for a few weeks — and stayed on for eighteen months on their 1985 – 1986 Listen Like Thieves World Tour . Morris recorded and , in November 1985 , released her first single for Warner Entertainment Australia ( WEA ) , " Get Some Humour " , with a contribution from Dave Dobbyn , which reached the top 100 . 
 = = = Solo success : 1986 – 1994 = = = 
 During the US leg of the Listen Like Thieves World Tour , in January 1986 , Morris recorded " You ’ re Gonna Get Hurt " , which was written and produced by INXS songwriter and keyboardist , Andrew Farriss . Recorded with backing from INXS ' Andrew and Jon Farriss and Garry Gary Beers , together with guitarist Ian Moss ( ex @-@ Cold Chisel ) , it was released in September and peaked at number 24 . The next single " Body and Soul " — composed by Morris — reached the top 100 in mid @-@ 1987 . 
 In 1986 she performed on The Rock Party 's Everything to Live For , a charity project initiated by The National Campaign Against Drug Abuse ( <unk> ) , which included many Australasian musicians such as Big Pig 's Sherine <unk> ; Crowded House 's Neil Finn , Tim Finn , Paul Hester , Eddie Rayner and Nick Seymour ; Dynamic <unk> ' Robert <unk> ; <unk> 's Mark Callaghan , Robbie James and Geoff Stapleton ; Paul Kelly & the Coloured Girls ' Michael Barclay and Paul Kelly ; Mental As Anything 's Reg <unk> and Martin Plaza ; Models ' Sean Kelly ; The Promise 's Greg Herbert ; <unk> ' Mary Azzopardi , Peter Blakeley and Danny De Costa ; The Venetians ' Rick <unk> ; The <unk> ' Andrew Barnum and Lissa Barnum ; and Deborah Conway , Spencer P. Jones , and John Kennedy . 
 In July 1987 , Morris released her first solo album , Body and Soul , produced by Moffatt and Fataar and mixed by Tim Kramer . It sold over 70 @,@ 000 copies in Australia ( platinum status ) reaching number 13 on the album charts in Australia and number 21 in New Zealand . The album spawned two further hits in " You I Know " — written by Neil Finn — which reached number 13 in Australia and number 30 in New Zealand , and " Light @-@ hearted " peaked in the top 100 in both countries . Morris also hit the road with her backing band , including Vincent , Jehan Lindsay ( ex @-@ Richard Clapton Band ) , Paul Burton ( ex @-@ Mark Williams Band ) , and Roger Mason ( ex @-@ Models ) . Morris won back @-@ to @-@ back ARIA Awards for ' Best Female Artist ' in 1987 and 1988 . In 1988 , Morris and photographer , Paul Clarke , were married . 
 Her next single " Saved Me " was released in July 1989 — reached top 40 in Australia and New Zealand — it featured a distinctly Latin @-@ Spanish feel permeated by funk undertones , with the promo video shot in Nicaragua by Richard Lowenstein . Morris ' second solo album Shiver , followed in August and was produced by Farriss , with Morris writing ten of the eleven tracks . In between recording the album , she gave birth to her son , Hugh . The second single was " She Has to Be Loved " , a song which melded funk rhythms with a pop hook . In addition , it featured a strong feminist theme , and quickly became a favourite among Morris 's female fans . " She Has to Be Loved " became Morris ' first Australasian top ten hit reaching number five in Australia and number three in New Zealand during October 1989 . Shiver continued to chart over the Southern Hemisphere summer of 1989 – 1990 , peaking at number five on the Australian album charts and number six in New Zealand , it established Morris as one of the best selling female artists in Australia . The track " Aotearoa " — Māori term for ' Land of the Long White Cloud ' or New Zealand — received a special single release in New Zealand and reached top 40 . The album eventually sold over 250 @,@ 000 copies , achieving double platinum status in Australia . It spawned two more singles ; " Street of Love " written by Australian <unk> Paul Kelly , which reached the top 100 in Australia ; and the reggae inspired " Self Deceiver " , penned by Morris and Kelly , which reached top 100 in Australia . 
 As one of Australia 's leading female singer @-@ songwriters , Morris toured extensively locally and internationally , first by backing Tears for Fears on the European leg of their 1989 Sowing the Seeds of Love Tour , then on Prince 's 1990 Nude Tour in Denmark , Germany and France , — with Dweezil Zappa as her lead guitarist — and again with INXS on their X @-@ Factor tour . 
 In 1990 she released a cover of " Piece of my Heart " — popularised by Janis Joplin — which peaked in the Australian top 40 in early 1991 . She recorded her third album , Honeychild , with producers Nick Launay ( Midnight Oil , Killing Joke ) and Mark Forrester . The first single from the album , " Break in the Weather " , was co @-@ written by Morris and her youngest brother Tam , appeared in September 1991 , it reached number two in Australia and number five in New Zealand . Honeychild was released in October and became her second consecutive top ten album , peaking at number five in Australia and New Zealand . Her session musicians , included Wendy Matthews and Midnight Oil ’ s Jim Moginie . Honeychild spawned three more singles ; " I ’ ve Had You " , another Morris and Kelly collaboration , which reached top 50 in Australia and New Zealand ; the funk laden " Zero " , featuring the rhythm section of drummer Sly Dunbar and bassist Robbie Shakespeare , which peaked top 100 in Australia and top 40 in New Zealand ; and " Crackerjack Man " , which failed to reach the top 100 ARIA chart in Australia . 
 On 28 March 1992 Morris performed at the Concert for Life at Centennial Park in Sydney — a fund raiser for the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Centre — with Crowded House , Def FX , Diesel , INXS , <unk> and Yothu Yindi . Due to inclement weather an expected attendance of 100 @,@ 000 never eventuated and , with the event only raising $ 500 @,@ 000 , scandal was expressed in the media over funding distribution . 
 In November , The Best of Jenny Morris : The Story So Far , a best @-@ of compilation was released , it included " Jackson " which was performed as a duet with Michael Hutchence and INXS on a 1985 Countdown episode , and a re @-@ recorded version of an old The Crocodiles ' hit " Tears " . The album sold steadily and peaked at number four in New Zealand and number 12 on the Australian charts during May 1993 , after Morris had supported Paul McCartney on the Australian leg of his The New World Tour . 1994 saw the birth of her daughter , Bella . Morris ' next single , " The Price I Pay " , a Billy Bragg cover , was her last appearance on the Australian ARIA top 100 singles chart . 
 = = = Later years : 1995 – current = = = 
 Morris ' next four singles " Only We Can Hear " , " Rhythm and Flow " , " In Too Deep " , and " What Do I Do Now " , were released over eighteen months , from mid @-@ 1994 to early 1996 . Salvation Jane was released in July 1995 , nearly four years after her last album , and featured some of her strongest vocal work , including the languid " Rhythm and Flow , " with its Aboriginal influences . Issued on the <unk> label , it was produced by Andrew Farriss and Moffatt , together with Electric Hippies ' duo Steve Balbi and Justin Stanley . The album featured songs from a song writing retreat held at Miles Copeland 's castle in Bordeaux , France . Here , Morris co @-@ wrote a number of songs with other international songwriters . Also in 1995 , Morris became a non @-@ executive writer director on the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) Board and as of 2009 is still on the Board . Morris made an appearance in the television drama , Water Rats , in 1997 she continued her gigs , worked for environmental causes and maintained her family life . 
 In October 2000 she performed with Vika and Linda Bull and Jodi Phillis , at a sold @-@ out Carole King tribute show , Tapestry : the songs of Carole King , held at the Sydney Opera House ; it then toured the other Australian capital cities in August – September 2001 . In August 2002 , Morris ' released her next album , Hit & Myth , co @-@ produced by Nick Wales ( Coda ) , was released on 8 May 2002 by Yep ! Records . The album features classical musicians ( Renaissance Players , Winsome Evans ) , pop musicians ( Davey Lane , Jodi Phillis ( ex Clouds ) ) and jazz ( <unk> ) musicians . 
 I had people playing on the album from different backgrounds – classical musicians , programmers , jazz musicians , pop . The songs have been crafted so long and so hard , they ’ re not throw away but they ’ re not inaccessible . It ’ s lush , lots of strings beautifully arranged and then groove and beats and really modern sounds and classical guitars as well . It ’ s a collage of all my influences really . 
 Morris wrote or co @-@ wrote nine of the eleven songs on the album , the others , " Guiding Star " , was written by Neil Finn and " The Blacksmith " is a traditional folk song — the first one she learnt on guitar . Neither the album nor the singles " Home " , released 29 October 2001 , and " Downtime " , released 15 July 2002 , managed to chart . The music video for " Downtime " featured a number of well @-@ known Australian actors , including Hugo Weaving , Bryan Brown , Matt Newton and Peter Fenton , miming the words to the song . Also in 2002 , a portrait of Morris by artist Jan Williamson was entered in the Archibald Prize . The portrait did not win the main prize , but won both the popular awards , the " Packing Room Prize " and " The People 's Choice Award " . In February , Morris appeared on the SBS TV documentary , Mum 's the Word , where high profile women talked about being a working mother . She sang , " Little Little " an ode to her ( then ) unborn child written for her 1989 album , Shiver . In October Morris appeared in Finding Joy , a low budget independent Australian feature film , in a cameo role ( Tracey ) . She sings part of a song called " Educated Kind of Thing " . In November 2002 she performed at the Candlelight AIDS Memorial , in Darlinghurst , marking the beginning of AIDS awareness week . 
 In March 2003 , Port Fairy 's 27th Annual Folk Festival was staged with Archie Roach , John Williamson , Renée Geyer , Morris and emerging Australian band The Waifs were among the popular performers . In October she joined the board of Nordoff @-@ Robbins Music Therapy Australia , and is an active member of their Fundraising Committee . 
 In April 2004 , Listen : The Very Best of Jenny Morris a repackaging of her 1992 compilation , The Story So Far , was issued with new artwork and a bonus track , " Little Little " , an ode to her then unborn baby . In May 2005 , the Alive DVD was released , it was recorded in Sydney at The Basement and features Morris playing her hits with her band : Steve Balbi ( <unk> ) ; Paul Searles ( <unk> ) ; James <unk> ( The Dissociatives ) ; Jared Underwood ( Coda ) and actor Josh Quong Tart , with special guest appearances from Ian Moss , Andrew Farriss and Midnight Oil drummer Rob Hirst . The DVD was released with a bonus CD . 
 Clear Blue in Stormy Skies , her next album , was released by Liberation Music in June 2006 and includes a dozen remodelled versions of her radio hits of the 1980s and 1990s , together with some new material , a cover of the INXS song , " This Time " , in tribute to Michael Hutchence , and a new song , " The Time " . 
 In September 2009 , Morris toured Afghanistan to Tarin Kowt and Kandahar and played for occupying troops . In October , she appeared on the SBS TV quiz show , <unk> , which included a performance of the Crowded House classic , " It 's Only Natural " , with Don McGlashan . She performed at the closing ceremony of the 2009 World Masters Games in Sydney , together with Dragon and The <unk> . 
 In January 2010 Morris received the Order of Australia with a citation , " for service to the arts , particularly music , and to the community through charitable organisations " . Morris was glad that her charity , Nordoff @-@ Robbins was recognised . Morris appeared at the 2010 New Zealand International Arts Festival in Wellington on 13 March . 
 On February 22 , 2016 The Australian Taxation Office initiated insolvency proceedings for her company <unk> Pty Ltd ( aka Jenny Morris Band . ) 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Morris married photographer , Paul Clarke , in 1986 and they have had two children , Hugh and Bella . 
 She has two brothers : Tam ( a storyboard artist and musician ) and Rhys ( a graphic designer and web developer ) , and four sisters : Maxine , Bronte , Joanne and Shanley . Younger sister , Shanley Del has also won an ARIA Award – as a country music artist in 1998 . Her youngest brother , Tam Morris , co @-@ wrote , " Break in the Weather " with Jenny ; he is also in the group <unk> Dax as a singer @-@ songwriter . 
 In 2003 , on Australia Day ( 26 January ) , Morris became an Australian citizen . In 2005 Morris noticed the effects of a health disorder , spasmodic dysphonia , which affects both her speaking and singing voice . Subsequently she has stopped publicly singing and in October 2015 appeared on Australian Story episode " Raise You Voice " to publicise the disorder . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = The Crocodiles = = = 
 = = = QED = = = 
 = = = Solo = = = 
 Body and Soul 
 Shiver 
 Honeychild 
 Salvation Jane 
 Hit & Myth 
 Clear Blue in Stormy Skies 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 = Final Resolution ( 2005 ) = 
 Final Resolution ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , which took place on January 16 , 2005 from the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first annual event under the Final Resolution chronology . Nine matches were featured on the event 's card . 
 The main event was a standard wrestling match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which the champion , Jeff Jarrett , defeated the challenger , Monty Brown to retain the championship . The TNA X Division Championship was contested in an Ultimate X match , in which A.J. Styles defeated Chris Sabin and the champion , Petey Williams . The event 's undercard featured different varieties of matches . America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) defeated Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) for the NWA World Tag Team Championship on the undercard . Monty Brown defeated Diamond Dallas Page and Kevin Nash in a Three Way Elimination match to challenge Jeff Jarrett for the NWA Championship in the main event . 
 The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event an 8 out of 10 , which was higher than the 2006 event 's rating . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured nine professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots , and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or heroes in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Final Resolution was a standard wrestling match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between the champion , Jeff Jarrett , and the challenger , Monty Brown . On the December 24 episode of TNA 's primary television program , TNA Impact ! , authority figure Dusty Rhodes announced a Three Way Elimination match for Final Resolution involving Brown , Kevin Nash , and Diamond Dallas Page ( DDP ) . The winner of said match would challenge Jarrett for the NWA Championship in the main event . A Three Way Elimination match involves three competitors fighting to eliminate each man by pinfall , submission , or throwing one another over the top rope and down to the floor until there is one left . Brown defeated Nash and DDP at Final Resolution to gain the opportunity to challenge Jarrett . 
 Also on the event 's card , the TNA X Division Championship was contested for in an Ultimate X match , with the participants being the champion , Petey Williams , and the two challengers being , A.J. Styles and Chris Sabin . In an Ultimate X match , four pillars are set up at ringside with steel red ropes attached at the top , which are criss @-@ crossed to form an " X " over the center of the ring . The championship belt is hung on the center " X " with the objective being to remove it and fall to the mat below to win . On the December 17 episode of Impact ! , Rhodes announced that there was going to be an Ultimate X match at Final Resolution for the TNA X Division Championship . Styles and Williams were scheduled to be in the match after it was announced with Sabin being the only one having to earn the right to be in the match . Sabin defeated Christopher Daniels on the January 14 episode of Impact ! to gain entry . 
 In the tag team division , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) ( AMW ) challenged Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) for the NWA World Tag Team Championship . On the December 24 episode of Impact ! , AMW defeated Team Canada to earn the chance to challenge for the championship at Final Resolution . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Two matches aired during the thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show . The first encounter pitted The Naturals ( Chase Stevens and Andy Douglas ) against Johnny B. Badd and Sonny Siaki . The Naturals won the bout after Stevens bashed Siaki over the head with steel folding chair and then pinned him . A standard wrestling match between Chris Candido and Cassidy Riley followed . Candido was victorious in the bout by pinning Riley after a diving headbutt off the top of a padded turnbuckle . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first contest was a Six Man Tag Team match between the team of Ron Killings , Konnan , and B.G. James — The 3Live Kru ( 3LK ) — and the team of Christopher Daniels , Michael Shane , and Kazarian . The 3LK were the winners by pinfall after Killings kicked Shane in the face . 
 Elix Skipper fought Sonjay Dutt in the second encounter . Skipper defeated Dutt in the match after he performed a move he calls the Play of the Day , in which he laid his leg on Dutt 's head and neck , grabbed Dutt 's near arm , and then spun and slammed Dutt to the mat . 
 The third match was between Dustin Rhodes and Kid Kash . Rhodes claimed victory after grabbing Kash 's head and jumping forward to land on his butt to perform a bulldog . 
 Raven fought Erik Watts in the next contest . Watts won the match by pinfall , after he lifted Raven up by the neck and slammed him down to perform a chokeslam . 
 Roddy Piper was Special Guest Referee for a bout between Jeff Hardy and Scott Hall , which was the following contest . After the two fought for a few minutes , Hardy gained the pinfall victory after he jumped off the top rope and performed a Swanton Bomb , a high @-@ angle front flip from the top rope , onto Hall who was laying flat against the mat . Abyss attacked Hardy after the match finished , and lifted Hardy up onto his shoulders and then dropped to a seated position , a move which Abyss dubbed the Shock Treatment . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The sixth scheduled bout was a Three Way Elimination match between DDP , Kevin Nash , and Monty Brown . The winner of this match would go on to challenge Jeff Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship in the main event . DDP eliminated Nash by performing a dropkick , which caused Nash to fall over the top rope and down to the floor . With Nash eliminated , it was down to Brown and DDP . After the two fought back and forth for a few minutes , Brown threw DDP against the ropes while he ran against the opposite ropes and performed a running shoulder block in the center of the ring to complete a move he named the Pounce . 
 America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) challenged Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) , who were accompanied by Coach D 'Amore , for the NWA World Tag Team Championship in the seventh match . Johnny Devine interfered mid @-@ way through by hitting Storm with a kendo stick , which led to a pinfall attempt by Young , however <unk> kicked out at two . Later , Young went to grab a chair from Devine who had his back turned to the ring . This caused Devine to panic and hit Young in the head with the chair . Storm immediately followed by grabbing Young and pinning his shoulders to the mat with a school boy type pin attempt for the victory . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended in an Ultimate X match , which involved A.J. Styles , Chris Sabin , and the champion , Petey Williams , who was accompanied by Coach D 'Amore . D 'Amore was banned from ringside in the opening minutes of the contest . Styles at one point was climbing across the cables to retrieve the championship , when Sabin <unk> off the far top rope and performed a dropkick in mid @-@ air to Styles . This caused Styles to perform a front @-@ flip in mid @-@ air and land on his back in the center of the ring . The finish of the match saw Williams and Sabin both hanging on the ropes , each holding one end of the belt . Styles then <unk> off the far top rope and grabbed the belt in mid @-@ flight . After he landed on the mat , he was declared the official winner . 
 Jeff Jarrett defended the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Monty Brown in the main event . Near the closing minutes , Brown grabbed a guitar , which Jarrett had tried to use earlier , and bashed Jarrett over the head with it . Jarrett retained the championship in the bout after performed a maneuver he named the Stroke three times by grabbing Brown 's head , and tucking his leg between Brown 's two . He follows by extending Brown 's near arm and tripping him to force his face into the mat . Jarrett then pinned Brown to end the match . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Final Resolution , Jeff Jarrett went on to be challenged by Kevin Nash for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Against All Odds . Their match was announced on the episode of Impact ! that followed Final Resolution . At Against All Odds , Jarrett defeated Nash to retain the championship . 
 Newly crowned TNA X Division Champion , A.J. Styles , went on to defend his championship against Christopher Daniels in a 30 @-@ minute Iron Man match at Against All Odds . Styles had to defend the championship against Daniels at the event as per a pre @-@ match stipulation to their bout on the January 21 episode of Impact ! , in which if Styles failed to defeat Daniels in under 10 minutes , then he would have to give Daniels a title shot . Styles failed to win the contest in under ten minutes , which granted Daniels a title match . Dusty Rhodes then made the match a 30 @-@ minute Iron Man match . Styles went on to defeat Daniels at Against All Odds 2 to 1 in falls during over @-@ time . 
 America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) ( AMW ) went on to Against All Odds to defend their newly won NWA World Tag Team Championship against Kid Kash and Lance Hoyt . This feud was built on a challenge made by Kash and Hoyt directed towards AMW on the January 21 episode of Impact ! to defend their championship at Against All Odds against them , which AMW accepted . At the event , AMW retained the championship . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Canadian Online Explorer 's writer Jason Clevett rated the entire event an 8 out of 10 , which was higher than the 2006 event 's rating of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The NWA World Tag Team Championship bout was rated a 9 out of 10 . The Ultimate X match for the TNA X Division Championship was rated a 10 out of 10 . The Three Way Elimination match for a chance to challenge Jeff Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship was rated a 5 out of 10 , while main event was rated a 6 out of 10 . Clevett stated in his review that he felt " the crowd went home happy after the stellar Ultimate X bout " . When commenting on the NWA World Tag Team Championship match he stated it was " an awesome , awesome tag team match with insane crowd heat " . He thought the main event was a " decent match that was marred once again by an abundance of overbooking B.S. that seems to plague the main event scene of TNA . " The event was released on DVD on November 15 , 2005 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Three @-@ way elimination match = = = 
 = SMS Victoria Louise = 
 SMS Victoria Louise was the lead ship of her class of protected cruisers , built for the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) in the late 1890s . She was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in 1895 , launched in March 1897 , and commissioned into the German fleet in February 1899 . She was named after Princess Victoria Louise , the daughter of Kaiser Wilhelm II . The ship was armed with a battery of two 21 cm guns and eight 15 cm guns and had a top speed of 19 @.@ 2 knots ( 35 @.@ 6 km / h ; 22 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 Victoria Louise served with the fleet for the first seven years of her career . During this time , she represented Germany during the funeral of Queen Victoria in 1901 . In 1906 , she was modernized and after 1908 , used as a training ship for naval cadets . In 1909 , she visited the United States , and at the outbreak of World War I , was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group . She was attacked unsuccessfully by the British submarine HMS E1 in October 1914 , and at the end of the year she was withdrawn from service . She was used as a minelayer and barracks ship based in Danzig for the rest of the war . Victoria Louise was sold in 1919 and converted into a freighter the following year , though she served in this capacity until 1923 , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Victoria Louise was ordered under the contract name " L " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1895 . She was launched on 29 March 1897 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the German navy on 20 February 1899 . The ship was 110 @.@ 60 meters ( 362 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a beam of 17 @.@ 40 m ( 57 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 m ( 21 ft 7 in ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 491 t ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of three vertical 4 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Dürr boilers . Her engines provided a top speed of 19 @.@ 2 knots ( 35 @.@ 6 km / h ; 22 @.@ 1 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 412 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 319 km ; 3 @,@ 926 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 31 officers and 446 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with two 21 cm SK L / 40 guns in single turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns were supplied with 58 rounds of ammunition each . They had a range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . Victoria Louise also carried eight 15 cm SK L / 40 guns . Four were mounted in turrets amidships and the other four were placed in casemates . These guns had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . She also carried ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns . The gun armament was rounded out by machine guns . She was also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the broadside and the third was in the bow , all below the waterline . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Victoria Louise joined the squadron , commanded by Prince Heinrich , that went to Britain to participate in the funeral of Queen Victoria in 1901 . Along with Victoria Louise , Baden , Hagen , and Nymphe represented Germany at Spithead . In 1902 , Victoria Louise was assigned to the Cruiser Division of the I Squadron of the German home fleet . The Division consisted of the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich , the flagship , Freya , and the light cruisers Hela , Amazone , and Niobe . The Division participated in the summer fleet maneuvers of August – September 1902 . In 1906 , the ship went into dock for modernization in the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . After emerging from the drydock in 1908 , Victoria Louise served as a training ship for naval cadets and cabin boys . In September – October 1909 , Victoria Louise , Hertha , Dresden , and Bremen traveled to the United States to represent Germany during the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . In 1912 , Theodor Krancke served aboard the ship as a cadet ; he would go on to command the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer in World War II . 
 She served as a school ship until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . She was briefly mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , which was tasked with training cadets in the Baltic Sea . Shortly after 0900 on 17 October , the British submarine HMS E1 , commanded by Noel Laurence , attempted to torpedo Victoria Louise at a range of 460 m ( 1 @,@ 510 ft ) . The torpedo ran too deep , however , and missed . By the end of 1914 , however , the ships were again removed from service . She was put into service as a coastal defense ship . After 1915 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line duty again and employed as a minelayer and barracks ship in Danzig . In 1916 , Victoria Louise was disarmed . She remained in service in Danzig until 1 October 1919 , when she was stricken from the naval register . She was sold to the Norddeutscher Tiefbau company and rebuilt in 1920 into a freighter . She was renamed Flora Sommerfeld and operated by Danziger Hoch- und Tiefbau GmbH . She served in this capacity only briefly ; she was broken up for scrap in 1923 in Danzig . 
 = LW1 ( classification ) = 
 LW1 is a para @-@ Alpine standing skiing classification for people with severe lower extreme disabilities in both extremities . It includes both skiers with amputations and cerebral palsy . International classification is done through International Paralympic Committee Alpine Skiing , and national classification through local national sport federations . LW1 classified skiers use outriggers , and two skis or one ski with a prosthesis . Other equipment is used during training such as ski @-@ tips , ski @-@ bras , and short skis . 
 As this classification includes skiers with cerebral palsy and amputations , there are different skiing techniques used specific to these disability types . For skiers with amputations falling is an important skill to learn , while addressing balance is an important thing for skiers with cerebral palsy to master . 
 A factoring system is used to allow LW1 competitors to fairly compete against skiers in other standing classifications . At events such as the 1990 Disabled Alpine World Championships , this class had its own medal events . In later events such as the 2002 Winter Paralympics , it was grouped with other classes for a single medal event . Skiers in this class include New Zealanders Adam Hall and Kevin O 'Sullivan . 
 = = Definition = = 
 LW1 is a standing classification used in para @-@ Alpine skiing but not para @-@ Nordic skiing . LW stands for Locomotor Winter , and the classification is for people with severe lower extreme disabilities in both extremities . They may have cerebral palsy and be classified as CP5 or CP6 , or have spina bifida . The International Paralympic Committee explicitly defined this class as " Competitors with severe disabilities in both lower limbs ... The typical disability profile of the class is double above @-@ knee amputation . " In 2002 , Australian Paralympic Committee defined this classification as a standing skiing classification with " Two skis , two poles , disability in both legs above the knees . " 
 For international competitions , classification is done through International Paralympic Committee Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . When being assessed into this classification , a number of things are considered including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 LW1 classified skiers use outriggers , and two skis or one ski with a prosthesis . International Ski Federation rules for ski boots and binding heights are modified for this class and are not the same rules used for able @-@ bodied skiers . Skiers in this class are allowed to use ski @-@ tips in competition , using a setup sometimes called a Four Track . In training , they may use additional equipment . For example , skiers with cerebral palsy may use cants , wedges , ski @-@ bras , outriggers or short skis depending on the nature of their disability . Skiers with an amputation may use a prosthesis . As skiers in this classification improve , they require less use of this equipment . Ski bras are devices clamped to the tips of skis , which result in the skis being attached to each other . Outriggers are forearm crutches with a miniature ski on a rocker at the base . Cants are wedges that sit under the binding that are intended to more evenly distribute weight , and are customised for the specific needs of the skier . In the Biathlon , athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Technique = = 
 As this classification includes skiers with cerebral palsy and amputations , there are different skiing techniques used specific to these disability types . While skiing , competitors have a wider turning radius as a result of their disability . 
 For skiers in this class with above the knee amputations , how to fall properly is an important skill . They are taught to try to prevent the stump of their leg from hitting the snow as it can cause more damage to that leg than the one that is not partially missing . When working on side stepping , the skier is supported to keep the stump of their leg on the uphill side . Elite skiers are taught to avoid using outriggers as crutches . They are taught to turn using their leg instead of their ski poles . In getting on ski lifts , skiers in this classification with amputations are taught to lift their outriggers off the ground and point them forward . 
 Some skiers with cerebral palsy have better balance while using skis than they would otherwise . This presents challenges for coaches who are working with the skier . Compared to other skiers in the class , the skier with cerebral palsy may tire more quickly . In teaching skiers with cerebral palsy , instructors are encouraged to delay the introduction ski poles as skiers may overgrip them . Use of a ski bra is also encourage as it helps the skier learn correct knee and hip placement . Some skiers with cerebral palsy in this class have difficulty with the snowplough technique . 
 The American Teaching System is one learning method for competitors with cerebral palsy in this classification . Skiers first learn about their equipment , and how to put it on , before learning how to position their body in a standing position on flat terrain . After this , the skier learns how to side step , and then how to fall down and get back up again . The skier then learns how to do a straight run , and then is taught how to get on and off the chair lift . This is followed by learning wedge turns and weight transfers , wedge turns , wide track parallel turns , how to use ski poles , and advanced parallel turns . Skiers with cerebral palsy in this classification have difficulty walking in ski boots , and sometimes require assistance when walking in them . To go up hill , skiers often point their weaker side upwards . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . 
 = = Sport = = 
 In disability skiing events , this classification is grouped with standing classes who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes and before sitting classes in the Slalom and Giant Slalom . In downhill , Super @-@ G and Super Combined , this same group competes after the visually impaired classes and sitting classes . The skier is required to have their ski poles or equivalent equipment planted in the snow in front of the starting position before the start of the race . 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . In 2005 , the men 's Slalom alpine factor was 0 @.@ <unk> . The LW1 factoring during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season was 0 @.@ 838 for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ 8203 for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . 
 = = Events = = 
 This class competed at its own medal events at competitions in the 1990s , before being grouped with other classes . LW1 was not grouped with other classes at the 1990 Disabled Alpine World Championships for disciplines that included the downhill . At the 1992 Winter Paralympics and 1994 Winter Paralympics , it was grouped with LW2 for men 's para @-@ Alpine events . For the 1996 Disabled Alpine World Championships , in Lech , Austria , it was grouped with LW3 and LW5 for medal events . At the 1998 Winter Paralympics , the women 's LW1 , LW3 , LW4 , LW5 and LW6 classes competed in one group , with LW1 , LW3 and LW5 grouped for men 's medal events . At the 2002 Winter Paralympics , the LW1 , LW4 , LW5 and LW6 classes were combined for the women 's downhill , Giant Slalom and Slalom events , while on the men 's side , LW1 , LW3 , LW5 and LW9 were combined for the downhill and Giant Slalom events . There were no competitors from this class competing at the para @-@ Alpine 2009 World Championships on either the men 's side or the women 's side . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Skiers in this class include : 
 Austria : Helmut <unk> 
 Canada : Wayne Burton , Stephen Ellefson 
 Japan : Tsutomu Mino 
 New Zealand : Adam Hall , Kevin O 'Sullivan and Devin Shanks 
 Switzerland : Edwin Zurbriggen 
 United States : Dan Ashbaugh , Andy Fasth , Rod <unk> , Mark Godfrey 
 = The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) = 
 " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1973 album Living in the Material World . Like the album 's title track , it was inspired by the teachings of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , founder of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness ( ISKCON ) , more commonly known as the Hare Krishna movement . The song is an uptempo rock track with elements of blues and gospel . Some commentators have described it as the musical highpoint of Living in the Material World , with Harrison 's slide guitar playing singled out as being among the finest performances of his career . 
 The composition originated during a period marked by Harrison 's devotion to a Hindu @-@ aligned ascetic life and the height of his public association with the Hare Krishna movement , which included his donation of Bhaktivedanta Manor for use as an ISKCON temple . In his lyrics , Harrison sings of the falsehood of striving for wealth or power in the material world and advocates a direct relationship with one 's deity as a genuine life goal . In doing so , he belittles the role of political leaders , as well as his own status as a celebrated rock musician . The song 's Krishna Conscious message was also reflected in Harrison 's choice of artwork for the Material World album , specifically the reproduction of a painting from a Prabhupada @-@ published edition of the Bhagavad Gita . 
 Harrison recorded " The Lord Loves the One " between October 1972 and March 1973 with session musicians Nicky Hopkins , Klaus Voormann , Jim Keltner and Jim Horn . While the music has invited critical praise , the devout assertions in Harrison 's lyrics typified what some reviewers in 1973 viewed as an overly didactic message on much of the parent album . Among reviewers in the 21st century , the composition continues to divide opinion . Although some commentators consider it an obvious choice as a live track , Harrison performed " The Lord Loves the One " only once in concert – on the opening night of his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar . 
 = = Background = = 
 In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , George Harrison credits the influence for " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " to A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , founder of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness ( ISKCON ) , also known as the Hare Krishna movement . Harrison 's association with ISKCON began in December 1968 , when he befriended a small group of devotees that Prabhupada had sent to London to establish what became the Radha Krishna Temple . The Gaudiya Vaishnava teachings of Prabhupada , based on Hindu texts such as the Bhagavad Gita , resonated with Harrison , whose quest for an ego @-@ less , God @-@ conscious existence amid the false reality of Beatlemania had first taken him to India in September 1966 . 
 Harrison provided the devotees with financial assistance , in addition to producing their hit recording of the 5000 @-@ year @-@ old Hare Krishna mantra , to help spread the message of Krishna Consciousness . He then met Prabhupada in England in September 1969 and was impressed by the acharya 's declaration that he was merely " the humble servant of the servant of the servant " of the Hindu god Krishna . In line with Prabhupada 's contention that the chanting of Sanskrit mantras led to a direct connection with God , Harrison adopted the practice , counting out each mantra on Hindu prayer beads stored inside a cloth bag that he wore over his shoulder . 
 Further Harrison @-@ produced recordings by the Radha Krishna Temple followed their " Hare Krishna Mantra " single , culminating in an eponymous album released on Apple Records in May 1971 . By that time , the devotees were regular guests at Harrison 's Friar Park estate , and he subsequently bought permanent accommodation for the growing UK arm of ISKCON , at what became known as Bhaktivedanta Manor . When Prabhupada died in November 1977 , he bequeathed one of the rings he was wearing to Harrison , referring to him as the Hare Krishna movement 's " archangel " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Author Dale Allison writes of the lyrical themes in " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " : " this song preaches karma , warns about judgment at death , and exalts love as our most important aspiration . " Harrison wrote the song over 1971 – 72 , a period of heightened devotion on his part , as well as one of frustration due to the legal and business issues afflicting his Concert for Bangladesh aid project . The idea for the composition came about after a conversation with Prabhupada , when the latter visited Harrison at Friar Park . 
 The song begins with a riff over the chords of B major and B7 , which is then followed by a chorus , rather than a verse . Author Simon Leng describes the musical mood as " mean , dirty blues – funky and low @-@ down " , accompanying a " most uncompromising lyric " . In Allison 's view , the lyrics to the chorus equate love received from one 's deity with " human love " ( in that it " grows as it is reciprocated " ) , while also serving as a statement on karmic retribution : 
 The Lord loves the one that loves the Lord 
 And the law says if you don 't give , then you don 't get loving 
 Now the Lord helps those that help themselves 
 And the law says whatever you do 's gonna come right back on you . 
 The first verse reflects Harrison and Prabhupada 's discussion that day – although the reference to political leaders " acting like big girls " is an example of Harrison reverting to " Scouse parlance " , according to author Alan Clayson . The latter also notes the antipathy that Harrison felt towards politicians following the Bangladesh aid project , when the American and British governments continued to withhold funds intended for the millions of starving Bangladeshi refugees . The lyric centres on maya , or the illusory nature of human existence , as Harrison sings of humankind behaving as if " we own this whole world " , oblivious to the consequences and the end that awaits the individual in this life . Allison summarises the message to mean : " karma is the law of our existence ; substituting ego for God is our problem ; we must prepare ourselves for death . " 
 As with another Prabhupada @-@ inspired track that he wrote during this period , " Living in the Material World " , Harrison expresses his belief that the pursuit of fame and riches – particularly in the music industry – is meaningless . In the second verse of " The Lord Loves the One " , he sings : " We all fool around , with objectives in mind / To become rich or famous , with our reputations signed ... " While author Joshua Greene compares Harrison 's songs from this period to Vedic sutras , Allison specifies this verse @-@ two message to a passage from the Katha Upanishad , which reads : " Intoxicated , deluded by the glamour of riches , the childish do not see that they must pass away . They think , ' This is the world and there is no other . ' " 
 As with the ISKCON @-@ inspired " Awaiting on You All " , Allison views the conditions that Harrison imposes in the song 's choruses as a rare exception within the singer 's work . Elsewhere , Allison continues , Harrison 's songwriting reveals " a strong belief in the efficacy of unmerited divine grace " . In a 1982 interview , Harrison described his statement on God rewarding those who first look to God as a " flexible " one , adding : " In one way , I 'm never going to get out of here [ i.e. , escape the constant cycle of reincarnation ] unless it 's by His grace , but then again … [ t ] he amount of grace I would expect from God should be equal to the amount of grace I can gather or earn . " 
 Among other Harrison biographers ' interpretations of the lyrics , Ian Inglis writes of Harrison 's unwelcome " evangelical " message regarding " the consequences of a life of selfishness and greed which finds no place for ' the Lord ' " . In contrast , Leng views the verses as " the singer 's inner conversation " , in which Harrison acknowledges the futility of his own existence , at a time when he felt overwhelmed by his success as a solo artist following the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 . Of the apparent sermonising in the choruses , Leng concludes : " ' The Lord Loves the One ' conveys the same basic message as ' what you put in is what you get out , ' so , at one level , it 's more a matter of common sense than divine revelation . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Harrison began sessions for his Living in the Material World album in October 1972 , at Apple Studio in London . As a result of the problems associated with the Bangladesh project , author Peter Doggett writes , " [ e ] verything connected with the physical world seemed to annoy him . " The studio manager at the time , former Beatles engineer Geoff Emerick , recalls Harrison wearing his Hindu prayer bag and " mumbling away , chanting his mantra " , often unable to reply to questions put to him . As for all the tracks on the album , the recording engineer on " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " was Phil McDonald , who had also worked in that capacity for the Beatles . 
 The recording opens with Harrison 's acoustic guitar and an electric piano riff that creates " a sense of foreboding " , according to Inglis , who likens the intro to Three Dog Night 's 1970 hit single " Mama Told Me Not to Come " . Along with Harrison , the musicians on the basic track were Jim Keltner ( drums ) , Nicky Hopkins ( electric piano ) and Klaus Voormann ( bass ) . Part of Harrison 's guide vocal from the basic track was retained for the official release . 
 Among the overdubs , which were completed by the end of February 1973 , Harrison added slide guitar and Jim Horn played various saxophone parts that Leng describes as " a straight lift from Harrison 's favorite ' Savoy Truffle ' model " , with baritone saxophone prominent in the mix . Assisting Horn on " The Lord Loves the One " , Voormann played one of the tenor saxophone parts , a role he had recently provided on Harry Nilsson 's Son of <unk> album ( 1972 ) , to which Harrison and Hopkins also contributed . 
 = = Release = = 
 Apple released Living in the Material World in May 1973 in the United States ( June 1973 in Britain ) , with " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " sequenced as the first track on side two of the LP . According to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , Harrison had considered an alternative running order , whereby the album opener , " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " , began side two . The UK cassette format followed the latter sequence , which also placed " The Lord Loves the One " as the second track on side one , following " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " . As with eight other songs on Material World , Harrison donated the copyright to " The Lord Loves the One " to the Material World Charitable Foundation , which he launched in April 1973 with a stated aim " to encourage the exploration of alternative life views and philosophies " . 
 Reflecting the lyrical content of songs such as " The Lord Loves the One " and " Living in the Material World " , Tom Wilkes 's design for the album artwork contrasted a devout spiritual existence with life in the material world . The front of the inner @-@ sleeve insert reproduced a painting from a Prabhupada @-@ published edition of the Bhagavad Gita , depicting Krishna and the warrior prince Arjuna driving a chariot . Part of this image was also used on the LP 's side @-@ one face label ; in addition , it appeared opposite the words to " The Lord Loves the One " in the lyrics section of the Material World songbook , published by the Charles Hansen sheet music company . 
 Writing in 1977 , author Nicholas Schaffner described the combination of these " color representations of the Hindu scriptures " and the album @-@ wide message espoused by Harrison in " The Lord Loves the One " as " a luxuriant rock devotional designed to transform his fans ' stereo equipment into a temple " . In a 1982 interview with ISKCON 's Mukunda Goswami , Harrison discussed the song 's lyrics and referred to his use of the Krishna and Arjuna picture , along with the credit he gave Prabhupada 's book , as a " plug " for the Hare Krishna movement . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 The song , if not the title alone , was a source of irritation for those critics who deemed Living in the Material World overly preachy and didactic . In a full @-@ page album review in Melody Maker , Michael Watts summarised his impression of Harrison 's spiritual message : " One gets this feeling of George , somewhat remote and rarefied , indicting the world for being what it is , although if anybody could change the world it would be an old Beatle . " While noting the song as an autobiographical statement on the singer 's " struggle to retain personal dignity and peace of mind " , Watts wrote : " He 's dealing in lofty sentiments and abstractions ; not everyone will want to drink of the cup . " 
 In his 1973 album review for the NME , Tony Tyler described Material World as " so damn holy I could scream " . Two years later , he and his Beatles : An Illustrated Record co @-@ author Roy Carr remarked of Harrison 's religious beliefs : " it 's difficult to see why he travelled all the way to India to import a God who , by the sound of him ( ' The Lord Loves the One [ That ] Loves the Lord ' ) is as intractable and selfish as the petulant Jehovah of Victorian Sunday schools . " 
 To Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone , the track was " a compelling gospel @-@ flavored rocker ... a stunning achievement that carries the authority of pop scripture " . On an album that he considered " a pop religious ceremony for all seasons , one in which Harrison acts as priest , deliberately placing his gifts and his legend into public service for God " , Holden added of the song : " I hope that Aretha Franklin gets her hands on it , and soon . " 
 = = = Retrospective reviews and legacy = = = 
 Among reviewers in the 21st century , Zeth Lundy of PopMatters and Music Box editor John Metzger highlight " The Lord Loves the One " as one of the standout tracks on Living in the Material World . As with " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , Simon Leng sees the lyrics ' spiritual framework as a distraction from the true message of the song , which in this case is the " bankruptcy " of the music business . While noting that the media and anyone else associated with " the rock circus " had a vested interest in upholding its importance , Leng comments on the hostile reception afforded the song originally : " In 1973 , no one dared point out that the emperor had no clothes on – except Harrison . " 
 Author Robert Rodriguez describes " The Lord Loves the One " as " not the sanctimonious rant that some characterized it as " , but a revelation of Harrison 's inner conflict between his " earthly " status as a rock star and that role 's " utter triviality in the Grand Scheme of things " . Conversely , writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham finds the song 's " ' law says ' finger @-@ wagging " the exception on an album that otherwise " conveys his struggle " between the physical and spiritual worlds " with restraint and , in places , considerable grace and beauty " , while former Mojo editor Mat Snow commented in 2006 of this and the majority of the songs on Material World : " The rest is Hari Georgeson at his most preachy , but it 's never less than musical and often light on its feet . " Also writing for Mojo , John Harris pairs " The Lord Loves the One " with " Give Me Love " , as two tracks that support Material World 's standing as " a Hindu concept album … a pleasing fusion of Eastern religion , gospel , and the ghost of ' For You Blue ' " . 
 In his unfavourable assessment of the song , Ian Inglis contrasts it with the " impressive set of lyrics " on " Living in the Material World " and criticises Harrison for his " turgid proselytizing " , which he likens to " the <unk> of an evangelical preacher " . Inglis concludes : " Harrison 's impressive guitar work helps to compensate for the absence of a clear melody , but the song is ultimately undermined by some of his least @-@ effective lyrics ; the description of political leaders as ' big girls ' is puerile and sexist . " Another Harrison biographer , Elliot Huntley , describes " The Lord Loves the One " as a " polished foot @-@ tapper " , on which " the drums push the song along nicely but the excessively wordy libretto somehow struggles to fit " . Terry Staunton of Record Collector considers Living in the Material World to be " sloganeering with slide guitars " but lacking in any " out @-@ and @-@ out protest " message , such that " the more generalised , universally religious themes of The Lord Loves The One ( That Loves The Lord ) tend to sound a tad diluted . " 
 Leng praises the track 's musical accompaniment , highlighting Horn 's sax arrangement and particularly Harrison 's slide @-@ guitar playing , which includes a solo that he views as " one of the best of his career " . Similar sentiments come from Bruce Eder of AllMusic , who writes : " ' The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) ' , despite its title , is the high point of the record , a fast , rollicking , funky , bluesy jewel with a priceless guitar break ( maybe the best of Harrison 's solo career ) ... " 
 In a 2011 article for The Huffington Post , coinciding with the release of Martin Scorsese 's documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , Steve Rabey describes Harrison as " perhaps the most explicitly and consistently theological rock star of the last half @-@ century " . Rabey refers to the song among Harrison 's " mini @-@ sermons illustrating Hindu concepts " ( in this case , karma ) and concludes : " While he failed to convert everyone to his beliefs , he nudged his [ Beatles ] bandmates – and his listener fans – a bit further to the East , encouraging audiences to open themselves to new ( or very old ) spiritual influences . " 
 = = Performance = = 
 Harrison performed " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " at the start of his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar . In addition to Jim Horn , the horn players on this live version were Tom Scott and Chuck Findley . Consistent with his perception of an anti @-@ stardom message in the song , Leng writes of there being an " immense [ paradox ] " in Harrison 's attitude to this highly publicised tour , since : " here was one of the world 's most famous musicians telling a leading writer from Rolling Stone that he 'd ' gladly kiss it all good @-@ bye ' and purse his utterly sincere spiritual quest . " 
 On the first show of the tour , at Vancouver 's Pacific Coliseum on 2 November , Harrison played the song following his opening instrumental , " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " . In Rolling Stone , Ben Fong @-@ Torres began his feature article with the words " Holy Krishna ! What kind of an opening night for George Harrison is this ? " , before writing of Harrison 's performance of " The Lord Loves the One " : " he sang off key , and the voice , in its first flight , instantly sounded tired . " With Shankar 's segments having been poorly received , Harrison then reworked the show 's setlist , with the result that " The Lord Loves the One " and another Material World track , " Who Can See It " , were dropped for the rest of the tour . Leng writes of the song 's removal as " a fate the heavy @-@ funky arrangement did not deserve " , and Eder similarly considers that " The Lord Loves the One " belonged at " the heart " of any Harrison concert setlist . 
 Later on during the West Coast leg of his 1974 tour , Harrison donated the profits from one concert to the Haight @-@ Ashbury Free Medical Clinic in San Francisco . As recorded in Fong @-@ Torres 's article , Harrison then visited the clinic and sang the chorus of " The Lord Loves the One " to the grateful staff , as a way to illustrate his point : " Don 't thank me ... it 's something else over us that acts through people like me . I 'm just an instrument . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar , slide guitars , backing vocals 
 Nicky Hopkins – electric piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass , tenor saxophone 
 Jim Keltner – drums , percussion 
 Jim Horn – saxophones , horn arrangement 
 = Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark = 
 Letters Written During a Short Residence in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) is a personal travel narrative by the eighteenth @-@ century British feminist writer Mary Wollstonecraft . The twenty @-@ five letters cover a wide range of topics , from sociological reflections on Scandinavia and its peoples to philosophical questions regarding identity . Published by Wollstonecraft 's career @-@ long publisher , Joseph Johnson , it was the last work issued during her lifetime . 
 Wollstonecraft undertook her tour of Sweden , Norway , and Denmark in order to retrieve a stolen treasure ship for her lover , Gilbert Imlay . Believing that the journey would restore their strained relationship , she eagerly set off . However , over the course of the three months she spent in Scandinavia , she realized that Imlay had no intention of renewing the relationship . The letters , which constitute the text , drawn from her journal and from missives she sent to Imlay , reflect her anger and melancholy over his repeated betrayals . Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark is therefore both a travel narrative and an autobiographical memoir . 
 Using the rhetoric of the sublime , Wollstonecraft explores the relationship between self and society in the text . She values subjective experience , particularly in relation to nature ; champions the liberation and education of women ; and illustrates the detrimental effects of commerce on society . 
 Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark was Wollstonecraft 's most popular book in the 1790s — it sold well and was reviewed favorably by most critics . Wollstonecraft 's future husband , philosopher William Godwin , wrote : " If ever there was a book calculated to make a man in love with its author , this appears to me to be the book . " It influenced Romantic poets such as William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge , who drew on its themes and its aesthetic . While the book initially inspired readers to travel to Scandinavia , it failed to retain its popularity after the publication of Godwin 's Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman in 1798 , which revealed Wollstonecraft 's unorthodox private life . 
 = = Biographical background = = 
 In 1790 , at the age of thirty @-@ one , Wollstonecraft made a dramatic entrance onto the public stage with A Vindication of the Rights of Men , a work that helped propel the British pamphlet war over the French revolution . Two years later she published what has become her most famous work , A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . Anxious to see the revolution firsthand , she moved to France for about two years , but returned in 1795 after revolutionary violence increased and the lover she met there , American adventurer Gilbert Imlay , abandoned her and their illegitimate daughter , Fanny Imlay . Shortly after her return to Britain , Wollstonecraft attempted suicide in May ; Imlay , however , managed to save her . 
 One month after her attempted suicide , Wollstonecraft agreed to undertake the long and treacherous journey to Scandinavia in order to resolve Imlay 's business difficulties . Not only was her journey to Scandinavia fraught with peril ( she was a woman travelling alone during a time of war ) , it was also laced with sorrow and anger . While Wollstonecraft initially believed that the trip might resurrect their relationship , she eventually recognized that it was doomed , particularly after Imlay failed to meet her in Hamburg . Wollstonecraft 's despair increased as her journey progressed . 
 On her return to Britain in September , Wollstonecraft tried to commit suicide a second time : she attempted to drown herself in the River Thames but was rescued by passersby . Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , which draws its material from her journal and the letters she sent Imlay during the three @-@ month tour , was published in January 1796 by Wollstonecraft 's close friend and career @-@ long publisher , Joseph Johnson . Written after her two suicide attempts , Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark frequently returns to the topic of death ; it recreates Wollstonecraft 's mental state while she was in Scandinavia and has been described as a suicide note addressed to Imlay , although he is never referred to by name in the published text . It is the last work by Wollstonecraft published within her lifetime : she died in childbirth just one year later . 
 = = = Scandinavian journey and Imlay 's business interests = = = 
 Although Wollstonecraft appears as only a tourist in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , during her travels she was actually conducting delicate business negotiations on behalf of Imlay . For almost two hundred years , it was unclear why she had travelled to Scandinavia , but in the 1980s historian Per Nyström uncovered documents in local Swedish and Norwegian archives that shed light on the purpose of her trip . He revealed that Wollstonecraft was searching for a ship and cargo that had been stolen from Imlay . Imlay had authorized her to conduct his business dealings , referring to her in legal documents as " Mrs. Mary Imlay , my best friend and wife " , although the two were not married . 
 The intricate details of Imlay 's business dealings are laid out clearly by Nyström . On 18 June 1794 , Peder Ellefsen , who belonged to a rich and influential Norwegian family , bought a ship called the Liberty from agents of Imlay in Le Havre , France . It would later become clear that Ellefsen never owned the ship but rather engaged in a pro @-@ forma sale on behalf of Imlay . He renamed the ship the Maria and Margaretha ( presumably after Mary and her maid Marguerite ) and had the Danish Consulate in Le Havre certify it so that the ship could pass through the British blockade of France ( Imlay was a blockade runner ) . Carrying silver and gold Bourbon plate , the ship sailed from France under a Danish flag and arrived at Copenhagen on 20 August 1794 . Although Ellefsen supposedly ordered the ship to continue on to Gothenburg , it never reached its destination . Imlay engaged in several fruitless attempts to locate the ship and its valuable cargo and then dispatched Wollstonecraft to negotiate an agreement with Ellefsen , who had subsequently been arrested for stealing the ship and its contents . Wollstonecraft 's success or failure in the negotiations is unknown as is the ultimate fate of the ship and its treasure . 
 To engage in these negotiations , Wollstonecraft travelled first to Gothenburg , where she remained for two weeks . Leaving Fanny and her nurse Marguerite behind , she embarked for Strömstad , Sweden , where she took a short detour to visit the fortress of <unk> , and then proceeded to Larvik , Norway . From there she travelled to Tønsberg , Norway , where she spent three weeks . She also visited <unk> , Risør , and Kristiania ( now Oslo ) and returned by way of Strömstad and Gothenburg , where she picked up Fanny and Marguerite again . She returned to England by way of Copenhagen and Hamburg , finally landing at Dover in September 1795 , three months after she had left her home country . 
 = = Structure , genre , and style = = 
 Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark consists of twenty @-@ five letters that address an extensive range of contentious political topics , such as prison reform , land rights , and divorce laws , as well as less controversial subjects , such as gardening , salt works , and sublime vistas . Wollstonecraft 's political commentary extends the ideas she had presented in An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution ( 1794 ) ; her discussion of prison reform , for example , is informed by her own experiences in revolutionary France and those of her friends , many of whom were jailed . 
 While at first glance Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark appears to be a travel narrative , it is actually a " generic hybrid " . The nature of this hybridity , however , is not altogether agreed upon by scholars . Some emphasize Wollstonecraft 's fusion of the travelogue with the autobiography or memoir ( a word used by Wollstonecraft in the book 's advertisement ) , while others see it as a travelogue cum epistolary novel . The text , which reveals Wollstonecraft 's thought processes , flows seamlessly from autobiographical reflections to musings on nature to political theories . However , it is unified by two threads : the first is Wollstonecraft 's argument regarding the nature and progress of society ; the second is her increasing melancholy . Although Wollstonecraft aims to write as a philosopher , the image of the suffering woman dominates the book . 
 = = = Travel narrative : " the art of thinking " = = = 
 One @-@ half of the " generic hybridity " of Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark is the epistolary travel narrative . Wollstonecraft 's conception of this genre was shaped by eighteenth @-@ century empirical and moral travel narratives , particularly Oliver Goldsmith 's The Traveller , or a Prospect of Society ( 1764 ) , Laurence Sterne 's A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy ( 1768 ) , Samuel Johnson 's A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland ( 1775 ) , James Boswell 's Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides ( 1785 ) , and Arthur Young 's travel books . 
 After reviewing twenty @-@ four travel books for Joseph Johnson 's periodical , the Analytical Review , Wollstonecraft was well @-@ versed in the genre . This extensive reading solidified her ideas of what constituted a good travel book ; in one review , she maintained that travel writers should have " some decided point in view , a grand object of pursuit to concentrate their thoughts , and connect their reflections " and that their books should not be " detached observations , which no running interest , or prevailing bent in the mind of the writer rounds into a whole " . Her reviews praised detailed and engaging descriptions of people and places , musings on history , and an insatiable curiosity in the traveller . 
 " The art of travel is only a branch of the art of thinking " , Wollstonecraft wrote . Her journey and her comments on it are , therefore , not only sentimental but also philosophical . She uses the two modes to continue the critique of the roles afforded women and the progress of civilization that she had outlined in A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) , A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) , and An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution . After overturning the conventions of political and historical writing , Wollstonecraft brought what scholar Gary Kelly calls " Revolutionary feminism " to yet another genre that had typically been considered the purview of male writers , transforming the travel narrative 's " blend of objective facts and individual impressions ... into a rationale for autobiographical revelation " . As one editor of the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark writes , the book is " nothing less than a revolution in literary genres " ; its sublimity , expressed through scenes of intense feeling , made " a new wildness and richness of emotional rhetoric " desirable in travel literature . 
 One scholar has called Wollstonecraft the " complete passionate traveler " . Her desire to delve into and fully experience each moment in time was fostered by the works of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , particularly his Reveries of a Solitary Walker ( 1782 ) . Several of Rousseau 's themes appear in the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , such as " the search for the source of human happiness , the stoic rejection of material goods , the ecstatic embrace of nature , and the essential role of sentiment in understanding " . However , while Rousseau ultimately rejects society , Wollstonecraft celebrates both domesticity and industrial progress . 
 = = = Letter = = = 
 In one of the most influential interpretations of Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , Mary Favret has argued that Wollstonecraft 's letters must not only be viewed as personal correspondence but also as business correspondence , a genre that would have been ideologically ambiguous for her . According to Favret , Wollstonecraft attempts to reclaim the impersonal genre of the business letter and imbue it with personal meaning . One way she does this is through extensive use of " imaginative " writing that forces the reader to become a participant in the events narrated . 
 Favret points out that Wollstonecraft 's Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark is quite different from the despondent and plaintive love letters she actually sent to Imlay ; the travel narrative much more closely resembles the personal journal in which she recorded her thoughts regarding the people she encountered and the places she visited . While her letters to Imlay contain long passages focused almost exclusively on herself , the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark offers social commentary and sympathizes with the victims of disaster and injustice . To Imlay , Wollstonecraft represents herself as laid low by doubts , but to the world she depicts herself as overcoming all of these fears . She ruminates on them and transforms them into the basis of a letter akin to the open political letter popular during the last quarter of the eighteenth century , using her personal experience as the foundation for a discussion of national political reform . 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Heavily influenced by Rousseau 's frank and revealing Confessions ( 1782 ) , Wollstonecraft lays bare her soul in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , detailing not only her physical but also her psychological journey . Her personal disclosures , like those of other female autobiographers , are presented as " unpremeditated self @-@ revelations " and often appear to be " circuitous " . However , as Wollstonecraft scholar Mitzi Myers has made clear , Wollstonecraft manages to use this style of writing to articulate a stable and comprehensible self for the reader . Increasingly confident in her ability as a writer , she controls the narrative and its effect on readers to a degree not matched in her other works . She transforms the individual sorrows of her trip , such as the dissolution of her relationship with Imlay , into the stuff of gripping literature . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Wollstonecraft relies extensively on the language of the sublime in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark . She draws on and redefines Edmund Burke 's central terms in A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful ( 1757 ) . Burke privileges the sublime ( which he associates with masculinity , terror , awe , and strength ) over the beautiful ( which he associates with femininity , passivity , delicacy , and weakness ) , while Wollstonecraft ties the sublime to sterility and the beautiful to fertility . For her , the beautiful is connected to the maternal ; this aesthetic shift is evident , for example , in the many passages focusing on the affectionate tie between Wollstonecraft and little Fanny , her daughter . She thus claims the feminine category of the " beautiful " for the most virtuous and useful of women : mothers . 
 Wollstonecraft also revises the conventional negative associations between the sublime and death ; thoughts of death , prompted by a waterfall , for example , lead her to contemplate rebirth and immortality as well : 
 Reaching the cascade , or rather cataract , the roaring of which had a long time announced its vicinity , my soul was hurried by the falls into a new train of reflections . The impetuous dashing of the rebounding torrent from the dark cavities which mocked the exploring eye , produced an equal activity in my mind : my thoughts darted from earth to heaven , and I asked myself why I was chained to life and its misery ? Still the tumultuous emotions this sublime object excited , were pleasurable ; and , viewing it , my soul rose , with renewed dignity , above its cares – grasping at immortality – it seemed as impossible to stop the current of my thoughts , as of the always varying , still the same , torrent before me – I stretched out my hand to eternity , bounding over the dark speck of life to come . 
 Like her other manipulations of the language of the sublime , this passage is also heavily inflected by gender . As one scholar puts it , " because Wollstonecraft is a woman , and is therefore bound by the legal and social restrictions placed on her sex in the eighteenth century , she can only envisage autonomy of any form after death " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Reason , feeling , and imagination = = = 
 Often categorized as a rationalist philosopher , Wollstonecraft demonstrates her commitment to and appreciation of feeling in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark . She argues that subjective experiences , such as the transcendent emotions prompted by the sublime and the beautiful , possess a value equal to the objective truths discovered through reason . In Wollstonecraft 's earlier works , reason was paramount , because it allowed access to universal truths . In Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , however , reason serves as a tool for reflection , mediating between the sensual experiences of the world and an abstract notion of truth ( not necessarily universal truth ) . Maturation is not only the acquisition of reason — the view Wollstonecraft had adopted in Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) — but also an understanding of when and how to trust one 's emotions . 
 Wollstonecraft 's theories regarding reason , emotion , and the imagination are closely tied together . Some scholars contend that Wollstonecraft uses the imagination to liberate the self , especially the feminine self ; it allows her to envision roles for women outside the traditional bounds of eighteenth @-@ century thought and offers her a way to articulate those new ideas . In contrast , others view Wollstonecraft 's emphasis on the power of the imagination as detrimental , imprisoning her in an " individualized , bourgeois desire " which can never truly embrace sociality . 
 Favret has argued that Wollstonecraft uses the imagination to reconcile " masculine understanding " and " female sensibility " . Readers must imaginatively " work " while reading : their efforts will save them from descending into sentimentality as well as from being lured into commercial speculation . Even more importantly , readers become invested in the story of the narrator . Wollstonecraft 's language demands that they participate in the " plot " : 
 <unk> ' rescue the writer from the villain ; ' they ' accompany her on her flight from sorrow ... With the readers ' cooperation , the writer reverses the standard epistolary plot : here the heroine liberates herself by rejecting her correspondent and by embracing the ' world ' outside of the domestic circle . 
 In giving the imagination the power to reshape society ( a power suggested through numerous allusions to Shakespeare 's The Tempest ) , Wollstonecraft reveals that she has become a Romantic . 
 = = = Individual and society = = = 
 Throughout Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , Wollstonecraft ponders the relationship between society and the individual . While her earlier works largely focus on society 's failings and responsibilities , in this work she turns inward , explicitly arguing for the value of personal experience . In the advertisement for the work , also published as a preface , she explains her role as the " hero " of the text : 
 In writing these desultory letters , I found I could not avoid being continually the first person – ' the little hero of each tale . ' I tried to correct this fault , if it be one , for they were designed for publication ; but in proportion as I arranged my thoughts , my letter , I found , became stiff and affected : I , therefore , determined to let my remarks and reflections flow unrestrained , as I perceived that I could not give a just description of what I saw , but by relating the effect different objects had produced on my mind and feelings , whilst the impression was still fresh . 
 Throughout the book , Wollstonecraft ties her own psychic journey and maturation to the progress of civilizations . Nations , like individuals , she maintains have , as Wollstonecraft scholar Mary Poovey describes it , " a collective ' understanding ' that evolves organically , ' ripening ' gradually to fruition " . However , Wollstonecraft still views civilization 's tragedies as worthier of concern than individual or fictional tragedies , suggesting that , for her , sympathy is at the core of social relations : 
 I have then considered myself as a particle broken off from the grand mass of mankind ; — I was alone , till some involuntary sympathetic emotion , like the attraction of adhesion , made me feel that I was still a part of a mighty whole , from which I could not sever myself — not , perhaps , for the reflection has been carried very far , by snapping the thread of an existence which loses its charms in proportion as the cruel experience of life stops or poisons the current of the heart . 
 = = = Nature = = = 
 Wollstonecraft dedicates significant portions of Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark to descriptions of nature and her emotional responses to it . One of her most effective tactics is to associate a set of thoughts and feelings with a specific natural formation , such as the waterfall passage quoted above . Nature , Wollstonecraft assumes , is " a common reference point " between readers and herself , therefore her letters should generate a sense of social sympathy with them . Many of the letters contain these " miniature Romantic <unk> " which illustrate Wollstonecraft 's ideas regarding the connections between nature , God , and the self . The natural world becomes " the necessary ground of speculation and the crucial field of experience " . 
 = = = Gender : " Hapless woman ! what a fate is thine ! " = = = 
 All of Wollstonecraft 's writings , including the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , address the concerns of women in eighteenth @-@ century society . As in previous works , she discusses concrete issues such as childcare and relationships with servants , but unlike her more polemical books such as Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) or the Rights of Woman , this text emphasizes her emotional reactions to nature and maternity . Yet she does not depart from her interest in promoting women 's education and rights . In Letter 19 , the most explicitly feminist letter , Wollstonecraft anticipates readers ' criticisms : " still harping on the same subject , you will exclaim – How can I avoid it , when most of the struggles of an eventful life have been occasioned by the oppressed state of my sex : we reason deeply , when we forcibly feel . " Wollstonecraft comes to the realization that she has always been forced to experience the world as a woman — it is the defining feature of her sense of self . 
 Throughout Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , Wollstonecraft comments on the precarious position women occupy in society . She defends and sympathizes with Queen Caroline of Denmark , for example , who had been accused of " licentiousness " for her extra @-@ marital affair during her marriage to the insane Christian VII . ( Wollstonecraft herself had had unorthodox love affairs and an illegitimate child . ) Wollstonecraft describes this royal , who was also a progressive social reformer , as a woman of courage who tried to revolutionize her country before it was prepared . Such examples fuel Wollstonecraft 's increasing despair and melancholy . At one point , she laments the fate of her daughter : 
 You know that as a female I am particularly attached to her – I feel more than a mother 's fondness and anxiety , when I reflect on the dependent and oppressed state of her sex . I dread lest she should be forced to sacrifice her heart to her principles , or principles to her heart . With trembling hand I shall cultivate sensibility , and cherish delicacy of sentiment , lest , whilst I lend fresh blushes to the rose , I sharpen the thorns that will wound the breast I would fain guard – I dread to unfold her mind , lest it should render her unfit for the world she is to inhabit – Hapless woman ! what a fate is thine ! 
 Wollstonecraft 's anger and frustration over the secondary status afforded women compels her to define herself in antithesis to conventional images of femininity . In the first letter she proudly announces " at supper my host told me bluntly that I was a woman of observation , for I asked him men 's questions " ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) . 
 Wollstonecraft casts the female imagination as the productive counterpoint to destructive masculine commerce , a feat she achieves primarily through her use of the genre of the letter . While the Rights of Woman argued that women should be " useful " and " productive " , importing the language of the market into the home , Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark adopts the values of the domestic space for the larger social and political world . 
 = = = Commercialism = = = 
 Although Wollstonecraft spends much of Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark musing on nature and its connection to the self , a great deal of the text is actually about the debasing effects of commerce on culture . She argues , for example , that the damage done to Hamburg and France by mercenaries and an increasingly commercial culture is far greater than the damage caused by the violence of the French revolution , writing that " the sword has been merciful , compared with the depredations made on human life by contractors , and by the swarm of locusts who have <unk> on the pestilence they spread abroad " . Wollstonecraft believed that commerce " <unk> " the mind and fostered a selfish disposition in its practitioners . Commerce should be , she thought , " regulated by ideas of justice and fairness and directed toward the ideals of independence and benevolence " . 
 Wollstonecraft had become disenchanted with Imlay not only because of his dismissive attitude towards her but also because of his greed . Throughout Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark , she attaches criticisms of commerce to the anonymous lover who has betrayed her : 
 A man ceases to love humanity , and then individuals , as he advances in the chase after wealth ; as one clashes with his interest , the other with his pleasures : to business , as it is termed , every thing must give way ; nay , is sacrificed ; and all the endearing charities of citizen , husband , father , brother , become empty names . 
 Throughout the text , she contrasts the constructive , creative imagination with destructive commerce . By associating commercialism with the anonymous lover in the text , Wollstonecraft was also directly censuring Imlay , who she believed cared more for his business speculations than for her and their child . 
 = = = Revolution and progress = = = 
 Wollstonecraft spends several large sections of Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark speculating about the possibilities of social and political revolution and outlining a trajectory for the progress of civilization . In comparing Norway with Britain and France , for example , she argues that the Norwegians are more progressive because they have a free press , embrace religious toleration , distribute their land fairly , and have a politically active populace . However , her description of Norway 's " golden age " becomes less rhapsodic after she discovers that the country has no universities or scientists . 
 In many ways Norwegian society embodied the British radical ideal of " a small @-@ producer society , its wealth sufficiently dispersed to ensure rough equality " , similar to what Wollstonecraft had outlined in A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) . After careful consideration of how to improve the social and political problems in the places she visited , Wollstonecraft came to the conclusion that social progress must occur at a measured and " natural " rate . She argues that each country has to find its own way to improve , that democratic revolution cannot be foisted upon a people . She believed that the lower classes and the yeomen were the most promising " potential source of revolutionary social transformation " . Implicit in her assessment , however , was a bourgeois condescension ; she viewed the lower classes as a group separate from herself , at one point describing their behavior as " picturesque " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Wollstonecraft was prompted to publish Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark because she was heavily in debt . The successful sales of this , her most popular book in the 1790s , came at an opportune moment . Well @-@ received by reviewers , the work was translated into German , Dutch , Swedish , and Portuguese ; published in America ; and reissued in a second edition in 1802 . 
 Amelia Alderson praised the work , separating the philosopher from the woman : " As soon as I read your Letters from Norway , the cold awe which the philosopher had excited was lost in the tender sympathy call 'd forth by the woman . " William Godwin , Wollstonecraft 's future husband , wrote in his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman that reading Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark caused him to fall in love with Wollstonecraft : 
 If ever there was a book calculated to make a man in love with its author , this appears to me to be the book . She speaks of her sorrows , in a way that fills us with melancholy , and dissolves us in tenderness , at the same time that she displays a genius which commands all our admiration . Affliction had tempered her heart to a softness almost more than human ; and the gentleness of her spirit seems precisely to accord with all the romance of unbounded attachment . 
 Connecting the work to Wollstonecraft 's first novel , Mary : A Fiction ( 1788 ) , he celebrates its sensibility and " <unk> the condition of feminine sorrow " ; for Godwin , the work was an epistolary romance , not a work of political commentary . After Wollstonecraft 's death in 1797 , Godwin published her original letters to Imlay ( destroying the originals in the process ) . He deleted all references to contemporary political events and her business negotiations , emphasizing the romantic connection between the two sets of letters . Favret contends that Godwin wanted the public to see Wollstonecraft 's affair as a sentimental romance akin to that between Charlotte and Werther in Goethe 's Sorrows of Young Werther ( 1774 ) . 
 For a woman , a one @-@ year @-@ old child , and a maid to travel to Scandinavia without the protection of a man was unprecedented in the eighteenth century . The book resulting from the trip also seemed highly unusual to readers at the time : details of Wollstonecraft 's travels to a rarely visited area of the world , what one editor of the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark describes as " a boreal wilderness " , intrigued and even shocked contemporary readers . The unorthodox theology of the book also alienated some readers . The Monthly Magazine and American Review wrote : 
 [ She ] discarded all faith in <unk> . [ sic ] ... From this period she adored [ God ] ... not as one whose interposing power is ever silently at work on the grand theatre of human affairs , causing eventual good to spring from present evil , and permitting nothing but for wise and benevolent purposes ; but merely as the first great cause and vital spring of existence . 
 Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark retreated from Wollstonecraft 's earlier focus on God as judge to God as mere creator , shocking some conservative readers who were not prepared to accept anything akin to deism . Worried more about Wollstonecraft 's promotion of sensibility , fellow feminist and author Mary Hays criticized the book 's mawkishness . A professor of moral philosophy , Thomas Brown , published a poetic response to the book , The Wanderer in Norway ( 1816 ) . Rather than rejoicing in the freedom that Wollstonecraft argued the connection between nature and emotion offered , however , Brown represented her work as a failure and Wollstonecraft as a tragic victim . He read the book as a cautionary tale , whereas Wollstonecraft had intended it as a description of the possibilities of social and personal reform . As Favret argues , almost all of the responses to Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark placed the narrator / Mary in the position of a sentimental heroine , while the text itself , with its fusion of sensibility and politics , actually does much to challenge that image . 
 After the publication of Godwin 's Memoirs , which revealed and endorsed Wollstonecraft 's love affairs and illegitimate child , her works were scorned by the majority of the public . Nevertheless , " the book was to arouse a passion for travel among cultivated people in Europe " . Intrepid nineteenth @-@ century British female travel writers such as Isabella Bird and Mary Kingsley still read it and were inspired by Wollstonecraft 's pioneering efforts . Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark was republished at the end of the nineteenth century and Robert Louis Stevenson , the author of Treasure Island , took a copy on his trip to Samoa in 1890 . 
 Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark was a powerful influence on Wollstonecraft 's daughter , Mary Shelley . In 1817 , Shelley would publish History of a Six Weeks ' Tour , a narrative of her travels through Europe and to Lake Geneva which was modeled after her mother 's work . 
 = = = Romanticism = = = 
 The Romantic poets were more profoundly affected by Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark than anyone , except perhaps Godwin . The poet Robert Southey , for example , wrote to his publisher : " Have you met with Mary Wollstonecraft 's [ travel book ] ? She has made me in love with a cold climate , and frost and snow , with a northern moonlight . " The book 's combination of progressive social views with the advocacy of individual subjective experience influenced writers such as William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge . Wollstonecraft 's " <unk> theory of the creative imagination " paved the way for Wordsworth 's thorough treatment of the imagination and its relation to the self in Book V of The Prelude ( 1805 ; 1850 ) . Her book also had a significant influence on Coleridge 's Rime of the Ancient Mariner ( 1797 – 99 ) and Percy Shelley 's Alastor ( 1815 ) ; their depictions of " quest [ s ] for a settled home " strongly resemble Wollstonecraft 's . The most striking homage to Wollstonecraft 's work , however , is in Coleridge 's famous poem " Kubla Khan " ( 1797 ; 1816 ) . Not only does much of his style descend from the book , but at one point he alludes to Wollstonecraft as he is describing a cold wasteland : 
 = = Modern editions = = 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . The Complete Works of Mary Wollstonecraft . Ed . Janet Todd and Marilyn Butler . 7 vols . London : William Pickering , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 9225 @-@ 1 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary and Godwin , William . A Short Residence in Sweden , Norway and Denmark and Memoirs of the Author of ' The Rights of Woman ' . Ed . Richard Holmes . London : Penguin Books , 1987 . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Letters Written during a Short Residence in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark . Ed . Carol H. Poston . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 1976 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 = Henry Percy , 2nd Earl of Northumberland = 
 Henry Percy , 2nd Earl of Northumberland ( 3 February 1393 – 22 May 1455 ) was an English nobleman and military commander in the lead up to the Wars of the Roses . He was the son of Henry " Hotspur " Percy , and the grandson of Henry Percy , 1st Earl of Northumberland . His father and grandfather were killed in different rebellions against Henry IV in 1403 and 1408 respectively , and the young Henry spent his minority in exile in Scotland . Only after the death of Henry IV in 1413 was he reconciled with the Crown , and in 1416 he was created Earl of Northumberland . 
 In the following years , Northumberland occasionally served with the king in France , but his main occupation was the protection of the border to Scotland . At the same time , a feud with the Neville family was developing , particularly with Richard Neville , Earl of Salisbury . This feud became entangled with the conflict between the Duke of York and the Duke of Somerset over control of national government . The conflict culminated in the first battle of the Wars of the Roses , at St Albans , where both Somerset and Northumberland were killed . 
 = = Family @-@ background = = 
 Henry Percy was the son of another Henry Percy , known as " Hotspur " , and Elizabeth Mortimer . Elizabeth was the daughter of Edmund Mortimer , Earl of March and Philippa , granddaughter of Edward III . Hotspur 's father – the young Henry 's grandfather – was also called Henry Percy , and in 1377 became the first of the Percy family to hold the title of Earl of Northumberland . Both Hotspur and his father were early and active supporters of Henry Bolingbroke , who usurped the throne from Richard II in 1399 , and became King Henry IV . They were initially richly rewarded , but soon grew disillusioned with the new regime . Hotspur rose up in rebellion , and was killed at Shrewsbury on 21 July 1403 . 
 Earl Henry was not present at the battle , but there is little doubt that he participated in the rebellion . After a short imprisonment , he was pardoned , and in June 1404 he delivered his grandson into the king 's custody at Doncaster . By May 1405 , however , the earl was involved in another rebellion . His plans failed , and he was forced to flee to Scotland , taking his grandson with him . The following years were marked by an itinerant life and further plotting , while the young Henry remained in the custody of the Duke of Albany . On 19 February 1408 , the first earl of Northumberland was killed in the Battle of Bramham Moor , leaving the young Henry Percy as heir apparent to the earldom . Henry remained in Scotland until the accession of Henry V in 1413 , when he tried to claim his grandfather 's title . His cause was aided by the king 's aunt , Joan Beaufort , Countess of Westmorland , who arranged his marriage to her daughter Eleanor . It was in Henry V 's interest to reconcile with the Percys , with their vast network in the north of England ; in 1416 Henry Percy was created Earl of Northumberland . 
 = = Service to the king = = 
 Northumberland served occasionally in Henry V 's wars in France over the following years . He joined the king on an expedition to the Continent in 1416 , and sent a minor contingent of soldiers the next year . His main task , however , was the defence of the Scottish Borders , and on 16 December 1416 he was appointed Warden of the East March . In late August 1417 , the Scots invaded northern England ; while Albany laid siege to Berwick Castle , the Earl of Douglas attempted to take Roxburgh Castle . Percy lifted the siege of Berwick , and forced both Albany and Douglas across the border . At the same time , he was also involved in national political affairs , and acted as steward at the coronation of Henry 's queen Catherine on 24 February 1421 . 
 When Henry V died in 1422 , Northumberland was appointed member of the council appointed to govern during the minority of Henry VI . He might have been involved in an embassy to the Council of Siena in 1423 , but still his main area of responsibility lay in the border region . In the council , he seems to have belonged to the circle around Bishop Henry Beaufort , and he followed Beaufort – now cardinal – to peace negotiations at Berwick in 1429 . As Warden of the East March , he was constantly occupied with peace negotiations and defence of northern England , but his efforts were constantly frustrated , and in 1434 he resigned his commission . The next year , Richard Neville , Earl of Salisbury , equally exasperated by the lack of royal support , gave up his commission as Warden of the West March . Northumberland was appointed joint warden with the earl of Huntingdon of both marches for one year , during which time , although suffering defeat by the Earl of Angus at the Battle of <unk> , he was able to repel a siege on Roxburgh by James I of Scotland . In 1440 he was once more appointed Warden of the West March , and this time held the position until his death . 
 = = Feud with Neville family = = 
 Initially , Northumberland 's relations with the other great northern family , the Nevilles , were friendly . He was already connected to the Neville Earls of Westmorland through his marriage with Eleanor Neville , and in 1426 he married his sister Elizabeth to the young Ralph Neville , 2nd Earl of Westmorland . In the early 1440s , Northumberland was involved in other disputes . A conflict over land with the Archbishop of York escalated into open violence . The king intervened on the archbishop 's side , though Northumberland remained in favour at court . Nevertheless , he spent less time involved in central affairs at Westminster in the later 1440s . 
 In the early 1450s , the relationship between the Percy family and Salisbury – who belonged to a cadet branch of the Westmorland Neville family – started to deteriorate . What triggered the conflict was the marriage between Salisbury 's son Thomas and Maud Stanhope , niece and heiress of Lord Cromwell . By this marriage Wressle Castle , which had traditionally been in the possession of the Percy family , would pass to the Nevilles . At the same time , the Neville @-@ Cromwell wedding had led Huntingdon ( now Duke of Exeter ) to join the cause of the Percys , because of a territorial dispute with Cromwell . Northumberland himself , who was nearing sixty , did not take action at the time , but one of his younger sons did . Thomas Percy had been created Baron Egremont in 1449 , relating to his possessions in the Neville @-@ dominated county of Cumberland . On 24 August 1453 , Thomas attacked the Neville @-@ Cromwell wedding party at Heworth near York with a force of over 700 men . No one was killed in the skirmish , and the wedding party escaped intact . 
 The conflict , however , continued over the following years . On 8 October , Northumberland and Salisbury were summoned to court and ordered to end the conflict , but the warnings were ignored . Instead , the collective forces of the Percy and Neville families gathered at their Yorkshire strongholds of Topcliffe and Sand Hutton respectively , only a few miles apart . Both sides had ignored royal commands to disband , and battle seemed inevitable , but eventually a truce ensued and the forces withdrew . Then , in October 1454 , Thomas Percy and his brother Richard were captured by the Nevilles in a battle at Stamford Bridge . The conflict was escalating , and converging with events in national politics . 
 = = Towards civil war = = 
 Discontent was brewing in England against the personal rule of Henry VI , who had been declared of age in 1437 . The main antagonists were Richard , Duke of York , and Edmund Beaufort , Duke of Somerset . Somerset enjoyed great influence over the king , but after Henry had been incapacitated by mental illness in 1453 , York was appointed protector in 1454 . The Nevilles were by this time closely associated with York , so the natural option for Northumberland was to side with Somerset and the king . Attempts were made to reconcile Northumberland and Salisbury in the north , but little was accomplished . In December , the king rallied sufficiently to resume control of government , and York 's protectorate was terminated . With Somerset back at the centre of power , civil war seemed imminent . 
 In May 1455 , Northumberland was travelling with the king and Somerset to a great council at Leicester , when the party was intercepted by York and the Nevilles . On 22 May 1455 , at the First Battle of St Albans , the royal forces clashed with the forces loyal to the Duke of York , in what has been described as the first battle of the Wars of the Roses . The battle was a complete victory for the Yorkist side , and led to another reversal of the political situation . The king was taken captive , and Somerset was killed . Northumberland was also among the casualties , and was buried at the nearby St Albans Abbey . A suggestion made by a contemporary chronicler , and supported by modern @-@ day historians , said that the true purpose of the battle was to settle personal scores . Once York and Salisbury had killed Somerset and Northumberland respectively , the battle was effectively over . 
 = = Estates and family = = 
 The Percy estates were primarily located in the northern counties of Yorkshire , Northumberland , and Cumberland . Even though the title was restored in 1416 , and the Percy estates were officially regranted , this did not mean the immediate return of all the family possessions . Protracted legal battles followed , particularly with John , Duke of Bedford . Even at the time of his death , Northumberland had not recovered all the estates once held by his grandfather . 
 Northumberland 's marriage to Eleanor Neville produced at least ten children . Henry Percy was succeeded by his son Henry Percy , 3rd Earl of Northumberland , who himself died fighting in the Wars of the Roses , at the Battle of Towton on 29 March 1461 . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Azumanga Daioh = 
 Azumanga Daioh ( Japanese : あずまんが大王 , Hepburn : Azumanga <unk> , lit . " Great King Azumanga " ) is a Japanese yonkoma comedy manga series written and illustrated by Kiyohiko Azuma , which was serialized in MediaWorks ' Dengeki Daioh magazine between 1999 and 2002 . Three additional chapters were published in Shogakukan 's Monthly Shōnen Sunday in May 2009 to celebrate the manga 's tenth anniversary . The manga was first released in English by ADV Manga , and was later re @-@ issued by Yen Press . 
 A television anime adaptation titled Azumanga Daioh : the Animation was produced by J.C.Staff and aired in Japan between April and September 2002 , consisting of 130 five @-@ minute segments compiled into 26 episodes . The compiled episodes were released on DVD and Universal Media Discs ( UMDs ) by Starchild Records , and an English @-@ language version was produced by ADV Films . Prior to the series , a theatrical short and an original net animation were also produced . Several soundtrack albums were released , as well as three Azumanga Daioh video games . 
 Both the manga and anime have been praised for their humor driven by eccentric characters , with Azuma acclaimed as a " master of the four @-@ panel form " for both his art style and comic timing . 
 = = Title = = 
 The series title has no particular significance to the story . " Azumanga " is a portmanteau of the author 's name " Azuma " and " manga " , while " Daioh " comes from the magazine in which it was originally published , Dengeki Daioh . In the anime , " <unk> " is mentioned during the next episode previews , used in context with the meaning " great king " . 
 " Azumanga " is also used as a general term for Kiyohiko Azuma 's other comics and illustrations . Two previous collections of Azuma 's works , including official tie @-@ in comics of Pioneer animations , were published as Azumanga and Azumanga 2 in 1998 and 2001 , respectively . Azumanga was later republished in a reduced @-@ size edition called Azumanga Recycle . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Azumanga Daioh chronicles the everyday life in an unnamed Japanese high school of six girls and two of their teachers : child prodigy Chiyo <unk> and her struggle to fit in with girls five years older ; reserved Sakaki and her obsession with the cute animals who seem to hate her ; spacey Ayumu " Osaka " Kasuga with a skewed perspective on the world ; <unk> " Yomi " Mizuhara 's aggravation at an annoying best friend ; Tomo <unk> , whose energy is rivaled only by her lack of sense ; sporty Kagura and her one @-@ sided athletics rivalry with Sakaki ; their homeroom teacher Yukari Tanizaki ; and her friend , physical education teacher <unk> " <unk> " Kurosawa . 
 Secondary characters include Kimura @-@ sensei , a creepy male teacher with an obsession with teenage girls , and <unk> , a female classmate with a crush on Sakaki . 
 The story covers three years of tests , talking between classes , culture festivals , and athletic events at school , as well as time spent traveling to and from school , studying at Chiyo 's house , and vacations at Chiyo 's summer beach home and the fictional theme park Magical Land , concluding with the graduation of the main cast . It is generally realistic in tone , marked by occasional bursts of surrealism and absurdity , such as Osaka imagining Chiyo 's ponytails being " unscrewed " from her head and an episode featuring the characters ' New Year 's dreams . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Azumanga Daioh was written and illustrated by Kiyohiko Azuma , largely in yonkoma ( four @-@ panel ) format . The unnumbered chapters were serialized by MediaWorks ' in the monthly magazine Dengeki Daioh from February 1999 to May 2002 . The series was collected in four tankōbon volumes . Each of the four volumes covers about a year in the characters ' lives . A new edition in three volumes was released in Japan by Shogakukan to commemorate the manga 's 10th anniversary , with volume one , covering the first year of high school , being published June 11 , 2009 . The reprint edition contains three additional 16 @-@ page chapters serialized in Monthly Shōnen Sunday starting in May 2009 under the title Azumanga Daioh : Supplementary Lessons ( あずまんが大王 · <unk> , Azumanga <unk> <unk> ) . 
 The series was licensed in English in North America and the United Kingdom by ADV Manga , which released all four volumes between 2003 and 2004 . ADV later reprinted the series in an omnibus edition ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0364 @-@ 5 ) on November 7 , 2007 . In 2009 , Yen Press acquired the North American and UK license of Azumanga Daioh , and released a new translation in December 2009 in an omnibus volume . In Europe , Azumanga Daioh is licensed in French by Kurokawa , in German by Tokyopop , in Spanish by Norma Editorial , and in Finnish by <unk> <unk> . In Asia , the series has been licensed in Korean by Daiwon C.I. , in Thai by <unk> Comics , in Vietnam by TVM Comics , and in Chinese by Tong Li Publishing . It was the first yonkoma manga translated in France . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The anime television series , Azumanga Daioh : the Animation , was produced by J.C.Staff and aired from the week of April 8 , 2002 until the week of September 30 , 2002 . It was broadcast on TV Tokyo , TV Aichi , TV Osaka , and AT @-@ X in five @-@ minute segments every weekday , then repeated as a 25 @-@ minute compilation that weekend , for a total of 130 five @-@ minute segments collected in 26 episodes . For the compilation episodes , the respective opening and ending themes were " Soramimi Cake " ( <unk> , Soramimi <unk> , Cake of <unk> ) and " Raspberry Heaven " , both performed by Oranges & Lemons . The compilation episodes , which were the only versions to include the title and credits sequences , were released on 6 DVDs in 2003 and 9 Universal Media Discs between 2005 and 2006 by Starchild Records , and a DVD box set of all episodes was released on June 24 , 2009 ; the five @-@ minute segments can be distinguished by their individual titles . 
 Besides the anime television series , there have been two other animated adaptations : The Very Short Azumanga Daioh Movie , a six @-@ minute trailer released to movie theaters to publicize the upcoming television series , and Azumanga Web Daioh , a shorter original net animation made available for paid streaming on chara @-@ <unk> beginning from December 28 , 2000 , then offered as a paid download for a limited time . Azumanga Web Daioh was originally intended to gauge whether there was enough interest to create a web @-@ released anime adaptation ; because of overwhelming demand , the original plan for web @-@ release was changed to a television release . It featured different voice actors and music from the regular series . 
 In the United States , the anime television series was released in six DVDs on September 9 , 2005 , and then later in a five DVD volume " <unk> " set , both by ADV Films . The sixth DVD volume included The Very Short Azumanga Daioh Movie . In 2009 , Nokia offered the first five episodes of Azumanga Daioh on its Ovi phone service . Madman Entertainment licensed the series for release in Australia and New Zealand . As of September 1 , 2009 , all of ADV 's former catalog are transferred to AEsir Holdings , with distribution from Section23 Films . The series was later re @-@ licensed in 2016 by Sentai Filmworks . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Several soundtrack albums for the anime of Azumanga Daioh were released by Lantis , including two volumes of the Azumanga Daioh Original Soundtrack , collecting the show 's score and themes ; two tribute albums ; and Vocal Collection , collecting character image songs . One single was released for the opening and closing theme of the anime , and eight singles of image songs were released for the main cast members . Most of the releases charted on the Japanese Oricon charts , with the highest ranking album being Tribute to Azumanga Daioh at number 68 , and the highest ranking single being Soramimi no Cake / Raspberry Heaven , the opening and closing themes , at 36th . 
 The opening and closing theme single Soramimi no Cake / Raspberry Heaven was released on April 22 , 2002 , and peak ranked 36th on the Oricon singles chart . The two volumes of the soundtrack were released on June 26 , 2006 and October 23 , 2002 , and peak ranked 72nd and 99th on the Oricon albums chart , respectively . The soundtrack albums were re @-@ released as a two @-@ disc set on June 24 , 2009 in conjunction with the 10th anniversary release of the DVD box set . Azumanga Daioh Original Soundtrack Volume 1 was released in the United States by Geneon . 
 Azumanga Daioh : Vocal Collection collects the character image songs performed by the voice actors in the personas of the characters they played , and the opening and the closing theme songs . It was released on December 25 , 2002 in Japan , Eight image song singles were released as Azumanga Daioh Characters Songs Volumes 1 through 8 , which focused in order on Chiyo , Sakaki , Osaka , Tomo , Kagura , Yomi , Sensei , and <unk> . Volumes 1 and 2 were released May 22 , 2002 , Volume 3 on June 26 , 2002 , Volumes 4 and 5 on July 27 , 2002 , Volume 6 and 7 on September 4 , 2002 , and Volume 8 on September 25 , 2002 . Azumanga Daioh Characters Songs Volumes 3 through 8 peak ranked 63rd , 80th , 79th , 70th , 75th , and 49th on the Oricon singles chart , respectively . Azumanga Daioh : Vocal Collection was released in the United States by Geneon on July 5 , 2005 . 
 Two tribute albums , Tribute to Azumanga Daioh and Tribute to Live Azumanga Daioh , were released on October 2 , 2002 and December 10 , 2003 . Tribute to Azumanga Daioh peak ranked 68th on the Oricon albums chart . Tribute to Live Azumanga Daioh is the live album of the concert held on October 4 , 2003 at the public hall of <unk> , Tokyo . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Two art books for the anime were published under the titles Azumanga Daioh the Animation Visual Book 1 ( あずまんが大王 THE ANIMATION <unk> ( 1 ) ) ( ISBN 4 @-@ 8402 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ) and Azumanga Daioh the Animation Visual Book 2 ( あずまんが大王 THE ANIMATION <unk> ( 2 ) ) ( ISBN 4 @-@ 8402 @-@ 2290 @-@ 8 ) were published by MediaWorks on August 26 , 2002 and December 10 , 2002 , respectively . 
 Three Azumanga Daioh video games were released . Azumanga <unk> Daioh , a puzzle game similar to mahjong , was released by Bandai for the PlayStation on April 18 , 2002 . Azumanga Daioh Puzzle Bobble was released by Taito Corporation as an arcade @-@ only Puzzle Bobble spin @-@ off in December , 2002 . Azumanga Daioh Advance , a card @-@ playing game , was released by King Records for the Game Boy Advance on April 25 , 2003 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Japan , the Azumanga Daioh manga was named a jury recommended work of the sixth Japan Media Arts Festival in 2002 . The manga was named as one of the top 25 manga at the 2006 Japan Media Arts Festival . 
 English reviewers have commented positively about Azumanga Daioh . In Manga : The Complete Guide , Jason Thompson refers to it as a " charming comedy " and a " quiet master of the four @-@ panel form " , praising the series comedic timing and use of running gags . He felt one of the series ' best points was its " character @-@ driven writing " , but does warn that its moe nature and the jokes that revolve around the " vaguely pedophilic teacher " might disturb some newer readers of manga . He later said that Azumanga Daioh was an " almost totally innocent " kind of moe , centered around " peep [ ing ] at the chaste world of girls " , in which " adorable girls do adorable things " . The French manga dictionary <unk> noted that despite being a moe series targeted at otaku , it also appealed to female readers for celebrating " friendships between girls as well as [ its ] comedy . " Marc Hairston describes Azumanga Daioh as being " slightly disjointed " , with " frequently oblique " and " culturally biased " humour , and says it is both " lighter " and " more wry " than Maria @-@ sama ga Miteru . He describes the characters of Azumanga as being " individuals with slightly offbeat personalities " . Mark Thomas , writing for Mania.com , says that each character has " a defining personality trait that is ramped up to abnormal levels " and that each has a foil , which highlights these traits and prevents them from becoming too annoying or unbelievable as characters . Thomas said that the yonkoma format does not lend itself to " complex story arcs " , and the story is presented as " quick snapshots of random moments in their daily routines " , noting that the narrative is character @-@ driven . Patrick King , writing for Anime Fringe , considered it to be " one of the funniest , most adorable manga series I 've read " . IGN noted the lack of background art , but said that the expressive faces of the characters made up for it . 
 Fred Patton of Animation World Magazine described the anime as " delightfully witty and even an educational window onto what Japanese high school life is really like . " Chris Beveridge of Anime on DVD , stated that " There 's a lot to laugh with here and a cast of characters that grow quickly on you as you start finding those you favor and those you don 't . " Andrew Shelton from Anime Meta explains that " The character of the girls is extremely well brought out . The superb observation , and ability to capture expression , makes the anime incredibly fun to watch in addition to meeting the story requirements . The action , and very rich comedy , are also wonderfully represented . There is just so much meaning , and charm , in even the most minor of expressions . " The reviewers of THEM Anime and Anime News Network felt that fans who had already graduated high school would feel nostalgic at times while watching Azumanga Daioh . 
 The licensed manga had sales that reached top 100 lists on occasions and was included in the top 25 manga recommended by International Correspondence in Retailers Guide to Anime / Manga . The English dub for the show was well received , earning six ADR Awards from fans voting on <unk> and <unk> Four of the girls were included in Newtype 's top 100 anime heroines of 2002 : Osaka was awarded 7th , Chiyo 11th , Sakaki 21st , and Yomi 78th . Together they made Azumanga Daioh the second most popular series of 2002 for female characters . 
 = M @-@ 144 ( 1937 – 1939 Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 144 was the designation assigned to two former state trunkline highways in the US state of Michigan . The original version of M @-@ 144 existed as a 0 @.@ 388 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 624 km ) spur connecting the Michigan State Police headquarters in East Lansing to Michigan Avenue , which was signed M @-@ 39 at the time . It was designated by 1937 and decommissioned in 1939 , after which time the designation was shifted to the second version of M @-@ 144 further north in Roscommon and Oscoda counties . 
 = = Route description = = 
 As it existed at the time , M @-@ 144 started at the headquarters for the Michigan State Police next to the campus of Michigan State College , now Michigan State University . The highway ran north along Harrison Road next to campus and across the Red Cedar River . North of the river , the trunkline terminated at the junction with Michigan Avenue ( then M @-@ 39 , now the unsigned M @-@ 143 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The first incarnation of M @-@ 144 was designated by 1937 to serve as the connector to the state police headquarters . The highway was decommissioned in 1939 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in East Lansing , Ingham County . 
 = New Kidney in Town = 
 " New Kidney in Town " is the eighth episode of the ninth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on January 9 , 2011 . The episode follows Peter , after he drinks kerosene , causing him to suffer from immediate kidney failure . In need of a replacement kidney , Peter is unable to locate a match , until it is discovered that his anthropomorphic dog Brian is a match , but would require the donation of both his kidneys . Meanwhile , Chris is instructed by his English teacher to write an essay about hope , in preparation of United States President Barack Obama 's appearance at their school . Unable to write anything inspiring , he decides to pick his sister Meg 's brain and use her ideas . 
 The episode was written by Matt Harrigan and Dave Willis , and directed by Pete Michels . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 29 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Yvette Nicole Brown , Drew Carey , Gary Cole , Christine Lakin and Rachael MacFarlane , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " New Kidney in Town " was one of five episodes submitted for consideration for an Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category in 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter is introduced to Red Bull by Quagmire at the bar . He ends up becoming highly addicted to it and it makes him operate at high speeds . Peter buys packs of Red Bull and introduces it to his family , though things get out of hand as soon as he starts performing everything too fast . One day , Peter comes home to find that Lois has thrown the Red Bull out in an attempt to make Peter give up his new addiction . This angers Peter , who in retaliation , attempts to make his own . Because of a misreading , Peter decides to put kerosene in his beverage believing that fuel causes the effect Red Bull has on him . Brian tries to warn Peter that kerosene is dangerous , but Peter ignores him and adds it anyway . 
 Upon drinking it , Peter collapses and is rushed to the hospital , where the family learns that Peter has been diagnosed with Kidney failure due to the damage done and he is in need of a transplant . However , since they must wait a few months before they can get donors , Peter must undergo dialysis . Three weeks later , after undergoing constant dialysis procedures , Peter gets angry that the dialysis treatments have stolen him from the world . Convinced that one skipping would not hurt him , Peter eventually decides to skip an appointment but his assumptions are false and him skipping it causes him to become jaundiced and vomit blood . 
 At the hospital , the family learns that Peter 's condition has a big chance of suddenly failing and thus killing him . They learn that the only other option besides the daily procedures is that one must give up one of their kidneys to Peter . Lois volunteers to give up one of hers , but is informed that she isn 't a match . Dr Hartman suggests the idea of using their kids as donors but Lois refuses to bring them into it . Brian also volunteers , and they discover that he has the same kidney type as Peter . However , as dog kidneys are smaller than human 's , the donation requires both kidneys . If the procedure was successful , Brian would lose his life . Brian decides to go along with the procedure to save Peter 's life . Reluctant to lose Brian , Stewie kidnaps him and takes him to the local playground , in hopes of staying there the rest of their lives . Brian convinces Stewie to let him go , stating that Stewie needs his father more than he needs his dog . The next day , Brian and Peter prepare to undergo the kidney transfer . However , Dr. Hartman reveals that he is also a match and has decided to donate one of his own kidneys : Brian 's life is spared . 
 Meanwhile , at the same time during the kidney crisis , United States President Barack Obama has decided to visit Quahog , and Chris ' entire English class is assigned to write an essay about hope . He consults his sister Meg for her opinion and she lists her personal opinion on the subject , which Chris plagiarizes . Meg is angered that he has decided to take her words and call them his own , but she is eventually given credit for co @-@ writing the speech , and she and Chris introduce Obama to the school . President Obama then enters the school 's auditorium , and begins singing and playing the guitar as students swoon over his performance . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 " New Kidney in Town " was co @-@ written by Williams Street writers Dave Willis and Matt Harrigan , in their first official episode for the series . The two have also worked for Aqua Teen Hunger Force , Space Ghost Coast to Coast , and Squidbillies , among others . The episode was directed by series regular Pete Michels , shortly after the conclusion of the eighth production season , in his first episode for the season . Series veterans Peter Shin and James Purdum , both of whom having previously served as animation directors , served as supervising directors for the episode , with Alex Carter , Andrew Goldberg , Elaine Ko , Spencer Porter and Aaron Blitzstein serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " New Kidney in Town " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actress Yvette Nicole Brown , actor , comedian and game show host Drew Carey , actor Gary Cole , actress Christine Lakin and voice actress Rachael MacFarlane , sister of series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors John G. Brennan , actor Ralph Garman , writer Danny Smith and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , after complaining of being exhausted , Peter is introduced to the energy drink Red Bull by his friends , Quagmire and Joe . He then suddenly becomes extremely hyperactive , and begins singing the 1998 single " Ray of Light " by singer @-@ songwriter Madonna in a parody of the high speed time @-@ lapse of its video . Peter also goes on to appear on the American game show The Price Is Right , with actor and comedian Drew Carey appearing as host . He then begins playing the Showcase Showdown game , until the wheel suddenly spins off its axis and into the audience , running over several rows of people . After suffering from Red Bull withdrawal , Peter decides to create his own concoction , including kerosene . After drinking it , he suffers from immediate kidney failure , requiring constant dialysis . Deciding to go to The Drunken Clam with Quagmire and Joe , he is reluctant to go to his scheduled dialysis appointment , in order to watch the 1984 CBS series Charles in Charge . 
 In preparation for a special appearance at their school , James Woods High School , Chris is assigned to write an essay about " hope " to welcome United States President Barack Obama . After reading his essay to the entire school , along with his sister , Meg , President Barack Obama , dressed similarly to Conrad Birdie as portrayed in the film version of the musical , begins singing and playing guitar in the school 's auditorium . Obama then performs the song " Honestly Sincere " from the stage musical and film Bye Bye Birdie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " New Kidney in Town " was broadcast on January 9 , 2011 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , and was preceded by The Simpsons and the series premiere of the animated series Bob 's Burgers , and followed by Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's spin @-@ off , The Cleveland Show . It was watched by 9 @.@ 29 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , Undercover Boss on CBS and The Cape on NBC . The episode also acquired a 4 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Bob 's Burgers and The Cleveland Show in addition to significantly edging out the latter in total viewership . The episode 's ratings increased significantly from the previous episode , largely due to the lead @-@ in provided by the NFL Wild Card game that preceded the " Animation Domination " line @-@ up . 
 Television critics reacted mostly positive toward the episode , calling the storyline " heartfelt . " In a simultaneous review of the episodes of The Simpsons and The Cleveland Show that preceded and followed the show , respectively , The A.V. Club 's Rowan Kaiser wrote , " I spent the entire time expecting the rug to be pulled out and the whole thing revealed to be Seth MacFarlane just trying to manipulate my emotions . " Kaiser went on to compliment series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , stating " some of the more recent formal experiments that the show has done , such as the hour @-@ long murder mystery in this season 's premiere , indicate that MacFarlane and company agree with the criticism . " He concluded his review by writing , " I have to give props to Family Guy for going outside their wheelhouse without winking excessively at their audience , but I think it may have been a little bit too far to be truly great . " Kaiser ultimately gave the episode a B rating , the best rating of the night , beating The Cleveland Show episode " Ain 't Nothin ' But Mutton Bustin ' " and The Simpsons episode " Moms I 'd Like to Forget " . In another positive review of the episode , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode 's " funniest moments , " which included the opening sequence involving Peter and the Red Bull , as well as the reference to The Price Is Right . Hughes went on to comment that the episode " taught us about the depths and bonds of love that make a family . Whether it 's acceptance , hope or sacrifice , there 's no limit to what we will do for family . " Kate Moon of TV Fanatic also commented positively on the episode , writing in her review of the storyline , " Overall , I found the installment to be refreshing with everyone taking a part in Peter ’ s dilemma . It was actually sweet and emotional for a change . " Moon also praised the scenes involving President Obama , and Stewie 's attempt at saving Brian . 
 The episode was among four other episodes submitted by the Family Guy production team for consideration of an Emmy Award nomination , in the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series category . " New Kidney in Town " was submitted , along with " Halloween on Spooner Street " , " Road to the North Pole " , " And I 'm Joyce Kinney " and " Trading Places " . The series was successfully nominated in 2009 , but failed to merit an award . Mark Hentemann , executive producer and showrunner of Family Guy said of the nominating process , " We had internal discussions in the writers ' room , and it seemed like we were much more akin to the other primetime comedies than we were to children 's shows in animation . We assumed we would not get anywhere , and so it was a great surprise when we got the nomination . " 
 = Japanese cruiser Tokiwa = 
 Tokiwa ( <unk> ) was the second and last Asama @-@ class armored cruiser built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships herself , the ship was built in Britain . She played minor roles in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 and World War I , but was very active during the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 where she participated in the Battle of Port Arthur , the Battle off Ulsan , and the Battle of Tsushima . After the war she was sometimes used as a training ship for naval cadets . 
 Tokiwa was converted into a minelayer in 1922 – 24 . She was placed in reserve in 1927 after she was damaged by an accidental explosion of several mines . The ship was deployed to Northern China in 1932 – 33 after the Japanese invasion of Manchuria . After her refit in 1937 , Tokiwa returned to active duty and was assigned to the 4th Fleet in 1939 . During the Pacific War , she participated in the occupation of the Gilbert Islands and Rabaul and Kavieng in New Guinea . Damaged by American aircraft shortly afterwards , the ship was forced to return to Japan for repairs . Tokiwa laid minefields during 1944 – 45 until she was twice damaged by American mines in 1945 . After repairs were completed , the ship was badly damaged by American aircraft and her crew was forced to beach her lest she sink shortly before the end of the war . Tokiwa was salvaged in 1947 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The 1896 Naval Expansion Plan was made after the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and included four armored cruisers in addition to four more battleships , all of which had to be ordered from British shipyards as Japan lacked the capability to build them itself . Further consideration of the Russian building program caused the IJN to believe that the battleships ordered under the original plan would not be sufficient to counter the Imperial Russian Navy . Budgetary limitations prevented ordering more battleships and the IJN decided to expand the number of more affordable armored cruisers to be ordered from four to six ships . The revised plan is commonly known as the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " . Unlike most of their contemporaries which were designed for commerce raiding or to defend colonies and trade routes , Tokiwa and her half @-@ sisters were intended as fleet scouts and to be employed in the battleline . 
 The ship was 134 @.@ 72 meters ( 442 ft 0 in ) long overall and 124 @.@ 36 meters ( 408 ft 0 in ) between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 20 @.@ 48 meters ( 67 ft 2 in ) and had an average draft of 7 @.@ 4 meters ( 24 ft 3 in ) . Tokiwa displaced 9 @,@ 667 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 514 long tons ) at normal load and 10 @,@ 476 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 311 long tons ) at deep load . The ship had a metacentric height of 0 @.@ 88 meters ( 2 ft 11 in ) . Her crew consisted of 676 officers and enlisted men . 
 Tokiwa had two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by a dozen cylindrical boilers and the engines were rated at a total of 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) . The ship had a designed speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) and reached 23 @.@ 1 knots ( 42 @.@ 8 km / h ; 26 @.@ 6 mph ) during her sea trials from 19 @,@ 040 ihp ( 14 @,@ 200 kW ) . She carried up to 1 @,@ 390 long tons ( 1 @,@ 410 t ) of coal and could steam for 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament for all of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers was four eight @-@ inch guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of 14 Elswick Ordnance Company " Pattern Z " quick @-@ firing ( QF ) , 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . Only four of these guns were not mounted in armored casemates on the main and upper decks and their mounts on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . Tokiwa was also equipped with a dozen QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and eight QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Yamauchi guns as close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . The ship was equipped with five 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , one above water in the bow and four submerged tubes , two on each broadside . 
 All of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers used the same armor scheme with some minor differences , of which the most important was that the two Asama @-@ class ships used less tough Harvey armor . The waterline belt ran the full length of the ship and its thickness varied from 178 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) amidships to 89 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) at the bow and stern . It had a height of 2 @.@ 13 meters ( 7 ft 0 in ) , of which 1 @.@ 52 meters ( 5 ft 0 in ) was normally underwater . The upper strake of belt armor was 127 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick and extended from the upper edge of the waterline belt to the main deck . It extended 65 @.@ 42 meters ( 214 ft 8 in ) from the forward to the rear barbette . The Asama class had oblique 127 mm armored bulkheads that closed off the ends of the central armored citadel . 
 The barbettes , gun turrets and the front of the casemates were all 152 millimeters thick while the sides and rear of the casemates were protected by 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . The deck was also 51 millimeters thick and the armor protecting the conning tower was 356 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The contract for Tokiwa was signed on 6 July 1897 with Armstrong Whitworth . The ship had already been laid down at their shipyard in Elswick on 6 January 1897 as a speculative venture . She was launched on 6 July 1898 and completed on 18 May 1899 . The ship departed for Japan the next day and arrived in Yokosuka on 16 July . Captain Dewa Shigetō had been appointed on 5 April to supervise her construction and bring her to Japan . He was relieved of command after his arrival by Captain Nakayama <unk> . The following year , Tokiwa supported Japanese forces during the Boxer Rebellion in China . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 <unk> Kichisaburō Nomura , later Foreign Minister , was appointed to the ship in July 1903 until the ship 's return after the Battle off Ulsan in August 1904 . Captain <unk> Motaro assumed command of Tokiwa on 18 January 1904 . At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War a few weeks later , the ship was assigned to the 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 , when Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the Combined Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected the surprise night attack by his destroyers to be much more successful than it was , anticipating that the Russians would be badly disorganized and weakened , but they had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the protected cruiser Boyarin , which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russians . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defenses with his main armament and engage the ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as the Japanese eight- and six @-@ inch guns inflicted little damage on the Russian ships , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although many ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered some 150 , while the Japanese suffered roughly 90 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . 
 In early March , Tokiwa was detached from the 2nd Division and reassigned to Rear Admiral Dewa 's 3rd Division . On 10 March , Tokiwa and the protected cruiser Chitose attempted to capture the disabled destroyer Steregushchiy , but were driven off by heavy fire from the shore defenses , although they managed to rescue the wounded crewmen . Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Russian Pacific Squadron on 13 April , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . During this action , Tokiwa engaged the Russian cruisers that preceded the battleships before falling back on Tōgō 's battleships . When Makarov spotted the five Japanese battleships , he turned back for Port Arthur and his flagship ran into the minefield just laid by the Japanese . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , and Makarov was one of the 677 killed . In addition to this loss , the battleship Pobeda was damaged by a mine . 
 Tokiwa rejoined the 2nd Division a few days later and Kamimura was ordered north in mid @-@ April to cover the Sea of Japan and defend the Korea Strait against any attempt by the Vladivostok Independent Cruiser Squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral Karl Jessen , to break through and unite with the Pacific Squadron . The two units narrowly missed each other on the 24th in heavy fog and the Japanese proceeded to Vladivostok where they laid several minefields before arriving back at Wonsan on the 30th . 
 The division failed to intercept the Russian squadron as it attacked several transports south of Okinoshima Island on 15 June due to heavy rain and fog . The Russians sortied again on 30 June and Kamimura finally was able to intercept them the next day near Okinoshima . The light was failing when they were spotted and the Russians were able to disengage in the darkness . Jessen 's ships sortied again on 17 July headed for the eastern coast of Japan to act as a diversion and pull Japanese forces out of the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea . The Russian ships passed through Tsugaru Strait two days later and began capturing ships bound for Japan . The arrival of the Russians off Tokyo Bay on the 24th caused the Naval General Staff to order Kamimura to sail for Cape Toi Misaki , Kyūshū , fearing that Jessen would circumnavigate Japan to reach Port Arthur . Two days later he was ordered north to the Kii Channel and then to Tokyo Bay on the 28th . The General Staff finally ordered him back to Tsushima Island on the 30th ; later that day he received word that Jessen 's ships had passed through the Tsugaru Strait early that morning and reached Vladivostok on 1 August . 
 = = = = Battle off Ulsan = = = = 
 On 10 August , the ships at Port Arthur attempted a breakout to Vladivostok , but were turned back in the Battle of the Yellow Sea . Jessen was ordered to rendezvous with them , but the order was delayed . His three armored cruisers , Rossia , Gromoboi , and Rurik , had to raise steam , so he did not sortie until the evening of 13 August . By dawn he had reached Tsushima , but turned back when he failed to see any ships from the Port Arthur squadron . 36 miles ( 58 km ) north of the island he encountered Kamimura 's squadron , which consisted of four modern armored cruisers , Iwate , Izumo , Azuma , and Tokiwa . The two squadrons had passed during the night without spotting one another and each had reversed course around first light . This put the Japanese ships astride the Russian route to Vladivostok . 
 Jessen ordered his ships to turn to the northeast when he spotted the Japanese at 05 : 00 and they followed suit , albeit on a slightly converging course . Both sides opened fire around 05 : 23 at a range of 8 @,@ 500 meters ( 9 @,@ 300 yd ) . The Japanese ships concentrated their fire on Rurik , the rear ship of the Russian formation . She was hit fairly quickly and began to fall astern of the other two ships . Jessen turned southeast in an attempt to open the range , but this blinded the Russian gunners with the rising sun and prevented any of their broadside guns from bearing on the Japanese . About 06 : 00 , Jessen turned 180 ° to starboard in an attempt to reach the Korean coast and to allow Rurik to rejoin the squadron . Kamimura followed suit around 06 : 10 , but turned to port , which opened the range between the squadrons . Azuma then developed engine problems and the Japanese squadron slowed to conform with her best speed . Firing recommenced at 06 : 24 and Rurik was hit three times in the stern , flooding her steering compartment ; she had to be steered with her engines . Her speed continued to decrease , further exposing her to Japanese fire , and her steering jammed to port around 06 : 40 . 
 Jessen made another 180 ° turn in an attempt to interpose his two ships between the Japanese and Rurik , but the latter ship suddenly turn to starboard and increased speed and passed between Jessen 's ships and the Japanese . Kamimura turned 180 ° as well so that both squadrons were heading southeast on parallel courses , but Jessen quickly made another 180 ° turn so that they headed on opposing courses . The Russians reversed course for the third time around 07 : 45 in another attempt to support Rurik although Rossia was on fire herself ; her fires were extinguished about twenty minutes later . Kamimura circled Rurik to the south at 08 : 00 and allowed the other two Russian ships to get to his north and gave them an uncontested route to Vladivostok . Despite this , Jessen turned back once more at 08 : 15 and ordered Rurik to make her own way back to Vladivostok before turning north at his maximum speed , about 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 About this time Kamimura 's two elderly protected cruisers , Naniwa and Takachiho , were approaching from the south . Their arrival allowed Kamimura to pursue Jessen with all of his armored cruisers while the two new arrivals dealt with Rurik . They fought a running battle with the Russians for the next hour and a half ; scoring enough hits on them to force their speed down to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Azuma 's engines again broke down during this chase and Tokiwa assumed her place in the line . The Japanese closed to a minimum of about 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 5 @,@ 500 yd ) , but Kamimura then opened the range up to 6 @,@ 500 meters ( 7 @,@ 100 yd ) . 
 About 10 : 00 , Kamimura 's gunnery officer erroneously informed him that Izumo had expended three @-@ quarters of her ammunition and he turned back after a five @-@ minute rapid @-@ fire barrage . He did not wish to leave the Tsushima Strait unguarded and thought that he could use his remaining ammunition on Rurik . By this time she had been sunk by Naniwa and Takachiho . They had radioed Kamimura that she was sunk , but he did not receive the message . Shortly after the Japanese turned back , Gromoboi and Rossia were forced to heave @-@ to to make repairs . None of the Japanese ships were seriously damaged and Tokiwa only suffered three men wounded during the battle . After the battle the cruiser was transferred to Rear Admiral Uryū Sotokichi 's command who began a blockade of Shanghai on 20 August where the Russian cruiser Askold and a destroyer had taken refuge after the Battle of the Yellow Sea . He returned home on 8 September after the Chinese government formally interned the Russian ships . 
 In mid @-@ September , Tokiwa and Iwate were transferred to the 1st Division . In November the cruiser was sent to the Kure Naval Arsenal to refit . The ship was reassigned to the 2nd Division after the refit , which was ordered north to Wonsan on 2 February to escort the occupation force there . Tokiwa was ordered home on 12 February for another refit . On 13 April , the 2nd Division , including the armored cruisers Izumo and Kasuga , sailed to escort minelayers as they laid 715 mines off Vladivostok . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 As the Russian 2nd and 3rd Pacific Squadrons approached Japan on 27 May , having sailed from the Baltic Sea , they were spotted by patrolling Japanese ships early that morning , but visibility was limited and radio reception poor . The preliminary reports were enough to cause Tōgō to order his ships to put to sea and the 2nd Division spotted the Russian ships under the command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky at around 11 : 30 . Kamimura closed to about a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) before sheering off under fire to join Tōgō 's battleships . Tokiwa was third in line of six when Tōgō opened fire on the 2nd Pacific Squadron at 14 : 10 and , like most of the ships in the division , engaged the battleship Oslyabya which was forced to fall out of formation at 14 : 50 and sank 20 minutes later . By this time the Russian formation was in disorder and Knyaz Suvorov suddenly appeared out of the mist at 15 : 35 at a range of about 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . All of Kamimura 's ships engaged her for five minutes or so with Azuma and the armored cruiser Yakumo also firing torpedoes at the Russian ship without effect . 
 After 17 : 30 Kamimura led his division in a fruitless pursuit of some of the Russian cruisers , leaving Tōgō 's battleships to their own devices . He abandoned his chase around 18 : 03 and turned northwards to rejoin Tōgō . His ships spotted the rear of the Russian battleline around 18 : 30 and opened fire when the range closed to 8 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 – 9 @,@ 800 yd ) . Nothing is known of any effect on the Russians and they ceased fire by 19 : 30 and rejoined Tōgō at 20 : 08 as night was falling . The surviving Russian ships were spotted the next morning and the Japanese ships opened fire around 10 : 30 , staying beyond the range at which the Russian ships could effectively reply . Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov therefore decided to surrender his ships as he could neither return fire nor close the range . Over the course of the battle , Tokiwa was struck by one large and seven small shells , mostly 75 @-@ millimeter . They caused only minor damage , but killed one crewman and wounded fourteen . 
 Captain Imai <unk> assumed command of the ship on 14 June , as Tōgō was reorganizing the fleet for future operations . As the IJN was preparing to invade Sakhalin Island in early July , Kamimura 's 2nd Division , now reduced to Iwate , Izumo , and Tokiwa , was tasked to defend the Korea Strait before it escorted troops that made an amphibious landing in northeastern Korea . In mid @-@ August , the division covered the landing at Chongjin , closer to the Russian border . In 1910 , Tokiwa 's boilers were replaced by Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers and her six @-@ inch guns were replaced by Japanese @-@ built models . In December 1911 , Iwate and Tokiwa were deployed to Port Arthur to keep order there during the Chinese Revolution . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The ship participated in the early stages of the Battle of Tsingtao before returning to Sasebo on 2 October 1914 . The following month , Tokiwa was deployed to Singapore preparatory to searching for the German commerce raider Emden , but the ship was sunk before the mission began . The cruiser was assigned to the Training Squadron on 1 September 1916 preparatory to her departure on 5 April 1917 with Yakumo on a training cruise to ports in California , Hawaii and the South Sea Islands with cadets from the 44th class of the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy . After her return on 17 August , the ship was relieved of her assignment to the Training Squadron on 25 August and sent to Honolulu , Hawaii in October to protect shipping from any German commerce raiders and to allow the US Navy to redeploy its forces to the Atlantic . 
 Tokiwa was reassigned to the Training Squadron on 10 August 1918 and returned home to prepare for her next training cruise , together with Azuma , that began on 1 March 1919 for South Asia and Australia and again on 24 November 1919 , also with Azuma , for Singapore , Southeast Asia , Suez Canal and the Mediterranean Sea . After her return on 20 May 1920 , the ship was relieved of her assignment to the Training Squadron on 4 June . Tokiwa was reclassified as a 1st class coast @-@ defense ship on 30 September 1921 . 
 = = = Converted into a minelayer = = = 
 On 30 September 1922 , Tokiwa began her conversion into a minelayer at the Sasebo Naval Arsenal . To accommodate her 200 – 300 mines , her rear 8 @-@ inch gun turret removed , as were the six 6 @-@ inch guns on the main deck . In addition , the number of light guns was reduced to two 12 @-@ pounders , although two 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were added . These modifications were completed in March 1924 . The ship 's stern suffered substantial damage in an accidental explosion in Saiki Bay on 1 August 1927 when fuzed mines were being disarmed . One mine detonated and then several others followed , killing 35 crewmen and wounding 65 . Tokiwa was assigned to the reserve fleet after repairs . 
 Tokiwa was assigned to the 1st Fleet from January 1932 to May 1933 after the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 and patrolled northern China . From November 1937 to 1938 , the ship was retrofitted with eight Kampon boilers that reduced her maximum speed to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) and her remaining torpedo tubes were removed . The space made available by these changes increased her capacity to 500 mines . With the establishment of the 4th Fleet on 15 November 1939 , Tokiwa was assigned to the 18th Division , and a year later to the 19th Division under the command of Rear Admiral Kiyohide Shima together with the minelayer Okinoshima . In 1940 , the ship was refitted as a training minelayer which reduced her capacity to 200 @-@ 300 mines . As part of the refit , her forward 8 @-@ inch gun turret and the four amidships 6 @-@ inch guns were removed , as was one of the 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type AA guns . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament was heavily reinforced with the addition of two single 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns and twenty license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 @-@ millimeter Type 96 light AA guns in twin @-@ gun mounts . 
 = = = Pacific War = = = 
 On 9 and 10 December 1941 , Tokiwa and the other minelayers of the 19th Division escorted two troop transports that carried the occupation forces for Makin and Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands . In January 1942 , the ship participated in Operation R ( the invasion of Rabaul and Kavieng ) and returned to Kwajalein Atoll afterwards . She was damaged in an air raid by American aircraft from the carrier USS Enterprise on 1 February 1942 and forced to return to Sasebo for repairs . Tokiwa returned to Truk on 14 July , and , on 19 August , was assigned to the Japanese task force sent to reoccupy Makin Atoll after the Makin Raid . 
 On 1 May 1943 , the ship was reassigned to the <unk> Guard District and departed Truk on 26 May in a convoy to Yokosuka that was unsuccessfully attacked by USS Salmon ( SS @-@ 182 ) on 3 June . Tokiwa was reassigned to the 18th Escort Squadron of the 7th Fleet on 20 January 1944 . Tokiwa laid thousands of mines in the waters off Okinawa in June 1944 and Yakushima in February 1945 . Ironically , Tokiwa was herself mined on 14 April 1945 , approximately 78 miles ( 126 km ) off <unk> , Kyūshū suffering moderate damage . She was later damaged again by mines laid by USAAF B @-@ 29 Superfortress bombers on 3 June 1945 . At some point during the war , her armament was augmented with approximately ten 25 mm Type 96 AA guns in single mounts and 80 depth charges . In addition she was fitted with Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 and Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radars . 
 While at <unk> in Mutsu Bay in northern Japan at 41 @.@ 20 ° N 141 @.@ 60 ° E ﻿ / 41 @.@ 20 ; 141 @.@ 60 , Tokiwa was severely damaged by a direct bomb hit and four near misses in an air attack on 9 August 1945 by United States Navy aircraft from Task Force 38 , and was beached by her crew . On 30 November 1945 Tokiwa was removed from the navy list . After the end of World War II , the wreck was refloated on 5 April 1947 , towed to Hakodate , Hokkaidō , and scrapped from August – October 1947 . 
 = Russian battleship Imperatritsa Mariya = 
 Imperatritsa Mariya ( Russian : Императрица Мария : Empress Maria ) was one of three Imperatritsa Mariya @-@ class dreadnoughts built for the Imperial Russian Navy , lead ship of her class . Construction began before World War I and she served with the Black Sea Fleet during the war . She covered older pre @-@ dreadnought battleships as they bombarded Ottoman facilities in 1915 and engaged the Ottoman light cruiser Midilli , ( formerly the German SMS Breslau ) several times without inflicting anything more serious than splinter damage . Imperatritsa Mariya was sunk at anchor in Sevastopol by a magazine explosion in late 1916 , killing 228 crewmen . She was subsequently raised , but her condition was very poor . She was finally scrapped in 1926 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Imperatritsa Mariya was 168 meters ( 551 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline . She had a beam of 27 @.@ 43 meters ( 90 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 36 meters ( 27 ft 5 in ) . Her displacement was 23 @,@ 600 long tons ( 23 @,@ 979 t ) at load , 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) more than her designed displacement of 22 @,@ 600 long tons ( 22 @,@ 963 t ) . She proved to be very bow @-@ heavy in service and tended to ship large amounts of water through her forward casemates . The ammunition for the forward 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns was reduced from 100 to 70 rounds each , while the 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) ammunition was reduced from 245 to 100 rounds per gun , in an attempt to compensate for her trim . This did not fully cure the problem , but Imperatritsa Mariya was lost before any other changes could be implemented . 
 The ship was fitted with four Parsons @-@ type steam turbines imported from John Brown & Company of the United Kingdom . They were designed for a total of 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) , but produced 33 @,@ 200 shp ( 24 @,@ 757 kW ) on her sea trials using steam produced by 20 mixed @-@ firing triangular Yarrow boilers with a working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 atm ( 1 @,@ 773 kPa ; 257 psi ) . Designed speed was 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Her maximum coal capacity was 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 727 t ) plus 500 long tons ( 510 t ) of fuel oil , which gave her a range of 1 @,@ 640 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 040 km ; 1 @,@ 890 mi ) at maximum speed . All of her electrical power was generated by three Curtis 360 @-@ kilowatt ( 480 hp ) main turbo generators and two 200 @-@ kilowatt ( 270 hp ) auxiliary units . 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen 12 @-@ inch Obukhovskii Pattern 1907 guns mounted in four triple gun turrets distributed the length of the ship . Her secondary armament consisted of twenty 130 mm B7 Pattern 1913 guns mounted in casemates . They were arranged in two groups , six guns per side from the forward turret to the rear funnel and the remaining four were clustered around the rear turret . She was fitted with four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , one mounted on the roof of each turret . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were carried , two tubes on each broadside abaft the forward magazine . 
 = = Service = = 
 Imperatritsa Mariya , named after Tsarina Maria Feodorovna , mother of Tsar Nicholas II , was built by the Russud Shipyard at Nikolayev , Russian Empire . She was laid down on 30 October 1911 along with her sister ships Imperator Aleksander III and Imperatritsa Ekaterina Velikaya , but this was merely a ceremonial event as the design had not yet been finalized nor the contract signed . She was launched on 19 October 1913 and arrived in Sevastopol on 13 July 1915 , where she completed her fitting out during the next few months and conducted sea trials . On 1 October she provided cover for the Black Sea Fleet 's pre @-@ dreadnoughts as they bombarded targets in Kozlu , Zonguldak and <unk> <unk> . She did much the same when older battleships bombarded targets in Bulgaria on 20 – 22 October and then Varna itself on 27 October . The light cruiser Midilli narrowly escaped a running engagement with the Imperatritsa Mariya on 4 April 1916 as the battleship narrowly missed her several times before she could disengage . Three months later both Imperatritsa Mariya and Imperatritsa Ekaterina Velikaya , alerted by intercepted radio transmissions , sortied from Sevastopol in an attempt to intercept the ex @-@ German battlecruiser Yavuz as she returned from a bombardment of the Russian port of Tuapse on 4 July . The Yavuz dodged north and avoided the Russians by paralleling the Bulgarian coastline back to the Bosphorus . The Midilli mined the harbor of Novorossiysk on 21 July , but the Russians , again alerted by radio intercepts , attempted to catch her on her return journey . Midilli was lured into range of Imperatritsa Mariya 's guns the next day when the cruiser pursued the Russian destroyer <unk> , but she managed to escape with only splinter damage . 
 On the morning of 20 October 1916 , a fire was discovered in the Imperatritsa Mariya 's forward powder magazine while at anchor in Sevastopol , but it exploded before any efforts could be made to fight the fire . Sailors led by Engineer @-@ Mechanic Midshipman <unk> , however , managed to flood the forward shell magazine before the explosion at the cost of their own lives . Their action probably prevented a catastrophic detonation and all of the other magazines were flooded as a precaution . About forty minutes after the first explosion , a second occurred in the vicinity of the torpedo compartment that destroyed the watertight integrity of the rest of the forward bulkheads . Imperatritsa Mariya began to sink by the bow and listed to starboard . She capsized a few minutes later , taking 228 sailors with her . The subsequent investigation determined that the explosion was probably the result of spontaneous combustion of the nitrocellulose @-@ based propellant as it decomposed . 
 Following a complex salvage operation , the ship was eventually refloated on 18 May 1918 and moved into Sevastopol 's Northern Dry Dock on 31 May , still upside down . The chaos of the Russian Revolution and Civil War , prevented further repair work , although her 130 mm guns were removed . By 1923 , the wooden blocks supporting her in place were rotting . She was floated out and grounded in shallow water in 1923 . She was approved for scrapping in June 1925 and officially stricken on 21 November 1925 , although the work did not begin until 1926 when she was refloated and moved back into the dry dock . Her gun turrets , which had fallen out of the ship when she capsized , were later salvaged . Two of them were used as the 30th Coast Defense Battery defending the city during the Siege of Sevastopol in World War II . 
 = Douglas XCG @-@ 17 = 
 The Douglas XCG @-@ 17 was an American assault glider , developed by the conversion of a C @-@ 47 Skytrain twin @-@ engine transport during World War II . Although the XCG @-@ 17 was successful in testing , the requirement for such a large glider had passed , and no further examples of the type were built ; one additional C @-@ 47 , however , was converted in the field to glider configuration briefly during 1946 for evaluation , but was quickly reconverted to powered configuration . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 With the introduction of the Douglas C @-@ 54 Skymaster four @-@ engined transport aircraft , the United States Army Air Forces , observing that conventional gliders then in service would be an inefficient use of the C @-@ 54 's power and capacity , determined that a requirement existed for a new , much larger assault glider . It was determined that the best solution to the requirement was the conversion of the Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrain , already in large @-@ scale production , to meet the requirement . The C @-@ 47 could be converted to a glider configuration with minimal alteration to the airframe , and would provide the required capacity . 
 Trials conducted using a conventional , powered C @-@ 47 , first conducting ordinary deadstick landings , then being towed by another C @-@ 47 , indicated that the scheme was feasible . Therefore , a C @-@ 47 @-@ DL was taken in hand for conversion into a glider , which was given the designation XCG @-@ 17 . The aircraft , formerly a Northwest Airlines DC @-@ 3 that had been impressed into military service at the start of World War II , was modified by the removal of the aircraft 's engines ; the nacelles , containing the landing gear , remained in place , covered with aerodynamically profiled hemispherical domes for streamlining , containing fixed weight to compensate for the removal of the engines . Other equipment , no longer necessary with the conversion to an unpowered configuration , was also removed to save weight ; items removed included the aircraft 's wiring and bulkheads , along with the navigator 's and radio operator 's positions . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The conversion , carried out at Clinton County Army Air Field , was completed on June 12 , 1944 , with the aircraft undergoing its initial flight test shortly thereafter . The flight testing of the XCG @-@ 17 proved that the aircraft was satisfactory ; compared with conventional gliders in service , the aircraft possessed lower stalling and higher towing speeds than conventional gliders , as well as gliding at a significantly shallower angle . Tow tests were conducted using a variety of aircraft ; the most commonly used configuration was a tandem tow by two C @-@ 47s , with the towing aircraft coupled in tandem and the leading aircraft detaching following takeoff . This configuration was dangerous for the " middle " C @-@ 47 , however , and it was determined that a single C @-@ 54 was the optimal tug aircraft . 
 The XCG @-@ 17 's cargo hold had a capacity of 15 @,@ 000 pounds ( 6 @,@ 800 kg ) ; alternatively , up to 40 fully equipped troops could be transported , these figures being significantly larger than conventional gliders ' capacity . The XCG @-@ 17 was also capable of carrying three jeeps in a single load , or alternatively two 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) howitzers . Regardless of the aircraft 's load , no ballast was required to maintain the aircraft 's center of gravity , a trait unique among American assault gliders . 
 Despite the satisfactory results in testing , however , the aircraft failed the Army 's requirement that it be capable of landing on unimproved fields ; in addition , by the time the evaluation of the XCG @-@ 17 was completed the need for such a large assault glider had passed . The primary role for the glider had been intended to increase the amount of supplies that could be carried to China over " The Hump " ; the war situation had , however , become more favorable and the added capacity an oversized glider would provide was no longer required . No further examples of the type were produced ; the prototype , its trials complete , was placed in storage , being ferried to Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base for disposal in August 1946 . 
 In August 1949 , the aircraft was sold to Advance Industries , its engines being reinstalled to return the aircraft to powered status in DC @-@ 3C configuration . Some sources , however , indicate that the XCG @-@ 17 was reconverted to C @-@ 47 configuration in 1946 . Following its restoration to powered status , the aircraft was transferred to Mexico , where it remained in civilian service until 1980 . 
 = = Field conversion = = 
 Although the XCG @-@ 17 failed to lead to any production of a C @-@ 47 derived glider type , a single C @-@ 47 was converted in the field to glider configuration by the Fifth Air Service Area Command , located at Nichols Field on Luzon in the Philippines , during January 1946 . Carried out in much the same manner as the XCG @-@ 17 , the conversion included octagonally shaped fairings over the engine mountings , with an auxiliary power unit from a B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber being installed . 
 Referred to as " XCG @-@ 47 " as well as " XCG @-@ 17 " , and named " Nez Perce " , the aircraft undertook its initial flight following conversion on June 17 , 1946 , towed by a C @-@ 54 . The flight tests of the field @-@ converted aircraft proved favorable , and an ambitious flight , towing the aircraft from Luzon to Tokyo in Japan , was planned . This flight was intended to prove the suitability of large gliders to act as an " aerial freight train " for regular transport . 
 The flight , conducted in late June 1946 , took 11 hours of flight time and included an overnight stay on Okinawa ; covering 1 @,@ 800 miles ( 2 @,@ 900 km ) , it concluded at Tachikawa Airfield near Tokyo . Despite the success of the flight , the " aerial freight train " concept did not catch on ; the aircraft had its engines re @-@ fitted in August 1946 and was returned to service as a normal C @-@ 47 . 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Military ( as C @-@ 47 , then XCG @-@ 17 ) = = = 
 United States 
 United States Army Air Forces 
 = = = Civilian ( as DC @-@ 3C ) = = = 
 Mexico 
 <unk> Mexicanos 
 = = Specifications ( 41 @-@ <unk> ) = = 
 Data from 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Two ( Pilot and copilot ) 
 Capacity : 15 @,@ 000 pounds ( 6 @,@ 800 kg ) cargo or 40 troops 
 Length : 63 ft 9 in ( 19 @.@ 43 m ) 
 Wingspan : 95 ft 6 in ( 29 @.@ 11 m ) 
 Height : 17 ft ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) 
 Wing area : 987 sq ft ( 91 @.@ 7 m2 ) 
 Empty weight : 11 @,@ 001 lb ( 4 @,@ 990 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 26 @,@ 000 lb ( 11 @,@ 793 kg ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 290 mph ( 467 km / h ; 252 kn ) max towing speed 
 Cruising speed : 190 mph ; 165 kn ( 305 km / h ) gliding speed 
 Stall speed : 35 mph ( 30 kn ; 56 km / h ) 
 Maximum glide ratio : 14 : 1 
 Wing loading : 26 @.@ 3 lb / sq ft ( 128 kg / m2 ) 
 = Don Marostica = 
 Don Marostica ( born March 7 , 1948 ) is a real estate developer and former legislator in the U.S. state of Colorado , currently serving as director of the state 's Office of Economic Development and International Trade . 
 Raised in Colorado , Marostica is an Army veteran , former high school teacher , and most recently a prominent real estate developer in northern Colorado . After several years serving on the Loveland , Colorado city council , Marostica was elected to the Colorado House of Representatives in 2006 , represented House District 51 , which encompasses the city of Loveland . 
 Marostica , regarded as a moderate Republican , focused heavily on fiscal issues as a legislator , including transparency and loosening budgetary restrictions , and sat on the legislature 's Joint Budget Committee during the 2009 session . In July 2009 , Marostica resigned from the legislature to accept the post of economic development director in the cabinet of Democratic Gov. Bill Ritter , where he has focused on attracting and growing business in the state of Colorado during the ongoing recession . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Marostica was born in Sterling , Colorado and graduated from Roosevelt High School in Johnstown . He attended Colorado State University on football and wrestling scholarships , graduating in 1970 with a degree in physical science and geology . In 1975 , he earned a master 's degree in secondary school administration from the University of Northern Colorado 
 Have been commissioned through the ROTC program at Colorado State , Marostica served in the United States Army and the Colorado Army National Guard , leaving the service at the rank of captain in 1979 . After leaving the Army , Marostica taught and coached wrestling at Rocky Mountain High School in Fort Collins . Marostica currently resides in Loveland , Colorado with his wife , Carol . 
 Marostica entered the real estate industry in 1977 and is currently a partner in Loveland Commercial , LLC . In 1982 , during a downturn in the real estate market , Marostica declared bankruptcy and had judgements from creditors filed against him . He also had tax <unk> filed against him both in the early 1980s and in the mid @-@ 1990s , and has since paid all back taxes . Marostica became financially successful in real estate , and , together with other partners in Loveland Commercial , has donated extensively to local causes , including endowing a chair in the business department of Colorado State University . As a developer , Marostica specialized in commercial real estate , spearheading five Planned Unit Developments in Loveland and Milliken , Colorado . 
 Marostica was elected to the Loveland City Council in 2001 , serving for three years , including a span as mayor pro tem , before resigning in 2004 because of professional conflicts of interest . During his 2006 legislative campaign , he was criticized for , as a city council member , voting to award city money to his company for a development contract ; the city council had to authorize a special exception to its conflict of interest rules to approve the contract . 
 Marostica has served on over 60 boards and commissions in the Loveland area , with an emphasis on transportation @-@ related issues ( Loveland Transportation Finance Committee , Loveland East @-@ West Mobility Study Committee , Loveland Eisenhower Boulevard Alignment Analysis Committee , Fort Collins @-@ Loveland Airport Master Plan Update Committee ) . He has also served as the chair of the Board of Directors of the Poudre Valley Health System Foundation and the Medical Center of the Rockies Foundation , and on the bond oversight committee for the Thompson School District . He is also an avid motorcyclist and regularly participates in the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally and Ride to the Wall , a cross @-@ county ride ending at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . 
 = = Legislative career = = 
 = = = 2006 election = = = 
 In seeking the 51st House district state house seat , representing Loveland , Marostica first faced a challenge from Kevan McNaught in the Republican primary . McNaught was endorsed by the Colorado Club for Growth , who criticized Marostica for his support of higher taxes and his use of eminent domain when he was a member the Loveland city council . Marostica edged out McNaught in the Republican primary by about 250 votes , or 5 % of voters . In contrast with McNaught 's conservative credentials , Marostica was considered by observers on both the left and the right to be a moderate Republican ; he supported Colorado 's 2005 Referendum C , a loosening of state spending restrictions under the state 's Taxpayer Bill of Rights . 
 In the general election , Marostica defeated Democrat Jodi Radke in the general election with 56 % of the vote . Marostica raised and spent roughly $ 350 @,@ 000 , of which $ 220 @,@ 000 — almost least two @-@ thirds of the money his campaign spent — was donated by Marostica himself , to win the contested primary and general elections . 
 = = = 2007 legislative session = = = 
 For the 2007 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Marostica was assigned to seats on the House Finance Committee and the House Transportation and Energy Committee , while expressing an interest in eventually serving on the powerful Joint Budget Committee . Following the legislative session , Marostica sat on the interim Transportation Legislation Review Committee . 
 Although a Republican serving in a legislature controlled by Democrats , Marostica was relatively successful at passing legislation . During his first session , Marostica sponsored bills to streamline the issuance of search warrants , to give volunteer reserve peace officers the same status as regular peace officers , and to require that <unk> vehicles be sold only by licensed motor vehicle dealers . Marostica , an avid motorcyclist , was among the prominent opponents of a bill that would have required minors to wear motorcycle helmets while riding , even wearing his own motorcycle helmet to a committee hearing at which the bill was debated . 
 Marostica failed to win legislative approval what he described as his " most important " proposal — the " Taxpayer Transparency Act , " which would have required that government expenditures larger than $ 300 be reported on a searchable government website . Although supported by Republican House leadership , the bill died in committee ; however , Marostica saw his transparency proposal implemented in 2009 by an executive order of Gov. Bill Ritter . 
 = = = 2008 legislative session = = = 
 In the 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Marostica sat on the House Health and Human Services Committee , the House Transportation and Energy Committee , and the Joint Capital Development Committee . 
 Marostica declared his " favorite bill " among those he sponsored during the session to be a measure to exempt owners from property tax on buildings leased to public universities , an idea Marostica attributed to a local developer . Marostica also sponsored legislation signed into law to allow statutory counties , cities , and towns to spend money on marketing in addition to advertising , in response to a lawsuit challenging the town of Estes Park 's ability to engage in marketing . 
 = = = 2008 election = = = 
 Marostica announced his bid for re @-@ election to the legislature in January 2008 ; Marostica 's campaign raised about five times as much money as that of Democratic opponent Kenneth Bennett , bringing in over $ 80 @,@ 000 by mid @-@ October , of which $ 10 @,@ 000 was contributed by Marostica personally ; His re @-@ election bid was endorsed by the Denver Post , Marostica ultimately won with 58 percent of the vote . 
 In the contested 2008 Republican presidential primaries , Marostica supported former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani , helping to organize a November 2007 fundraiser for Giuliani 's campaign that was reported to net over $ 60 @,@ 000 . After John McCain secured the Republican nomination , Marostica supported the McCain @-@ Palin ticket , including kicking off a Sarah Palin rally in Loveland in October . 
 = = = 2009 legislative session = = = 
 For the 2009 legislative session , Marostica was named to a seat on the legislature 's Joint Budget Committee , and a seat on the House Appropriations Committee as the ranking Republican member . During hearings before the beginning of the legislative session , Marostica supported withdrawing all state funding from public research universities , a move opposed by university leaders , but which was discussed more seriously after poor economic forecasts . Marostica also helped to lead an effort to allow the state to tap the financial reserves of <unk> Assurance , a quasi @-@ governmental worker 's compensation insurer , in order to balance the state budget . Following the legislative session , Marostica served on Colorado 's Long @-@ Term Fiscal Stability Commission , a panel created by legislation during the 2009 General Assembly to consider changes to constitutional constraints on the state budget . 
 In February , Marostica was the only Republican who announced plans to support legislation to repeal Colorado 's <unk> @-@ Bird limit , which capped the growth of general fund expenditures at 6 percent per year . Marostica faced pressure from prominent Republicans , including Independence Institute President Jon <unk> and former state treasurer Mark Hillman , to drop his support ; in response , he referred to Hillman and Caldera as " has @-@ beens " and " losers , " earning him additional criticism from House Republicans ; Marostica later promised to apologize to Hillman and Caldera . Marostica was the prime sponsor of the bill in the House , where , after surviving an attempted Republican filibuster in the Senate , it was ratified , and later signed into law . Marostica also broke with other Republicans as the only member of his party to vote in support of a failed effort to repeal Colorado 's death penalty ; the proposal passed the Colorado House by one vote , but was defeated in the Senate . 
 Marostica also sponsored bills to allow golf carts , scooters , and small electric vehicles to travel on some public roads , to allow state veterans organizations to provide burial for unclaimed remains of Colorado military personnel , and to allow building inspectors from other municipalities to assess structural damage to properties , a proposal stemming from a May 2008 tornado in Windsor , <unk> to enable increased state funding for online education , and to keep Colorado 's tobacco litigation settlement cash fund open for one additional year . Marostica announced plans to introduce legislation to expand the definition of cigar bars to increase the number of establishments exempt from Colorado 's indoor smoking ban , but withdrew the legislation after facing opposition from Democrats ; that same week , he denounced as " inappropriate and offensive " a British National Health Service flyer distributed by a lobbyist linking smoking to erectile dysfunction , calling for an ethics investigation into the flyer . 
 = = Director of Economic Development = = 
 In July 2009 , Democratic governor Bill Ritter named Marostica , a Republican , to the post of executive director of the Colorado Office of Economic Development and International Trade , replacing Don Elliman , who Ritter had tapped as Colorado 's chief operating officer . Marostica resigned his House seat to take the position , and handed control of his development company to his partner and son in order to avoid conflicts of interest , Marostica named opening Asian markets to Colorado exports as a priority for his time in the new position , in addition to encouraging new venture capital investment and retaining existing major employers despite the late @-@ 2000s recession . Marostica was replaced in the House by small business owner Brian <unk> , and on the legislature 's Joint Budget Committee by the more conservative Rep. Kent Lambert . 
 During Marostica 's first months in the position , he helped lead Colorado 's effort to keep Frontier Airlines jobs in Denver following its merger with Republic Airways ; ultimately , Frontier moved several hundred jobs , and Frontier 's headquarters , to Wisconsin and Indiana , which offered greater tax and <unk> incentives . When legislators proposed eliminating business tax credits in late 2009 to help balance the states budget , Marostica publicly defended many of those credits , but he did support limited cuts to tax credits in Governor Ritter 's proposed 2010 – 2011 budget . 
 In late 2009 , Marostica was also involved in attracting a wind turbine parts supplier to Colorado , announcing a renewed emphasis on natural gas development on Colorado 's Western Slope , and pushing to speed the permitting process for oil and gas operations . In 2010 , Marostica pushed for additional incentives for the " creative industry , " including arts , media , and film , in Colorado . 
 = Boletus edulis = 
 Boletus edulis ( English : cep , porcino or porcini ) is a basidiomycete fungus , and the type species of the genus Boletus . Widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere across Europe , Asia , and North America , it does not occur naturally in the Southern Hemisphere , although it has been introduced to southern Africa , Australia , and New Zealand . Several closely related European mushrooms formerly thought to be varieties or forms of B. edulis have been shown using molecular phylogenetic analysis to be distinct species , and others previously classed as separate species are conspecific with this species . The western North American species commonly known as the California king bolete ( Boletus edulis var. <unk> ) is a large , darker @-@ coloured variant first formally identified in 2007 . 
 The fungus grows in deciduous and coniferous forests and tree plantations , forming symbiotic ectomycorrhizal associations with living trees by enveloping the tree 's underground roots with sheaths of fungal tissue . The fungus produces spore @-@ bearing fruit bodies above ground in summer and autumn . The fruit body has a large brown cap which on occasion can reach 35 cm ( 14 in ) in diameter and 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) in weight . Like other boletes , it has tubes extending downward from the underside of the cap , rather than gills ; spores escape at maturity through the tube openings , or pores . The pore surface of the B. edulis fruit body is whitish when young , but ages to a greenish @-@ yellow . The stout stipe , or stem , is white or yellowish in colour , up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) tall and 10 cm ( 4 in ) thick , and partially covered with a raised network pattern , or reticulations . 
 Prized as an ingredient in various foods , B. edulis is an edible mushroom held in high regard in many cuisines , and is commonly prepared and eaten in soups , pasta , or risotto . The mushroom is low in fat and digestible carbohydrates , and high in protein , vitamins , minerals and dietary fibre . Although it is sold commercially , it is very difficult to cultivate . Available fresh in autumn in Central , Southern and Northern Europe , it is most often dried , packaged and distributed worldwide . Keeping its flavour after drying , it is then reconstituted and used in cooking . B. edulis is one of the few fungi sold pickled . The fungus also produces a variety of organic compounds with a diverse spectrum of biological activity , including the steroid derivative ergosterol , a sugar binding protein , antiviral compounds , antioxidants , and <unk> , which give the organism resistance to toxic heavy metals . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Boletus edulis was first described in 1782 by the French botanist Pierre Bulliard and still bears its original name . The starting date of fungal taxonomy had been set as January 1 , 1821 , to coincide with the date of the works of the ' father of mycology ' , Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries , which meant the name required sanction by Fries ( indicated in the name by a colon ) to be considered valid , as Bulliard 's work preceded this date . It was thus written Boletus edulis Bull . : Fr . A 1987 revision of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature set the starting date at May 1 , 1753 , the date of publication of Linnaeus ' work , the Species Plantarum . Hence , the name no longer requires the ratification of Fries ' authority . Early alternate names include Boletus solidus by English naturalist James Sowerby in 1809 , and Gray 's Leccinum edule . Gray 's transfer of the species to Leccinum was later determined to be inconsistent with the rules of botanical nomenclature , and he apparently was unfamiliar with the earlier works of Fries when he published his arrangement of bolete species . 
 B. edulis is the type species of the genus Boletus . In Rolf Singer 's classification of the Agaricales mushrooms , it is also the type species of section Boletus , a grouping of about 30 related boletes united by several characteristics : a mild @-@ tasting , white flesh that does not change colour when exposed to air ; a smooth to distinctly raised , netted pattern over at least the uppermost portion of the stem ; a yellow @-@ brown or olive @-@ brown spore print ; white tubes that later become yellowish then greenish , which initially appear to be stuffed with cotton ; and cystidia that are not strongly coloured . Molecular analysis published in 1997 established that the bolete mushrooms are all derived from a common ancestor , and established the Boletales as an order separate from the Agaricales . 
 The generic name is derived from the Latin term <unk> " mushroom " , which was borrowed in turn from the Ancient Greek <unk> , " terrestrial fungus " . Ultimately , this last word derives from <unk> / <unk> " lump " , " clod " , and , metaphorically , " mushroom " . The <unk> of Galen , like the boletus of Latin writers like Martial , Seneca and Petronius , is often identified as the much prized Amanita caesarea . The specific epithet edulis in Latin means " <unk> " or " edible " . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 Common names for B. edulis vary by region . The standard Italian name , porcino ( pl. porcini ) , means porcine ; <unk> porcino , in Italian , echoes the term suilli , literally " hog mushrooms , " a term used by the Ancient Romans and still in use in southern Italian terms for this species . The derivation has been ascribed to the resemblance of young fruit bodies to piglets , or to the fondness pigs have for eating them . It is also known as " king bolete " . The English penny bun refers to its rounded brownish shape . The German name <unk> ( stone mushroom ) refers to the species ' firm flesh . In Austria , it is called <unk> , the " noble mushroom " , while in Mexico , the Spanish name is <unk> , meaning " belly " . Another Spanish name , <unk> , means " small round boulder " , while the Dutch name <unk> means " squirrel 's bread " . Russian names are : " <unk> <unk> " ( " white mushroom " as opposed to less valuable " black mushrooms " ) and " <unk> " ( from " bor " - " pine forest " ) . The vernacular name cep is derived from the Catalan cep or its French name cèpe , although the latter is a generic term applying to several related species . In France , it is more fully cèpe de Bordeaux , derived from the Gascon cep " trunk " for its fat stalk , ultimately from the Latin <unk> " stake " . <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> bianco , giallo <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> are names from Italian dialects , and <unk> or <unk> is another term in Catalan . The French @-@ born King Charles XIV John popularised B. edulis in Sweden after 1818 , and is honoured in the local vernacular name <unk> as well as the Danish name Karl Johan <unk> . The monarch cultivated the fungus about his residence , <unk> Palace . It is known as hed tab tao <unk> ็ <unk> ่ <unk> in Thai . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of this mushroom is 7 – 30 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) broad at maturity . Slightly sticky to touch , it is convex in shape when young and flattens with age . The colour is generally reddish @-@ brown fading to white in areas near the margin , and continues to darken as it matures . The stipe , or stem , is 8 – 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) in height , and up to 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick — rather large in comparison to the cap ; it is club @-@ shaped , or bulges out in the middle . It is finely reticulate on the upper portion , but smooth or irregularly ridged on the lower part . The under surface of the cap is made of thin tubes , the site of spore production ; they are 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) deep , and whitish in colour when young , but mature to a greenish @-@ yellow . The angular pores , which do not stain when bruised , are small — roughly 2 to 3 pores per millimetre . In youth , the pores are white and appear as if stuffed with cotton ( which are actually mycelia ) ; as they age , they change colour to yellow and later to brown . The spore print is olive brown . The flesh of the fruit body is white , thick and firm when young , but becomes somewhat spongy with age . When bruised or cut , it either does not change colour , or turns a very light brown or light red . Fully mature specimens can weigh about 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) ; a huge specimen collected on the Isle of Skye , Scotland , in 1995 bore a cap of 42 cm ( 16 @.@ 5 in ) , with a stipe 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) in height and 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) wide , and weighed 3 @.@ 2 kg ( 7 @.@ 1 lb ) . A similarly sized specimen found in Poland in 2013 made international news . 
 B. edulis is considered one of the safest wild mushrooms to pick for the table , as no poisonous species closely resemble it . The most similar poisonous mushroom may be the devil 's bolete ( Rubroboletus satanas ) , which has a similar shape , but has a red stem and stains blue on bruising . It is often confused with the very bitter and unpalatable Tylopilus felleus , but can be distinguished by the reticulation on the stalk ; in porcini , it is a whitish , net @-@ like pattern on a brownish stalk , whereas it is a dark pattern on white in the latter . Porcini have whitish pores while the other has pink . If in doubt , tasting a tiny bit of flesh will yield a bitter taste . It can also resemble the " bolete @-@ like " Gyroporus castaneus , which is generally smaller , and has a browner stem . 
 The spores are elliptical to spindle @-@ shaped , with dimensions of 12 – 17 by 5 – 7 µm . The basidia , the spore @-@ bearing cells , are produced in a layer lining the tubes , and arrange themselves so their ends are facing the center of the tube ; this layer of cells is known technically as a hymenium . The basidia are thin @-@ walled , mostly attached to four spores , and measure 25 – 30 by 8 – 10 µm . Another cell type present in the hymenium is the cystidia , larger sterile cells that protrude beyond the basidia into the lumen of the hymenium , and act as air traps , regulating humidity . B. edulis has pleurocystidia ( cystidia located on the face of a pore ) that are thin @-@ walled , roughly spindle @-@ shaped to ventricose , and measure 30 – 45 by 7 – 10 µm ; the " stuffed " feature of the hymenium is caused by cheilocystidia — cells found on the edges of the pores . The hyphae of B. edulis do not have clamp connections . 
 = = = Related species = = = 
 Several similar brownish @-@ coloured species are sometimes considered subspecies or forms of this mushroom . In Europe , in addition to B. edulis ( or cèpe de Bordeaux ) , the most popular are : 
 Tête de nègre ( " negro 's head " ; Boletus aereus ) , much rarer than B. edulis , is more highly regarded by gourmets , and more expensive . Usually smaller than B. edulis , it is also distinctively darker in colour . It is especially suited to drying . 
 <unk> des pins ( " pine tree cep " ; Boletus pinophilus or Boletus pinicola ) grows among pine trees . Rarer than B. edulis , it is less appreciated by gourmets than the two other kinds of porcini , but remains a mushroom rated above most others . 
 <unk> d 'été ( " summer cep " ; Boletus reticulatus ) , also less common and found earlier . 
 Molecular phylogenetic analyses have proven these three are all distinctive and separate species ; other taxa formerly believed to be unique species or subspecies , such as B. <unk> , B. <unk> , B. persoonii , B. <unk> and B. <unk> , are now known to be part of a B. edulis species complex with a wide morphological , ecological and geographic range , and that the genetic variability in this complex is low . Similar molecular technology has been developed to rapidly and accurately identify B. edulis and other commercially important fungi . 
 Three divergent lineages found in Yunnan province in China that are commonly marketed and sold as B. edulis ( and are actually more closely related to B. aereus ) were described in 2013 as B. <unk> , B. <unk> and B. <unk> . 
 Western North America has several species closely related to B. edulis . The white king bolete ( Boletus <unk> ) , found in parts of Colorado , New Mexico , Arizona , and California ( and possibly elsewhere ) , is named after its discoverer Chuck Barrows . It is lighter in colour than B. edulis , having a cream @-@ coloured cap with pink tones ; often mycorrhizal with Ponderosa pine , it tends to grow in areas where there is less rainfall . Some find its flavour as good as if not better than B. edulis . The California king bolete ( Boletus edulis var. <unk> ) can reach massive proportions , and is distinguished from B. edulis by a mature pore surface that is brown to slightly reddish . The cap colour appears to be affected by the amount of light received during its development , and may range from white in young specimens grown under thick canopy , to dark @-@ brown , red @-@ brown or yellow brown in those specimens receiving more light . The queen bolete ( Boletus regineus ) , formerly considered a variety of B. aereus , is also a choice edible . It is generally smaller than B. edulis , and unlike that species , is typically found in mixed forests . The spring king bolete ( Boletus rex @-@ veris ) , formerly considered a variety of B. edulis or B. pinophilus , is found throughout western North America . In contrast to B. edulis , B. rex @-@ veris tends to fruit in clusters , and , as its common name suggests , appears in the spring . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Boletus edulis can grow singly or in small clusters of two or three specimens . The mushroom 's habitat consists of areas dominated by pine ( Pinus spp . ) , spruce ( Picea spp . ) , hemlock ( Tsuga spp . ) and fir ( Abies spp . ) trees , although other hosts include chestnut , chinquapin , beech , <unk> spp . , Lithocarpus spp . , and oak . In California , porcini have been collected in a variety of forests , such as coastal forests , dry interior oak forests and savannas and interior high @-@ elevation montane mixed forests , to an altitude of 3 @,@ 500 m ( 11 @,@ 500 ft ) . In northwestern Spain , they are common in scrublands dominated by the rock rose species Cistus <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 Boletus edulis has a cosmopolitan distribution , concentrated in cool @-@ temperate to subtropical regions . It is common in Europe — from northern Scandinavia , south to the extremities of Greece and Italy — and North America , where its southern range extends as far south as Mexico . It is well known from the Borgotaro area of Parma , Italy , and has PGI status there . The European distribution extends north to Scandinavia and south to southern Italy and Morocco . In China , the mushroom can be found from the northeastern Heilongjiang Province to the Yunnan @-@ Guizhou Plateau and Tibet . It has been recorded growing under Pinus and Tsuga in Sagarmatha National Park in Nepal , as well as in the Indian forests of Arunachal Pradesh . In West Asia , the species has been reported from the northwest forests of Iran . 
 = = = Non @-@ native introductions = = = 
 Boletus edulis grows in some areas where it is not believed to be indigenous . It is often found underneath oak and silver birch in Hagley Park in central Christchurch , New Zealand , where it is likely to have been introduced , probably on the roots of container @-@ grown beech , birch , and oak in the mid @-@ 19th century — around the time exotic trees began to be planted in the Christchurch area . Similarly , it has been collected in Adelaide Hills region of Australia in association with three species of introduced trees . It has been growing plentifully in association with pine forests in the southern KwaZulu @-@ Natal Midlands in South Africa for more than 50 years and is believed to have been introduced with the import of pine trees . It also grows in pine plantations in neighboring Zimbabwe . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Fruit body production = = = 
 Italian folklore holds that porcini sprout up at the time of the new moon ; research studies have tried to investigate more scientifically the factors that influence the production of fruit bodies . Although fruit bodies may appear any time from summer to autumn ( June to November in the UK ) , their growth is known to be triggered by rainfall during warm periods of weather followed by frequent autumn rain with a drop in soil temperature . Above average rainfall may result in the rapid appearance of large numbers of boletes , in what is known in some circles as a " bolete year " . A 2004 field study indicated that fruit body production is enhanced by an open and sunny wood habitat , corroborating an earlier observation made in a Zimbabwean study ; removal of the litter layer on the forest floor appeared to have a negative effect on fruit body production , but previous studies reported contradictory results . A Lithuanian study conducted in 2001 concluded that the maximal daily growth rate of the cap ( about 21 mm or 0 @.@ 8 in ) occurred when the relative air humidity was the greatest , and the fruit bodies ceased growing when the air humidity dropped below 40 % . Factors most likely to inhibit the appearance of fruit bodies included prolonged drought , inadequate air and soil humidity , sudden decreases of night air temperatures , and the appearance of the first frost . Plots facing north tend to produce more mushrooms compared to equivalent plots facing south . 
 = = = Mycorrhizal associations = = = 
 Boletus edulis is mycorrhizal — it is in a mutualistic relationship with the roots of plants ( hosts ) , in which the fungus exchanges nitrogen and other nutrients extracted from the environment for fixed carbon from the host . Other benefits for the plant are evident : in the case of the Chinese chestnut , the formation of mycorrhizae with B. edulis increases the ability of plant seedlings to resist water stress , and increases leaf succulence , leaf area , and water @-@ holding ability . The fungus forms a sheath of tissue around terminal , nutrient @-@ absorbing root tips , often inducing a high degree of branching in the tips of the host , and penetrating into the root tissue , forming , to some mycologists , the defining feature of ectomycorrhizal relationships , a <unk> net . The ectomycorrhizal fungi are then able to exchange nutrients with the plant , effectively expanding the root system of the host plant to the furthest reaches of the symbiont fungi . Compatible hosts may belong to multiple families of vascular plants that are widely distributed throughout the Northern Hemisphere ; according to one 1995 estimate , there are at least 30 host plant species distributed over more than 15 genera . Examples of mycorrhizal associates include Chinese red pine , Mexican weeping pine , Scots pine , Norway spruce , Coast Douglas @-@ fir , mountain pine , and Virginia pine . The fungus has also been shown to associate with Gum rockrose , a pioneer early stage shrub that is adapted for growth in degraded areas , such as burned forests . These and other <unk> species are ecologically important as fungal reservoirs , maintaining an inoculum of mycorrhizal fungi for trees that appear later in the forest regrowth cycle . 
 The mushroom has been noted to commonly co @-@ occur with Amanita muscaria or A. rubescens , although it is unclear whether this is due to a biological association between the species , or because of similarities in growing season , habitat , and ecological requirements . An association has also been reported between B. edulis and Amanita excelsa on Pinus radiata ectomycorrhizae in New Zealand , suggesting that other fungi may influence the life cycle of porcini . A 2007 field study revealed little correlation between the abundance of fruit bodies and presence of its mycelia below ground , even when soil samples were taken from directly beneath the mushroom ; the study concluded that the triggers leading to formation of mycorrhizae and production of the fruit bodies were more complex . 
 = = = Heavy metal contamination = = = 
 Boletus edulis is known to be able to tolerate and even thrive on soil that is contaminated with toxic heavy metals , such as soil that might be found near metal smelters . The mushroom 's resistance to heavy metal toxicity is conferred by a biochemical called a <unk> — an <unk> whose production is induced after exposure to metal . <unk> are chelating agents , capable of forming multiple bonds with the metal ; in this state , the metal cannot normally react with other elements or ions and is stored in a detoxified form in the mushroom tissue . 
 = = = Pests and predators = = = 
 The fruit bodies of B. edulis can be infected by the parasitic mould @-@ like fungus Hypomyces chrysospermus , known as the bolete eater , which manifests itself as a white , yellow , or reddish @-@ brown cottony layer over the surface of the mushroom . Some reported cases of stomach ache following consumption of dried porcini have been attributed to the presence of this mould on the fruit bodies . The mushroom is also used as a food source by several species of mushroom flies , as well as other insects and their larvae . An unidentified species of virus was reported to have infected specimens found in the Netherlands and in Italy ; fruit bodies affected by the virus had relatively thick stems and small or no caps , leading to the name " little @-@ cap disease " . 
 Boletus edulis is a food source for animals such as the banana slug ( <unk> columbianus ) , the long @-@ haired grass mouse , the red squirrel , and , as noted in one isolated report , the fox sparrow . 
 = = Culinary uses = = 
 Boletus edulis , as its name implies , is an edible mushroom . Italian chef and restaurateur Antonio Carluccio has described it as representing " the wild mushroom par excellence " , and hails it as the most rewarding of all fungi in the kitchen for its taste and versatility . Considered a choice edible , particularly in France , Germany and Italy , it was widely written about by the Roman writers Pliny the Elder and Martial , although ranked below the esteemed Amanita caesarea . 
 sunt tibi <unk> ; <unk> ego sumo <unk> ( <unk> iii . 60 ) 
 ( " You eat the choice boletus , I have mushrooms that swine grub up . " ) 
 wrote the disgruntled Martial when served suilli instead of <unk> . The term suilli was also thought to encompass the related Leccinum scabrum . 
 The flavour has been described as nutty and slightly meaty , with a smooth , creamy texture , and a distinctive aroma reminiscent of sourdough . Young , small porcini are most appreciated by gourmets , as the large ones often harbour maggots ( insect larvae ) , and become slimy , soft and less tasty with age . Fruit bodies are collected by holding the stipe near the base and twisting gently . Cutting the stipe with a knife may risk the part left behind rotting and the mycelium being destroyed . <unk> and washing are not recommended . The fruit bodies are highly perishable , due largely to the high water content ( around 90 % ) , the high level of enzyme activity , and the presence of a flora of microorganisms . Caution should be exercised when collecting specimens from potentially polluted or contaminated sites , as several studies have shown that the fruit bodies can bioaccumulate toxic heavy metals like mercury , cadmium , caesium and polonium . <unk> metals or radioactive fission decay products are like chemical signatures : chemical and radiochemical analysis can be used to identify the origin of imported specimens , and for long @-@ term <unk> monitoring of polluted areas . 
 Porcini are sold fresh in markets in summer and autumn in Central and Southern Europe , and dried or canned at other times of the year , and distributed worldwide to countries where they are not otherwise found . They are eaten and enjoyed raw , sautéed with butter , ground into pasta , in soups , and in many other dishes . In France , they are used in recipes such as cèpes à la <unk> , cèpe <unk> and cèpe aux <unk> . Porcini risotto is a traditional Italian autumn dish . Porcini are a feature of many cuisines , including Provençal , and Viennese . They are used in soups and consumed blanched in salads in Thailand . Porcini can also be frozen — either raw or first cooked in butter . The colour , aroma , and taste of frozen porcini deteriorate noticeably if frozen longer than four months . <unk> or soaking and blanching as a processing step before freezing can extend the freezer life up to 12 months . They are also one of the few mushroom species pickled and sold commercially . 
 = = = Dried = = = 
 Boletus edulis is well suited to drying — its flavour intensifies , it is easily reconstituted , and its resulting texture is pleasant . Reconstitution is done by soaking in hot , but not boiling , water for about twenty minutes ; the water used is infused with the mushroom aroma and it too can be used in subsequent cooking . Dried porcini have more protein than most other commonly consumed vegetables apart from soybeans . Some of this content is indigestible , though digestibility is improved with cooking . 
 Like other boletes , porcini can be dried by being strung separately on twine and hung close to the ceiling of a kitchen . Alternatively , the mushrooms can be dried by cleaning with a brush ( washing is not recommended ) , and then placing them in a wicker basket or bamboo steamer on top of a boiler or hot water tank . Another method is drying in an oven at 25 to 30 ° C ( 77 to 86 ° F ) for two to three hours , then increasing the temperature to 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) until crisp or brittle . Once dry , they are kept in an airtight jar . Importantly for commercial production , porcini retain their flavour after industrial preparation in a pressure cooker or after canning or bottling , and are thus useful for manufacturers of soups or stews . The addition of a few pieces of dried porcino can significantly add to flavour , and they are a major ingredient of the pasta sauce known as <unk> ( carter 's sauce ) . The drying process is known to induce the formation of various volatile substances that contribute to the mushroom 's aroma . Chemical analysis has shown that the odour of the dried mushroom is a complex mixture of 53 volatile compounds . 
 = = = Commercial harvest = = = 
 A 1998 estimate suggests the total annual worldwide consumption of Boletus edulis and closely related species ( B. aereus , B. pinophilus , and B. reticulatus ) to be between 20 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 tons . Approximately 2 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 000 tons ) were sold in France , Italy and Germany in 1988 , according to official figures . The true amount consumed far exceeds this , as it does not account for informal sales or consumption by collectors . They are widely exported and sold in dried form , reaching countries where they do not occur naturally , such as Australia and New Zealand . The autonomous community of Castile and León in Spain produces 7 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 8 @,@ 500 tons ) annually . In autumn , the price of porcini in the Northern Hemisphere typically ranges between $ 20 and $ 80 dollars per kilogram , although in New York in 1997 , the scarcity of fruit bodies elevated the wholesale price to over $ 200 per kilogram . 
 In the vicinity of Borgotaro in the Province of Parma of northern Italy , the four species Boletus edulis , B. aereus , B. aestivalis and B. pinophilus have been recognised for their superior taste and officially termed <unk> di Borgotaro . Here , these mushrooms have been collected for centuries , and exported commercially . Due to the globalization of the mushroom trade , most of the porcini commercially available in Italy or exported by Italy no longer originate there . Porcini and other mushrooms are imported into Italy from various locations , especially China and eastern European countries ; these are then often re @-@ exported under the " Italian porcini " label . 
 In Italy , the disconnect with local production has had an adverse effect on quality ; for example , in the 1990s , some of the dried porcino mushrooms exported to Italy from China contained species of genus Tylopilus , which are rather similar in appearance , and when dried , are difficult for both mushroom labourers and mycologists alike to distinguish from Boletus . Tylopilus species typically have a very bitter taste , a bitterness that is imparted to the flavour of the porcini with which they are mixed . 
 After the fall of the Iron Curtain and the economic and political barriers that followed , central and eastern European countries with local mushroom harvesting traditions , such as Albania , Bulgaria , Macedonia , Romania , Serbia and Slovenia , developed into exporters of porcini , concentrating primarily on the Italian market . Exported porcini and other wild fungi are also destined for France , Germany and other western European markets , where demand for them exists , but collection on a commercial scale does not . Picking B. edulis has become an annual seasonal income earner and pastime in countries like Bulgaria , especially for many Roma communities and the unemployed . A lack of control has led to heavy exploitation of the mushroom resource . 
 Like many other strictly mycorrhizal fungi , B. edulis has to date eluded cultivation attempts . The results of some studies suggest that unknown components of the soil microflora might be required for B. edulis to successfully establish a mycorrhizal relationship with the host plant . 
 = = = Nutritional composition = = = 
 Boletus edulis constitutes a food source which , although not rich in easily absorbed carbohydrates or fat , contains vitamins , minerals and dietary fibre . Fresh mushrooms consist of over 80 % moisture , although reported values tend to differ somewhat as moisture content can be affected by environmental temperature and relative humidity during growth and storage , as well as the relative amount of water that may be produced as a result of normal metabolic processes during storage . 
 Carbohydrates make up the bulk of the fruit bodies , comprising 9 @.@ 23 % of the fresh weight ( see table ) , and 65 @.@ 4 % of the dry weight . The carbohydrate component contains the monosaccharides glucose , mannitol and α , α @-@ trehalose , the polysaccharide glycogen , and the water @-@ insoluble structural polysaccharide chitin , which accounts for up to 80 – 90 % of dry matter in mushroom cell walls . <unk> , hemicellulose , and pectin @-@ like carbohydrates — all indigestible by humans — contribute to the nutritionally desirable high proportion of insoluble fibre in B. edulis . 
 The total lipid , or crude fat , content makes up 2 @.@ 6 % of the dry matter of the mushroom . The proportion of fatty acids ( expressed as a % of total fatty acids ) are : palmitic acid , 9 @.@ 8 % ; stearic acid , 2 @.@ 7 % ; oleic acid , 36 @.@ 1 % ; linoleic acid , 42 @.@ 2 % , and linolenic acid , 0 @.@ 2 % . 
 A comparative study of the amino acid composition of eleven Portuguese wild edible mushroom species showed Boletus edulis to have the highest total amino acid content , about 2 @.@ 3 g per 100 g of dried mushroom . This total includes a full complement of 20 essential and nonessential amino acids . Analysis of the free amino acids ( that is , those not bound up in protein ) revealed glutamine and alanine to be the principal amino acids ( each about 25 % of total compounds ) ; a separate analysis concluded that lysine is another predominant compound . 
 Reported values of the composition and concentrations of trace metals and minerals in Boletus edulis tend to differ considerably , as the mushroom bioaccumulates different elements to varying degrees , and the element concentration in the fruit bodies is often a reflection of the element concentration of the soils from which they were picked . In general , B. edulis contains appreciable amounts of selenium ( 13 – 17 ppm ) , a trace mineral essential for good health , though the bioavailability of mushroom @-@ derived selenium is low . Whole fruit bodies also contain 4 @.@ 7 μg of vitamin D2 per 100 g dry weight . The relatively high ergosterol content ( see next section ) of the fruit bodies can make the mushroom nutritionally pragmatic for vegetarians and vegans , who would otherwise have a limited intake of vitamin D. 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Boletus edulis fruit bodies contain about 500 mg of ergosterol per 100 g of dried mushroom . <unk> is a sterol compound common in fungi . Additionally , the fruit bodies have about 30 mg of ergosterol peroxide per 100 g of dried mushroom . <unk> peroxide is a steroid derivative with a wide spectrum of biological activity , including antimicrobial and anti @-@ inflammatory activity , and cytotoxicity to various tumor cell lines grown in laboratory culture . 
 The mushroom also contains a sugar @-@ binding protein , or lectin , that has affinity for the sugars <unk> and <unk> . The lectin is <unk> — that is , it can stimulate cells to begin the process of cell division , resulting in mitosis . Further , the lectin has antiviral properties : it inhibits the human immunodeficiency virus enzyme reverse transcriptase . Other studies suggest that B. edulis also has antiviral activity against Vaccinia virus and tobacco mosaic virus grown in culture . Antiviral compounds from mushrooms are a subject of interest in biomedical research for their potential to advance the knowledge of viral replication , and as new drugs in the treatment of viral disease . 
 The fruit bodies have a high antioxidative capacity , due probably to a combination of various organic acids ( such as oxalic , citric , malic , <unk> and fumaric acids ) , tocopherols , phenolic compounds and alkaloids ; the highest antioxidant activity is in the mushroom caps . Furthermore , fruit bodies were determined to have 528 mg of the antioxidant compound <unk> per kilogram of fresh mushroom ; this value was the highest among many food items tested in one study . Porcini were thought to have anti @-@ cancer properties according to Hungarian research conducted in the 1950s , but later investigations in the United States did not support this . 
 = Chris Field ( composer ) = 
 Chris Field is a Los Angeles @-@ based singer / songwriter , composer , and musician . He was raised in the San Fernando Valley , and played guitar in Los Angeles for groups among multiple genres including electric guitar , jazz , and rock music . He learned how to compose music by inputting compositions from Ludwig van Beethoven and Sergei Prokofiev into his computer . Through his music associates , he became acquainted with two friends who started X @-@ Ray Dog , and he began to contribute musical compositions to this company . Field also works with Extreme Music , and through them , Field 's music has been placed in numerous television shows . In December 2014 , a part of Field 's catalogue was acquired by BMG Chrysalis . 
 Chris Field is the writer of the composition , " Gothic Power " , which developed an international cult following . Field 's work as a musical composer for movie theatrical trailers has included Alice In Wonderland , X @-@ Men , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , XXX , Austin Powers in Goldmember , Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines , Hotel Rwanda , Kinsey , Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl , Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest , and The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring . His first contribution to a film trailer was for the The Full Monty . " Gothic Power " was the main theme for the trailer for The Lord of the Rings film series ; this was later used as a trailer for a film within a film in a sequence for Ben Stiller 's movie Tropic Thunder . In 2014 , Field 's piece " Acts of Courage " was released on the album , This Is Epic Music , Volume I , through <unk> Records , on iTunes and physical cd . The album notes state that the piece " Gothic Power " , written by Field in 1999 , started a new direction in cinematic music that came to be identified as epic music . 
 Field released his second album " Personal Elegy " , a rock album , in 2015 . The title track is a elegy for the passing of actor Heath Ledger . 
 Field released his debut album , Sub @-@ Conscious , in 2006 ; it was made available on iTunes , CD Baby , Amazon.com , and for retail sale . It received a positive reception , and his song " Floating " from the album reached spot number eight in the New Age genre for iTunes in Luxembourg on July 7 , 2011 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Field was raised in the San Fernando Valley . He played guitar in Los Angeles for a period of time as a young man . He contributed to productions including electric guitar , jazz , and rock music . He acquired his first computer about 1998 , wherein he began to learn musical composition and production . He experimented by taking compositions from Ludwig van Beethoven and Sergei Prokofiev , and inputting them electronically into his computer . He noted in a 2006 interview that his wife Katie O 'Brien Field helped with promotion of his music . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Film trailers = = = 
 He met associate Mitch <unk> through his guitar playing , and was introduced to Tim <unk> . <unk> and <unk> started X @-@ Ray Dog and he started contributing musical composition through work with this firm . Field has worked as a composer for theatrical trailers for films . His trailer musical composition work has included films such as X @-@ Men , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , XXX , Austin Powers in Goldmember , Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines , Hotel Rwanda , Kinsey , Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl , Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest , and The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring . 
 His first musical composition for a movie trailer was for the film The Full Monty ; he worked on this piece with friend Mark Griskey who was a fellow composer at X @-@ Ray Dog . Field explained his thought process on the film trailer : " A trailer , is like a one @-@ minute or whatever , mini movie that 's got to have its own feeling and form to it — trailer music is very intense and gets right to the point . It sounds simple , but it 's taken me some years to really figure out . I call it ' rock and roll orchestra ' because it 's got orchestral elements and , sometimes , a choir , but it also has a lot of rock elements like the drive , the drums and the way it just builds and builds . " 
 His musical composition piece " Gothic Power " was used in trailers for The Lord of the Rings film series . The debut of the first trailer in theaters was quite popular with fans . Subsequently the piece was utilized by Ben Stiller in a fictional movie trailer for a film within a film in Tropic Thunder . He composed a piece called " The Vision " which incorporated string music ; it was utilized for the end of the trailer for the 2007 film Atonement . 
 = = = Solo artist = = = 
 Field released his second album , Personal Elegy , in 2015 . 
 Field released his debut album , Sub @-@ Conscious , in 2006 . It featured orchestral music from the Northwest Sinfonia . He created the album as a way to branch out from theatrical trailer composition into work as a solo artist . Field utilizes Logic Pro and MIDI for his musical composition ; after this process he delivers these files along with an MP3 to the individual in charge of orchestration , who uses Finale software to convert this to musical notation . The album was made available on iTunes , CD Baby , Amazon.com , and for retail sale ] . 
 The album received a positive review from Jamie Bonk of <unk> , who commented : " As far as debut albums are concerned , composer / producer / multi- instrumentalist Chris Field 's Sub @-@ Conscious is an outstanding record : great compositions and arrangements , first @-@ rate performances and most importantly a defined point of view . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Track listing 
 All music composed by Chris Field . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 The following is a complete list of music Field has composed . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = Savior ( Rise Against song ) = 
 " Savior " is a song by American rock band Rise Against , featured on their fifth studio album Appeal to Reason ( 2008 ) . Written and performed by the band , the song deviates from the social and political topics normally discussed in Rise Against songs , and is instead about forgiveness and broken relationships . It is a punk rock song , with a " frenetic pace " that John Hanson of Sputnikmusic described as reminiscent of tracks from the band 's 2003 album Revolutions per Minute . It was released as Appeal to Reason 's third single on June 3 , 2009 . 
 " Savior " was well received by critics , with praise directed towards its lyrics , and remains one of the band 's most commercially successful singles to date . It peaked at number three on both the Hot Rock Songs and Alternative Songs music charts , and holds the record for the most consecutive weeks spent on either chart , with sixty @-@ three and sixty @-@ five weeks respectively . The accompanying music video depicts actors in animal costumes engaging in a mosh pit . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Savior " was written by American rock band Rise Against , with lyrics by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath , and produced by Bill Stevenson and Jason Livermore . Stevenson and Livermore engineered the song with Andrew Berlin , while Chris Lord @-@ Alge assisted as the mixer . It was recorded at the Blasting Room in Fort Collins , Colorado and was mastered by Ted Jensen . Rise Against released the song as the Appeal to Reason 's third and final single on June 3 , 2009 . It impacted radio stations on June 16 . 
 When writing the lyrics for Rise Against songs , McIlrath will often sing nonsensical words over completed melodies , in order to identify the lyrical tone that each song will eventually convey . For " Savior " , McIlrath remarked that while he mostly sang gibberish , he always found himself singing the line " I don 't hate you " . McIlrath used this line as a base to construct the lyrics and themes present within " Savior " . In a 2014 interview , McIlrath commented on how he had originally voted to cut the song from Appeal to Reason , but was eventually overruled . 
