 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Daniel Chun , and was his first script for the series . The episode also was the inception of two major story arcs , the first being the season @-@ long arc of Dunder Mifflin going out of business and its purchase by the printer company Sabre in the episode of the same name , and the second being the budding romance between Andy and Erin . According to series creator and episode director Greg Daniels , the episode explores the idea that Michael is positively motivated due to his subconscious ; although his antics seem nonsensical to many members of the office , in the end , his idea to take his coworkers ' minds off of the fiscal trouble proves to be the best choice . This was first explored in the third season episode " Grief Counseling " . Chun later explained in a Q & A with The Office fansite OfficeTally that " the episode was partly about Jim realizing that sometimes Michael isn 't crazy , he 's crazy like a fox " in that sometimes his underlying motives are clever . 
 Most of the names were based on " Southern puns " , and it took Chun a while to think of all the names . All of the props , cards , and box were designed by the series ' prop department . The producers tried to market the game as a real product , although that never came to fruition . Chun crafted the cold open after being inspired by the second season episode " The Fight " because he wanted to see more " Karate Dwight " . In the original version of the open , the scripted featured Dwight and Michael kicking each other in the groin . Jennifer Celotta , however , suggested that Dwight fight himself . The episode guest @-@ stars Andy Buckley , who plays David Wallace . Buckley appears only via the telephone , and recorded his lines in the annex of the set , to give the illusion that he was calling from a long ways away . 
 " Murder " was directed by Daniels . Daniels particularly enjoyed directing both the cold open , as well as the closing tag , likening both to " an action film " . In regards to the latter , he referred to it as a sequence that director Quentin Tarantino would have thought up , and noted the importance of having the camera appear in the middle of the Mexican standoff to reveal Fischer . Wilson , Helms , and Carell enjoyed filming the scene , and were particularly exuberant when it came time to fake @-@ kill each other . Several of the scenes , such as when Andy first asks Erin on a date , had to be re @-@ shot so that the cameras were in more discreet places . Daniels later referred to these shots as " spy shots " . Initially , after Michael announces that " there has been a murder " , the show was supposed to have cut to a commercial break . However , the producers realized that this was too misleading , as it would have implied that a real homicide had taken place . 
 The Season Six DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael berating and then apologizing to Erin , Michael making a racist remark about slavery while in character , various conference room scenes , and extended sequences of the members of the office playing the game in @-@ character . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Wallace alerts the office that the companies troubles have been published in the Wall Street Journal , but Michael and Erin mistake this to mean the " feelings journal " , Michael listens to " Lullaby " by Shawn Mullins to soothe himself ; Chun explained that the reason the song was chosen was because " Michael would probably have loved top 40 pop from the 90s . And I figured the song would have to be devoid of subtext . That 's why ' <unk> ' felt like a fit . " When Jim lowers the volume on Michael 's computer , the tell @-@ tale " click " of a Mac computer comes out of the speakers . Daniels and Chun note that this was intentional , and they wanted that specific sound , even though Windows computers do not make that sound . Pam 's southern accent is compared to the fictional character Forrest Gump . After Andy successfully does a Savannah accent , Kevin asks him to do " the Swedish Chef " . Andy , not understanding the reference asks " what province " he is from , to which Kevin replies that " he lives on Sesame Street , dumbass . " Angela blames her character 's dabbling with the dark arts — she portrays a witch doctor in the game — with being exposed to the Harry Potter series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Murder " first aired on NBC on November 12 , 2009 . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 8 @.@ 046 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 10 percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight increase in the ratings from the previous episode , " Double Date " . 
 " Murder " received generally positive reviews , with many complimenting the fact that the show was able to dabble in a ridiculous situation with over @-@ the @-@ top characters while , in the end , still having a point . Dan Phillips of IGN said that the episode was a " major step up " from the " disappointing " last two episodes , " Koi Pond " and " Double Date " . Phillips stated that the episode " struck a nice balance between unbound silliness and grounded drama , even if the silliness dominated at times . " Phillips praised the way that , when Michael stood up to Jim and argued that the office members needed the game to remain sane , " the character I love had returned after playing the part of moronic jerk for too much of this season . " Ultimately , he gave the episode an 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 score , denoting a " great " episode . 
 Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " and praised the way it both managed to touch upon Dunder Mifflin 's serious economic trouble , as well as allowed the actors and actresses — and Steve Carell in particular — to use " ridiculous accent [ s ] " and " crazy character [ s ] " . He also enjoyed the way that Andy and Erin 's subplot was developed , writing that " Andy becomes a deeper , more lovable character with each passing episode " and that " Erin has quickly become an appealing , engaging character . " He concluded that the episode was enjoyable because it " was silliness with a purpose " . 
 Alan Sepinwall praised Krasinski 's acting , noting that he got the chance to " nail a great dramatic moment " . He also felt that Dunder Mifflin 's crisis was an interesting development for the show , and put a new spin on the recurring theme of fiscal issues . Finally , he praised the Andy and Erin romancing , noting that it " allows the writers to push a similar scenario [ that had been used with Pam and Jim ] in a more overtly comic direction , while still getting some pathos out of it . " Gage Henry of Paste felt that the entry was a " great way to dust off last week ’ s " episode . He was pleased that it show @-@ cased Michael as the " all @-@ knowing father figure whose mysterious ways pan out in the end . " 
 = Caerphilly Castle = 
 Caerphilly Castle ( Welsh : Castell Caerffili ) is a medieval fortification in Caerphilly in South Wales . The castle was constructed by Gilbert de Clare in the 13th century as part of his campaign to conquer Glamorgan , and saw extensive fighting between Gilbert and his descendants and the native Welsh rulers . Surrounded by extensive artificial lakes – considered by historian Allen Brown to be " the most elaborate water defences in all Britain " – it occupies around 30 acres ( 12 ha ) and is the second largest castle in Britain . It is famous for having introduced concentric castle defences to Britain and for its large gatehouses . 
 Gilbert began work on the castle in 1268 following his occupation of the north of Glamorgan , with the majority of the construction occurring over the next three years at a considerable cost . The project was opposed by Gilbert 's Welsh rival Llywelyn ap Gruffudd , leading to the site being burnt in 1270 and taken over by royal officials in 1271 . Despite these interruptions , Gilbert successfully completed the castle and took control of the region . The core of Caerphilly Castle , including the castle 's luxurious accommodation , was built on what became a central island , surrounding by several artificial lakes , a design Gilbert probably derived from that at Kenilworth . The dams for these lakes were further fortified , and an island to the west provided additional protection . The concentric rings of walls inspired Edward I 's castles in North Wales , and proved what historian Norman Pounds has termed " a turning point in the history of the castle in Britain " . 
 The castle was attacked during the Madog ap Llywelyn revolt of 1294 , the Llywelyn Bren uprising in 1316 and during the overthrow of Edward II in 1326 – 27 . In the late 15th century , however , it fell into decline and by the 16th century the lakes had drained away and the walls were robbed of their stone . The Marquesses of Bute acquired the property in 1776 and under the third and fourth Marquesses extensive restoration took place . In 1950 the castle and grounds were given to the state and the water defences were re @-@ flooded . In the 21st century , the Welsh heritage agency Cadw manages the site as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 Caerphilly Castle was built in the second half of the 13th century , as part of the Anglo @-@ Norman expansion into South Wales . The Normans began to make incursions into Wales from the late 1060s onwards , pushing westwards from their bases in recently occupied England . Their advance was marked by the construction of castles and the creation of regional lordships . The task of subduing the region of Glamorgan was given to the earls of Gloucester in 1093 ; efforts continued throughout the 12th and early 13th centuries , accompanied by extensive fighting between the Anglo @-@ Norman lords and local Welsh rulers . The powerful de Clare family acquired the earldom in 1217 and continued to attempt to conquer the whole of the Glamorgan region . 
 In 1263 , Gilbert de Clare , also known as " Red Gilbert " because of the colour of his hair , inherited the family lands . Opposing him in Glamorgan was the native Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd . Llywelyn had taken advantage of the chaos of the civil war in England between Henry III and rebel barons during the 1260s to expand his power across the region . In 1265 Llywelyn allied himself with the baronial faction in England in exchange for being granted authority over the local Welsh magnates across all the territories in the region , including Glamorgan . De Clare believed his lands and power were under threat and allied himself with Henry III against the rebel barons and Llywelyn . 
 The baronial revolt was crushed between 1266 and 1267 , leaving de Clare free to advance north into Glamorgan from his main base in Cardiff . De Clare started to construct a castle at Caerphilly to control his new gains in 1268 . The castle lay in a basin of the Rhymney Valley , alongside the Rhymney River and at the heart of network of paths and roads , adjacent to a former Roman fort . Work began at a huge pace , with ditches cut to form the basic shape of the castle , temporary wooden palisades erected and extensive water defences created by damming a local stream . The walls and internal buildings were built at speed , forming the main part of the castle . The architect of the castle and the precise cost of the construction are unknown , but modern estimates suggest that it could have cost as much as castles such as Conwy or Caernarfon , perhaps as much as £ 19 @,@ 000 , a huge sum for the period . 
 Llywelyn responded by intervening with his own forces but outright conflict was prevented by the diplomatic efforts of Henry III . De Clare continued building work and in 1270 Llywelyn responded by attacking and burning the site , probably destroying the temporary defences and stores . De Clare began work again the following year , raising tensions and prompting Henry to send two bishops , Roger de <unk> and Godfrey Giffard , to take control of the site and arbitrate a solution to the dispute . 
 The bishops took possession of the castle later in 1271 and promised Llywelyn that building work would temporarily cease and that negotiations would begin the following summer . In February of the next year , however , de Clare 's men seized back the castle , threw out the bishops ' soldiers , and de Clare – protesting his innocence in these events – began work once again . Neither Henry nor Llywelyn could readily intervene and de Clare was able to lay claim to the whole of Glamorgan . Work on the castle continued , with additional water defences , towers and gatehouses added . 
 Llywelyn 's power declined over the next two decades . In 1276 Henry 's son , Edward I , invaded Wales following a dispute with the prince , breaking his power in South Wales , and in 1282 Edward 's second campaign resulted in Llwelyn 's death and the collapse of independent Welsh rule . Further defences were added to the walls until work stopped around 1290 . Local disputes remained . De Clare argued with Humphrey de Bohun , the earl of Hereford , in 1290 and the following year the case was brought before the king , resulting in the temporary royal seizure of Caerphilly . 
 In 1294 Madog ap Llywelyn rebelled against English rule , the first major insurrection since the 1282 campaign . The Welsh appear to have risen up over the introduction of taxation and Madog had considerable popular support . In Glamorgan , Morgan ap Maredudd led the local uprising ; Morgan had been dispossessed by de Clare in 1270 and saw this as a chance to regain his lands . Morgan attacked Caerphilly , burning half of the town , but failed to take the castle . In the spring of 1295 Edward pressed home a counter @-@ attack in North Wales , putting down the uprising and arresting Madog . De Clare attacked Morgan 's forces and retook the region between April and May , resulting in Morgan 's surrender . De Clare died at the end of 1295 , leaving Caerphilly Castle in a good condition , linked to the small town of Caerphilly which had emerged to the south of it and a large deer park in the nearby Aber Valley . 
 = = = 14th – 17th centuries = = = 
 Gilbert 's son , also called Gilbert de Clare , inherited the castle , but he died fighting at the battle of Bannockburn in 1314 while still quite young . The family 's lands were initially placed under the control of the Crown , but before any decision could be taken on the inheritance , a revolt broke out in Glamorgan . Anger over the actions of the royal administrators caused Llywelyn Bren to rise up in January 1316 , attacking Caerphilly Castle with a large force of men . The castle withstood the attack , but the town was destroyed and the rebellion spread . A royal army was despatched to deal with the situation , defeating Bren in a battle at Caerphilly Mountain and breaking the Welsh siege of the castle . 
 In 1317 Edward II settled the inheritance of Glamorgan and Caerphilly Castle on Eleanor de Clare , who had married the royal favourite , Hugh le Despenser . Hugh used his relationship with the king to expand his power across the region , taking over lands throughout South Wales . Hugh employed Master Thomas de la <unk> and William Hurley to expand the Great Hall at the castle , including richly carved windows and doors . In 1326 , however , Edward 's wife , Isabella of France , overthrew his government , forcing the king and Hugh to flee west . The pair stayed in Caerphilly Castle at the end of October and early November , before leaving to escape Isabella 's approaching forces , abandoning the extensive stores and £ 14 @,@ 000 held at the castle . William la Zouche besieged the castle with a force of 425 soldiers , cornering the constable , Sir John de Felton , Hugh 's son – also called Hugh – and the garrison of 130 men inside . Caerphilly held out until March 1327 , when the garrison surrendered on the condition that the younger Hugh was pardoned , his father having been already executed . 
 Tensions between the Welsh and the English persisted and spilled over in 1400 with the outbreak of the Glyndŵr Rising . It is uncertain what part the castle played in the conflict , but it seems to have survived intact . In 1416 , the castle passed through Isabel le Despenser in marriage to her first husband Richard de Beauchamp , the earl of Worcester , and then to her second husband , Richard Beauchamp , the earl of Warwick . Isabel and her second husband invested heavily in the castle , conducting repairs and making it suitable for use as their main residence in the region . The castle passed to Richard Neville in 1449 and to Jasper Tudor , the earl of Pembroke , in 1486 . 
 After 1486 , the castle went into decline , eclipsed by the more fashionable residence of Cardiff Castle ; once the sluice @-@ gates fell into disrepair , the water defences probably drained away . Antiquarian John Leland visited Caerphilly Castle around 1539 , and described it as having " <unk> of a wonderful <unk> " , but beyond a tower used to hold prisoners it was in ruins and surrounded by marshland . Henry Herbert , the earl of Pembroke used the castle for his manorial court . In 1583 the castle was leased to Thomas Lewis , who stripped it of much of its stone to extend his house , causing extensive damage . 
 In 1642 the English Civil War broke out between the Royalist supporters of Charles I and those of Parliament . South Wales was predominantly Royalist in sympathy , and during the conflict , a sconce , or small fort , was built overlooking Caerphilly Castle to the north @-@ west , on the site of the old Roman fort . It is uncertain if this was built by Royalist forces or by the Parliamentary army that occupied the area during the final months of the war in March 1646 , but the fort 's guns would have dominated the interior of the castle . It is also uncertain whether or not Caerphilly Castle was deliberately slighted by Parliament to prevent its future use as a fortification . Although several towers had collapsed by the 18th century , possibly as a result of such an operation , it is probable that this deterioration was actually the result of subsidence damage caused when the water defences retreated , as there is no evidence of deliberate destruction having been ordered . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The Marquesses of Bute acquired the castle in 1776 . John Stuart , the first marquess , took steps to protect the ruins . His great @-@ grandson John Crichton @-@ Stuart , the third marquess , was immensely rich as the result of the family 's holdings in the South Wales coalfields and was passionately interested in the medieval period . He had the site fully surveyed by the architect William Frame , and reroofed the great hall in the 1870s . The marquess began a process of buying back leasehold properties around the castle with the intent of clearing back the town houses that had been built up to the edge of the site . 
 The fourth marquess , John Crichton @-@ Stuart , was an enthusiastic restorer and builder and commissioned a major restoration project between 1928 and 1939 . The stonework was carefully repaired , with moulds made to recreate missing pieces . The Inner East Gatehouse was rebuilt , along with several of the other towers . The marquess carried out landscaping work , with the intent of eventually re @-@ flooding the lakes , and thanks to several decades of purchases was finally able to demolish the local houses encroaching on the view of the castle . 
 By 1947 , when John Crichton @-@ Stuart , the fifth marquess , inherited the castle , the Bute family had divested itself of most of its land in South Wales . John sold off the family 's remaining property interests and in 1950 he gave Caerphilly Castle to the state . The lakes were re @-@ flooded and the final stages of the restoration work were completed in the 1950s and 1960s . In the 21st century the castle is managed by the Welsh heritage agency Cadw as a tourist attraction . In 2006 , the castle saw 90 @,@ 914 visitors . It is protected as a scheduled monument and as a grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Caerphilly Castle comprises a set of eastern defences , protected by the Outer East Moat and the North Lake , and fortifications on the Central Island and the Western Island , both protected by the South Lake . The site is around 30 acres ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) in size , making it the second largest in Britain . It is constructed on a natural gravel bank in the local river basin , and the castle walls are built from Pennant sandstone . The castle 's architecture is famous and historically significant . The castle introduced concentric castle defences to Britain , changing the future course of the country 's military architecture , and also incorporated a huge gatehouse . The castle also featured a sophisticated network of moats and dams , considered by historian Allen Brown to be " the most elaborate water defences in all Britain " . 
 The eastern defences were reached via the Outer Main Gatehouse , which featured circular towers resting on spurred , <unk> bases , a design particular to South Wales castles . Originally the gatehouse would have been reached over a sequence of two drawbridges , linked by an intervening tower , since destroyed . To the north side of the gatehouse was the North Dam , protected by three substantial towers , and which may have supported the castle 's stables . Despite subsidence damage , the dam still holds back the North Lake . The South Dam was a massive structure , 152 metres ( 499 ft ) long , ending in a huge buttressed wall . The remains of the castle mill – originally powered by water from the dam – survive . Four replica siege engines have been placed on display . The dam ended in Felton 's Tower , a square fortification designed to protect the <unk> regulating the water levels of the dam , and the South Gatehouse – also called Giffard 's Tower – originally accessed via a drawbridge , which led into the town . 
 Caerphilly 's water defences were almost certainly inspired by those at Kenilworth , where a similar set of artificial lakes and dams was created . Gilbert de Clare had fought at the siege of Kenilworth in 1266 and would have seen these at first hand . Caerphilly 's water defences provided particular protection against mining , which could otherwise undermine castle walls during the period , and are considered the most advanced of their kind in Britain . 
 The central island held Caerphilly 's inner defences , a roughly square design with a walled inner and middle ward , the inner ward protected by four turrets on each of the corners . The walls of the inner ward overlooked those of the middle ward , producing a concentric defence of two enclosed rings of walls ; in the medieval period , the walls of the middle ward would have been much higher than today , forming a more substantial defence . Caerphilly was the first concentric castle in Britain , pre @-@ dating Edward I 's famous programme of concentric castles by a few years . The design influenced the design of Edward 's later castles in North Wales , and historian Norman Pounds considers it " a turning point in the history of the castle in Britain " . Probable subsidence has caused the south @-@ east tower in the Inner Ward to lean outwards at an angle of 10 degrees . 
 Access to the central island occurred over a drawbridge , through a pair of gatehouses on the eastern side . Caerphilly Castle 's Inner East Gatehouse , based on the gatehouse built at Tonbridge in the 1250s , reinforced a trend in gatehouse design across England and Wales . Sometimes termed a keep @-@ gatehouse , the fortification had both exterior and interior defences , enabling it to be defended even if the perimeter of the castle was breached . Two huge towers flanked the gatehouse on either side of an entrance that was protected by portcullises and murder @-@ holes . The substantial size of the gatehouse allowed it to be used for accommodation as well as defence and it was comfortably equipped on a grand scale , probably for the use of the castle constable and his family . Another pair of gatehouses protected the west side . 
 Inside the inner ward was the castle 's Great Hall and accommodation . Caerphilly was built with fashionable , high @-@ status accommodation , similar to that built around the same time in Chepstow Castle . In the medieval period the Great Hall would have been subdivided with wooden screens , colourful decorations , with rich , detailed carving and warmed by a large , central fireplace . Some carved medieval corbels in the shape of male and female heads survive in the hall today , possibly depicting the royal court in the 1320s , including Edward II , Isabella of France , Hugh Despenser and Eleanor de Clare . To the east of the Great Hall was the castle chapel , positioned above the buttery and pantry . On the west side of the hall were the castle 's private apartments , two solar blocks with luxurious fittings . 
 Beyond the central island was the Western Island , probably reached by drawbridges . The island is called Y <unk> or Caer y Werin in Welsh , meaning " the people 's fort " , and may have been used by the town of Caerphilly for protection during conflicts . On the north @-@ west side of the Western Island was the site of the former Roman fort , enclosing around 3 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) , and the remains of the 17th @-@ century civil @-@ war fortification built on the same location . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The long @-@ running British television show Doctor Who chose Caerphilly Castle as a filming location for several episodes , including The End of Time in 2009 . On that occasion , producers used the residential quarters of the East Gatehouse , Constable 's Hall and <unk> Gallery for the filming of a dungeon in the fictional <unk> Prison . 
 = Masterpiece ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Masterpiece " is a song by American singer Madonna for the soundtrack of the 2011 film W.E. The song was later included on her twelfth studio album MDNA ( 2012 ) . It served official radio release in the United Kingdom on April 2 , 2012 , to promote the album . Madonna composed the song alongside Julie Frost and Jimmy Harry , and produced it with William Orbit . " Masterpiece " is a midtempo pop ballad which is reminiscent of her works from the 1990s . The song garnered positive reviews from contemporary critics , who praised its lyrical content and Madonna 's vocal performance . 
 " Masterpiece " won the Best Original Song category at the 69th Golden Globe Awards , but was deemed ineligible for the similar category at the 84th Academy Awards . Its Golden Globe nomination sparked a red carpet rivalry between Madonna and singer Elton John . " Masterpiece " peaked at number one in Russia , while reaching the lower regions of the charts in the Czech Republic , Japan , South Korea and the United Kingdom . It was performed by Madonna on The MDNA Tour ( 2012 ) , where she was accompanied by Basque musicians Kalakan trio . The performance was considered a highlight of the tour . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 " Masterpiece " was composed by Madonna , Julie Frost and Jimmy Harry and produced by Madonna and William Orbit . When Madonna was directing her film W.E. , her manager Guy Oseary persuaded the singer to compose a song for the soundtrack . Frost was living in Los Angeles at that time and was assessing her priorities in the music world , and wanted to collaborate with a number of artists , Madonna being the first . " She is an icon " , Frost said , " But most importantly she has some of the best Pop songs in the history of music ... so yeah it 's always a dream to work with people like her . " Orbit , who was working with Frost and Harry on an assignment , contacted them for collaborating with Madonna on " Masterpiece " . He had heard Frost 's initial composition of the song and knew that Madonna would love it . According to Frost the theme explained to them was about bittersweet love and the hardships felt being in a relationship . Madonna , Frost and Harry sat together with this idea and brainstormed and came up with the lyrics and the melody . Over time , Madonna changed the structure of the song and the final version was ready for recording . Madonna recalled : 
 " [ Guy Oseary ] harangued me for the entire time I was filming and editing my movie to write a song . And I said , ' Please , Guy , I 'm trying to focus on being a director and I want people to pay attention to the film and I don 't have time . ' So then I finished the film and I started making my record and somehow magically and miraculously the song emerged , ' Masterpiece , ' so thank you , Guy Oseary , for being so irritating . " 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Masterpiece " is a midtempo pop ballad featuring basic recording and production by Orbit . It was recorded in two locations , 3 : 20 Studios , Los Angeles , California and MSR Studios , New York , New York . Madonna reflected on the recording sessions with Orbit : " We 've worked on stuff for so many years that we kind of finish each other 's sentences . He knows my taste and what I like . Magic happens when we get into a recording studio together . " Additional production came from Harry , who also played acoustic guitars , keyboards , vocoder and did the programming for the track . Demacio " Demo " Castellon mixed and engineered the song with help from Frank <unk> , while Angie Teo did additional engineering and editing . Other personnel working on " Masterpiece " was Ron Taylor who did protools editing and further editing from Stephen " The Koz " Kozmeniuk . 
 In " Masterpiece " , Madonna sings about the pain of being in love with someone who is a great work of art , with the lyrics including " If you were the Mona Lisa , You 'd be hanging in the Louvre , Everyone would come to see you , You 'd be impossible to move . " Madonna said the song describes Wallis Simpson and is " about a woman who has fallen in love with this untouchable thing , this man that was raised to be king . One of the lines of the song ' it must be so hard to always be the chosen one . ' At the end of the day nothing is indestructible , no matter how high you might rise in the world you are still a human being . " Marc Schneider from Billboard described " Masterpiece " as a slowed @-@ down , moody ballad that showcases strong execution of vocals from Madonna . He described the production as " simple , direct and reminiscent of her sound in the 1990s " . The lyrics were described as emotional , and was comparable to the film 's love story , with the chorus as follows : " And I 'm right by your side , Like a thief in the night , I stand in front of a masterpiece . And I can 't tell you why it hurts so much to be in love with a masterpiece . ' Cause after all , nothing 's indestructible " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Masterpiece " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Bradley Stern from MTV wrote that " with its poetic lyrics and gorgeous orchestration , " Masterpiece " is an instant classic addition to Madonna 's back catalog of stellar balladry . " Another review from MTV stated that " the song doesn 't follow Madonna 's usual style of sexy , energetic and <unk> [ sic ] , rather it shows Madge 's wisdom of naked beauty with stripped down vocals , strong penned lyrics and haunting melodies . " Michael Cragg from The Guardian praised the song as one of the best vocal performances on MDNA . Neil McCormick from The Daily Telegraph described the song as " sweet , gentle love song with a Spanish guitar loop , a light beat and flowing melody , filled out by synthetic strings . " Keith Caulfield from Billboard felt that the song is " very pretty " and Madonna vocals are " lovely " . 
 Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly described the song as a throwback to Madonna 's mid @-@ 1990s style . Nick Levine from The National felt that the song would slot neatly onto her 1995 ballads compilation Something to Remember . Blogcritics editor Tyrone S. Reid called the song a " slow @-@ burning instant classic , " which recalls Madonna 's Ray of Light era . A writer for Idolator website said that the song 's minimal production " remind [ s ] us very much of Madge 's American Life days , allowing us to focus on the lovely lyrics and Madonna 's gorgeous vocals . All in all , a terrific effort that bodes well for [ MDNA ] . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy felt that the song 's production is more " organic " and " it doesn 't try to be anything other than a solid pop song . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 On January 15 , 2012 , " Masterpiece " won the Best Original Song category at the 69th Golden Globe Awards . Its nomination sparked <unk> comments on the red carpet from fellow singer Elton John , whose song — " Hello , Hello " from Gnomeo & Juliet — was also nominated in the category . John told host Carson Daly that Madonna " hasn 't got a fucking chance " of winning the award . When Madonna later had her red carpet interview with Daly , she took swipes at John 's masculinity first , asking about his wardrobe : " Was he wearing a dress ? " and after being informed of his comments stating , " May the best man win " . 
 Subsequent to the announcement , John 's husband , David Furnish , opined on his personal Facebook page that " Madonna winning Best Original Song truly shows how these awards have nothing to do with merit " . Madonna commented backstage : " I hope [ Elton John ] speaks to me for the next couple of years . He 's been known to get mad at me so I don 't know . He 's brilliant and I adore him so he 'll win another award . I don 't feel bad ! " Three days later Furnish recanted his comments saying , " My passion for our film Gnomeo & Juliet and belief in Elton 's song really got my emotional juices going , " and continuing by wishing her well on the premiere of W.E. 
 " Masterpiece " was ineligible for the Best Original Song category at the 84th Academy Awards , since it was not " used either in the body of the film , or as the ' first music cue ' in the closing credits ( i.e. the first song that plays once the screen fades to black ) . " It was used too late in the film credits to be eligible . " Masterpiece " was also nominated for Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film at the 2012 World Soundtrack Awards , but lost to Albert Nobbs theme " Lay Your Head Down " by Brian Byrne and Glenn Close . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Masterpiece " was released to radio stations the United Kingdom on April 2 , 2012 . The song reached number 25 on the UK Airplay Chart with 26 @.@ 60 million audience impressions and 660 plays on radio during the eleventh week of 2012 . The song later debuted at number 68 on the UK Singles Chart for issue date of April 7 , 2012 , due to digital download of the track from MDNA . The next week was its final appearance on the chart , dropping at number 87 . In Japan , the song debuted at number 77 on the Japan Hot 100 chart on the issue date of February 13 , 2012 and remained on the chart for one week . The song also debuted on the Japanese Hot Top Airplay at number 58 as well as on the Digital and Airplay Overseas at number 19 . In Czech Republic , the song debuted at number 83 on the official airplay chart for the ninth week of 2012 . It peaked at number 58 in its seventh week and stayed on the chart for 12 weeks . In South Korea , the song debuted at number 147 on the Gaon International Downloads Chart with sales of 2 @,@ 516 copies . The song achieved its strongest chart performance in Russia , where it topped the Russian Music Charts in the week of December 2 , 2012 . It became the sixth most successful song of 2012 with 409 @,@ 334 radio plays across Russia . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Madonna performed " Masterpiece " at The MDNA Tour in 2012 . It was a part of the second segment of the concert , titled Prophecy , where a mix of joyful songs that " bring people together " were performed . The wardrobe during the performance included an all @-@ leather look , a custom design by Hervé Léger and Max Azria , with knee @-@ high boots and a mini fur bolero . After finishing an energetic performance of " Open Your Heart " , Madonna is joined by Basque musicians Kalakan trio and they perform a Basque song called " <unk> Jo " . After that , Madonna sat down to sing an acoustic guitar , fiddle , and beat @-@ based version of " Masterpiece " , as clips from W.E. appeared in the backdrops . The Kalakan trio backed the singer during the performance , while her dancers accompanied Madonna on stage , dressed as soldiers . The performance of the song at the November 19 – 20 , 2012 , shows in Miami , at the American Airlines Arena were recorded and released in Madonna 's fourth live album , MDNA World Tour . 
 Sarah Rodman from The Boston Globe felt that the addition of the Kalakan trio " enriched " the song , which was already a stand @-@ out track from MDNA . Journalist Liz Smith wrote in her blog for The Huffington Post that Madonna 's vocals , when she sings live is " effective and moving " , especially in the performance of " Masterpiece " . This view was shared by Dean Piper from Daily Mirror . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution 's Melissa Ruggieri considered it the show 's highlight , while a writer for The Glasgow Herald felt that the performance invigorated Madonna 's artistic side . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at 3 : 20 Studios , Los Angeles , California and MSR Studios , New York 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) , EMI April Music Inc . , Totally Famous Music and <unk> Music ( ASCAP ) , 
 Personnel 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , vocals 
 Julie Frost – songwriter 
 Jimmy Harry – songwriter , additional production , acoustic guitars , keyboards , vocoder , programming 
 William Orbit – producer 
 Demacio " Demo " Castellon – mixing , engineering 
 Frank <unk> – engineering 
 Angie Teo – engineering , additional editing 
 Ron Taylor – protools editing 
 Stephen " The Koz " Kozmeniuk – additional editing 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the liner notes of MDNA . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Richard M. Daley = 
 Richard Michael Daley ( born April 24 , 1942 ) is an American politician , who served as the 54th Mayor of Chicago , Illinois from 1989 to 2011 . Daley was elected mayor in 1989 and was re @-@ elected five times until declining to run for a seventh term . At 22 years , he was the longest @-@ serving Chicago mayor , surpassing the tenure of his father , Richard J. Daley . Mayor Daley took over the Chicago Public Schools , developed tourism , oversaw the construction of Millennium Park , increased environmental efforts and the rapid development of the city 's central business district downtown and adjacent near North , near South and near West sides . Daley expanded employee benefits to same @-@ sex partners of city workers , and advocated for gun control . Daley was a national leader in privatization and the lease and sale of public assets to private corporations . Daley was criticized when family , personal friends , and political allies seemed to disproportionately benefit from city contracting . Mayor Daley took office in a city with regular annual budget surpluses and left the city with massive structural deficits . His budgets ran up the largest deficits in Chicago history . Prior to serving as mayor , Daley served in the Illinois Senate and then as the Cook County State 's Attorney . Police use of force was an issue in Daley 's tenures as state 's attorney and mayor . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Richard M. Daley is the fourth of seven children and eldest son of Richard J. and Eleanor Daley , the late Mayor and First Lady of Chicago . Daley was raised in Bridgeport , a historically Irish @-@ American neighborhood located on Chicago 's South Side . Daley is a brother of William M. Daley , former White House Chief of Staff and former United States Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton ; John P. Daley , a commissioner on the Cook County Board of Commissioners and chairman of the Board 's Finance Committee ; and Michael Daley , an attorney with Daley & Georges , a law firm founded by their father Richard J. Daley , that specializes in zoning law and is often hired by developers to help get zoning changes through city hall . Daley was married to Margaret " Maggie " Corbett until her death on Thanksgiving Day , November 24 , 2011 after a decade @-@ long battle with metastatic breast cancer , which had spread to her bones and liver ; Maggie Daley Park in the Chicago Loop commemorates her . They have four children : Nora , Patrick , Elizabeth and Kevin , all born at Mercy Hospital and Medical Center in Chicago . Their second son , Kevin , died at age two of complications from spina bifida in 1981 . 
 Daley graduated from De La Salle Institute high school in Chicago and obtained his bachelor 's degree from Providence College in Providence , Rhode Island in 1964 . In 1962 , at age 19 , home on Christmas break , Daley was ticketed for running a stop sign at Huron and Rush , and the Chicago Sun @-@ Times headline was " Mayor 's Son Gets Ticket , Uses No Clout , " with a subhead reading " Quiet Boy . " 
 Sources conflict on Daley 's military record . The only book @-@ length biography of Daley makes no mention of military service . A 1995 profile in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times stated that Daley served in the United States Marine Corps Reserve from 1961 to 1967 , while a 1996 profile in People Magazine cited 1960 to 1964 . A civilian website for Marines and their families found no military record for Daley . 
 Daley earned a Juris Doctor degree from DePaul University . He passed the Illinois Bar Examination on his third try . Daley later reflected , " I flunked the bar exam twice . I had to keep studying harder and harder and harder . I passed it the third time . " Daley never tried a case . Daley was elected to his first party office as a delegate to the 1969 Illinois Constitutional Convention . 
 According to journalist Rick <unk> , in June , 1972 , Daley led a mob on behalf of his father 's Democratic Party regulars against pro @-@ McGovern reformers meeting in a church in Illinois ' Fifth Congressional District . The action was unsuccessful and the reformers ' slate ( which included Rev. Jesse Jackson ) replaced the Daley slate at the Democratic National Convention in Miami Beach , Florida . 
 After his father died in 1976 , Daley succeeded his father as the 11th Ward Democratic committeeman , a party post , until succeeded in the post by his brother John P. Daley in 1980 . With John P. Daley holding the post from 1980 to the present , a Daley has held the post of 11th Ward Committeeman for 60 years . 
 = = Illinois State Senate ( 1972 – 1980 ) = = 
 With the support of the Democratic political organization , Daley was elected to the Illinois Senate , serving from 1972 to 1980 . State Senator Daley rarely spoke to reporters and didn 't hold a news conference for six years . Daley chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee . Daley was named one of Illinois ' ten worst state legislators by Chicago Magazine " for arrogance , for <unk> qualities , for living off his father 's name , and for pulling puppet strings attached to some of the worst members of the Senate . " He was considered " too shrewd to be one of the worst , but he controls so many of the worst senators that he belongs on the list to represent all of them . " After the Spring 1975 state legislative session , Chicago Democrat Dawn Clark <unk> , who served with Daley as Illinois Constitutional Convention delegates and as State Senators , blamed " dirty little Richie " for frustrating her good government legislative agenda in the state legislature . 
 = = Cook County State 's Attorney ( 1981 – 1989 ) = = 
 Daley challenged incumbent Republican Bernard Carey for Cook County State 's Attorney . Democratic Mayor Jane Byrne endorsed Alderman Edward M. Burke in the Democratic primary , and after Daley prevailed in the primary , endorsed Carey in the general election . Daley prevailed and served from 1981 to 1989 . 
 = = = Police torture reported to Daley , 1982 = = = 
 In February 1982 , Andrew Wilson was arrested for the murder of two Chicago police officers . Wilson was taken to Area 2 detective headquarters on the South Side for interrogation under Chicago Police Detective Jon Burge . Dr. John <unk> , Medical Director of Cermak Health Services , the prison hospital in the Cook County Hospital system , examined Wilson , determined Wilson had been tortured , and complained in writing to then Chicago Police Superintendent Richard Brzeczek : 
 I examined Mr. Andrew Wilson on Feb. 15 & 16 , 1982 . He had multiple bruises , swellings and abrasions on his face and head . His right eye was battered and had a superficial laceration . Andrew Wilson had several linear blisters on his right thigh , right cheek and anterior chest which were consistent with radiator burns . He stated he 'd been cuffed to a radiator and pushed into it . He also stated that electrical shocks had been administered to his gums , lips and genitals . All these injuries occurred prior to his arrival at the Jail . There must be a thorough investigation of this alleged brutality . 
 Brzeczek forwarded the letter to State 's Attorney Daley . Daley never replied , and charges were never brought against any officers . Daley 's prosecutors convicted Wilson and his brother Jackie of murder , and Andrew Wilson was sentenced to death . On April 2 , 1987 the Illinois Supreme Court overturned the convictions , ruling that Wilson was forced to confess involuntarily after being beaten by police . 
 = = = First campaign for Mayor , 1983 : challenge to Jane Byrne = = = 
 In November 1982 , Daley announced his first campaign for mayor . The candidates in the three @-@ way Democratic primary , which included incumbent Mayor Jane Byrne , a former protegée of his father , and Congressman Harold Washington , held a series of four televised debates . Daley finished third . Many of Richard J. ' s political allies blamed Richard M. for splitting the white vote , enabling Washington to become Chicago 's first black mayor . 
 = = = Second campaign for Mayor , 1989 : challenge to Eugene Sawyer = = = 
 On November 25 , 1987 , Mayor Washington died in office of a heart attack . On December 2 , 1987 , the Chicago City Council appointed Alderman Eugene Sawyer as mayor until a special election for the remaining two years of the term could be held in 1989 . Daley announced his candidacy on December 6 , 1988 , saying 
 Let 's face it : we have a problem in Chicago . The name @-@ calling and politics at City Hall are keeping us from tackling the real issues ... I may not be the best speaker in town , but I know how to run a government and how to bring people together . 
 Rahm Emanuel worked for the Daley campaign as a fundraiser , David Axelrod as campaign strategist , William Daley as chief strategist , and Forrest Claypool as a campaign aide . Among four Daley campaign appearances on a Sunday shortly before the primary was a rally of Polish Highlanders at <unk> S. Archer Ave . In a videotaped television newscast , it appeared that Daley said , " You want a white mayor to sit down with everybody . " Sawyer said he was " shocked . " Daley explained , " It was my standard stump speech . I 'm not maybe the best speaker in town , but I have never used the word [ white ] . " That Friday , the campaign watchdog group <unk> censured Daley and commended Sawyer for his " rejection of racially inflammatory comments . " 
 Daley defeated Sawyer in the primary . In the 1989 general election , Daley faced Republican candidate Edward Vrdolyak , a former Democratic alderman who had opposed Mayor Washington , and Alderman Timothy C. Evans , the candidate of the newly created Harold Washington Party . After winning the general election on April 4 , 1989 , Daley was inaugurated as Mayor of Chicago on April 24 , 1989 , his 47th birthday , at a ceremony in Orchestra Hall . 
 = = Mayor of Chicago ( 1989 – 2011 ) = = 
 = = = First term ( 1989 – 1991 ) = = = 
 Daley presided over the most docile City Council since his father . One of the new mayor 's first acts was to <unk> the City Council 's power to approve city contracts , a right aldermen exercised under former Mayors Washington and Sawyer . Daley 's first budget proposal , the 1990 budget , included $ 3 billion in spending , $ 50 million more than 1989 , featured a $ 25 million reduction in the property tax levy , extended Mayor Sawyer 's hiring freeze , piloted recycling , and privatized the City 's tow truck fleet . Daley became the first Chicago Mayor to lead Chicago 's Gay and Lesbian Pride Parade , at the 20th annual parade on Sunday , June 26 , 1989 . On August 22 , 1990 , Daley told reporters that " people are getting hurt in drive @-@ by shoot @-@ a @-@ longs . " In December 1990 Amnesty International issued a report " Allegations of Police Torture in Chicago , Illinois " calling for a full inquiry into allegations that some Chicago police officers tortured criminal suspects between 1972 and 1984 . 
 = = = Second term ( 1991 – 1995 ) = = = 
 On April 2 , 1991 Daley was re @-@ elected to a second term ( his first full , four @-@ year term ) , with 70 @.@ 7 % of the vote , over African American civil rights attorney and Appellate Judge R. Eugene Pincham . Questioned about the city 's rising homicide rate on September 10 , 1991 , Daley said " The more killing and homicides you have , the more havoc it prevents . " 
 = = = = Brawl at Daley home in Michigan = = = = 
 On the weekend of March 1 – 2 , 1992 , Daley and his wife arranged for 16 @-@ year @-@ old son Patrick to stay with relatives while they attended a family event in New York . Patrick told the relatives he was staying with friends , drove his father 's new sports utility vehicle to the Daley second home in Grand Beach , Michigan and threw a party Saturday night without parental consent or adult supervision . Someone asked two Filipino and two white youths to leave , racial epithets were exchanged , and a fistfight broke out . Patrick fetched Richard J. Daley 's shotgun from the house and gave it to his cousin , who was aged 17 . A youth was seriously injured when a juvenile struck him in the head with a baseball bat . On Monday a sobbing Mayor Daley read a statement at a City Hall press conference , pausing repeatedly as he tried to maintain his composure , 
 I am very disappointed , as any parent would be , after his son held a party in their home while his parents were away . I am more deeply distressed for the welfare of the young man who was injured in this fight . 
 Patrick pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of furnishing alcohol to minors and disturbing the peace and was sentenced to six months ' probation , 50 hours of community service in Grand Beach , fined $ 1 @,@ 950 and ordered to pay restitution to his parents for property damage . His cousin pleaded guilty to aiming a firearm without malice and was fined $ 1 @,@ 235 . Sixteen other youths were charged with juvenile and adult offenses . The injured youth recovered . 
 = = = Third term ( 1995 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Daley took control of the Chicago Public School system in 1995 and appointed Paul Vallas . When Vallas left the post to run for governor , Daley chose the relatively obscure Arne Duncan , now the U.S. Secretary of Education , to lead the district . On March 19 , 1997 , the Chicago City Council adopted the Domestic Partners Ordinance , which made employee benefits available to same @-@ sex partners of City employees . Daley said it was an issue of fairness . 
 = = = = Daley 's floor leader in City Council resigns = = = = 
 The first major public corruption scandal of Daley 's tenure as mayor involved the circumstances of the resignation of his City Council floor leader , Alderman Patrick Huels , in October 1997 . Daley , Huels , and another close friend Michael Tadin grew up within two blocks on S. Emerald Avenue in Bridgeport . Huels attended De La Salle Institute , the same high school attended by Daley , his father , and Michael Bilandic . Huels worked for the city 's Public Works Department as a laborer and tree trimmer , then as an administrative assistant in the Environment Department , and then as a City Council investigator . He answered phones for the 11th Ward Democratic organization , and was its secretary for several years . When Mayor Richard J. Daley died , 11th Ward Alderman Bilandic was named acting mayor , and Huels , then 26 , replaced Bilandic as alderman . Huels chaired the Council 's Transportation Committee and became Mayor Richard J. Daley 's floor leader . In the summer of 2007 , in reaction to ongoing indictments and convictions of aldermen , Daley and Huels shepherded a package of ethics reforms through city council . Huels owned a security firm , SDI Security , Inc. along with his wife and his brother , a Chicago police lieutenant . In the mid @-@ 1990s , the firm had about 390 full @-@ time employees and was grossing $ 7 million a year . Huels was president and a director , and Council Finance Committee Chairman Alderman Edward M. Burke ( 14th ) was secretary . Huels and Burke authorized $ 633 @,@ 971 in legal consulting fees from their respective Council committees to attorney Michael A. Pedicone , a long @-@ time officer of SDI . In March 1995 the Internal Revenue Service placed a lien on SDI for $ 326 @,@ 951 and in June 1996 for $ 997 @,@ 382 for failing to pay payroll taxes , including money withheld from its employees ' pay checks . 
 In 1970 , after high school , Tadin went to work for Marina Cartage ; within a decade , he owned the company , and over the next 15 years expanded it from 20 trucks to 150 . Between 1992 and 1997 , the city paid Marina Cartage and another Tadin company $ 49 million for supplying the city with snow removal and other heavy equipment and operators . Tadin earned millions of dollars by buying land cheaply , then leasing or selling it to the city . Marina Cartage used Huels ' SDI Security services since 1992 . In 1995 , with Huels ' support , the City Council approved a tax reduction which halved the assessment on a new $ 4 @.@ 5 million headquarters and trucking terminal for Marina Cartage at 4450 S. Morgan in Huels ' ward , a tax savings of as much as $ 80 @,@ 000 per year . In 1996 , with Huels ' support , the City Council approved a $ 1 @.@ 1 million direct grant for the construction of the facility . Weeks later , Tadin created a new company which was used to originate a $ 1 @.@ 25 million bailout loan to SDI . Daley said Huels " did the right thing resigning " and claimed no knowledge of Huels ' business dealings . " I don 't get into people 's private lives . I am not into that , " Daley said . Daley announced an executive order and new ethics legislation , saying : 
 The goal of this executive order is to help address questions about favoritism in city contracting by preventing conflicts of interest , or even the appearance of such conflicts . ... There should be a level playing field , where no one has an advantage — or a disadvantage — in obtaining city contracts , simply because they know me or anyone else in government . ... Under the steps I 'm taking today and recommending to the City Council , the public can easily learn everything there is to know about a city contract : who is involved , who will benefit and whether the city is paying a fair price . I and every other city official must be prepared to defend every contract on its merits . 
 = = = Fourth term ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 On February 23 , 1999 , Daley won re @-@ election to a fourth term with 68 @.@ 9 percent of the vote over challenger U.S. Congressman Bobby Rush . In August 1999 , prompted by police excessive @-@ force incidents in Chicago , New York and other cities , the U.S. affiliate of Amnesty International issued a report " Race , Rights & Brutality : Portraits of Abuse in the USA , " that called on federal officials to better document excessive @-@ force cases and to pursue prosecutions of the officers involved . In October 1999 the organization issued a report " Summary of Amnesty International 's concerns on police abuse in Chicago " which expressed concerns including improper interrogation tactics , excessive force , shootings of unarmed suspects , and the detention and interrogation of children . 
 The Duff family formed a janitorial services company , Windy City Maintenance Inc . , one month after Daley 's inauguration . Bruce DuMont , president of the Museum of Broadcast Communications , said that Daley recommended that Dumont 's wife Kathy Osterman , then director of the Mayor 's Office of Special Events , award city contracts to Duff family companies . Daley denied steering contracts to the <unk> , and said he would " look into " the allegations , while stopping short of promising to do so , saying " I don 't promise . That 's the wrong word to use . You know ... promising , promising . We do look into it , yes . " In September 2003 a federal investigation led to indictments of Patricia Green Duff , her sons John M. Duff and James Duff , and others on charges they won nearly $ 100 million in city contracts through the city 's set @-@ aside program by misrepresenting their companies as <unk> and minority @-@ owned . John M. Duff pleaded guilty to 33 counts of racketeering , fraud and other charges on January 10 , 2004 . A 1978 state law designed by Illinois Democrats gave the Mayor the power to appoint to fill vacancies in the City Council rather than holding special elections , and by 2002 more than a third of the Council 's 50 aldermen were initially appointed by Daley . The Council became even more of a rubber stamp than in Richard J. Daley 's terms . In the 18 months from January 12 , 2000 to June 6 , 2001 , only 13 votes in the Council were divided , less than one a month . 32 aldermen supported the mayor 90 @-@ 100 % of the time and another 14 80 @-@ 89 % of the time . 
 = = = Fifth term ( 2003 – 2007 ) = = = 
 On February 26 , 2003 , Daley took 78 @.@ 5 % of the vote to prevail over challenger Reverend Paul Jakes Jr . Daley endorsed same @-@ sex marriage , saying on February 18 , 2004 he would have " no problem " with Cook County issuing marriage licenses to gay couples . Time magazine in its April 25 , 2005 issue named Daley as the best out of five mayors of large cities in the United States , and characterized Daley as having " imperial " style and power . In May 2006 in Geneva , Switzerland the United Nations Committee Against Torture released a report which noted the " limited investigation and lack of prosecution " into allegations of torture in Areas 2 and 3 of the Chicago Police Department and called on American authorities to " promptly , thoroughly and impartially " investigate the allegations , and provide the committee with more information . Daley was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame in 2006 as a Friend of the Community . 
 = = = = Daley orders demolition of Meigs Field = = = = 
 A long @-@ standing agreement between the city and state required the city to maintain and operate Meigs Field , a small , downtown , lakefront airport on Northerly Island used by general aviation aircraft and helicopters , until 2011 or turn it over to the state . On September 12 , 1996 , the City Council approved Daley 's plan to convert the airport into a park , and the state began planning to take over operation of the airport . Fresh off a 2003 re @-@ election mandate , one of Daley 's first major acts was ordering the demolition of Meigs Field . On Sunday night , March 30 , 2003 , shortly before midnight , transport trucks carrying construction equipment moved onto Meigs with Chicago Police escort . By early Monday morning , city crews excavated six large X 's into the only runway . The city 's 50 aldermen , Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich , the Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Homeland Security were not consulted on the plan . The demolition of the runway trapped planes . In the days following , many of those aircraft were able to take off using the taxiway . 
 " To do this any other way would have been needlessly contentious , " Daley explained at a news conference Monday morning . Daley argued that the airport was a threat to Chicago 's high @-@ rise cityscape and its high profile skyscrapers , such as the Sears Tower and the John Hancock Center . Daley criticized the Federal Aviation Administration , saying " Now , think of that ; Mickey and Minnie have it . I mean , I can 't believe that . They get it first before we get it ? " , referring to the post @-@ 9 / 11 air space restrictions in place over Orlando , Florida . " The signature act of Richard Daley 's 22 years in office was the midnight bulldozing of Meigs Field , " according to Chicago Tribune columnist Eric Zorn . " He ruined Meigs because he wanted to , because he could , " Chicago Tribune columnist John Kass wrote of Daley . " The issue is Daley 's increasingly authoritarian style that brooks no disagreements , legal challenges , negotiations , compromise or any of that messy give @-@ and @-@ take normally associated with democratic government , " the Chicago Tribune editorialized . The Federal Aviation Administration cited the City for failure to comply with federal law requiring thirty @-@ day advance notice to the FAA of plans for an airport closure . The city was fined $ 33 @,@ 000 , the maximum allowable . The city paid the fine and repaid $ 1 million in misspent federal airport development grants . Daley defended his actions by claiming that the airport was abandoned , in spite of the fact that the Chicago Fire Department had several helicopters based on the field at the time , in addition to the dozens of private aircraft left stranded . 
 = = = = Hired Truck Program scandal = = = = 
 The $ 40 million @-@ a @-@ year Hired Truck program was the biggest scandal of Daley 's first 15 years as mayor . The Hired Truck Program hired private truck companies to do city work . A six @-@ month investigation by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times resulted in a three @-@ day series of articles in January 2004 that revealed some participating companies were being paid for doing little or no work , had American Mafia connections or were tied to city employees , or paid bribes to get into the program . Between 1996 and 2004 , companies in the Hired Truck Program gave more than $ 800 @,@ 000 in campaign contributions to various politicians , including Daley , House Speaker Michael Madigan , and Governor Rod Blagojevich ; Daley received at least $ 108 @,@ 575 and his brother John Daley and his ward organization more than $ 47 @,@ 500 . 
 Mark Gyrion , Daley 's second cousin , was a superintendent of garages for the City 's Water Management Department , and among his duties was deciding when City @-@ owned trucks should be sold for scrap . Gyrion 's mother @-@ in @-@ law 's firm , Jacz Transportation , participated in the Hired Truck Program , receiving about $ 1 million between 1998 and 2004 . Jacz Transportation bought a truck three days after the city sold it to a Franklin Park dealership and then leased it back to the city . Gyrion was accused of failing to disclose his mother @-@ in @-@ law 's role in the Hired Truck Program and the transfer of the truck . Gyrion was fired and Jacz Transportation was one of 13 truck companies suspended from the Hired Truck program . About 35 % of the 70 firms in the program were suspended or referred to the city 's Inspector General . The program was overhauled in 2004 , and phased out in 2005 . 
 = = = = Daley patronage chief among officials convicted of fraud = = = = 
 On July 5 , 2006 , Robert Sorich , formally , director of the Mayor 's Office of Intergovernmental Affairs and , informally , Daley 's patronage chief , and Timothy McCarthy , Sorich 's aide , were each convicted on two counts of mail fraud connected to rigging blue @-@ collar city jobs and promotions . Sorich 's best friend , former Streets and Sanitation official Patrick Slattery was convicted of one count of mail fraud . A former Streets and Sanitation managing deputy commissioner was found guilty of lying to federal agents about political hiring . Sorich , McCarthy and Slattery lived in the Bridgeport neighborhood in 11th Ward , the Daley family 's home neighborhood and ward . " I 've never known them to be anything but hard working , and I feel for them at this difficult time , " Daley said . " It is fair criticism to say I should have exercised greater oversight to ensure that every worker the city hired , regardless of who recommended them , was qualified and that proper procedures were always followed , " Daley admitted a few days later . Weeks later , David Axelrod , a Democratic political consultant whose clients included Daley , defended patronage in an op @-@ ed in the Chicago Tribune . 
 = = = = Daley son concealed city contracting = = = = 
 Mayor Daley 's son Patrick R. Daley was an MBA student at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business working as an unpaid intern at Cardinal Growth , a Chicago venture capital firm , when he profited from two Cardinal Growth ventures formed to win city contracts while concealing his role . Patrick 's cousin , and Mayor Daley 's nephew , is Robert G. Vanecko . In June 2003 , Patrick and Vanecko formed a Delaware company , MSS Investors LLC , and invested $ 65 @,@ 000 each . MSS Investors LLC in turn purchased a 5 % stake in Municipal Sewer Services , a Cardinal Growth venture . Patrick and Vanecko failed to disclosed their ownership stake in Municipal Sewer Services as required by city ethics ordinances . Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc. was one of the largest black @-@ owned contractors in the Hired Truck program . Municipal Sewer Services partnered with Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc. in their bid for City sewer @-@ inspection contracts . Five months after Patrick and Vanecko became owners , Municipal Sewer Services ' city contract was extended by $ 3 million , the first of two no @-@ bid contract extensions , totalled an additional 23 months and $ 4 million . Patrick and Vanecko cashed out their initial investment after about a year as the federal investigation into the Hired Truck program advanced . Patrick and Vanecko got a $ 13 @,@ 114 " tax distribution " in December 2004 . Patrick , then 29 and a recent University of Chicago MBA graduate , enlisted in the US Army . The day after the Mayor 's son 's and nephew 's hidden involvement in the city contract was disclosed by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Daley spoke at a Chicago police recruit graduation ceremony , then left for Fort Bragg , North Carolina to see his son deployed . Before departing , Mayor Daley read a statement to reporters , his voice cracking , fighting back tears , 
 I did not know about [ Patrick 's ] involvement in this company . As an adult , he made that decision . It was a lapse in judgement for him to get involved with this company . I wish he hadn 't done it . I know the expectations for elected officials , their families , are very high — rightfully so — especially for me . ... Patrick is a very good son . I love him . Maggie and I are very proud of him . I hope you respect I have nothing more to say on this . 
 Mayor Daley also said he didn 't know if there were other city contracts involving the younger Daley . The city 's Inspector General and federal authorities began investigations in December 2007 . Patrick and Vanecko hired criminal defense attorneys . Municipal Sewer Services LLC folded in April 2008 . In January 2011 , Anthony Duffy , the president of Municipal Sewer Services , was charged with three counts of mail fraud in conjunction with minority @-@ contracting and Jesse Brunt and his company , Brunt Brothers Transfer Inc . , were indicted on three counts of mail fraud . Patrick and Vanecko were not charged . 
 In 2005 , Concourse Communications , another Cardinal Growth venture , signed a city contract for airport wi @-@ fi service at city @-@ owned O 'Hare and Midway airports . For years , the Daley administration maintained that Patrick had no financial stake in the deal . Concourse disclosed its investors to the city , as required , but Patrick was not reported . Patrick lined up investors for Concourse . On June 27 , 2006 , nine months after Concourse signed the contract , Concourse was sold at a 33 % profit to Boingo Wireless Inc. for $ 45 million . On June 30 , 2006 , Patrick received the first of five payments totalling $ 708 @,@ 999 . On December 3 , 2007 , shortly after Patrick received the last of those payments , Mayor Daley 's press secretary , Jacquelyn Heard said Patrick Daley " has no financial interest with the wi @-@ fi contract at O 'Hare . " The Chicago Sun @-@ Times editorialized , " ... the conflict of interest was blatant . " 
 = = = = Park Grill contracting scandal = = = = 
 In 2003 an operating company included over 80 investors , including some of Mayor Daley 's friends and neighbors won , under controversial circumstances , a lucrative contract to operate the Park Grill , the only restaurant in the new Millennium Park . In 2005 Daley criticized the deal , saying that the city wanted to renegotiate the pact . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times dubbed the Park Grill the " Clout Cafe " and included the contract award process in a year @-@ end review of 2005 Daley administration scandals . The contract was never renegotiated , and after Daley announced he would not seek a seventh term , the owners of the Park Grill sought to sell . Deposed in August , 2013 in Mayor Rahm Emanuel 's administration 's lawsuit to renegotiate the contract , former Mayor Daley responded " I don 't recall " 139 times . 
 = = = = Long @-@ term leases of public infrastructure = = = = 
 In January 2006 , Skyway Concession Company , a joint venture between the Australian Macquarie Infrastructure Group and Spanish Cintra <unk> de Infraestructuras de Transporte S.A. , paid the City $ 1 @.@ 83 billion for rights to operate the Chicago Skyway and collect tolls for 99 years . The deal was the first of its kind in the U.S. In December 2006 , Morgan Stanley paid Chicago $ 563 million for a 99 @-@ year lease of the city 's parking garages . " I 'm the one who started talking about leasing public assets . No other city has done this in America , " Daley recalled in 2009 . Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning commentator George F. Will wrote of the deals in the Washington Post , 
 Unfortunately , Daley 's theory — that it can be better to get a sum X immediately , rather than getting over many years a sum Y that is substantially larger than X — assumes something that cannot be assumed . It assumes that governments will prudently husband sudden surges of revenue from the lease or sale of assets . 
 = = = Sixth term ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = = 
 On February 6 , 2008 , the Chicago City Council approved , by a 41 – 6 vote , an increase in the city 's real estate transfer tax to fund the Chicago Transit Authority . Presiding over the meeting , Daley harshly <unk> the dissenting aldermen . On March 15 , 2010 , Daley appointed two aldermen on the same day , bringing to 19 the number of alderman initially appointed by Daley . 
 = = = = More long @-@ term leases of public infrastructure = = = = 
 In September 2008 , Chicago accepted a $ 2 @.@ 52 billion bid on a 99 @-@ year lease of Midway International Airport to a group of private investors , but the deal fell through due to the collapse of credit markets during the 2008 – 2012 global recession . In 2008 , as Chicago struggled to close a growing budget deficit , the city agreed to a 75 @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 16 billion deal to lease its parking meter system to an operating company created by Morgan Stanley . Daley said the " agreement is very good news for the taxpayers of Chicago because it will provide more than $ 1 billion in net proceeds that can be used during this very difficult economy . " The agreement quadrupled rates , in the first year alone , while the hours which people have to pay for parking were broadened from 9 a.m. – 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. – 9 p.m. , and from Monday through Saturday to every day of the week . Additionally , the city agreed to compensate the new owners for loss of revenue any time any road with parking meters is closed by the city for anything from maintenance work to street festivals . In three years , the proceeds from the lease were all but spent . 
 = = = = Failed Olympic bid = = = = 
 In 2007 Daley entered into ten @-@ year contracts with the city 's labor unions to preclude labor unrest as Chicago launched a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympic Games . For months in 2009 , Daley promoted the economic benefits of the proposal to the city and its corporate community . Many thought the games would be a capstone of Daley 's career . On October 2 , 2009 , in a major disappointment for Daley , Chicago was the first of four finalists to be eliminated during selection ceremonies in Copenhagen . According to a March 2011 report from the city 's Office of the Inspector General , 
 By signing a 10 @-@ year ( contract ) with the Teamsters ( and with over 30 other unions representing city employees ) , the current administration and City Council unduly hamstrung not only the current management of city government , but the next six years of management as well , a period that extends well beyond the elected terms of the incoming administration and City Council . 
 = = = = Gun control = = = = 
 " If it was up to me , no one except law enforcement officers would own a handgun . But I understand that 's impractical , " Daley told attendees at a conference of gun control advocates in Washington , D.C. in 1998 , during his third term . Daley was a member of the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition , an organization formed in 2006 and co @-@ chaired by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Boston Mayor Thomas Menino . On January 17 , 2006 , during Daley 's fifth term , at a joint press conference with Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich calling for a statewide ban on semi @-@ automatic assault weapons , Daley said , " If we are really to make the progress that we want , we have to keep the most dangerous weapons that are right here off of our streets . " 
 The US Supreme Court took up McDonald v. Chicago , 561 U.S. <unk> , 130 <unk> 3020 ( 2010 ) , which challenged handgun bans in the Chicago and in the neighboring suburb of Oak Park . In May 2010 , Daley held a press conference to address gun control and a pending possible adverse decision in McDonald v. Chicago . After Mick <unk> , a reporter for the Chicago Reader , questioned the effectiveness of the city 's handgun ban , Daley picked up a rifle with a bayonet from a display table of confiscated weapons and told him , " If I put this up your butt , you 'll find out how effective it is . Let me put a round up your , you know . " The remark was voted " the <unk> thing that Mayor Richard Daley the Younger has ever said " in an online poll by the Chicago Tribune . 
 On June 28 , 2010 , the US Supreme Court held , in a 5 – 4 decision in McDonald v. Chicago , that the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was incorporated under the Fourteenth Amendment , thus protecting the right of an individual to " keep and bear arms " from local governments , and all but declared Mayor Jane Byrne 's 1982 handgun ban unconstitutional . That afternoon , at a press conference concerning the gun ban , Daley said , 
 " We 'll publicly propose a new ordinance very soon ... As a city we must continue to stand up ... and fight for a ban on assault weapons ... as well as a crackdown on gun shops ... We are a country of laws not a nation of guns . " 
 Daley called a special meeting of the city council for four days later , and the Council approved a gun control ordinance revised to include city firearms licences . 
 = = = = Daley budget deficits and fund draw @-@ downs = = = = 
 Daley came into office in a city with revenue @-@ generating assets , manageable debt and flush pension funds , but he left behind a city with a structural deficit that Mayor @-@ elect Rahm Emanuel estimated at $ 1 @.@ 2 billion when under @-@ funded pension funds were included . The Daley administration 's expenditures exceeded revenues by hundreds of millions of dollars a year . In August 2010 , Fitch Ratings downgraded the city 's bond credit rating , citing the administration 's use of reserve funds for general operating expenses and under @-@ funding of its pension funds , and noted that the city faced rising fixed operating costs yet lacked plans for new revenue . Wall Street analysts noted that the Daley administration began drawing on the city 's reserves as early as 2006 , before the 2008 – 2012 global recession . " While there had been sound economic growth in years prior to 2008 , there were still sizable fund balance drawdowns in both 2006 and 2007 , " Fitch wrote . The city 's budgets continued to increase even after the recession began , to more than $ 6 billion a year , and , when under @-@ funded city employee pension funds were included , the city 's annual deficit exceeded $ 1 billion . In January 2011 , Moody 's Investors Service downgraded to a " negative " outlook some of the revenue bonds issued for the $ 15 billion O 'Hare Modernization Program and related infrastructure projects , citing the city 's plan to postpone repayment of interest and principal on some construction bonds . 
 In his annual budget address in City Council Chambers on October 15 , 2008 , Daley proposed a 2009 budget totaling $ 5 @.@ 97 billion , including not filling 1 @,@ 350 vacancies on the 38 @,@ 000 employee city payroll and $ 150 million in new revenue from a then @-@ obscure parking meter lease deal to help erase a $ 469 million budget shortfall . The Daley administration employed an in @-@ house staff of more than 50 public relations officers across City departments at a cost of $ 4 @.@ 7 million , and millions more on seven private public relations firms . " It 's worth it " , Daley said . On the first day of City Council hearings on Daley 's 2009 budget proposal , several aldermen questioned the administration 's public relations spending . On November 4 , 2008 , Jacquelyn Heard , the mayor 's press secretary , said the city would halt spending on 10 public relations contracts that could have paid as much as $ 5 million each . 
 In his annual budget address on October 21 , 2009 , Daley projected a deficit for 2009 of more than $ 520 million . Daley proposed a 2010 budget totaling $ 6 @.@ 14 billion , including spending $ 370 million from the $ 1 @.@ 15 billion proceeds from the parking meter lease . In his annual budget address on October 13 , 2010 , Daley projected a deficit for 2010 of $ 655 million , the largest in city history . Daley proposed a 2011 budget totaling $ 6 @.@ 15 billion , including spending all but $ 76 million of what remained of the parking meter lease proceeds , and received a standing ovation from aldermen . 
 = = = = Daley declines to run for seventh term = = = = 
 Daley 's approval rating was at an all @-@ time low of 35 % by late 2009 . On September 7 , 2010 , Daley announced that he would not seek a seventh term . " I 've always believed that every person , especially public officials , must understand when it 's time to move on . For me , that time is now , " Daley said . On December 26 , 2010 , Daley surpassed his father as Chicago 's longest @-@ serving mayor . Daley chaired his final city council meeting on Wednesday morning , May 11 , 2011 and his term ended May 16 , 2011 . Daley was succeeded by Rahm Emanuel . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Daley was supported by Chicago 's traditionally Republican business community . He came under criticism for focusing city resources on the development of businesses downtown , the North , Near South , and Near West Sides , while neglecting neighborhoods in the other areas of the city ; in particular the needs of low @-@ income residents . According to Chicago Tribune columnist Steve Chapman , " Daley lasted 22 years in office partly because he resolved to ingratiate himself with black Chicagoans . He appointed blacks to high positions , stressed his commitment to provide services to all neighborhoods , tore down public housing projects , and pushed reform of the minority @-@ dominated public schools . " Daley focused on Chicago as a tourist destination as opposed to a manufacturing base , improved and expanded parkland , added flower planters along many primary streets , and oversaw the creation of Millennium Park on what had previously been an abandoned train yard . He spearheaded the conversion of Navy Pier into a popular tourist destination . Daley supported immigration reform , and green building initiatives , for which he was presented with an Honor Award from the National Building Museum in 2009 as a " visionary in sustainability . " Chicago avoided some of the most severe economic contractions of other midwest Rust Belt cities such as Detroit and Cleveland . 
 = = Post @-@ mayoral career = = 
 Days after leaving office , the University of Chicago appointed Daley a " distinguished senior fellow " at the Harris School of Public Policy . The five @-@ year , part @-@ time appointment includes responsibility for coordinating a guest lecture series . Weeks after leaving office , Daley joined the international law firm Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP , one of the law firms to which he had awarded no @-@ bid legal work as mayor . Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP had negotiated the city 's much @-@ criticized long @-@ term lease of its parking meters , parking garages , and the Chicago Skyway . Daley joined an exclusive speakers bureau , the Harry Walker Agency , that pays tens of thousands of dollars an appearance . Daley joined the board of directors of The Coca @-@ Cola Company . Daley is a managing principal of Tur Partners LLC , an investment firm , where Daley 's son , Patrick Daley , is a principal . The National Law Journal included Daley in its 2013 list of " The 100 Most Influential Lawyers in America , " based on " his political connections — the best in Chicago . " 
 = = Publications = = 
 Daley , Richard M. ( 2013 @-@ 02 @-@ 13 ) . " US Must Side with Its Young Not Its Guns " . Financial Times . Retrieved 2013 @-@ 04 @-@ 29 . 
 = Long Range Desert Group = 
 The Long Range Desert Group ( LRDG ) was a reconnaissance and raiding unit of the British Army during the Second World War . 
 Originally called the Long Range Patrol ( LRP ) , the unit was founded in Egypt in June 1940 by Major Ralph A. Bagnold , acting under the direction of General Archibald Wavell . Bagnold was assisted by Captain Patrick Clayton and Captain William Shaw . At first the majority of the men were from New Zealand , but they were soon joined by Southern Rhodesian and British volunteers , whereupon new sub @-@ units were formed and the name was changed to the better @-@ known Long Range Desert Group ( LRDG ) . The LRDG never numbered more than 350 men , all of whom were volunteers . 
 The LRDG was formed specifically to carry out deep penetration , covert reconnaissance patrols and intelligence missions from behind Italian lines , although they sometimes engaged in combat operations . Because the LRDG were experts in desert navigation they were sometimes assigned to guide other units , including the Special Air Service and secret agents across the desert . During the Desert Campaign between December 1940 and April 1943 , the vehicles of the LRDG operated constantly behind the Axis lines , missing a total of only 15 days during the entire period . Possibly their most notable offensive action was during Operation Caravan , an attack on the town of Barce and its associated airfield , on the night of 13 September 1942 . However , their most vital role was the ' Road Watch ' , during which they clandestinely monitored traffic on the main road from Tripoli to Benghazi , transmitting the intelligence to British Army Headquarters . 
 With the surrender of the Axis forces in Tunisia in May 1943 , the LRDG changed roles and moved operations to the eastern Mediterranean , carrying out missions in the Greek islands , Italy and the Balkans . After the end of the war in Europe , the leaders of the LRDG made a request to the War Office for the unit to be transferred to the Far East to conduct operations against the Japanese Empire . The request was declined and the LRDG was disbanded in August 1945 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Before the war , Major Ralph Bagnold learned how to maintain and operate vehicles , how to navigate , and how to communicate in the desert . On 23 June 1940 he met General Archibald Wavell , the commander of the Middle East Command in Alexandria and explained his concept for a group of men intended to undertake long @-@ range reconnaissance patrols to gather intelligence behind the Italian lines in Libya . General Wavell was familiar with desert warfare , having been a liaison officer with the Egyptian Expeditionary Force during the First World War , and he understood and endorsed Bagnold 's suggested concept . Wavell assisted in equipping the force . 
 The unit , initially known as the No.1 Long Range Patrol Unit ( LRP ) , was founded on 3 July 1940 . Bagnold wanted men who were energetic , innovative , self @-@ reliant , physically and mentally tough , and able to live and fight in seclusion in the Libyan desert . Bagnold felt that New Zealand farmers would possess these attributes and was given permission to approach the 2nd New Zealand Division for volunteers ; over half the division volunteered . Two officers and 85 other ranks including 18 administrative and technical personnel were eventually selected , coming mostly from the Divisional Cavalry Regiment and the 27th Machine @-@ Gun Battalion . Once the men had been recruited , they started training in desert survival techniques and desert driving and navigation , with additional training in radio communications and demolitions . 
 The LRP could initially form only three units , known as patrols , but a doubling of strength allowed the addition of a new Heavy Section . In November 1940 , the name of the LRP was changed to the " Long Range Desert Group " ( LRDG ) , and the New Zealanders were joined by volunteers from British and Southern Rhodesian regiments . The British volunteers , who came mostly from the Brigade of Guards and Yeomanry regiments , were incorporated into their own patrols . The original patrol unit consisted of two officers and 28 other ranks , equipped with a Canadian Military Pattern ( CMP ) Ford 15 Imperial hundredweight ( cwt ) truck and 10 Chevrolet 30 cwt trucks . In March 1941 new types of trucks were issued and the patrol units were split into half @-@ patrols of one officer and 15 – 18 men in five or six vehicles . Each patrol incorporated a medical orderly , a navigator , a radio operator and a vehicle mechanic , each of whom manned a truck equipped for their role . 
 = = Patrols = = 
 The Long Range Patrol comprised a 15 @-@ man headquarters with Bagnold in command . There were three sub @-@ units : ' R ' Patrol commanded by Captain Donald Gavin Steele , ' T ' Patrol commanded by Captain Patrick Clayton and ' W ' Patrol commanded by Captain Edward ' Teddy ' Cecil Mitford . ' T ' and ' W ' Patrols were combat units while ' R ' Patrol was intended to be a support unit . 
 In November 1940 , the LRP was reorganised and re @-@ designated the Long Range Desert Group . It was expanded to six Patrols : ' T ' , ' W ' and ' R ' Patrols were joined by ' G ' , ' S ' and ' Y ' Patrols . Each patrol was expected to belong to the same regimental group , but only the Brigade of Guards and the Yeomanry regiments formed their own Patrols , ' G ' and ' Y ' respectively . The men of ' G ' Patrol were drawn from the 3rd Battalion Coldstream Guards and the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards under command of Captain Michael Crichton @-@ Stuart . The ' Y ' Patrol men were drawn from the Nottinghamshire Yeomanry under command Captain P. J. D. <unk> , with additional men from the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers and the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders . In December 1940 , ' W ' Patrol was disbanded and its personnel used to bring ' R ' and ' T ' Patrols up to strength , while ' G ' Patrol took over their vehicles . By June 1941 the LRDG was re @-@ organised into two squadrons : the New Zealand and Rhodesian ' A ' Squadron with ' S ' , ' T ' and ' R ' Patrols , and ' B ' Squadron with ' G ' , ' H ' and ' Y ' Patrols . There was also a Headquarters Section along with signals , survey and light repair sections . A Heavy section , initially equipped with four 6 @-@ ton Marmon @-@ Herrington trucks , was used to provide logistical support by transporting supplies to bases and setting up hidden replenishment points at pre @-@ arranged locations . In addition there was an Air Section , using Waco <unk> @-@ 7 and <unk> biplanes which transported key personnel , evacuated wounded and performed other liaison tasks . 
 In August 1941 an artillery unit was formed to attack Italian forts more effectively . Initially it used a QF 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzer carried on a 10 @-@ ton Mack NR 4 truck , with an accompanying light tank as an armoured observation post . However , these were handed over to the Free French at Kufra . The unit was then issued a 25 pounder portee . After successfully attacking and capturing the El <unk> fort , the truck had to be abandoned and the experiment ended . 
 = = = Squadrons = = = 
 In October 1941 the LRDG was expanded to 10 patrols by the simple method of splitting the existing patrols into two @-@ half patrols ; the New Zealanders formed A Squadron comprising ' R1 ' , ' R2 ' , ' T1 ' , and ' T2 ' Patrols and the British and Rhodesians formed B Squadron comprising ' G1 ' , ' G2 ' , ' S1 ' , ' S2 ' , ' Y1 ' , and ' Y2 ' Patrols . The ' H ' Patrol had been disbanded in September 1941 after three months service . 
 These two squadrons were joined in December 1941 by the Indian Long Range Squadron , which had been formed by volunteers from the 2nd Lancers , 11th Cavalry and the 18th Cavalry , all part of the 3rd Indian Motor Brigade . The Indian Squadron was organized along ethnic and religious lines with the first two patrols originally known as ' J ' ( Jats ) and ' R ' ( Rajput ) Patrols . Their designations were changed to ' I1 ' and ' I2 ' to avoid confusion . In October 1942 two further Indian patrols were formed : ' M ' ( Muslim ) and ' S ' ( Sikh ) Patrols , which became the ' I3 ' and ' I4 ' Patrols . No. 1 Demolition Squadron , commanded by Major Vladimir ' <unk> ' <unk> , was briefly attached to the LRDG from December 1942 . 
 The vehicles of each patrol adopted their own markings . The New Zealand ' R ' Patrol used a green Hei @-@ tiki with a red tongue painted on the right side of the bonnet of the vehicle and on the left they put a Māori place name beginning with the letter ' R ' ( for example , ' <unk> ' ) . The ' T ' Patrol vehicles had a black Kiwi over green ' grass ' and a Māori name starting with ' Te ' ( for example , ' Te <unk> ' ) in the corresponding places . The ' W ' Patrol vehicles had a Māori name or word starting with ' W ' painted on their vehicles . 
 The British ' G ' Patrol vehicles carried no distinctive markings , although some vehicles had the Guards insignia . They took over ' W ' Patrol 's vehicles when that unit was disbanded . The ' Y ' Patrol vehicles were slightly different ; ' Y1 ' half @-@ patrol vehicles all had names of famous drinking establishments ( such as ' Cock O ’ The North ' ) and ' Y2 ' half @-@ patrol had names from the Three Musketeers books ( for example , ' Aramis ' ) on the left side of their vehicle bonnets . The Headquarters Section used a sequence of letters arranged in a square ( see photo of " Louise " ) . The Rhodesian ' S ' Patrol vehicles had names with a Rhodesian connection ( such as ' Salisbury ' ) painted on the left side of the vehicles ' bonnets . By 1943 the practice of naming replacement vehicles was dropped . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = Vehicles = = = 
 The LRDG vehicles were mainly two wheel drive , chosen because they were lighter and used less fuel than four wheel drive . They were stripped of all non @-@ essentials , including doors , windscreens and roofs . They were fitted with a bigger radiator , a condenser system , built up leaf springs for the harsh terrain , wide , low pressure desert tyres , sand mats and channels , plus map containers and a sun compass devised by Bagnold . Wireless trucks had special compartments built into the bodywork to house wireless equipment . Initially the LRDG patrols were equipped with one Canadian Military Pattern ( CMP ) Ford 15 cwt <unk> truck for the commander , while the rest of the patrol used up to 10 Chevrolet 30 cwt WB trucks . From March 1941 the 30 cwt Chevrolets were replaced by the CMP Ford 30 cwt <unk> , although in some ways this was a retrograde step ; because they were four wheel drive and heavier than the Chevrolets , they used twice as much fuel , which in turn reduced the range of a patrol . From March 1942 the Fords were progressively replaced by 200 Canadian Chevrolet 1533 X2 30 <unk> which had been specially ordered for the LRDG . From July 1942 Willys Jeeps began to be issued for the patrol commander and patrol sergeant . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 The patrol vehicles were initially armed with 11 Lewis machine guns , four Boys anti @-@ tank rifles and a Bofors 37 mm anti @-@ tank gun distributed amongst their vehicles . By December 1940 , the vehicle armaments had been improved and ' T ' Patrol , for example , had five .303 Vickers Medium Mk . I machine guns , five Lewis guns , four Boys anti @-@ tank guns and the Bofors 37 mm . Another Vickers gun used was the heavy Vickers .50 machine gun , which would be mounted at the rear of the vehicle . All of the unit 's vehicles were armed with at least one gun ; each vehicle was fitted with six to eight gun mountings , but normally only two or three of them would be in use . 
 Supplementing their army @-@ supplied weapons , the LRDG was equipped with surplus Royal Air Force ( RAF ) aircraft guns which were acquired for their high rate of fire . The most widely used of these was the Vickers K machine gun , which was sometimes used mounted in pairs . From mid @-@ 1941 the LRDG acquired .303 Browning Mk II 's from RAF stocks , also mounted in pairs , with a combined rate of fire of 2 @,@ 400 rounds per minute . When new vehicles were issued in March 1942 , several were converted to carry captured dual @-@ purpose 20 mm Breda Model 35s , which replaced the Bofors 37 mm , and each half @-@ patrol was equipped with one Breda " Gun truck " . In September 1942 the .50 Browning AN / M2 heavy machine gun began to replace both calibres of the Vickers machine guns and the Boys anti @-@ tank rifle . 
 The men of the LRDG carried the standard British Second World War small arms , the Short Magazine Lee – Enfield ( SMLE ) No.1 Mk III * being the primary rifle . Other small arms carried were Thompson submachine guns and .38 Enfield , Webley & Scott or .45 Colt <unk> pistols . Several types of hand grenade were used : the Mills bomb , No. 68 Anti @-@ tank and No. 69 's . Each truck was outfitted with a Lee – Enfield <unk> rifle attachment with a discharger cup able to fire the No. <unk> Mills rifle grenade . The LRDG also laid land mines , the most common being the Mk 2 mine . Other explosives used are the Lewes bombs , a custom made weapon using Nobel 808 , were used to destroy aircraft and other targets , and sticky bombs used to destroy enemy vehicles . 
 Captured German and Italian small arms were utilised including the Beretta M 1934 , Luger <unk> and Walther P38 pistols . The German <unk> submachine gun and <unk> , MG42 along with Italian Breda M37 and Breda M38 machine guns were all used . 
 = = = Communications = = = 
 In the LRP most of the radio operators were New Zealanders , but the LRDG radio operators were all from the Royal Corps of Signals . These men were skilled in communications and were able to maintain and repair their equipment without any outside help . On only three occasions did a broken radio prevent a patrol communicating with its headquarters . All LRDG patrols included one vehicle equipped with a Wireless Set No. 11 and a non @-@ military Philips model 635 receiver . The No. 11 Set had been designed for use in tanks , and had transmitter and receiver circuits ; the Royal Signals expected to use the No. 11 set to transmit and receive between 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) and 20 miles ( 32 km ) with the use of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) or 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) antennas . The LRDG used Morse code for all transmissions , and were able to transmit over great distances using either a dipole antenna system attached to a 6 @.@ 3 feet ( 1 @.@ 9 m ) rod antenna mounted on the truck which was adequate up to 500 miles ( 800 km ) , or for greater distances , a Windom dipole system slung between two 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) tall poles . The disadvantage of using the Windom system was that it took time to erect and work out the correct antenna length , so it could only be used in a relatively safe area . To power the No. 11 set extra batteries had to be carried by the radio vehicles . The Philips receiver was used to monitor Greenwich Mean Time ( GMT ) time checks which was vital for desert navigation . 
 While on the move the lead vehicles of the patrol commanders and sergeants flew a small flag . Because the LRP was organised on divisional cavalry lines the leaders carried green flags for ' A ' ( HQ ) Troop , black for ' B ' Troop , yellow for ' C ' Troop and red for ' D ' . When the LRDG was organised into 11 vehicle patrols this was simplified to a green flag displaying the patrol letter in white ; the later half @-@ patrols used a plain green flag on occasion . When it became necessary to change course from an intended route , or in the event of enemy action , patrol movements were controlled by a simple semaphore flag system using blue and white signal flags , or hand signals , depending on how widely dispersed the trucks were . 
 = = = Navigation = = = 
 All trucks of the LRDG were equipped with the Bagnold sun compass and some trucks were also equipped with a <unk> Tank Compass . Each patrol had a navigator who always rode in the second truck in the formation . He was equipped with a theodolite and astronomical position tables with which to plot star sightings , and maps . Watches were used and adjusted each evening using the GMT time check . One major problem faced early on by the LRDG was a lack of accurate maps for Libya in particular . Patrols had to do their own surveys and make their own maps of each route they took . In July 1941 the Survey Section was formed to carry out this task . 
 = = History = = 
 The LRDG area of operations between 1940 – 1943 was the Libyan desert , which stretches about 930 miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) south from the Mediterranean to the Tibesti and the Jebel Uweinat mountains , and about 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ) from the Nile valley in the east to the mountains of Tunisia and Algeria in the west . Paved roads were non @-@ existent and only small tracks and pathways crossed the area . The daytime temperatures could reach 60 ° C ( 140 ° F ) and at night drop below freezing . The only water in the area is found in a number of small oases , which is also where the only vegetation grows . 
 The first LRP patrol began during the Italian invasion of Egypt . ' W ' Patrol commanded by Captain Mitford set out on 15 September 1940 to carry out a reconnaissance of Kufra and Uweinat . Finding no trace of the Italians , they turned south and attacked fuel dumps , aircraft and an Italian convoy carrying supplies to Kufra . ' T ' Patrol , commanded by Captain Clayton , reconnoitred the main route between Kufra and Uweinat , then drove south to meet up with ' W ' Patrol ; both units returned to base , having captured two Italian trucks and official mail . The Italian response to these raids was to reduce their front line forces and increase the number of troops garrisoning the area from 2 @,@ 900 men in September to 5 @,@ 500 by November 1940 . On 27 December 1940 , ' G ' and ' T ' Patrols left Cairo and crossed the desert to northwest of Kufra . On arrival they met with representatives from the Free French forces in Chad , and on 11 January carried out a joint raid on the Italian fort at Murzuk . After two hours ' fighting the fort remained in Italian hands , but the adjoining airfield had been destroyed . The units then withdrew southwards towards the Free French post at Zouar . 
 On 31 January they were intercepted by the Compagnia <unk> di <unk> , an Italian unit similar to the LRDG , in the Gebel Sherif valley . The LRDG had one man killed and three men captured , including Major Clayton , and three trucks destroyed during the battle . The Italians losses were five killed and three wounded , and one truck was abandoned . Four members of the LRDG escaped by walking 200 miles ( 320 km ) to safety in ten days with no food and only a two gallon water can between them . The patrol arrived back in Egypt on 9 February ; it had covered about 4 @,@ 500 miles ( 7 @,@ 200 km ) , experiencing the loss of six trucks , four by enemy action and two by mechanical breakdowns . One vehicle with a broken rear axle had been towed about 900 miles ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) before it could be repaired . Total casualties were three dead and three captured . Major Clayton was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . 
 After Operation Compass ended with the Italians forced out of Cyrenaica it was decided to move the LRDG from Cairo to Kufra ( SE Libya ) . At the same time the LRDG was expanded with the addition of ' Y ' and ' S ' Patrols . When the German Afrika Korps under command of General Erwin Rommel counterattacked in April 1941 , the LRDG was ordered to reinforce the Kufra area . ' R ' Patrol were based at <unk> , ' S ' Patrol at <unk> , and the headquarters LRDG , ' T ' Patrol , and the Free French were at Kufra , under command of Bagnold . The detached ' G ' and ' Y ' Patrols were based at Siwa Oasis , under command of XIII Corps . 
 The LRDG air link was created during the occupation of Kufra by Major Guy Lenox Prendergast . Appreciating the value of aircraft for reconnaissance , liaison , evacuating wounded and flights to GHQ Cairo , he had two Waco aircraft fitted with long range fuel tanks . Prendergast flew one himself and Sergeant R. F. T. Barker flew the other . When Bagnold was appointed to the General Staff Cairo in August 1941 , Prendergast was given command of the LRDG . 
 The LRDG now began a series of patrols behind the Axis lines . Near the end of July ' T ' Patrol left for the desert to the south of the Gulf of Sirte . One ' T ' Patrol truck managed to observe the main coastal road , along which Axis traffic was passing . They were followed two or three weeks later by ' S ' Patrol , who carried out a similar reconnaissance between Jalo oasis and <unk> . Both patrols returned safely to Kufra without being discovered . In August 1941 ' R ' Patrol relieved ' G ' and ' Y ' Patrols at Siwa and was joined by ' T ' Patrol in October . 
 = = = Eighth Army command = = = 
 In November 1941 the LRDG , now under command of the newly formed Eighth Army , moved from Kufra to Siwa ( central Libya ) . The patrols were given the task of watching the desert tracks south of Jebel Akhdar and report any signs of reinforcements and withdrawals . ' R1 ' Patrol was to pick up Captain David Stirling and 30 men who had parachuted behind the lines to raid airfields to the west of Tobruk . Only 21 men arrived at the rendezvous and were returned to the British lines , later becoming the nucleus of the Special Air Service ( SAS ) . One of the other roles assigned to the LRDG was to transport SAS units behind enemy lines ; this continued until the SAS were issued with their own transport in 1942 . In early November ' T2 ' Patrol took four British officers to the Gebel and was to return and collect them three weeks later . The officers were the advance land party of Operation Flipper which had planned to kill General Rommel . 
 On 24 November , in support of Operation Crusader , the LRDG were ordered to attack Axis rear areas . Already on patrol , ' Y1 ' and ' Y2 ' Patrols attacked targets in the <unk> , Derna and Gazala area . ' Y1 ' damaged fifteen vehicles in a transport park and ' Y2 ' captured a small fort and about 20 Italians . ' S2 ' and ' R2 ' Patrols attacked targets in the Benghazi , Barce and <unk> area , where they ambushed nine vehicles . ' G1 ' and ' G2 ' Patrols were assigned the main road near <unk> where ' G1 ' made two attacks on road traffic and shot up a few vehicles . After the Axis forces withdrew from Cyrenaica the LRDG moved to a base at Jalo oasis , about 140 miles ( 230 km ) to the south @-@ south @-@ east of Ajdabiya . 
 The last operations of 1941 were in December , when the LRDG twice ferried the SAS to and from raids on Axis airfields , attacking the airfields at Sirte ( twice ) , El Agheila , Ajdabiya , <unk> and <unk> , and destroying 151 aircraft and 30 vehicles . During the second raid at Sirte , the SAS devised a new method of attacking parked aircraft . They drove the LRDG trucks between the rows of aircraft , which were then engaged by machine guns and hand grenades . Prior to this the procedure had been to quietly infiltrate an airfield and place Lewes bombs on aircraft and vehicles , leaving before the bombs exploded , but this attack was so successful that it became the preferred method for attacking airfields . 
 = = = Road watch = = = 
 When the LRDG was based at Siwa , they took part in what has since became known as the ' Road Watch ' along the Via <unk> ( the Tripoli to Benghazi road ) . Three patrols were engaged on road watch duties at any one time , with one watching the road for a week to 10 days , another would be en route to relieve them and the third was returning to Siwa after having been relieved . The site of the road watch was about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the Marble Arch monument . The road watch patrol would park about 2 miles away from the road and the trucks would be camouflaged using camouflage nets , any local foliage and sand . Before dawn each day two men would move into a well camouflaged position about 350 yards ( 320 m ) from the road . By day they would record the details of all vehicles and troop movements , and at night they would move to about 30 yards ( 27 m ) from the road and guess what type of vehicles were passing by their sound and outline . At daylight they were relieved by another pair of men who took over that day 's road watch . If tanks or a large number of troops were seen passing they would radio the LRDG headquarters at Siwa immediately so that by the time the enemy reached the front line , GHQ at Cairo would know they were coming . Once a patrol was relieved they would transmit details of all they had seen back to Siwa . The LRDG did not lose any men or vehicles when on the road watch , but they did have some close encounters . On 21 March ' R1 ' Patrol was surrounded by a convoy of 27 vehicles and about 200 men who stopped for the night between the watchers and their vehicles . While the road watch was ongoing , other patrols would be attacking targets along other stretches of the Tripoli to Benghazi road , by planting mines or attacking vehicles with machine gun fire . The road was kept under constant observation around the clock from 2 March to 21 July 1942 . 
 After the Battle of Gazala and the fall of Tobruk the LRDG were forced to withdraw from Siwa on 28 June . ' A ' Squadron withdrew to Cairo to resupply and then moved back to Kufra , while ' B ' Squadron moved to Faiyum . 
 = = = Barce = = = 
 With the Eighth Army now holding the El Alamein line , plans were submitted to attack the Axis supply lines and the ports of Benghazi and Tobruk . In September 1942 , British Commandos would attack Tobruk by land and sea ( Operation Agreement ) . The SAS would attack Benghazi ( Operation <unk> ) and the Sudan Defence Force would capture Jalo oasis ( Operation <unk> ) . The LRDG would be used to guide the attacking forces to their targets and at the same time , a LRDG force would attack Barce ( Operation Caravan ) . The Barce force consisted of 17 vehicles and 47 men of ' G1 ' and ' T1 ' Patrols , which had to travel 1 @,@ 155 miles ( 1 @,@ 859 km ) to reach their target . On arrival ' T1 ' Patrol attacked the airfield and ' G1 ' the Barce barracks . The attack on the airfield destroyed 35 aircraft according to an Italian prisoner of war . Official Italian figures quote 16 aircraft destroyed and seven damaged . 
 On 30 September 1942 , the LRDG ceased to be under command of the Eighth Army and came under direct command of GHQ Middle East . The final LRDG operation in North Africa was in Tunisia during the Mareth Offensive when they guided the 2nd New Zealand Division around the Mareth Line in March 1943 . 
 = = = Post 1943 operations = = = 
 In May 1943 the LRDG was sent to Lebanon to retrain in mountain warfare . However , following the Italian armistice in 1943 , they were sent to Leros , one of the Dodecanese islands , to serve as normal infantry . They later took part in the Battle of Leros , where the commanding officer John Richard <unk> was killed and replaced by David Lloyd Owen . After the battle the last New Zealanders , two officers and approximately 46 men , were withdrawn from the LRDG and returned to their division . 
 In December 1943 , the LRDG re @-@ organised into two squadrons of eight patrols . Each patrol contained one officer and 10 other ranks . Major Moir <unk> Darling was given command of the British Squadron and Major Kenneth Henry Lazarus the Rhodesian Squadron . Patrols were then parachuted north of Rome to obtain information about German troop movements , and also carried out raids on the Dalmatian Islands and Corfu . 
 In August 1944 , British Squadron patrols were parachuted into Yugoslavia . One patrol destroyed two 40 feet ( 12 m ) spans of a large railway bridge , which caused widespread disruption to the movement of German troops and supplies . The commanding officer Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Owen and a team of 36 men were parachuted into Albania in September 1944 . Their mission was to follow the German retreat and assist Albanian resistance groups in attacking them . In October 1944 , two British Squadron patrols were parachuted into the Florina area of Greece . Here they mined a road used by the retreating Germans , destroying three vehicles and blocking the road . Firing on the stranded convoy from an adjacent hillside , they directed RAF aircraft in to destroy the rest of the convoy . 
 After the end of the war in Europe , the leaders of the LRDG made a request to the War Office for the unit to be transferred to the Far East to conduct operations against the Japanese Empire . The request was declined and the LRDG was disbanded in August 1945 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Long Range Desert Group was disbanded at the end of the Second World War . The only comparable British Army units today are the Mobility troops of the Special Air Service . Each of the regular army Special Air Service squadrons has a Mobility troop . Like the LRDG , they are specialists in using vehicles , trained in an advanced level of motor mechanics to fix any problem with their vehicles , and are experts in desert warfare . 
 The Long Range Desert Group are one of the Second World War units represented by the Special Air Service Association . Other wartime units represented include all the SAS regiments , the Special Raiding Squadron , the Special Boat Service ( Wartime ) , the Phantom Signal Squadron , the Raiding Support Regiment and the Greek Sacred Squadron . 
 The New Zealand Army erected a permanent memorial to the LRDG at the New Zealand Special Air Service barracks , in the <unk> Military Camp . On 7 August 2009 , two honour boards containing details of every New Zealand soldier who served in the LRDG were unveiled . 
 One of the LRDG 's Chevrolet WB trucks is displayed in the Imperial War Museum in London . It was presented to the museum by the LRDG Association , after being recovered from the Libyan desert in 1983 by David Lloyd Owen , by then a retired Major General and chairman of the Association . It is preserved in the condition in which it was discovered , rusted but largely intact . 
 = = Media appearances = = 
 Lost in Libya - In Search of the Long Range Desert Group ( 2009 ) 
 In 2008 historians Brendan O <unk> ( New Zealand ) , <unk> Goss ( Switzerland ) and Roberto <unk> ( Italy ) travelled to Libya to track down three LRDG trucks that had been abandoned in 1941 at Gebel Sherif , in Southern Libya , after the LRDG 's first encounter with their Italian equivalent , the <unk> . This 65 minute documentary traced their journey , and includes never before seen archival film of the LRDG in action . It was first aired on ANZAC day , 25 April 2009 on Television New Zealand . 
 = Music of Sesame Street = 
 Music has been a part of the children 's television show Sesame Street since its debut on PBS in 1969 . For the first time , music was used as a teaching tool on a TV program for children ; the songs written and performed on the show fulfilled specific purposes and supported its curriculum . The music on Sesame Street consisted of many styles and genres , but was consistent and recognizable so that it could be reproduced . The producers recorded and released dozens of albums of music ; many songs became " timeless classics " . In order to attract the best composers and lyricists , CTW allowed songwriters to retain the rights to the songs they wrote , which allowed them to earn lucrative profits . Sesame Street Book & Record , recorded in 1970 , went gold and won a Grammy . 
 Sesame Street 's songwriters included the show 's first music director Joe Raposo , Jeff Moss , and Christopher Cerf , and scriptwriters like Tony Geiss and Norman Stiles . Raposo and his musical team created a huge amount of music for the show , including dozens of unique songs per show . Raposo was inspired by the goals of Sesame Street , especially in the early days of the show 's production , and composed hundreds of curriculum @-@ inspired songs . Raposo won three Emmys and four Grammys for his work on the show . The " Sesame Street Theme " ( also called " Sunny Day " ) , which has been called " a " siren song for preschoolers " , was written by Raposo , director Jon Stone , and writer Bruce Hart . Raposo also wrote " Bein ' Green , " " Somebody Come and Play " and " C is for Cookie " . " Sing " became a hit for The Carpenters in 1973 . Moss wrote " I Love Trash " , which was included on the first album of Sesame Street songs , and " Rubber Duckie " , which was performed by the Boston Pops and hit # 11 on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1971 , " I Don 't Want to Live on the Moon " and " People in Your Neighborhood " . 
 Artists like Barbra Streisand , Lena Horne , Dizzy Gillespie , Paul Simon , and Jose Feliciano have recorded Raposo 's Sesame Street songs . By 1991 , Sesame Street had been honored with eight Grammys . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 Sesame Street , from its earliest planning and development stages before its debut on PBS in 1969 , has used music as a teaching tool . The show 's creators recognized that children responded to commercial jingles , so they wanted to use their characteristics , which included repetition , clever visuals , brevity , and clarity , in what they presented to young viewers . For the first time in children 's television , the show 's songs fulfilled a specific purpose and supported its curriculum . The show 's creators understood that music and sound effects provided a direct means of teaching children basic skills , and that children learned more effectively when new material was accompanied by a song . Co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney observed in her proposal for the new show , written in 1967 , that children had an " affinity for commercial jingles " , so many of the show 's songs were constructed like television ads . Critic Peter Hellman put it this way : " If [ children ] could recite Budweiser jingles from TV , why not give them a program that would teach the ABCs and simple number concepts ? " 
 The music on Sesame Street consisted of many styles and genres , but it retained its own distinctive sound , which was consistent and recognizable so that it could be reproduced . " There was no other sound like it on television " , Jon Stone , the show 's first director , said . Music was used to encourage children 's dual @-@ attention abilities by allowing them to attend to the show 's action even when not actively watching . In order to be effective , however , Gerald S. Lesser , who supervised research for Sesame Street , stated that because music and sound effects naturally evokes physical participation , they need to be carefully integrated with visual movement . As a result , the songwriters avoided pairing music with static visual presentations . Auditory cues in the form of music or sound effects signaled the entrance of a character or the end and beginning of a sequence . 
 The producers recorded and released its musical content early in the show 's history , to reinforce its curriculum lessons for children when they were not watching it , and for entertainment . Recording albums of the substantial amount of music written for the show , along with publishing books , was the first attempts to generate income and to fund the show and other projects of the Children 's Television Workshop ( the CTW , later renamed the Sesame Workshop ) , the organization that oversaw the production of Sesame Street . 
 Many of the songs written for the show have become what writer David Borgenicht called " timeless classics " In order to attract the best composers and lyricists , CTW allowed songwriters to retain the rights to the songs they wrote . For the first time in children 's television , the writers earned lucrative profits , which helped the show sustain public interest . Sesame Street Book & Record , recorded in 1970 , the first of dozens of albums made up of Sesame Street songs , was also the show 's first cast album . The album went gold and won a Grammy . The final track " Rubber Duckie " , written by Jeff Moss , was released as a single , appeared on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart , and was nominated for a Grammy . The Boston Pops performed with the show 's cast in a television special that aired in 1971 . 
 = = Songs and songwriters = = 
 Sesame Street 's songwriters included the show 's first music director Joe Raposo , Jeff Moss , who Davis called a " gifted poet , composer , and lyricist " , and Christopher Cerf , who Gikow called " the go @-@ to guy on Sesame Street for classic rock and roll as well as song spoofs " . Scriptwriters like Tony Geiss , who wrote approximately 150 songs for the show , and Norman Stiles often also wrote their own lyrics to accompany their scripts . 
 Raposo was brought to Sesame Street by producer Tom Whedon , who was his friend and college roommate , and by Stone , who had worked with Raposo on other productions . Stone found Raposo 's music brilliant , melodic , and simple enough for children to recognize and sing with , but sophisticated . According to writer Michael Davis , Sesame Street 's signature sound grew out of sessions with a seven @-@ piece band consisting of a keyboardist , drummer , electric bass player , guitarist , trumpeter , a winds instrumentalist , and a percussionist . One of these musicians was drummer Danny Epstein , who became the show 's music coordinator in 1970 and performed for the show since its inception . Stone reported that a typical recording session with Raposo , which would often last three days , was " an on @-@ the @-@ fly , off @-@ the @-@ cuff experience " . 
 Raposo and his musical team created a huge amount of music in order to accompany 130 episodes a year , which often included dozens of unique songs per show . Raposo , who wrote over 2 @,@ 000 compositions for Sesame Street , called it a " sausage factory " . Raposo was inspired by the goals of Sesame Street , especially in the early days of the show 's production , and responded by composing , as Davis put it , " a stack " of curriculum @-@ inspired songs . Davis also stated , " In the early days of production , nobody ' got ' the gestalt of Sesame Street faster of better than Raposo " . The show 's researchers reported that they enjoyed working with Raposo , and he enjoyed working with them . They also reported that he would change his songs based upon the researchers ' needs and suggestions , and on the goals of the show 's curriculum . Raposo won three Emmys and four Grammys for his work on the show . 
 Raposo wrote the music to the " Sesame Street Theme " , also known as " Sunny Day " , which Davis called " jaunty " and " deceptively simple " . Stone and writer Bruce Hart were listed as the song 's lyricists ; Stone considered the song " a musical masterpiece and a lyrical embarrassment " . On Epstein 's recommendation , Raposo enlisted jazz harmonica player Jean " Toots " Thielemans , as well as a mixed choir of children , to record the opening and closing themes . The song 's arrangement has changed about six times , but the words have remained the same throughout the years . " Sunny Day " has since become what Davis called a " siren song for preschoolers " . 
 Epstein called Moss " a true gentleman " , and Cooney called him " a true music visionary " . He wrote " I Love Trash " for Oscar the Grouch , which was included on the first album of Sesame Street songs . One of Moss ' best @-@ known compositions for the show was Rubber Duckie ; it was performed by Henson for the Muppet Ernie and also appeared on the album . The song was performed by the Boston Pops and hit # 11 on the Billboard charts in 1971 , and became a hit in Germany in 1996 . Moss also wrote " I Don 't Want to Live on the Moon " and " People in Your Neighborhood " . Epstein called his music " simple " but " not simplistic " . Moss co @-@ wrote over 70 songs with Raposo . 
 Raposo also wrote Bein ' Green in 1970 , again performed by Henson , but this time for Kermit the Frog . Davis calls it " Raposo 's best @-@ regarded song for Sesame Street " , and it has been recorded by several singers , including Frank Sinatra , Van Morrison and Ray Charles . Raposo 's other notable songs written for the show include " Somebody Come and Play " and " C is for Cookie " . " Sing " , which Epstein called " a monument " , became a hit for The Carpenters in 1973 . Barbra Streisand , Lena Horne , Dizzy Gillespie , Paul Simon , and Jose Feliciano also recorded Raposo 's Sesame Street songs . By 1991 , Sesame Street had been honored with eight Grammys . In 2010 , Time Magazine compiled a list of the Top Ten celebrity songs to be featured on the show . The list included older artists such as Smokey Robinson , Johnny Cash and Cab Calloway as well as newer performers like Norah Jones and Feist . 
 = California State Route 76 = 
 State Route 76 ( SR 76 ) is a 52 @.@ 63 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 84 @.@ 70 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of California . It is a frequently used east – west route in the North County region of San Diego County that begins in Oceanside near Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and continues east . The highway serves as a major route through the region , continuing east into the community of Bonsall while providing access to Fallbrook . East of the junction with I @-@ 15 , SR 76 goes through Pala and Pauma Valley before terminating at SR 79 . 
 A route along the corridor has existed since the early 20th century , as has the bridge over the San Luis Rey River near Bonsall . The route was added to the state highway system in 1933 , and was officially designated as SR 76 in the 1964 state highway renumbering , though the route was known as SR 76 before then . The section of the highway through Oceanside and Bonsall is mostly a four @-@ lane expressway ; east of Bonsall , SR 76 is mostly a two @-@ lane highway . Originally , the entire highway was two lanes wide ; west of Bonsall , the route was widened in stages , after decades of funding shortages , planning , and litigation . Caltrans plans to expand the entire length of the highway west of I @-@ 15 to an expressway . As of March 2016 , construction is under way between Bonsall and I @-@ 15 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The roadway carrying the SR 76 designation begins at County Route S21 ( CR S21 ) in Oceanside , although Caltrans does not consider the road west of I @-@ 5 as part of the route , and that part of the road is not in the legal definition . It quickly has an interchange with I @-@ 5 , then becomes a four @-@ lane expressway known as the San Luis Rey Mission Expressway . From I @-@ 5 to Mission Avenue , SR 76 parallels the San Luis Rey River until it passes by Oceanside Municipal Airport . During this stretch , SR 76 intersects Loretta Street , Canyon Drive , Benet Road , Airport Road , and Foussat Road . It then has two overpasses , one over Mission Avenue , and one over El Camino Real , before intersecting Douglas Drive , the main road to the San Luis Rey gate of Camp Pendleton . After an intersection with Rancho Del Oro Road , SR 76 passes over Mission Avenue again before intersecting with Old Grove Road , Frazee Road , a turnoff into the Towne Center North shopping center , and College Boulevard . 
 As it begins to enter rural Oceanside , SR 76 intersects with North Santa Fe Avenue ( CR S14 ) , Guajome Lake Road ( near Guajome County Park ) , and Melrose Drive . SR 76 intersects the southern segment of CR S13 , known as East Vista Way , and passes over the San Luis Rey River on roughly parallel bridges before an intersection at North River Road . The highway then goes through Bonsall , intersecting Via <unk> , Olive Hill Road , and <unk> Lane . SR 76 then meets the northern segment of CR S13 , known as South Mission Road , while heading north into Fallbrook ; SR 76 is the primary road connecting the two portions of CR S13 . It is at this point when SR 76 becomes known as Pala Road , and the road narrows to two lanes . It intersects Via <unk> and Gird Road south of Fallbrook before encountering the former routing of US 395 and the current routing of I @-@ 15 in the community of Pala Mesa Village . 
 SR 76 then goes through Pala and the Pala Indian Reservation , passing by Pala Casino and intersecting CR S16 , the turnoff to the Pala Mission and Temecula . Continuing to parallel the San Luis Rey River , SR 76 passes by the Wilderness Gardens County Park before entering the community of Pauma Valley and meeting the southern terminus of CR S7 ( Nate Harrison Grade ) , a dirt road leading into Palomar Mountain State Park . SR 76 intersects the southern leg of CR S6 ( Valley Center Road ) , leading to Valley Center and Escondido . East of the small <unk> Indian Reservation , it then encounters the northern leg of CR S6 , the southern approach to the Palomar Observatory and Palomar Mountain State Park , as well as the community of La Jolla <unk> . It then briefly passes through the Cleveland National Forest and meets the eastern terminus of CR S7 , the eastern approach to Palomar Mountain . SR 76 then passes along the shores of Lake Henshaw before terminating at the intersection with SR 79 at <unk> Junction , southeast of Lake Henshaw . 
 From I @-@ 5 to I @-@ 15 , SR 76 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , but is not part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . SR 76 is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System , but it is not officially designated as a scenic highway by the California Department of Transportation . The part of the highway from the western terminus to Douglas Drive is also named for Tony <unk> , an Oceanside police officer killed while on duty performing a traffic stop . In 2013 , SR 76 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 1 @,@ 500 between East Palomar Road and the eastern terminus at SR 79 , and 53 @,@ 000 between Airport Road and El Camino Real in Oceanside , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The road through the San Luis Rey Valley was planned as early as 1889 , and was constructed during the early 20th century . It was added to the state highway system in 1933 , while the condition of the highway continued to improve . After a few decades of litigation , the San Luis Rey Mission Expressway was constructed during the 1990s and 2000s , and efforts were underway to extend the expressway east to I @-@ 15 during the 2010s . 
 = = = Original road = = = 
 Plans by the City of Oceanside for a road east through the San Luis Rey Valley to Fallbrook date from June 1889 , and included a bridge over the San Luis Rey River . Construction on the bridge over the river at Bonsall had commenced by October 1906 , and the bridge was to be 250 feet ( 76 m ) long . In November , the road to the bridge was under construction ; originally , the bridge was to serve the road from Escondido to Temecula . A survey was commissioned in 1908 to replace the road along the south bank of the river with one along the north bank to Pala , as the former was sandy and difficult for travel . However , there were state funding issues for the Pala road by May 1912 that prevented completion , though the planned road had been surveyed from Bonsall , where it met with the Escondido road , to Oceanside . 
 Flooding in January 1916 resulted in the closing of the road that existed between Bonsall and Pala ; part of it had reopened October . Nevertheless , six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of the road between Pauma Valley and Pala did not reopen until two years later . Meanwhile , a road from Pala to Warner Springs neared completion in March 1918 , though a bridge would be necessary for the road to be usable during the winter months . By mid @-@ 1921 , plans were underway to pave Mission Avenue through the Oceanside city limits . The first three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east from Oceanside were paved by November 1924 . The Bonsall Bridge over the San Luis Rey River was completed in 1925 , and opened in 1926 as the county 's largest bridge at the time , and served as part of the road from San Diego to Elsinore . The Pala road was constructed by 1930 , although it was not paved east of Pala . 
 SR 76 was originally added to the state highway system in 1933 , and extended from US 101 in Oceanside all the way to SR 79 near Lake Henshaw . However , it was not designated as legislative Route 195 until 1935 . By 1936 , US 395 was signed along what would become SR 76 through Bonsall , as part of the route in between Elsinore and San Diego . In 1943 , work began on widening the approaches to the Bonsall bridge . US 395 had been shifted east away from Bonsall by 1949 . SR 76 was signed by 1954 . During the 1964 state highway renumbering , Route 195 was legally redesignated as State Route 76 ; at that time , the legal definition was updated to reflect the new designation of I @-@ 5 , replacing US 101 . 
 = = = Delays and postponement = = = 
 Plans for constructing a replacement for Mission Avenue date from 1950 . By 1961 , there were plans to make SR 76 a freeway from Oceanside to Fallbrook Road , and an expressway from there to US 395 . The next year , the new Highway 76 Association formed a committee to promote the upgrade of the road into Pauma Valley . In 1963 , more specific plans were proposed by the Highway Development Association initiative , including making the portions from Foussat Road and the Mission San Luis Rey de Francia and from Vista Way to Mission Road an expressway , and making the part of the highway in Oceanside wider . In 1964 , the state allocated funds for the widening of SR 76 to four lanes in Oceanside , and in October 1965 , the first portion of the widening from Carey Road to Frontier Drive entered the bidding phase . The next part of the widening entered the bidding phase in December 1968 , and extended from Frontier Drive to near the Mission . 
 Caltrans engineer Jacob Dekema announced in April 1969 that the construction on SR 76 and the nearby SR 78 between I @-@ 5 and US 395 would be delayed until the construction on I @-@ 5 and US 395 was underway , or at least until 1976 . Nevertheless , a widening project was commissioned in 1970 between Pauma Reservation Road and Cole Grade Road , well east of US 395 . The next year , construction began on a new interchange between the future routing of SR 76 and I @-@ 5 , near Oceanside Harbor and Camp Del Mar in Camp Pendleton . The expansion of SR 76 appeared on the Comprehensive Planning Organization ( CPO ) regional government plan in late 1974 . At that time , there was an effort by the City of Oceanside to have SR 76 included as a scenic highway , but SR 76 has not been included in the system . The Chamber of Commerce decided to continue efforts to have SR 76 expanded at the end of 1974 . 
 In January 1975 , Caltrans presented plans to realign SR 76 away from Mission Avenue and move it to the south side of the San Luis Rey River from I @-@ 5 to Frontier Drive . However , one member of the Tri @-@ Cities Taxpayers ' League suggested that the freeway be built on the northern side of the river , and follow the river all the way east to I @-@ 15 . Following concerns that the project would be cancelled due to lack of state funding , the California Highway Commission ( CHC ) stated that the plans were still being considered . The City of Oceanside raised concerns about the congestion on Mission Avenue , as well as the realignment being a part of the city master plan . After this , at the start of the next year , the CHC decided to keep the proposal , though there were concerns that construction would be delayed due to the state financial crisis . Caltrans stated a few months later that SR 76 would be delayed because of the funding issues and the relatively low levels of traffic that would not support building a freeway . Following this , State Senator John Stull alleged that Caltrans head Adriana Gianturco was purposefully delaying the project by delaying the release of the environmental impact report . A petition drive began soon thereafter , supported by many North County leaders , with the exception of Bonsall due to concerns about a full freeway running through the community . 
 Over the period from 1974 to 1977 , Oceanside police kept track of over 1 @,@ 000 accidents that occurred along SR 76 from that time period . A citizen action group known as Concerned Citizens for Highway 76 formed soon afterward . Caltrans began holding hearings again in 1979 , proposing the building of an expressway as opposed to a freeway or to widening Mission Avenue . At one hearing , local officials criticized the delay , while others criticized the routing , the decision to build an expressway instead of a freeway , and building a route through an environmentally sensitive area . In May 1980 , the state Assembly Transportation Committee approved a resolution that requested an answer from the governor at the time , Jerry Brown , and Caltrans as to why certain projects , including SR 76 , had not been started . 
 In the meantime , the Oceanside Development Agency recommended extending the new highway west to Pacific Street to aid in redeveloping the downtown area . The San Diego Regional Coastal Commission disagreed with constructing the highway , among other development proposals for downtown Oceanside , due to concerns about destroying habitat along the river and the marsh areas . Soon after , in October 1980 , the California Coastal Commission recommended removing the realignment of the freeway from plans entirely , on environmental grounds . 
 = = = Widening and realignment = = = 
 In 1983 , a federal gasoline tax of five @-@ cents @-@ per @-@ gallon ( one @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ liter ) was approved , which added more funding to complete projects in San Diego County , among other places . From that revenue , $ 5 million ( about $ 18 million in 2015 dollars ) was allocated to rebuilding the Bonsall bridge and realigning the highway . Issues cited with the old bridge included the sharp turns at either end of the bridge and its narrow width . However , some members of the community hoped that the old bridge would remain standing as a historical landmark , and a pedestrian bridge . County Supervisor Paul Eckert commissioned a campaign to leave the bridge standing a week later . Plans to replace the bridge were delayed by April , due to issues acquiring the land necessary for the new bridge . 
 Caltrans tentatively approved the westernmost 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of the SR 76 widening project in May , while noting that there were several more steps in the legal process necessary before construction began . Two years later , concerns were expressed by environmental groups over the potential destruction of the habitat of the least Bell 's vireo songbird by the construction of SR 76 and other projects in the region . In 1986 , the bird was added to the federal endangered species register . The next year , the Oceanside Jaycees group collected 12 @,@ 000 signatures supporting the construction of the freeway immediately . At that time , the fatality rate on SR 76 was 222 percent above that of any other state highway in California . The petitions were given to the office of then @-@ Governor George Deukmejian . In November 1987 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service approved the project , on condition that Caltrans purchase additional land to set up habitat for environmental mitigation . 
 Funds for the new Bonsall bridge were approved by the California Transportation Commission ( CTC ) in October 1988 , and construction was scheduled to begin in early 1989 . In November 1989 , the California Coastal Commission gave the go @-@ ahead for the realignment of SR 76 in western Oceanside , from I @-@ 5 to Frontier Drive . However , in February 1990 , the Sierra Club , National Audubon Society , and League for Coastal Protection filed a lawsuit to have the approval overturned , citing concerns over the destruction of habitat . The Bonsall bridge was completed in early 1990 , while the old bridge became a National Historic Place . In 1992 , the City of Oceanside offered to purchase land as additional habitat for the songbird , even though it was not a party to the lawsuit . However , the following year , the City Council voted to use the Lawrence Canyon land for commercial use instead of for the environmental mitigation , thus stalling the project . Following this , the CTC rejected the proposal to build the highway , requiring Caltrans to find another parcel to use for constructing habitat . The CTC did approve the proposal a month later , provided that this land was found before construction began . In October , the City Council decided to use the Lawrence Canyon land for mitigation after all . Nevertheless , a city councilman raised concerns that the expressway would not be adequate to handle 2010 traffic levels . 
 The four lane expressway bypass of Oceanside was constructed beginning in 1994 . The first four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from I @-@ 5 to Foussat Road opened to traffic in late 1995 . The cost of this portion was $ 10 million ( about $ 19 @.@ 4 million in 2015 dollars ) ; at that time , completion of the rest of the route was expected for 2008 . The rerouting of SR 76 away from Mission Avenue resulted in a decrease in business for establishments located along the old routing . On June 12 , 1996 , the groundbreaking ceremony for the second phase of the project took place , by which time the completion date for the entire roadway had slipped to 2010 . This phase between Foussat Road and Jefferies Ranch Road was finished in late 1999 . Because the expressway was constructed on top of Mission Avenue east of Old Grove Road , the former was rerouted onto a new alignment that connected to Frazee Road . However , Mission Avenue was thus fragmented , and does not exist between Frazee Road and Jefferies Ranch Road , where the designation resumes . 
 = = = East of Oceanside = = = 
 By 2002 , Caltrans had two proposals for the part of the widening project between East Vista Way and Mission Road : building the new highway on top of the old one , or constructing a new roadway to the south of the San Luis Rey River . Concerns arose , however , that the TransNet local sales tax would not be extended by voters , leading to the cancellation of that project . The San Diego Association of Governments included the widening east to Bonsall in the regional plan in 2003 , but indicated that the portion from Bonsall to I @-@ 15 would be dependent on the availability of funding . Residents of Fallbrook and Bonsall criticized the fact that SR 76 was one of the few TransNet projects that was not to be completed by the expiration of the tax in 2008 . The city of Oceanside proposed plans for grade @-@ separated interchanges with College Boulevard and Melrose Drive in 2004 , in the event that the expressway through Oceanside would have had to be converted to a freeway . However , after complaints from residents , these proposals were tabled . 
 After TransNet was renewed in November 2004 , planning continued for widening the remaining portion of SR 76 west of I @-@ 15 , due to the frequent accidents that occurred on the eastern portion ; however , some claimed that the habits of drivers were at fault . The 2007 environmental impact report recommended constructing the new roadway along the route of the old one , rather than moving the entire highway south . 
 Meanwhile , congestion east of I @-@ 15 increased with the opening of four new casinos near Pala . The Pala Indian band was required to pay for the costs to improve the road in order to mitigate the increased traffic levels from their proposed expansion . Construction began on widening the highway in April 2008 , and in March 2009 , two lanes of a realigned 1 @.@ 3 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) segment of SR 76 opened east of I @-@ 15 . Initially , only two lanes were open , with the other two lanes of this new four lane divided highway planned to open in September 2009 . The purpose of this improvement was to reduce accidents on a stretch of road that carried over 12 @,@ 000 motorists per day , many headed for either the Pala Indian casino or a new gravel quarry that had recently opened . The casino and quarry owners each paid for half of the $ 26 million ( about $ 30 @.@ 9 million in 2015 dollars ) cost of the new road . Even after this , in 2009 , the corner of SR 76 and Palomar Mountain Road was determined to be the place in the county with the most motorcycle accidents . 
 Construction started on widening SR 76 between Melrose Drive and South Mission Road in January 2010 to four lanes , and was funded by the federal government , state government , and by TransNet revenue . The project included building a second bridge over the San Luis Rey River . Discussion on whether the route of the highway should go south or north of the river east of Mission Road began later that year , with residents expressing concerns about being able to make left turns . In June 2011 , Caltrans decided to use the existing roadway as the path , but agreed to build traffic signals at Via <unk> , South Mission Road , Gird Road , and Old Highway 395 . For environmental mitigation , Caltrans purchased the parcel known as Rancho Lilac , which was 902 acres ( 365 ha ) . The additional Bonsall bridge was finished by April 2012 . The westbound lanes between Melrose Drive and Mission Road opened to traffic in October , with the entire roadway projected to be complete by the end of the year . The total cost of the entire widening project east of Melrose Drive is projected to be $ 371 million . 
 A request by the city of Oceanside to restore access to Jefferies Ranch Road from SR 76 was declined by Caltrans in late 2012 , due to concerns about future expressway expansion to six lanes . In May 2013 , construction at the I @-@ 15 and SR 76 interchange uncovered a Bison latifrons fossil ; revisions to the interchange were finished in August 2013 . The final portion east to I @-@ 15 was contracted out in August , and construction was to begin soon afterward and extend until 2017 , at a cost of $ 200 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in San Diego County . 
 = Star Wars : Jedi Knight ( series ) = 
 Star Wars : Jedi Knight is a first @-@ person shooter and third @-@ person shooter video game series set in the fictional Star Wars expanded universe . The series focuses primarily on Kyle Katarn , a former Imperial officer who ultimately becomes a member of the New Republic and an instructor at the Jedi Academy . 
 The Jedi Knight series began in 1995 with the release of Star Wars : Dark Forces for DOS , Macintosh , and PlayStation . This was followed in 1997 by Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II for Microsoft Windows , in which Katarn learns the ways of a Jedi . In 1998 , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Mysteries of the Sith was released as an expansion pack for Dark Forces II , this time giving the player control of Mara Jade as well as Katarn . In 2002 , Star Wars Jedi Knight II : Jedi Outcast was added to the series . Jedi Outcast was developed by Raven Software and powered by the id Tech 3 game engine . It was released for Windows , Mac , Xbox and GameCube . Star Wars Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy followed in 2003 on Windows , Mac and Xbox . It was powered by the same game engine as its predecessor . Jedi Academy was the first game in the series where the player does not control Katarn at any point , although he is featured prominently in the storyline . 
 The games in the Jedi Knight series have received generally favorable reviews . Multiple publications have commented on the quality of the series as a whole , with GameNOW describing it as " consistently great . " The use of the lightsaber in the series , a prominent gameplay element in all but the first game , has received specific praise for its implementation . 
 = = Games = = 
 Star Wars : Dark Forces was developed and published by LucasArts , and released in North America on February 28 , 1995 for MS @-@ DOS and Macintosh , and on November 30 , 1996 for PlayStation . It was the first officially produced first @-@ person shooter set in the Star Wars universe . 
 Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II was again developed and published by LucasArts , and released in North America on September 30 , 1997 for Microsoft Windows . 
 Star Wars Jedi Knight : Mysteries of the Sith is an expansion pack for Dark Forces II . Developed and published by LucasArts , it was released on February 24 , 1998 for Microsoft Windows . The expansion includes a single @-@ player mode and fifteen multiplayer maps . 
 Star Wars Jedi Knight II : Jedi Outcast was developed by Raven Software for the PC and Mac , and Vicarious Visions for the Xbox and GameCube . LucasArts published the PC version worldwide and the Xbox and GameCube versions in North America , Activision published the Xbox and GameCube versions in Europe , and Aspyr published the Mac version worldwide . The PC version was released in North America on March 26 , 2002 , the Mac version on November 5 , and the Xbox and GameCube versions on November 19 . 
 Star Wars Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy was developed by Raven Software for the PC and Mac , and Vicarious Visions for the Xbox . LucasArts published the PC and Xbox versions in North America , Activision published them in Europe , and Aspyr published the Mac version worldwide . Jedi Academy was released on September 16 , 2003 for Mac , on September 17 for Windows , and on November 18 for Xbox . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 The Jedi Knight series is composed primarily of first / third @-@ person shooter gameplay elements , with a number of variation on the norms of the genre within each game . All of the games use a level based system which contains a series of objectives that must be completed before the player can continue . From Dark Forces II onwards , the games have included lightsaber combat and the use of Force powers , which have been tweaked and modified as the series has progressed . 
 In the first game , Dark Forces , the focus is on combat against various creatures and characters from the Star Wars universe , and includes environmental puzzles and hazards , whilst following a central storyline outlined in mission briefings and cutscenes . For combat , the player may use fists , explosive land mines and thermal detonators , as well as blasters and other ranged weapons , with the gameplay leaning more towards ranged combat . 
 In Dark Forces II , the player has the option of a third @-@ person view , plus an option to switch automatically to third @-@ person when the lightsaber is the selected weapon . Three types of Force powers are introduced in this game : Light powers provide non violent advantages , Dark powers provide violent ones , while Neutral powers enhance athletic abilities . The game has two endings , depending on whether the player chooses to focus on the Light Side or the Dark Side . 
 Unlike its predecessor , Mysteries of the Sith has a single , morally positive course , as the player progresses through the game in a linear fashion . The game includes most of the enemies featured in Dark Forces II , plus some new monsters . The player has access to Force powers and projectile weapons such as a blaster or railgun , as well as a lightsaber . 
 Jedi Outcast 's gameplay is similar to that of its predecessors , with some small additions , such as access to gun turrets , or the use of combos unique to each of the three lightsaber styles in the game ; fast , medium and strong . As with Dark Forces II and Mysteries of the Sith , the use of Force powers is restricted by a " Force Meter " , which depletes when the powers are used . 
 Jedi Academy features very similar gameplay to Jedi Outcast , although one new feature is that the player may customize their lightsaber at the outset of the game . Later , the player has the option of choosing dual sabers , or a " saber staff " , similar to Darth Maul 's double ended lightsaber in The Phantom Menace . Instead of moving linearly from one level to the next , the player chooses from a selection of different missions which can be played in any order . The game also introduces player @-@ controllable vehicles and vehicle @-@ based levels . 
 Starting with Jedi Knight , a multiplayer mode has been included in every game , in which up to eight people can compete with one another via a LAN or up to four people online . In Jedi Knight , the player creates an avatar , and then selects a ranking , with higher rankings having access to more Force powers . There are two types of multiplayer game available ; " Capture the flag " and " Jedi Training " . Mysteries of the Sith includes fifteen multiplayer maps , four of which only allow players to battle with lightsabers , and a ranking system that tracks the player 's experience . The multiplayer mode allows the use of pre @-@ set characters featured in both Jedi Knight and Mysteries of the Sith , as well as characters from the Star Wars films , such as Luke Skywalker , Darth Vader and Boba Fett . In Mysteries , the " Capture the flag " mode is altered , with the gradual reduction of the Force powers of the player who is carrying the flag . 
 Jedi Outcast features several multiplayer modes , which , in the PC and Mac versions , can be played over a LAN or the internet . Multiplayer mode is limited to two players on the Xbox and GameCube versions of the game . Game modes include " Free @-@ For @-@ All " , " Team Deathmatch " , " Capture the Flag " , " Power Duel " and " Siege " , all of which can be played with other players , bots , or both . Jedi Academy introduces several multiplayer modifications , such as Movie Battles II which allows players to take part in lightsaber duels that featured in the Star Wars films . Movie Battles also lets players choose different classes of character , ranging from Jedi Knight to Wookiee . Another popular modification , Evolution of Combat , allows players to use more movie @-@ realistic saber combat along with other additions such as a movie accurate class system featuring tens of new characters . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The Jedi Knight video games are set in the Star Wars universe . For the majority of the series , the player controls Kyle Katarn , who begins as a mercenary , eventually learning the ways of The Force , becoming a Jedi Master and teaching at the Jedi Academy . 
 Prior to the events of Dark Forces , Katarn was a student studying to follow in his father 's career of agricultural mechanics . However , while at an academy , he was told by officials that the Rebel Alliance had killed his parents . His anger led him to enlist in the Imperial army , where he soon met Jan Ors , an undercover double agent working for the Alliance . Ors uncovered the real information about Katarn 's parents ; they had actually been killed by the Empire . Shortly thereafter , Ors ' cover was blown , and she was taken prisoner . Katarn helped her escape , thus ending his career with the Empire . He then became a mercenary , and due to his hatred for the Empire , regularly took on jobs for the Alliance . 
 In the first level of Dark Forces , which is set prior to A New Hope , Katarn recovers the plans to the Death Star , a heavily armed space station capable of destroying entire planets . The Rebel Alliance uses the plans to find a weakness in and then destroy the Death Star . Katarn then aids the Rebels in stopping the threat of the Imperial " Dark Trooper " project . Despite the successful missions on behalf of the Alliance , however , Katarn does not join their cause . Dark Forces II begins several years after the destruction of the second Death Star in Return of the Jedi , when Katarn is informed of the exact details of his father 's death . His father , Morgan Katarn , had discovered the location of " The Valley of the Jedi " , a source of great Force power , but a Dark Jedi named Jerec murdered Morgan in an attempt to find the location . Katarn travels to the Valley of the Jedi while learning the ways of the Jedi himself . Eventually , he confronts and defeats Jerec , avenging his father 's death . However , Katarn still does not join the Jedi Order , instead using his powers for the New Republic , and taking on an apprentice with a similar history to himself ; Mara Jade . During this time , Katarn learns of a Sith temple on the planet Dromund Kaas . There , Katarn is corrupted by the Dark Side of the Force . However , Jade is able to convince him to return to the Light and they leave together . 
 This incident causes Katarn to distance himself from the Force and return to mercenary missions with Jan Ors . In Jedi Outcast , Ors is captured by Desann , a former pupil of Luke Skywalker who has turned to the Dark Side . Katarn believes Desann to have killed Ors , and so he returns to the Valley of the Jedi in an attempt to reconnect to the Force so as to stop Desann . Eventually , it is revealed that Ors ' death is a ruse by Desann for the express purpose of having Katarn return to the Valley , so Desann may learn of its location . Desann , in league with the Imperial Remnant , uses the power of the Valley to endow his troops with Force power , before using them to launch an attack on the Jedi Academy . However , Katarn defeats Desann and discovers his true path , becoming a tutor at the Academy . In Jedi Academy , Katarn takes on two students : Jaden Korr and Rosh <unk> . The protagonist of the game is Jaden , who is dispatched on various peace @-@ keeping missions across the galaxy , sometimes with Katarn , sometimes alone . Jaden eventually encounters a Sith cult led by Tavion ( Desann 's former apprentice ) who plans to restore the Sith to power by using stolen Force energy to resurrect an ancient Sith Lord , Marka Ragnos . After learning that Rosh has betrayed the Jedi and joined Tavion , Jaden may either kill him and turn to the Dark Side or let him live and remain on the Light Side . If Jaden chooses to free Rosh , he ultimately faces and defeats both Tavion and the spirit of Ragnos . If he chooses the Dark Side , he kills Tavion , fights and defeats ( but does not kill ) Katarn , and then flees with Tavion 's staff , which is capable of absorbing the Force . The game ends with Katarn setting out in pursuit of Jaden . 
 = = Development = = 
 Production of Star Wars : Dark Forces began in September 1993 , with Daron Stinnett as project leader and Justin Chin as lead writer . The developers wanted to adapt the first @-@ person shooter format to include strategy and puzzles , which at the time , had never been done . Dark Forces thus features numerous logic puzzles and parts of the game requires a strategic method to progress , often involving manipulation of the environment . This style of gameplay has remained constant in all Jedi Knight games . Another aspect that has remained the same since Dark Forces is the use of John Williams ' soundtrack from the Star Wars films . In Dark Forces the music was implemented using <unk> , software that alters the music depending on what is happening at any given moment in the game . Lucasarts developed the Jedi game engine to power Dark Forces , adding features to the first @-@ person shooter genre that were uncommon at the time , such as multi @-@ level floors and free look , as well as athletic abilities such as running , jumping , ducking and swimming . Original plans for the game had Luke Skywalker as the main character , but due to the limitations this would impose on the story , the developers designed a new character , Kyle Katarn . 
 Even before the release of Dark Forces , Justin Chin had planned out Katarn 's role in Dark Forces II , indicating that Katarn would face a " big trial " in a game that would be a " rite of passage . " Chin became project leader for Dark Forces II . In the game , the digital audio from Dark Forces was replaced with CD audio . Dark Forces II adds two " Jedi " aspects to the series ; the use of The Force and the lightsaber . The Force plays an integral role in how the player plays the game . The method of allocating credits to Force powers was designed with an RPG style in mind , allowing the player the choice of which powers to improve . Chin said in an early interview that progress through the game is based upon the abilities the player develops . A new game engine , the Sith engine , was developed for Dark Forces II , which uses both 3D graphics and sound . It was one of the first games to adopt the use of 3D graphics hardware acceleration using Microsoft Direct3D . Another development was that Dark Forces II moved on from the static images between levels used in Dark Forces to full motion video cutscenes . The characters are represented by live actors while the backgrounds are pre @-@ rendered . The cutscenes included the first lightsaber footage filmed since Return of the Jedi in 1983 . Dark Forces II also introduced multiplayer gaming to the series , allowing players to play online or via a LAN . 
 Nearly four years after the release of Dark Forces II , LucasArts announced at E3 2001 that Jedi Knight II : Jedi Outcast would be released in 2002 . Unlike previous games in the series , Jedi Outcast was not developed in @-@ house by LucasArts , but by Raven Software . The subsequent success of Outcast led LucasArts to continue the partnership with Raven , leading to the development of Jedi Knight : Jedi Academy a year later ; " With the overwhelming success and critical acclaim of Star Wars : Jedi Outcast , continuing an alliance with Activision and Raven Software was a clear and very easy decision , " said then @-@ president of LucasArts , Simon Jeffery . Jedi Outcast and Jedi Academy are both powered by the Quake III : Team Arena game engine , with modifications for the use of a lightsaber and The Force . Jedi Academy is the only game in the Jedi Knight series that does not give the player control of Katarn at any point . Instead the focus is on Jaden Korr , a student of the Force under Katarn . The decision to change protagonist was made by the developers for gameplay reasons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Jedi Knight series as a whole has been well received . The series itself has been described as " highly acclaimed , " and has been noted by IGN as one of few Star Wars themed video game franchises that is of consistently high quality on the PC . <unk> called the series " rather entertaining , " whilst GameNOW rated it as " consistently great . " 
 Individually , each game in the series has been generally well received . In 1995 , Dark Forces became LucasArts ' highest sell @-@ in with more than 300 @,@ 000 copies accounted for at launch . Games in the series have achieved consistently favorable review scores from most publications , and hold high aggregate scores on both Metacritic and GameRankings . The only exceptions are the PlayStation version of Dark Forces , which was perceived to have graphical problems and the GameCube version of Jedi Outcast , which was seen as considerably inferior to the PC and Xbox versions . 
 Games in the Jedi Knight series have also received specific commendation and awards . Dark Forces II was judged the best game of the year for 1997 by five publications , and was number one in PC Gamer 's " 50 best games ever " list in 1998 . Jedi Outcast was a finalist in the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences " Interactive Achievement Awards " in the 2002 Game of the Year category . The game also received commendations from PC Gamer and Computer Gaming World . 
 Gameplay aspects of the series have also been well received . The lightsaber charted at number 7 in UGO Networks 's countdown of the 50 best weapons in video games . The publication commented that using such a weapon in a game was " extremely satisfying , " and stated that lightsaber usage had been refined as the series continued . 
 Kyle Katarn has also received a positive reception . IGN placed him as their 22nd top Star Wars character , praising him as " a gamer 's reliable blank state , " a feature which they felt made him one of the most " human " Star Wars characters . They also stated that Katarn 's <unk> with fans was because of his " mishmash of quirks and dispositions . " In GameSpot 's vote for the all @-@ time greatest videogame hero , Katarn was eliminated in round two when faced against Lara Croft , garnering 27 @.@ 5 % of the votes . In round one he defeated Dig Dug , with 67 @.@ 6 % of the votes . 
 = History of Norwich City F.C. = 
 The history of Norwich City F.C. stretches back to 1902 . After a brief period in amateur football , the club spent 15 years as a semi @-@ professional team in the Southern League before admission to The Football League in 1920 . For most of the next 50 years , Norwich City F.C. sat in Division Three ( South ) , then the joint lowest tier of the football league , a period that was distinguished by " a thrilling giant @-@ killing sequence which took them to the FA Cup semi @-@ finals " in 1959 . Shortly afterwards , the club won its first major trophy , the 1962 League Cup . Norwich finally reached the pinnacle of the league structure in 1972 , with their first promotion to the top tier . 
 Since then , Norwich City has acquired a reputation as a " yo @-@ yo club " , with 22 seasons in the top league and 15 in the second tier . It is during this period that the club has achieved most of its greatest distinctions , claiming its second major trophy , the League Cup in 1985 , reaching two more FA Cup semi finals , finishing fifth , fourth and third in the top division and beating Bayern Munich in the UEFA Cup . 
 In the course of its history , Norwich City has survived a number of incidents that threatened its survival , including ousting from amateur football , the need to be re @-@ elected to The Football League and financial crises . Geoffrey Watling , who was to become club Chairman and after whom a stand at the club 's stadium , Carrow Road is named , was instrumental in saving the club from bankruptcy , both in the 1950s and 1990s ; his father had played a similar role in 1919 . 
 = = Early years : 1902 – 1930 = = 
 Norwich City F.C. was formed following a meeting at the Criterion Cafe in Norwich on 17 June 1902 by a group of friends led by two former Norwich <unk> players , and played their first competitive match against Harwich & Parkeston , at Newmarket Road on 6 September 1902 . Originally , the club was nicknamed the Citizens , and played in light blue and white halved shirts . The popular pastime of canary rearing had given rise to the team 's nickname of " The Canaries " by April 1905 , and by February 1907 this moniker had been adopted by the national press . The following season , inspired by the nickname , City played for the first time in Canary livery ; yellow shirts with green collars and cuffs . A local paper reported that " The Cits are dead but the Canaries are very much alive " . 
 Norwich played for just over two seasons as an amateur club under The Football Association ( FA ) . However , following an FA Commission of inquiry , the club was informed on the last day of 1904 that they had been deemed a professional organisation and hence ineligible to compete in amateur football . The main allegations were : 
 fees ... paid for the use of a gymnasium and also for the training and massage of players . The sum of £ 8 was also paid to a player when he left the club . Payments were made to players without a receipt being taken . The club advertised for players ... [ the ] secretary ... spent considerable sums of money in travelling to other towns in East Anglia ... complete outfits ... were bought for players out of club funds ... there was no adequate system for checking gate money ... travelling expenses were ... excessive . 
 The club officials , including founding chairman Robert Webster , had to be removed from office and Norwich were to be ousted from the amateur game at the end of the season . The response was swift : at a meeting , just two days later , Wilfrid Lawson Burgess became the first chairman of the professional club and it was resolved to find a place in the professional game . The decision was endorsed at a public meeting in March 1905 , a meeting that , significantly , was attended by Nat Whitaker , secretary of the Southern League . He seconded a motion proposed by a local businessman that endorsed the club 's " ... determination to run a first class professional team " . Whitaker actively supported Norwich , as he wanted the League 's influence to spread eastwards . On 30 May 1905 , they were elected to play in the Southern League , in place of Wellingborough . 
 With increasing attendances at matches and strict new clauses included in a proposed lease extension , Norwich were forced to leave Newmarket Road and move to a converted disused chalk pit in Rosary Road which became known as " The Nest " . Works at The Nest , which included dismantling and moving the stands from Newmarket Road , were complete in time for the start of the 1908 – 09 season . On 10 December 1917 , with football suspended during the First World War and the club facing spiralling debts , City went into voluntary liquidation . The club was officially reformed on 15 February 1919 ; a key figure in the events was a Mr C Watling , father of future club Chairman , Geoffrey Watling . In May 1920 , The Football League formed a Third Division , to which Norwich was admitted for the following season . Their first league fixture , against Plymouth , on 28 August 1920 , ended in a 1 – 1 draw . The club endured a mediocre first decade in the League , finishing no higher than eighth but no lower than 18th . It was during this period that the players began to wear a canary emblem on their shirts . A simple canary badge was first adopted in 1922 ; a variation is used to this day . 
 = = Striving to reach the top level : 1930 – 1972 = = 
 The 1930s began with a brush with disaster – the side finished bottom of the League in 1931 , but were successful in their bid for re @-@ election . The rest of the decade proved more successful for Norwich , with a club @-@ record victory , 10 – 2 , over Coventry City and promotion to the Second Division as champions in the 1933 – 34 season under the management of Tom Parker . 
 With rising crowds and the Football Association raising concerns over the suitability of The Nest , the club considered renovation , but ultimately decided on a move to Carrow Road . The original stadium was terraced on three sides , with only one stand ( along Carrow Road ) having wooden bench seating and a roof . The inaugural match at the new ground , held on 31 August 1935 , against West Ham United , ended in a 4 – 3 victory for the home team and set a new record attendance of 29 @,@ 779 . A highlight of the fourth season at Carrow Road was the visit of King George VI on 29 October 1938 ; this was the first occasion a reigning monarch attended a second tier football match . The club was relegated back to the Third Division at the end of the season . Norwich 's anguish was exacerbated by the closeness of the relegation fight ; having finished second from bottom of Division Two , they were demoted on a goal average difference of just 0 @.@ 05 . 
 The league was suspended the following season as a result of the outbreak of the Second World War , and professional play did not resume until the 1946 – 47 season . City finished this and the following season in 21st place , the poor results forcing the club to apply for re @-@ election to the league . The lacklustre performances did not deter the crowds , and , in 1948 , Carrow Road attracted its record attendance ; 37 @,@ 863 spectators watched City play Notts County . The club narrowly missed out on promotion under the guidance of manager Norman Low in the early 1950s , but following the return of Tom Parker as manager , Norwich finished bottom of the football league in the 1956 – 57 season . Events off the field were to overshadow the team 's performances as the club faced financial difficulties severe enough to render them non @-@ viable . With debts amounting to more than £ 20 @,@ 000 , the club was rescued by the formation of a new Board , chaired by Geoffrey Watling and the creation of an appeal fund chaired by the Lord Mayor of Norwich , Arthur South , which raised more than £ 20 @,@ 000 . For these and other services to the club , both men ( now deceased ) were later honoured by having stands named after them at Carrow Road . 
 Archie Macaulay became manager when the club was reformed and he oversaw one of the club 's greatest achievements , its run to the semi @-@ final of the 1958 – 59 FA Cup . Competing as a Third Division side , Norwich defeated two First Division opponents along the way , notably a 3 – 0 win against the Manchester United " Busby Babes " . City lost the semi @-@ final only after a replay against another First Division side , Luton Town . The team of 1958 – 59 — including Terry Bly who scored seven goals in the run , and Ken Nethercott who played most of the second half of one match in goal despite a dislocated shoulder — is today well represented in the club Hall of Fame . The " 59 Cup Run " as it is now known locally , " remains as one of the truly great periods in Norwich City 's history " . Norwich were the third @-@ ever Third Division team to reach the FA Cup semi @-@ final . In the 1959 – 60 season , Norwich were promoted to the Second Division after finishing second to Southampton , and achieved a fourth @-@ place finish in the 1960 – 61 season . From 1960 , Norwich spent the next 12 seasons in the second tier , with finishes of fourth in 1961 and sixth in 1965 being among the most notable . 
 In 1962 , Ron Ashman guided Norwich to their first trophy , defeating Rochdale 4 – 0 on aggregate in a two @-@ legged final to win the League Cup . Norwich finally achieved promotion from Division Two when they finished as champions in the 1971 – 72 season under manager Ron Saunders ; Norwich City had reached the highest level of English football for the first time . 
 = = First division yo @-@ yo : 1972 – 1992 = = 
 Norwich made their first appearance at Wembley Stadium in 1973 , losing the League Cup final 1 – 0 to Tottenham Hotspur . Relegation to the Second Division in 1974 resulted in the resignation of Saunders and the appointment of John Bond . A highly successful first season saw promotion back to the First Division and another visit to Wembley , again in the League Cup final , this time losing 1 – 0 to Aston Villa . They remained in the top @-@ tier of English football for another six seasons . The club finished tenth in the 1975 – 76 season ; at the time their highest ever finish . Under Bond though , the club never managed to qualify for European competitions . Off the field , during Bond 's tenure , a new River End Stand was constructed at Carrow Road . Bond resigned during the 1980 – 81 season and the club were relegated , but bounced back the following season after finishing third . 
 The 1984 – 85 season was one of mixed fortunes for the club ; a fire gutted the old Main Stand on 25 October 1984 but on the pitch , under Ken Brown 's management , they reached the final of the Milk Cup at Wembley Stadium . They defeated local rivals Ipswich Town in the semi @-@ final . In the final , they beat Sunderland 1 – 0 , but in the league both Norwich and Sunderland were relegated to the second tier of English football . Norwich had qualified for a place in the UEFA Cup , but were denied their first foray into European competition when English club sides were banned , following the Heysel Stadium disaster . City made an immediate return to the top flight by winning the Second Division championship in the 1985 – 86 season . High league placings in the First Division in 1986 – 87 and 1988 – 89 would have been enough for UEFA Cup qualification , but the ban on English clubs was still in place . They also had good cup runs during his period , reaching the FA Cup semi @-@ finals in 1989 and again in 1992 . 
 = = Europe , rise and fall : 1992 – 1999 = = 
 In 1992 – 93 , the inaugural season of the English Premier League , Norwich City led the league for much of the season , having been among the pre @-@ season favourites for relegation , and were eight points clear of the field shortly before Christmas , before faltering in the final weeks to finish third behind the champions , Manchester United , and Aston Villa . 
 They had shown that they were a force to be reckoned with from the very first day of the Premier League season , achieving an impressive 4 – 2 away win over an Arsenal side who were among the pre @-@ season title favourites in a race finally won by Manchester United . This was a big surprise not least to the media and pundits who had tipped Norwich for a season of struggle . 
 The following season Norwich played in the UEFA Cup for the first time , defeating Vitesse Arnhem of the Netherlands 3 – 0 in the first round . In the second round , they faced Bayern Munich of Germany . Norwich won the tie 3 – 2 on aggregate ; their 2 – 1 victory in Munich earning them a place in history , as the only English team to beat Bayern Munich in the Olympic Stadium . The Independent described the win in Munich as " the pinnacle of Norwich City 's history " . Reflecting on the shock result , Four Four Two wrote " The news that Norwich had gone 2 – 0 up in the Olympic Stadium seemed frankly surreal . " Norwich 's cup run was ended by Italy 's Internazionale , who defeated them 2 – 0 over two legs . Mike Walker 's success at Norwich attracted attention and , in January 1994 , he left the club to take charge of Everton . Walker 's replacement was first team coach John Deehan , who was assisted by Gary Megson , then still a player . Deehan led the club to 12th place in the 1993 – 94 season in the Premier League . 
 During the 1994 close season , the club sold 21 @-@ year @-@ old striker Chris Sutton to Blackburn Rovers for a then British record fee of £ 5 million . By Christmas 1994 , Norwich City were seventh in the Premiership and were therefore challenging for a return to the UEFA Cup . But , following a serious injury to goalkeeper Bryan Gunn , the club 's performance <unk> ; with just one win in their final 20 Premiership fixtures , Norwich plummeted to 20th place and relegation to the second tier of English football . Deehan resigned just before relegation was confirmed and his deputy , Megson , took over as temporary manager until the end of the season . Martin O 'Neill , who had taken Wycombe Wanderers from the Conference to the Second Division with successive promotions , was appointed as Norwich City manager in the summer of 1995 . He lasted just six months in the job before resigning after a dispute with chairman Robert Chase over Chase 's refusal to permit O 'Neill to spend significant sums on strengthening the squad . 
 Soon after O 'Neill 's resignation , Chase stepped down after protests from supporters , who complained that he kept selling the club 's best players and was to blame for the relegation . Indeed , between 1992 and January 1995 , Norwich had disposed of a number of key attacking players : Robert Fleck ( for £ <unk> ) , Ruel Fox ( for £ <unk> ) , Chris Sutton ( for £ 5M ) , <unk> <unk> ( £ <unk> ) and Mark Robins ( £ 1M ) . Nearly 40 years after being instrumental in saving the club from bankruptcy , Geoffrey Watling bought Chase 's majority shareholding . Gary Megson was appointed Norwich manager on a temporary basis for the second time in eight months . Megson remained in charge until the end of the season before leaving the club . Just four seasons after finishing third in the Premiership and beating Bayern Munich in the UEFA Cup , Norwich had finished 16th in Division One . 
 English television cook Delia Smith and her husband Michael Wynn @-@ Jones took over the majority of Norwich City 's shares from Watling in 1996 , and Mike Walker was re @-@ appointed as the club 's manager . He was unable to repeat the success achieved during his first spell and was sacked two seasons later with Norwich mid @-@ table in the First Division . His successor Bruce Rioch lasted two seasons and departed in the summer of 2000 , with promotion yet to be achieved . 
 = = New millennium and centenary : 2000 – 2010 = = 
 Rioch 's successor , Bryan Hamilton , lasted in the job for six months before he resigned with the club 20th in the First Division , and in real danger of relegation to the third tier of English football for the first time since the 1960s . The new appointee was Nigel Worthington , who had been Hamilton 's assistant manager . Worthington 's time as Norwich manager was one of peaks and troughs , with mid @-@ table comfort a rarity . In his first part @-@ season , he successfully steered the team away from the threat of relegation . The following season , Norwich exceeded expectations and reached the play @-@ off final , losing to Birmingham City on penalties . 
 Norwich City celebrated its centenary in 2002 . Among the celebrations and events , was an initiative to create a Hall of Fame , to honour players , coaches , managers , directors and executives who have " made the greatest contribution to the club in its long history both on and off the pitch " . Initially , 100 significant figures from the club 's history were honoured ; 25 were nominated by the club and a further 75 were subsequently chosen by a fan vote . A further 10 members were inducted in 2006 , elected by the club 's supporters . 
 After a season of consolidation , in 2003 – 04 Worthington led the club to the First Division title , a success achieved by a margin of eight points and Norwich returned to the top flight for the first time in nine years . For much of the 2004 – 05 season , the club struggled in the Premiership , with Daily Star journalist Brian <unk> commenting after a 4 – 0 defeat at Chelsea that the Canaries were " gutless , " that they would " stink the place out " with Premiership performances of a similar ilk , and that he " Hopes they go down , and good riddance . " But the team staged a remarkable comeback in the final weeks of the season , the catalyst being victory against Manchester United 2 – 0 . Norwich , who had not won in months , suddenly went on a run , securing 13 points out of 18 . With the bottom three sides to be automatically relegated , on the last day of the season , the club were fourth from bottom and a win would therefore have kept them in top flight football , but a 6 – 0 away defeat to Fulham condemned them to relegation . 
 The club was expected to make a quick return to the Premiership in the 2005 – 06 season , but a terrible first four months to the campaign saw City fall as low as 18th in The Championship . Worthington had won promotion just two seasons earlier , but " by October , following some inept performances and bad results , the fans started to turn on Nigel Worthington " . Dean Ashton was sold for a club @-@ record £ 7M , approximately a 100 % profit on the fee they had paid just one year earlier . Half of Ashton 's fee ( £ 3.5M ) was immediately reinvested in the purchase of Welsh striker Robert Earnshaw , who helped the Canaries ' revival to a ninth @-@ place finish . Worthington made just one permanent signing in the close season , and when a poor run of form ensued , leaving the club in 17th place in the Championship , Worthington was dismissed . First team coach Martin Hunter acted as caretaker manager for a fortnight before former City player Peter Grant left West Ham United to become the new manager . 
 Grant brought in his fellow Scot , Jim Duffy , as his assistant , and managed to lift the side to finish 16th in the league . During the 2007 close season , Grant brought in nine players , however ten players , including Earnshaw , departed and Darren Huckerby caused controversy by criticising the club for selling their best players . When the 2007 – 08 season opened with only two Norwich wins by 9 October 2007 , Peter Grant left the club by " mutual consent " . Jim Duffy took over as caretaker manager for three games , losing them all . On 30 October , former Newcastle United boss Glenn Roeder was confirmed as the new manager . Roeder released a number of players , largely replacing them with inexperienced loan signings . Results improved enormously , lifting the club from five points adrift at the foot of the table to a comfortable mid @-@ table position . 
 Following a poor first half of the 2008 – 09 campaign it was announced on 14 January 2009 , that Roeder had been relieved of his first team duties after 60 games in charge of the club , and just 20 victories . The appointment of Bryan Gunn as temporary manager did not prevent relegation to the third tier of English league football ( League One ) , a level the club had not played at since 1960 , at the end of the 2008 – 09 Championship season . 
 Norwich started their League One campaign on 8 August 2009 at home to fellow East Anglians Colchester United . They were widely expected to return swiftly to the Championship , however they suffered a shock 1 – 7 defeat . This was their worst home defeat in their 107 @-@ year history , beating the previous record , a 1 – 6 loss to Bournemouth and Boscombe Athletic in 1946 . The fans ' displeasure was obvious . Gunn was sacked six days later and his assistant Ian Butterworth was placed in temporary charge . The club moved swiftly to appoint the man who had masterminded the downfall of Gunn , Colchester manager Paul Lambert . He oversaw a turnaround in fortunes to lead them to promotion back to The Championship as League One champions , during a season that included a 16 @-@ game unbeaten run that included just two draws . 
 = = A new era : 2010 – = = 
 Norwich 's return to the second tier saw two victories in the Old Farm derby over Ipswich Town . A Grant Holt hat @-@ trick set City on their way to a 4 – 1 home win in November , which preceded a 5 – 1 victory in the return fixture at Portman Road in April . Promotion from the Championship marked a return to the Premier League following a six @-@ year absence . Having been in the top six for the majority of the season , they were the Championship 's highest scorers , ending the season as runners @-@ up on 84 points – 4 points behind title @-@ winners QPR . 
 When Norwich 's new management was appointed at the start of the 2009 – 10 season , it inherited a team twice relegated in the previous five seasons and a business saddled with debt . At that stage a turnaround team was put together from Lloyds Banking Group and Deloitte . The turnaround has resulted in operational profitability , consistent performance and successive promotions back to the Premier League . Activities include the disposal of non @-@ core property assets , a new equity investment and a financial restructuring agreement with lenders for all debt to be repaid within five years . 
 Norwich finished 2nd in the championship , 12th and 11th in the 2010 – 11 , 2011 – 12 and 2012 – 13 premier league seasons but were relegated after finishing 18th in the 2013 – 14 season . 
 The club was forced to make a late change to their opponents during a pre @-@ season tour of Italy , and despite advertising that they had played the Italian Serie D club Vallée d <unk> , and defeating them 13 – 0 , it was subsequently discovered that the opponents were a selection of amateurs from the region . 
 After finishing third in the 2014 @-@ 15 Championship season , Norwich won the Championship promotion playoffs convincingly to gain promotion to the English Premier League at the first time of asking . Norwich will play in the English Premier League again in the 2015 @-@ 16 season . 
 = Eurasian eagle @-@ owl = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl ( Bubo bubo ) is a species of eagle @-@ owl that resides in much of Eurasia . It is sometimes called the European eagle @-@ owl and is , in Europe , where it is the only member of its genus besides the snowy owl ( B. <unk> ) , occasionally abbreviated to just eagle @-@ owl . It is one of the largest species of owl , and females can grow to a total length of 75 cm ( 30 in ) , with a wingspan of 188 cm ( 6 ft 2 in ) , males being slightly smaller . This bird has distinctive ear tufts , with upper parts that are mottled with darker blackish colouring and tawny and the wings and tail are barred . The underparts are a variably hued buff , streaked with darker colour . The facial disc is poorly developed and the orange eyes are distinctive . 
 Besides being one of the largest living species of owl , it is also one of the most widely distributed . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is found in a number of habitats but is mostly a bird of mountain regions , coniferous forests , steppes and other relatively remote places . It is a mostly nocturnal predator , hunting for a range of different prey species , predominately small mammals but also birds of varying sizes , reptiles , amphibians , fish , large insects and other assorted invertebrates . It typically breeds on cliff ledges , in gullies , among rocks or in some other concealed locations . The nest is a scrape in which averages of two eggs are laid at intervals and which hatch at different times . The female incubates the eggs and broods the young , and the male provides food for her and when they hatch , for the nestlings as well . Continuing parental care for the young is provided by both adults for about five months . There are at least a dozen subspecies of Eurasian eagle @-@ owl . 
 With a total range in Europe and Asia of about 32 million square kilometres ( 12 million square miles ) and a total population estimated to be between 250 thousand and 2 @.@ 5 million individuals , the IUCN lists the bird 's conservation status as being of " least concern " . Tame eagle @-@ owls have occasionally been used in pest control because of their size to deter large birds such as gulls from nesting . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is a very large bird , smaller than the golden eagle ( Aquila chrysaetos ) but larger than the snowy owl , despite some overlap in size with both other species . It is sometimes referred to as the world 's largest owl , although Blakiston 's fish owl ( B. <unk> ) is slightly heavier on average and the much lighter weight great grey owl ( Strix nebulosa ) is slightly longer on average . It should be noted , however , that <unk> Mikkola reported the largest specimens of eagle @-@ owl as having the same upper body mass , 4 @.@ 6 kg ( 10 lb ) , as the largest Blakiston ’ s fish owl and attained a length of around 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) longer . In terms of average weight and wing size , the Blakiston ’ s is the slightly larger species seemingly , even averaging a bit larger in these aspects than the biggest eagle @-@ owl races from Russia . Also , although 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) shorter than the largest of the latter species , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl can weigh well more than twice as much as the largest great grey owl . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl typically has a wingspan of 131 – 188 cm ( 4 ft 4 in – 6 ft 2 in ) , with the largest specimens possibly attaining 200 cm ( 6 ft 7 in ) . The total length of the species can vary from 56 to 75 cm ( 22 to 30 in ) . Females can weigh from 1 @.@ 75 to 4 @.@ 6 kg ( 3 @.@ 9 to 10 @.@ 1 lb ) and males can weigh from 1 @.@ 22 to 3 @.@ 2 kg ( 2 @.@ 7 to 7 @.@ 1 lb ) . In comparison , the barn owl ( Tyto alba ) , the world 's most widely distributed owl species , weighs about 500 g ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) and the great horned owl ( Bubo virginianus ) , which fills the eagle @-@ owl 's ecological niche in North America , weighs around 1 @.@ 4 kg ( 3 @.@ 1 lb ) . 
 Besides the female being larger , there is little external sexual dimorphism in the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl although the ear tufts of males reportedly tend to be more upright than those of females . When an eagle @-@ owl is seen on its own in the field , it is generally not possible to distinguish the individual ’ s sex . However , gender determination by size is possible via in hand measurements . Reportedly , in some populations the female may be slightly darker on average than the male . The plumage coloration across at least 13 accepted subspecies can be highly variable . The upper parts may be brown @-@ black to tawny @-@ buff to pale creamy gray , typically showing dense <unk> on the forehead and crown , stripes on the nape , sides and back of the neck , and dark splotches on the pale ground colour of the back , mantle and scapulars . A narrow buff band , freckled with brown or buff , often runs up from the base of the bill , above the inner part of the eye and along the inner edge of the black @-@ brown ear tufts . The rump and upper tail @-@ coverts are delicately patterned with dark vermiculations and fine wavy barring , the extent of which varies with subspecies . The underwing coverts and undertail coverts are similar but tend to be more strongly barred in brownish @-@ black . The primaries and secondaries are brown with broad dark brown bars and dark brown tips , and grey or buff irregular lines . A complete moult takes place each year between July and December . The facial disc is tawny @-@ buff , speckled with black @-@ brown , so densely on the outer edge of the disc as to form a " frame " around the face . The chin and throat are white with a brownish central streak . The feathers of the upper breast generally have brownish @-@ black centres and reddish @-@ brown edges except for the central ones which have white edges . The chin and throat may appear white continuing down the center of the upper breast . The lower breast and belly feathers are creamy @-@ brown to tawny buff to off @-@ white with a variable amount of fine dark wavy barring , on a tawny @-@ buff ground colour . The legs and feet ( which are feathered almost to the talons ) are likewise marked on a buff ground colour but more faintly . The tail is tawny @-@ buff , mottled dark grey @-@ brown with about six black @-@ brown bars . The bill and feet are black . The iris is most often orange but is fairly variable . In some European birds , the iris is a bright reddish , blood @-@ orange colour but then in subspecies found in arid , desert @-@ like habitats , the iris can range into an orangish @-@ yellow colour ( most closely related species generally have yellowish @-@ coloured irises , excluding their Indian cousins ) . 
 = = = Standard measurements and physiology = = = 
 Among standard measurements for the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , the wing chord measures 378 to 518 mm ( 14 @.@ 9 to 20 @.@ 4 in ) , the tail measures 229 – 310 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 – 12 @.@ 2 in ) long , the tarsus measures 64 @.@ 5 – 112 mm ( 2 @.@ 54 – 4 @.@ 41 in ) and the total length of the bill is 38 @.@ 9 – 59 mm ( 1 @.@ 53 – 2 @.@ 32 in ) . The wings are reportedly the smallest in proportion to the body weight of any European owl , when measured by the grams per square cm of wing size , was found to be 0 @.@ 72 . Thus they have quite high wing loading . However , the great horned owl has even smaller wings ( 0 @.@ 8 grams per square cm ) relative to its body size . The golden eagle has just slightly lower wing loading proportionately ( 0 @.@ 65 grams per square cm ) , so the aerial abilities of the two species ( beyond the eagle ’ s spectacular ability to stoop ) may not be as disparate as expected . However , some other owls , such as barn owls , short @-@ eared owls ( Asio flammeus ) and even the related snowy owls have lower wing loading relative to their size and so are presumably able to fly faster , with more agility and for more extended periods than the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl . In the relatively small race B. b. hispanus , the middle claw , the largest talon , ( as opposed to rear hallux @-@ claw which is the largest in accipitrids ) was found to measure from 21 @.@ 6 to 40 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 58 in ) in length . A 3 @.@ 82 kg ( 8 @.@ 4 lb ) female examined in Britain ( origins unspecified ) had a middle claw measuring 57 @.@ 9 mm ( 2 @.@ 28 in ) , on par in length with a large female golden eagle hallux @-@ claw . Generally , owls do not have talons as proportionately large as those of accipitrids but have stronger , more robust feet relative to their size . This is related to the killing methods used , in accipitrids , they use their talons to inflict organ damage and blood loss , whereas typical owls use their feet to constrict their prey to death , the talons serving only to hold the prey in place or provide incidental damage . However , the talons of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl are very large and not often exceeded in size by diurnal raptors . Unlike the great horned owls , the overall foot size and strength of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is not known to have been tested but it must enormous considering that the considerably smaller horned owl has one of the strongest grips ever measured in a bird . 
 The feathers of the ear tufts in Spanish birds ( when not damaged ) were found to measure from 63 @.@ 3 to 86 @.@ 6 mm ( 2 @.@ 49 to 3 @.@ 41 in ) . The ear openings ( covered in feathers as in all birds ) are relatively uncomplicated but are also large , being larger on the right than on the left as in most owls , and proportionately larger than those of the great horned owl . In the female , the ear opening averages 31 @.@ 7 mm ( 1 @.@ 25 in ) on the right and 27 @.@ 4 mm ( 1 @.@ 08 in ) on the left and , in males , averages 26 @.@ 8 mm ( 1 @.@ 06 in ) on the right and 24 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 96 in ) on the left . The depth of the facial disc and the size and complexity of the ear opening are directly correlated to the importance of sound in an owl ’ s hunting behaviour . Examples of owls with more complicated ear structures and deeper facial disc are barn owls , long @-@ eared owls ( Asio otus ) and boreal owls ( <unk> funereus ) . Given the uncomplicated structure of their ear openings and relatively shallow , undefined facial disc , hunting by ear is secondary to hunting by sight in the eagle @-@ owl , this seems to be true for Bubo in general . It is likely that more sound @-@ based hunters such as the aforementioned species focus their hunting activity in more complete darkness . Also owls with white throat patches such as the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl are more likely to be active in low light conditions in the hours before and after sunrise and sunset rather than the darkest times in the middle of the night . The boreal and barn owls , to extend these examples , lack obvious visual cues such as white throat patches ( puffed up in displaying eagle @-@ owls ) , again indicative of primary activity being in darker periods . 
 = = = Distinguishing from other species = = = 
 Great horned owls . Whether these are examples of mimicry either way is unclear but it is known that both Bubo owls are serious predators of long @-@ eared owls . The same discrepancy in underside streaking has also been noted in the Eurasian and American representations of the grey grey owl . A few other related species overlap minimally in range in Asia , mainly in east Asia and the southern reaches of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl ’ s range . Three fish owls appear to overlap in range , the brown ( B. <unk> ) in at least northern Pakistan , probably Kashmir and discontinuously in southern Turkey , the tawny ( B. flavipes ) through much of eastern China and the Blakiston 's fish owl in the Russian Far East , northeastern China and Hokkaido . Fish owls are distinctively different looking , possessing more scraggy ear tufts that hang to the side rather than sit erect on top of the head , generally have more uniform , brownish plumages without the contrasting darker streaking of an eagle @-@ owl . The brown fish owl has no feathering on the tarsus or feet and the tawny has feathering only on the upper portion of the tarsi but the Blakiston ’ s is nearly as extensively feathered on the tarsi and feet as the eagle @-@ owl . Tawny and brown fish owls are both slightly smaller than co @-@ occurring Eurasian eagle @-@ owls and Blakiston ’ s fish owls are similar or slightly larger than co @-@ occurring large northern eagle @-@ owls . Fish owls , being tied to the edges of freshwater where they hunt mainly fish and crabs , also have slightly differing , and more narrow , habitat preferences . 
 In the lower Himalayas of northern Pakistan and Jammu and Kashmir , along with the brown fish owl , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl at the limit of its distribution may co @-@ exist with at least two to three other eagle @-@ owls . One of these , the dusky eagle @-@ owl ( B. coromandus ) is smaller , with more uniform tan @-@ brownish plumage , untidy uniform light streaking rather than the Eurasian ’ s dark streaking below and an even less well @-@ defined facial disc . The dusky is usually found in slightly more enclosed woodland areas than Eurasian eagle @-@ owls . Another is possibly the spot @-@ bellied eagle @-@ owl ( Bubo <unk> ) , which is strikingly differ looking , with stark brown plumage , rather than the warm hues typical of the Eurasian , bold spotting on a whitish background on the belly , and somewhat askew ear tufts that are bold white with light brown crossbars on the front . It is possible that both species occur in some parts of the Himalayan foothills but they are not currently verified to occur in the same area , in part this is because of the spot @-@ bellied ’ s preference for dense , primary forest . Most similar , with basically the same habitat preferences and the only one verified to co @-@ occur with the Eurasian eagle owls of the race B. b. turcomanus in Kashmir is the Indian eagle @-@ owl ( B. bengalensis ) . The Indian species is smaller with a bolder blackish facial disc border , more rounded and relatively smaller wings and partially unfeathered toes . Far to the west , the pharaoh eagle @-@ owl ( B. <unk> ) also seemingly overlaps in range with the Eurasian , in at least the country of Jordan . Although also relatively similar to the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , the pharaoh is distinguished by its smaller size , paler , more washed @-@ out plumage and the notably diminished size of its ear @-@ tufts . 
 = = = Moulting = = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owls ’ feathers are lightweight and robust but nevertheless need to be replaced periodically as they become worn . In the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , this happens in stages and the first moult starts the year after hatching with some body feathers and wing coverts being replaced . The next year the three central secondaries on each wing and three middle tail feathers are shed and regrow , and the following year two or three primaries and their coverts are lost . In the final year of this post @-@ juvenile moult , the remaining primaries are moulted and all the juvenile feathers will have been replaced . Another moult takes place during years six to twelve of the bird 's life . This happens between June and October after the conclusion of the breeding season and again it is a staged process with six to nine main flight feathers being replaced each year . Such a moulting pattern lasting several years is repeated throughout the bird 's life . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is a member of the genus Bubo , which may include either 22 or 25 extant species . Almost all the larger owl species in the world today are included in Bubo . Based on an extensive fossil record and a central distribution of extant species on that continent , the Bubo appears to have evolved into existence in Africa , although early radiations seem to branch from southern Asia as well . Two genera belonging to the scops owls complex , the giant scops owls ( Otus <unk> ) found in Asia and the <unk> or the white @-@ faced scops owl found in Africa , although firmly ensconced in the scops owl group , appear to share some characteristics with the eagle @-@ owls . The Strix is also related to the Bubo and is considered a " sister complex " , with the <unk> possibly being intermediate between the two . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl appears to represent an expansion of the Bubo genus into the Eurasian continent . A few of the other species of Bubo seem to have been derived from the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , making it a " <unk> " , or they at least share a relatively recent common ancestor . The pharaoh eagle @-@ owl , distributed in the Arabian Peninsula and sections of the Sahara Desert through North Africa where rocky outcrops are found , was until recently considered a subspecies of Eurasian eagle @-@ owl . It appears that the pharaoh eagle @-@ owl differs about 3 @.@ 8 % in mitochondrial DNA from the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , well past the minimum genetic difference to differentiate species of 1 @.@ 5 % . Smaller and paler than Eurasian eagle @-@ owls , the pharaoh can also be considered a distinct species largely due to its higher pitched and more descending call and the observation that Eurasian eagle @-@ owls formerly found in Morocco ( B. b. hispanus ) apparently did not breed with the co @-@ existing pharaoh eagle @-@ owls . On the contrary , the race still found together with the pharaoh in the wild ( B. b. interpositus ) in the central Middle East has been found to interbreed in the wild with the pharaoh eagle @-@ owls , although <unk> materials have indicated interpositus may itself be a distinct species from the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl as it differs from nominate subspecies eagle @-@ owls by 2 @.@ 8 % in mitochondrial DNA . The Indian eagle owl was also considered a subspecies of Eurasian eagle @-@ owl until recently , however its smaller size , distinct voice ( more clipped and high @-@ pitched than Eurasians ) and the fact that it is largely allopatric in distribution ( filing out the Indian subcontinent ) with Eurasian eagle @-@ owl races has led to it being considered a distinct species . The mitochondrial DNA of the Indian species also appears considerably distinct from the Eurasian species . The cape eagle @-@ owl ( B. capensis ) appears to represent a return of this genetic line back into the African continent , where it leads a lifestyle similar to northern eagle @-@ owls albeit far to the south . Another offshoot of the northern Bubo group is the snowy owl . It appears to have separated from other Bubo at least 4 million years ago . 
 The fourth and most famous derivation of the evolutionary line that includes the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is the great horned owl , which appears to have been the result of primitive eagle @-@ owls spreading into North America . It has been stated that the great horned owls and Eurasian eagle @-@ owls are barely distinct as species , with a similar level of divergence in their plumages as the Eurasian and North American representations of the great grey owl or the long @-@ eared owl . However , there are more outward physical differences between the great horned owl and the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl than in those two examples , including a great size difference favoring the Eurasian species , the horned owl ’ s horizontal rather than vertical underside barring , yellow rather than orange eyes and a much strong black bracket to the facial disc , not to mention a number of differences in their reproductive behaviour and distinctive voices . Furthermore , genetic research has revealed that snowy owls are more closely related to the great horned owl than are Eurasian eagle @-@ owls . The most closely related species beyond the pharaoh , Indian and cape eagle @-@ owls to the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is the smaller , less powerful and African spotted eagle @-@ owl ( B. africanus ) , which was likely to have divided from the line before they radiated away from Africa . Somehow , genetic materials indicate the spotted eagle @-@ owl appears to share a more recent ancestor with the Indian eagle @-@ owl than with the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl or even the sympatric cape eagle @-@ owl . Eurasian eagle @-@ owls in captivity have produced apparently healthy hybrids with both the Indian eagle @-@ owl and the great horned owl . The pharaoh , Indian and cape eagle @-@ owls and great horned owl are all broadly similar in size to each other but all are considerably smaller than the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , which averages at least 15 – 30 % larger in linear dimensions and 30 – 50 % larger in body mass than these other related species , possibly as the eagle @-@ owls adapted to warmer climates and smaller prey . However , fossils from south France have indicated that during the Middle Pleistocene , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls ( this paleo @-@ subspecies given the name B. b. <unk> ) were larger than they are today . Even larger than those found in Azerbaijan and in Caucasus ( either B. b. <unk> or B. <unk> ) , which were deemed to date to the Late Pleistocene . About a dozen subspecies are recognized today . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 B. b. bubo ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) - Also known as the European eagle @-@ owl , the nominate subspecies inhabits continental Europe from near the Arctic Circle in Norway , Sweden , Finland , the southern Kola Peninsula , and Arkhangelsk where it ranges north to about latitude 640 30 ' N. , southward to the Baltic Sea , central Germany , to southeastern Belgium , eastern , central , and southern France to Italy and Sicily , and through Central and Southeastern Europe to Greece . It intergrades with B. b. ruthenus in northern Russia around the basin of the upper Mezen River and in the eastern vicinity of Gorki <unk> , Tambov and Voronezh , and intergrades with B. b. interpositus in northern Ukraine . This is a medium @-@ sized race , measuring in wing chord length 435 – 480 mm ( 17 @.@ 1 – 18 @.@ 9 in ) in males and 455 – 500 mm ( 17 @.@ 9 – 19 @.@ 7 in ) . In captive owls of this subspecies , the mean wingspan were 157 cm ( 5 ft 2 in ) for males and 167 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 ft 6 in ) for females . The total bill length is 45 to 56 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) . Adult male European Eagle @-@ Owls from Norway weigh 1 @.@ 63 to 2 @.@ 81 kg ( 3 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 2 lb ) , averaging 2 @.@ 38 kg ( 5 @.@ 2 lb ) , while females there weigh from 2 @.@ 28 to 4 @.@ 2 kg ( 5 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 3 lb ) , averaging 2 @.@ 95 kg ( 6 @.@ 5 lb ) . Unsurprisingly , adult owls from western Finland were about the same size , averaging 2 @.@ 65 kg ( 5 @.@ 8 lb ) . The race seems to follow Bergmann ’ s rule in regards to body size decreasing closer to the Equator , as specimens from central Europe average 2 @.@ 14 or 2 @.@ 3 kg ( 4 @.@ 7 or 5 @.@ 1 lb ) in body mass and those from Italy average about 2 @.@ 01 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 lb ) . The weight range for eagle @-@ owls in Italy is 1 @.@ 5 to 3 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . The nominate subspecies is perhaps the darkest and most richly coloured of eagle @-@ owl races . Many nominate birds are heavily overlaid with broad black streaking over the upper @-@ parts , head and chest . While generally a brownish base @-@ colour , many nominate owls can appear rich rufous , especially about the head , upper @-@ back and wing primaries . The lower belly is usually a buffy brown color , as opposed to whitish or yellowish in several other races . Birds seen from southern Italy and Sicily may show a tendency to be smaller than more northern birds and reportedly are duller , possessing paler ground coloration , and more narrow streaks , but museum specimens are often not hugely distinct from north Italian eagle @-@ owls . To the contrary , in Scandinavia , some birds are so are darkly plumages as to give a blackish @-@ brown impression with almost no paler colour showing . 
 B. b. hispanus ( Rothschild and Hartert , 1910 ) – Also known as the Spanish eagle @-@ owl or Iberian eagle @-@ owl . This race mainly occurs on the Iberian Peninsula , where it occupies a majority of Spain and scattered spots in Portugal . B. b. hispanus at least historically occurred in wooded areas of the Atlas Mountains in Algeria , Morocco and Tunisia , making it the only subspecies of Eurasian eagle @-@ owl known to breed in Africa , but this population is thought to be extinct . This is a fairly small @-@ bodied subspecies . In males , wing chord length can range from 400 to 450 mm ( 16 to 18 in ) and in females from 445 to 485 mm ( 17 @.@ 5 to 19 @.@ 1 in ) . Wingspans in this race can vary from 131 to 168 cm ( 4 ft 4 in to 5 ft 6 in ) , averaging about 154 @.@ 1 cm ( 5 ft 1 in ) . Among standard measurements of B. b. hispanus , the tail is 229 to 310 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 to 12 @.@ 2 in ) , the total bill length is 38 @.@ 9 to 54 @.@ 3 mm ( 1 @.@ 53 to 2 @.@ 14 in ) and the tarsus is 64 @.@ 5 to 81 mm ( 2 @.@ 54 to 3 @.@ 19 in ) . Adult male B. b. hispanus from Spain weigh 1 @.@ 22 to 1 @.@ 9 kg ( 2 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 2 lb ) , averaging 1 @.@ 63 kg ( 3 @.@ 6 lb ) , while females weigh from 1 @.@ 75 to 2 @.@ 49 kg ( 3 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 5 lb ) , averaging 2 @.@ 11 kg ( 4 @.@ 7 lb ) . In terms its life history , this may be the most extensively studied race of eagle @-@ owl . The Spanish eagle @-@ owl is the most similar in plumage to the nominate subspecies amongst other races , but tends to be a somewhat lighter , more greyish color , with generally lighter streaking and a paler belly . 
 B. b. ruthenus ( Buturlin and <unk> , 1906 ) - May be known as the eastern eagle @-@ owl . This race replaces the nominate in eastern Russia from about latitude 660 N. in the <unk> @-@ Pechora Basin south to the western Ural Mountains and the upper Don and lower Volga Rivers . This is a fairly large subspecies going on wing chord length , which is 430 – 468 mm ( 16 @.@ 9 – 18 @.@ 4 in ) in males and 470 – 515 mm ( 18 @.@ 5 – 20 @.@ 3 in ) in females . The race is intermediate in coloration between the nominate race and B. b. sibiricus . B. b. ruthenus may be confused with B. b. interpositus , even by authoritative ornithologists . B. b. interpositus is darker than B. b. ruthenus , distinctly more yellowish , less gray , and its brown pattern is darker , heavier , and more regular . The entire color pattern of B. b. interpositus is brighter , richer , and more contrasting than that of B. b. ruthenus , but B. b. interpositus , though very well characterized , is an intermediate subspecies . 
 B. b. interpositus ( Rothschild and Hartert , 1910 ) - May be known as Aharoni ’ s eagle @-@ owl or the Byzantine eagle @-@ owl . B. b. interpositus ranges from southern Russia , south of the nominate , with which it intergrades in northern Ukraine , from Bessarabia and the steppes of the Ukraine north to Kiev and Kharkov then eastward to the Crimea , the Caucasus and Transcaucasia to northwestern and northern Iran ( <unk> , region of Tehran , and probably the southern Caspian districts ) , and through Asia Minor south to Syria and Iraq but not to the Syrian desert where it is replaced by the pharaoh eagle @-@ owl . The latter and B. b. interpositus reportedly hybridize from western Syria south to southern Palestine . B. b. interpositus may be a distinct species from the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl based on genetic studies . This medium @-@ sized race is about the same size as the nominate subspecies B. b. bubo , with male wing chord lengths 425 to 475 mm ( 16 @.@ 7 to 18 @.@ 7 in ) and female lengths of 440 to 503 mm ( 17 @.@ 3 to 19 @.@ 8 in ) . It differs from the nominate race by being paler and more yellow , less ferruginous , and by having a sharper brown pattern ; from B. b. turcomanus by being very much darker and less yellow , and also by being much more sharply and heavily patterned with brown . Aharoni ’ s eagle @-@ owl is darker and more rusty than B. b. ruthenus . 
 B. b. sibiricus ( Gloger , 1833 ) - The western Siberian eagle @-@ owl . This race is distributed from the Ural Mountains of western Siberia and <unk> to the mid Ob River and the western Altai Mountains , north to limits of the taiga , the most northerly distribution known in the species overall . B. b. sibiricus is a large race , wherein the males measure 435 – 480 mm ( 17 @.@ 1 – 18 @.@ 9 in ) in wing chord length , while the females are 472 – 515 mm ( 18 @.@ 6 – 20 @.@ 3 in ) . Captive males were found to measure 155 to 170 cm ( 5 ft 1 in to 5 ft 7 in ) in wingspan and weigh 1 @.@ 62 to 3 @.@ 2 kg ( 3 @.@ 6 to 7 @.@ 1 lb ) ; whereas the females measure 165 to 190 cm ( 5 ft 5 in to 6 ft 3 in ) in wingspan and weigh 2 @.@ 28 to 4 @.@ 5 kg ( 5 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 9 lb ) . Males were cited with a mean body mass of approximately 2 @.@ 5 kg ( 5 @.@ 5 lb ) . This race is physically the most distinctive of all the Eurasian eagle @-@ owls , and is sometimes considered the most " beautiful and striking " . It is the most pale of the eagle @-@ owl races ; the general coloration is a buffy off @-@ white overlaid with dark markings . The crown , hindneck and underparts are streaked blackish but somewhat sparingly , with the lower breast and belly indistinctly barred , the primary coverts dark , contrasting with rest of the wing . The head , back and shoulders are only somewhat dark unlike in most other races . In the eastern limits of its range , B. b. sibiricus may intergrade with B. b. yenisseensis . 
 B. b. yenisseensis ( Buturlin , 1911 ) - Known as the eastern Siberian eagle @-@ owl . This race is found in central Siberia from about the Ob eastward to Lake Baikal , north to about latitudes 580 to 590 N on the Yenisei River , south to the Altai , <unk> and the Saur Mountain ranges and in <unk> Tuva and <unk> Mountains in northwestern Mongolia , grading into B. b. sibiricus near Tomsk in the west and into B. b. ussuriensis in the east of northern Mongolia . The zone of <unk> with the latter in Mongolia seems to be quite extensive , however , with intermediate eagle @-@ owls being especially prevalent around the <unk> River Valley , resulting in owls intermediate in coloration between B. b. yenisseensis and B. b. ussuriensis . B. b. yenisseensis is a large race , with wing chord lengths of 435 – 470 mm ( 17 @.@ 1 – 18 @.@ 5 in ) in males and 473 – 518 mm ( 18 @.@ 6 – 20 @.@ 4 in ) in females . B. b. yenisseensis is typically much darker with more yellowish ground color than B. b. sibiricus . However , it does have a similar amount of dazzling white on its underwing as does sibiricus . It is buffy @-@ greyish overall with well @-@ expressed dark patterning on the upper @-@ parts and around the head . The underside is overall pale greyish with black streaking . 
 B. b. jakutensis ( Buturlin , 1908 ) - May be called the <unk> eagle @-@ owl . This subspecies inhabits northeastern Siberia , from southern Yakutia north to about latitude 640 N. , west in the basin of the Vilyuy River to the upper <unk> Tunguska River , and east to the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk from Magadan south to the Khabarovsk Krai . It has been reported farther north , from the regions of the upper Kolyma River and the upper Anadyr . Eurasian eagle @-@ owls are absent in Kamchatka and north of the Verkhoyansk Range . This is a large race , rivaling the proceeding two subspecies as the largest of all eagle @-@ owls , going on wing chord length , which race is largest is unclear considering the extensive size overlap in wing size . The wing chord is 455 to 490 cm ( 179 to 193 in ) in males and 480 to 503 mm ( 18 @.@ 9 to 19 @.@ 8 in ) in females . B. b. jakutensis is much darker and browner above than both B. b. sibiricus and B. b. yenisseensis , though its coloration is more diffused , less sharp than the latter . It is more distinctly streaked and barred below than B. b. sibiricus while being whiter and more heavily vermiculated below than B. b. yenisseensis . 
 B. b. ussuriensis ( <unk> , 1915 ) - Would presumably be referred to as the Ussuri eagle @-@ owl . This subspecies ranges from southeastern Siberia , to the south of the range of B. b. jakutensis , southward through eastern Transbaikal , <unk> , Sakhalin , <unk> and the Manchurian portion of the Chinese provinces of Shaanxi , Shanxi and Hebei . This subspecies is also reportedly found in the southern Kuril Islands ranging down to as far as northern Hokkaido , the only Japanese representation in the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl species , although this is apparently not a stable , viable population . Going on wing chord length , B. b. ussuriensis is slightly smaller than the various races from further north in Siberia . Males have a wing chord length of 430 – 475 mm ( 16 @.@ 9 – 18 @.@ 7 in ) and females are 460 – 502 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 – 19 @.@ 8 in ) . This race differs from B. b. jakutensis by being much darker throughout . It is also darker than B. b. yenisseensis . The brown markings on the upper parts of B. b. ussuriensis are much more extensive and diffused than in B. b. jakutensis or B. b. yenisseensis , with the result that the white markings are much less conspicuous in B. b. ussuriensis than in the other two races . The under parts are also more buffy , much less white , and more heavily streaked and vermiculated in B. b. ussuriensis than in the two more northerly , larger races . It overlaps considerably with jakutensis and some birds are of an intermediate appearance . 
 B. b. turcomanus ( <unk> , 1835 ) - This subspecies is known as the steppe eagle @-@ owl . It is distributed from Kazakhstan between the Volga and upper Ural Rivers , the Caspian Sea coast and the former Aral Sea , but replaced in that country by B. b. omissus in the mountainous south and in the coastal region of the <unk> Peninsula by B. b. <unk> . Out of Kazakhstan , the range of B. b. turcomanus continues through the Transbaikal and the Tarim Basin to western Mongolia . This subspecies appears to be variable in size , but is generally medium @-@ sized . Males can range in wing chord length from 418 – 468 mm ( 16 @.@ 5 – 18 @.@ 4 in ) and females from 440 to 512 mm ( 17 @.@ 3 to 20 @.@ 2 in ) . In standard measurements , the tail is 260 – 310 mm ( 10 – 12 in ) , the tarsus is 77 – 81 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 2 in ) and the bill is 45 – 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 9 in ) . This race can reportedly weigh from 1 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 8 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 to 8 @.@ 4 lb ) . The plumage background colour is pale , yellowish @-@ buff . The dark patterns on the upper- and underparts is paler , less well @-@ defined and more shattered than in B. b. interpositus . Dark longitudinal patterning on the under @-@ parts discontinue above the belly . B. b. turcomanus is greyer than B. b. <unk> but is otherwise somewhat similar @-@ looking . This race is unique in that it seems to shun mountainous and obvious rocky habitats in favor of inhabits low hills , plateaus , lowlands , steppes , and semideserts at or near sea @-@ level . 
 B. b. omissus ( <unk> , 1932 ) - May be called the Turkoman eagle @-@ owl or the <unk> eagle @-@ owl . B. b. omissus is native to Turkmenistan and adjacent regions of northeastern Iran and western Xinjiang . This is small subspecies ( only nikolskii averages smaller among currently accepted races ) , with males possessing a wing chord length of 404 – 450 mm ( 15 @.@ 9 – 17 @.@ 7 in ) and females of 425 to 460 mm ( 16 @.@ 7 to 18 @.@ 1 in ) . B. b. omissus may be considered a typical sub @-@ desert form . The general coloration is an ochre to buffy off @-@ yellow ; with the dark pattern on the upper- and under @-@ parts being relatively undefined . The dark shaft @-@ streaks on nape are very narrow , while the dark longitudinal patterning on the underparts does not cover the belly . A dark cross @-@ pattern on the belly and flanks is thinner and paler than in B. b. turcomanus . Compared to B. b. nikolskii , which may occupy the more southern reaches of the same upland ranges , it is somewhat larger as well as darker , less distinctly yellowish and more heavily streaked . 
 B. b. nikolskii ( Zarudny , 1905 ) - May be referred to in English either the Afghan eagle @-@ owl or the Iranian eagle @-@ owl . The range of B. b. nikolskii appears to extend from the Balkan Mountains and <unk> Dagh in southern Transcaspia eastward to southeastern Uzbekistan or to perhaps southwestern <unk> , then southward 290 N. It may range north to Iran , Afghanistan and Baluchistan south to the region of Kalat , or at about latitude of Hindu Kush . In Iran , B. b. nikolskii is replaced by B. b. interpositus in the north , and probably also in the northwest , and probably by B. b. <unk> in Badakhshan , part of northeastern Afghanistan . The birds of southern <unk> found west of the Pamirs are more or less intermediate between B. b. omissus and B. b. hemachalana . This is the smallest known race of eagle @-@ owl , though the only known measurements have been of wing chord length . Males can measure 378 to 430 mm ( 14 @.@ 9 to 16 @.@ 9 in ) and females can measure 410 to 465 mm ( 16 @.@ 1 to 18 @.@ 3 in ) in wing chord . Other than its smaller size , B. b. nikolskii is distinguished from the somewhat similar B. b. omissus by its rusty wash and being less dark above . 
 B. b. hemachalana ( Hume , 1873 ) – The Himalayan eagle @-@ owl . The range of B. b. hemachalana extends from the Himalayas and Tibet , westward to the Tian Shan system in Russian Turkestan , west to the Kara Tau , north to the Dzungarian <unk> , east to at least the <unk> Valley in Xinjiang , and south to the regions of Kashgar , <unk> and probably the western Kunlun Mountains . This bird is partly migratory , descending to the plains of Turkmenistan with colder winter weather , and apparently reaches northern Balochistan . This is a medium @-@ sized subspecies , though is larger than other potentially abutting arid Asian eagle @-@ owl races which share a somewhat similar yellowish ground colour . The male attains a wing chord length of 420 – 485 mm ( 16 @.@ 5 – 19 @.@ 1 in ) , while the female ’ s wing chord is 450 – 505 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 – 19 @.@ 9 in ) . The bill measures 42 – 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) in length . 11 adult eagle @-@ owls of this race from the Tibetan Plateau averaged 301 mm ( 11 @.@ 9 in ) in tail length , 78 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in tarsus length and scaled an average of 2 @.@ 16 kg ( 4 @.@ 8 lb ) in mass . This race is physically similar to B. b. turcomanus but the background colour is more light yellowish @-@ brown and less buff . The dark patterns on upper- and under @-@ parts are some more expressed and less regular than in B. b. turcomanus and B. b. omissus and the general color from the mantle to the ear tufts is a more consistent brownish colour than most other abutting races . B. b. hemachalana differs from B. b. yenisseensis by being much more yellow on the rump , under tail coverts , and outer tail feathers , rather than grayish or whitish , and the ground coloration of its body is more yellowish above , and is less whitish below . Dark longitudinal pattern on the under @-@ parts cover the fore @-@ belly . 
 B. b. kiautschensis ( Reichenow , 1903 ) – This could be called the north Chinese eagle @-@ owl . This race ranges from South Korea and China , south of the range of B. b. ussuriensis , southward to Kwangtung and Yunnan , and inland to <unk> and southern Kansu . This is a smallish subspecies , with the male ’ s wing chord measuring 410 – 448 mm ( 16 @.@ 1 – 17 @.@ 6 in ) and the female ’ s being 440 – 485 mm ( 17 @.@ 3 – 19 @.@ 1 in ) . In Korea , this race was found to average 2 @.@ 26 kg ( 5 @.@ 0 lb ) in mass , with a range of 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 9 kg ( 4 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 4 lb ) . B. b. kiautschensis is much darker , more tawny and rufous , and slightly smaller than B. b. ussuriensis . It resembles the nominate race from Europe ( though obviously considerably disparate in distribution ) rather closely in coloration but differs from it by being paler , more mottled , and less heavily marked with brown on the upper parts , by having narrower dark shaft streaks on the under parts , which average also duller and more ocher , and by averaging smaller . 
 B. b. swinhoei ( Hartert , 1913 ) – This could be called the south Chinese eagle @-@ owl . This race is endemic to southeastern China . A quite rufescent form , it is somewhat similar to B. b. kiautschensis . In this small race , the wing chord measures 410 – 465 mm ( 16 @.@ 1 – 18 @.@ 3 in ) in both sexes . This is a rather poorly known and described subspecies and , although still generally recognized , is considered invalid by some authorities . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Eagle @-@ owls are distributed somewhat sparsely but can potentially inhabit a wide range of habitats , with a partiality for irregular topography . They have been found in habitats as diverse as northern coniferous forests to the edge of vast deserts . Essentially , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls have been found living in almost every climatic and environmental condition on the Eurasian continent , excluding the greatest extremities , i.e. they are absent from humid rainforest in Southeast Asia as well as the high Arctic tundra , both of which they are more or less replaced by other variety of Bubo owls . They are often found in the largest numbers in areas where cliffs and ravines are surrounded by a scattering of trees and bushes . However , grassland areas such as alpine meadows or desert @-@ like steppe can also host them so long as they have the cover and protection of rocky areas . The preference of eagle @-@ owls for places with irregular topography has been reported in most known studies . The obvious benefit of such nesting locations is that both nests and daytime roosts located in rocky areas and / or steep slopes would be less accessible to predators , including man . Also , they may be attracted to the vicinity of riparian or wetlands areas , due to the fact that the soft soil of wet areas is conducive to burrowing by the small , terrestrial mammals normally preferred in the diet , such as voles and rabbits . Due to their preference for rocky areas , the species is often found in mountainous areas and can be found up to elevations of 2 @,@ 100 m ( 6 @,@ 900 ft ) in the Alps and 4 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Himalayas and 4 @,@ 700 m ( 15 @,@ 400 ft ) in the adjacent Tibetan Plateau . However , they can also be found living at sea @-@ level and may nest amongst rocky sea cliffs . Despite their success in areas such as sub @-@ arctic zones and mountainous that are frigid for much of the year , warmer conditions seem to result in more successful breeding attempts per studies in the Eifel region of Germany . In a study from Spain , areas primarily consisting of woodlands ( 52 % of study area being forested ) were preferred with pine trees predominating the oaks in habitats used , as opposed to truly mixed pine @-@ oak woodland . Pine and other coniferous stands are often preferred in great horned owls as well due to the constant density , which make it more likely to overlook the large birds . However , in mountainous forest , they are not generally found in enclosed wooded areas , as is the tawny owl ( Strix <unk> ) . Only 2 @.@ 7 % of the habitat included in the territorial ranges for eagle @-@ owls per the habitat study in Spain consisted of cultivated or agricultural land . On the other hand , compared to golden eagles , they can visit cultivated land more regularly in hunting forays due to their nocturnal habits , which allows them to largely evade human activity . In the Italian Alps , it was found that almost no pristine habitat remained and locally eagle @-@ owls nested in the vicinity of towns , villages and ski resorts . 
 Although found in the largest numbers in areas sparsely populated by humans , farmland is sometimes inhabited and they even have been observed living in park @-@ like settings within European cities . Since 2005 , at least five pairs have nested in Helsinki . This is due in part to feral European rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) having recently populated the Helsinki area , originally from pet rabbits released to the wild . The number is expected to increase due to the growth of the European rabbit population in Helsinki . European hares ( Lepus europaeus ) , the often preferred prey species by biomass of the eagle @-@ owls in their natural habitat , live only in rural areas of Finland , not in the city centre . In June 2007 , an eagle @-@ owl nicknamed ' Bubi ' landed in the crowded Helsinki Olympic Stadium during the European Football Championship qualification match between Finland and Belgium . The match was interrupted for six minutes . After tiring of the match , following Jonathan Johansson 's opening goal for Finland , the bird left the scene . Finland 's national football team have had the nickname <unk> ( Finnish for " Eurasian eagle @-@ owls " ) ever since . The owl was named " Helsinki Citizen of the Year " in December 2007 . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is largely nocturnal in activity , as are most owl species , with its activity focused in the first few hours after sunset and the last few hours before sunrise . However , in the northern stretches of its range , partial diurnal behavior has been recorded , including active hunting in broad daylight during the late afternoon . In such areas , full nightfall is essentially non @-@ existent at the peak of summer , so eagle @-@ owls must presumably hunt and actively brood at the nest during daylight . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl has a number of vocalizations that are used at different times . It will usually select obvious topographic features such as rocky pinnacles , stark ridges and mountain peaks to use as regular song posts . These are doted along the other edges of the eagle @-@ owl ’ s territory and they are visited often but only for a few minutes at a time . Vocal activity is almost entirely confined to the colder months from late fall through winter , with vocal activity in October through December mainly having territorial purposes and from January to February being primarily oriented towards courtship and mating purposes . The territorial song , which can be heard at great distance , is a deep resonant ooh @-@ hu with emphasis on the first syllable for the male , and a more high @-@ pitched and slightly more drawn @-@ out uh @-@ hu for the female . It is not uncommon for a pair to perform an antiphonal duet . The widely used name in Germany as well as some other sections of Europe for this species is <unk> due to its song . At 250 – 350 Hz , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owls territorial song or call is deeper , farther @-@ carrying and is often considering " more impressive " than the territorial songs of the great horned owl or even that of the slightly larger Blakiston ’ s fish owl , although the horned owl ’ s call averages slightly longer in duration . Other calls include a rather faint , laughter @-@ like OO @-@ OO @-@ oo and a harsh <unk> @-@ <unk> . <unk> eagle @-@ owls and other potential dangers may be met with a " terrifying " , extremely loud <unk> . Raucous barks not unlike those of <unk> owls or long @-@ eared owls have been recorded but are deeper and more powerful than those species ’ barks . Annoyance at close quarters is expressed by bill @-@ clicking and cat @-@ like spitting , and a defensive posture involves lowering the head , ruffling the back feathers , fanning the tail and spreading the wings . 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl rarely assumes the so @-@ called " tall @-@ thin position " , which is when an owl adopts an upright stance with plumage closely compressed and may stand tightly beside a tree trunk . Among others , the long @-@ eared owl is among the most often reported to sit with this pose . The great horned owl has been more regularly recorded using the tall @-@ thin , if not a consistently as some Strix and Asio owls , and it is commonly thought to aid camouflage if encountering a threatening or novel animal or sound . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl is a broad @-@ winged species and engages in a strong , direct flight , usually consisting of shallow wing beats and long , surprisingly fast glides . It has , unusually for an owl , also been known to soar on updrafts on rare occasions . The latter method of flight has led them to be mistaken for <unk> , which are smaller and quite differently proportioned . Usually when seen flying during the day , it is due to being disturbed by humans or mobbing crows . Eurasian eagle @-@ owls are highly sedentary , normally maintaining a single territory throughout their adult lives . 
 Even those near the northern limits of their range , where winters are harsh and likely to bare little in food , the eagle @-@ owl does not leave its native range . However , there are cases from Russia of Eurasian eagle @-@ owls moving south for the winter , as the icebound , infamously harsh climate there is too severe even for these hardy birds and their prey . Similarly , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls living in the Tibetan highlands and Himalayas may also in some cases vacate their normal territories when winter hits and move south . Even in those two examples , there is no evidence of consistent , annual migration by Eurasian eagle @-@ owls and the birds may eke out a living on their normal territories even in the sparsest times . 
 = = Dietary biology = = 
 = = Breeding = = 
 Eurasian eagle @-@ owls are strictly territorial and will defend their territories from <unk> eagle @-@ owls year around , but territorial calling appears to peak around October to early January . Territory size is similar or occasionally slightly greater than great horned owl : averaging 15 to 80 km2 ( 5 @.@ 8 to 30 @.@ 9 sq mi ) . Territories are established by the male eagle @-@ owl , who selected the highest points in the territory from which to sing . The high prominence of singing perches allows their song to be heard at greater distances and lessens the need for potentially dangerous physical confrontations in the areas where territories may meet . Nearly as important in territorial behaviour as vocalization is the white throat patch . When <unk> specimens with flared white throats were placed around the perimeter of eagle @-@ owl territories , male eagle @-@ owls reacted quite strongly and often attacked the stuffed owl , reacting more mildly to a stuffed eagle @-@ owl with a non @-@ flared white throat . Females were less likely to be aggressive to mounted specimens and did not seem to vary in their response whether exposed to the specimens with or without the puffed up white patch . In January and February , the primary function for vocalization becomes for the purpose of courtship . More often than not , eagle @-@ owls will pair for life but usually engage in courtship rituals annually , most likely to re @-@ affirm pair bonds . When calling for the purposes of courtship , males tend to bow and hoot loudly but do so in a less contorted manner than the male great horned owl . Courtship in the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl may involve bouts of " duetting " , with the male sitting upright and the female bowing as she calls . There may be mutual bowing , billing and fondling before the female flies to a perch where coitus occurs , usually taking place several times over the course of a few minutes . 
 The male selects breeding sites and advertises their potential to the female by flying to them and kneading out a small depression ( if soil is present ) and making staccato notes and clucking noises . Several potential sites may be presented , with the female selecting one . Like all owls , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls do not build nests or add material but nest on the surface or material already present . Eurasian eagle @-@ owls normally nest on rocks or boulders , most often utilizing cliff ledges and steep slopes , as well as crevices , gullies , holes or caves . Rocky areas that also prove concealing woodlots as well as , for hunting purposes , that border river valleys and grassy scrubland may be especially attractive . If only low rubble is present , they will nest on the ground between rocks . Often , in more densely forested areas , they ’ ve been recorded nesting on the ground , often among roots of trees , under large bushes and under fallen tree trunks . Steep slopes with dense vegetation are preferred if nesting on the ground , although some ground nests are surprisingly exposed or in flat spots such as in open spots of the taiga , steppe , ledges of river banks and between wide tree trunks . All Eurasian eagle @-@ owl nests in the largely forested Altai Krai region of Russia were found to be on the ground , usually at the base of pines . This species does not often use other bird ’ s nests as does the great horned owl , which often prefers nests built by other animals over any other nesting site . However , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl has been recorded in singular cases using nests built by common buzzards ( Buteo buteo ) , golden , greater spotted ( <unk> clanga ) and white @-@ tailed eagles ( Haliaeetus albicilla ) , common ravens ( Corvus corax ) and black storks ( Ciconia nigra ) . Among the eagle @-@ owls of the fairly heavily wooded <unk> of Belarus , they more commonly utilize nests built by other birds than most eagle @-@ owls , i.e. stork or accipitrid nests , but a majority of nests are still located on the ground . This is contrary to the indication that ground nests are selected only if rocky areas or other bird nests are unavailable , as many will utilize ground nests even where large bird nests seem to be accessible . Tree holes being used for nesting sites are even more rarely recorded than nests constructed by other birds . While it may be assumed that the eagle @-@ owl is too large to utilize tree hollows , when other large species like the great grey owl have never been recorded nesting in one , the even more robust Blakiston 's fish owl nests exclusively in cavernous hollows . The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl often uses the same nest site year after year . 
 In Engadin , Switzerland , the male eagle @-@ owl hunts until the young are 4 to 5 weeks old and the female spends all her time brooding at the nest . After this point , the female gradually resumes hunting from both herself and the young and thus provides a greater range of food for the young . While it may seem contrary to the species ’ highly territorial nature , there is one verified cases of polygamy in Germany , with a male apparently mating with two females , and cooperative brooding in Spain , with a third adult of undetermined sex helping a breeding pair care for the chicks . The response of Eurasian eagle @-@ owls to humans approaching at the nest is quite variable . The species is often rather less aggressive than some other owls , including related species like the spot @-@ bellied <unk> , great horned and snowy owls , many of the northern Strix species and even some rather smaller owl species , which often fearlessly attack any person found to be nearing their nests . Occasionally , if a person climbs to an active nest , the adult female eagle @-@ owl will do a distraction display , in which they feign an injury . This is an uncommon behaviour in most owls and most often associated with small birds trying to falsely drawl the attention of potential predators away from their offspring . More commonly , the female flies off and abandons her nest temporarily , leaving the eggs or small nestlings exposed , when a human approaches it . Occasionally , if cornered both adults and nestlings will do an elaborate threat display , also rare in owls in general , in which the eagle @-@ owls raise their wings into a semi @-@ circle and puff up their feathers , followed by a snapping of their bills . Apparently eagle @-@ owls of uncertain and probably exotic origin in Britain are likely to react aggressively to humans approaching the nest . Also , aggressive encounters involving eagle @-@ owls around their nest , despite being historically rare , apparently have increased in recent decades in Scandinavia . The discrepancy of aggressiveness at the nest between the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl and its Nearctic counterpart may be correlated to variation in the extent of nest predation that the species endured during the evolutionary process . 
 = = = Eggs and offspring development = = = 
 The eggs are normally laid at intervals of three days and are incubated only by the female . Laying generally begins in late winter but may be later in the year in colder habitats . During the incubation period , the female is brought food at the nest by her mate . A single clutch of white eggs is laid , each egg can measure anything from 56 to 73 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 9 in ) long by 44 @.@ 2 to 53 mm ( 1 @.@ 74 to 2 @.@ 09 in ) in width and will usually weigh about 75 to 80 g ( 2 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 oz ) . In Central Europe , eggs average 59 @.@ 8 mm × 49 @.@ 5 mm ( 2 @.@ 35 in × 1 @.@ 95 in ) , while in Siberia , eggs average 59 @.@ 4 mm × 50 @.@ 1 mm ( 2 @.@ 34 in × 1 @.@ 97 in ) . Their eggs are only slightly larger than those of snowy owls and the nominate subspecies of great horned owl , while similar in size to those of spot @-@ bellied eagle @-@ owls and Blakiston 's fish owls . However , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl ’ s eggs are noticeably larger than those of Indian and pharaoh eagle @-@ owls . Usually clutch size is 1 to 2 , rarely 3 to 4 and exceptionally to 6 . The average number of eggs laid varies with latitude in Europe . Mean clutch size averages from 2 @.@ 02 @-@ 2 @.@ 14 in Spain and the massifs of France , 1 @.@ 82 to 1 @.@ 89 in central Europe and the eastern Alps , while in Sweden and Finland the clutch size averages 1 @.@ 56 and 1 @.@ 87 , respectively . While variation based on climate is not unusual for different wide ranging palearctic species , the higher clutch size of western Mediterranean eagle @-@ owls is also probably driven by the presence of lagomorphs in the diet , which provide high nutritional value than most other regular prey . The average clutch size , attributed as 2 @.@ 7 , was the lowest of any European owl per one study . One species was attributed with an even lower clutch size in North America , the great grey owl with a mean of 2 @.@ 6 , but the mean clutch size was much higher for the same species in Europe , at 4 @.@ 05 . 
 In Spain , incubation is from mid- January to mid @-@ March , hatching and early nestling period is from late March to early April , fledging and post @-@ fledging dependence can be anywhere from mid @-@ April to August and territorial / courtship is anytime hereafter ; i.e. the period between the beginning of juvenile dispersal to egg laying ; from September to early January . The same general date <unk> were followed in southern France . In the Italian Alps , the mean egg @-@ laying date was similarly February 27 but the young were more likely to be dependent later , as all fledglings were still being cared for by the end of August and some even lingered under parental care until October . 
 The first egg hatches after 31 to 36 days of incubation . Although the eggs do hatch successively , considering that the average intervals between egg @-@ laying is three day , surprisingly the young tend to hatch no more than a day or two apart . Like all owls that nest in the open , the downy young are not white often a mottled grey with some white and buff , which provides camouflage . They open their eyes at 4 days of age . The chicks grow rapidly , being able to consume small prey whole after roughly three weeks . In Andalusia , it was found that the most noticeably development of the young before they leave the nest was the increase of body size , which was the highest growth rate of any studied owl as the eagle @-@ owls grew from a small size more quickly than either snowy or great horned owls . Body mass increased fourteen times over from 5 days old to 60 days old in this study . The male continues to bring prey , leaving in on or around the nest , and the female feeds the nestlings , tearing up the food into suitably @-@ sized pieces . The female resumes hunting after about three weeks which increases the food supply to the chicks . <unk> has been recorded widely in Eurasian eagle @-@ owls and , according to some authorities , is almost a rule in the species . However , many nesting attempts produce 2 fledglings indicating that siblicide is not as common as in other birds of prey , especially some eagles . It has been theorized in Spain that males are likely to be the first egg laid to reduce the likelihood of sibling aggression due to the size difference , thus the younger female hatchling is less likely to be killed since it is similar in size to its older sibling . 
 Apparently , the point at which the chicks venture out of the nest is driven by the location of the nest . In elevated nest sites , chicks usually wander out of the nest at 5 to as late as 7 weeks of age , but have been recorded leaving the nest if the nest is on the ground as early as 22 to 25 days old . The chicks can walk well at five weeks of age and by seven weeks are taking short flights . Hunting and flying skills are not tested prior to the young eagle @-@ owls leaving the nest . Young Eurasian eagle @-@ owls leave the nest by 5 – 6 weeks of ago and typically can flying weakly ( a few metres ) by about 7 – 8 weeks of age . Normally , they are cared for at least another month . By the end of the month , the young eagle @-@ owls are quite assured fliers . There are a few confirmed cases of adult eagle @-@ owls in Spain feeding and caring for post @-@ fledgling juvenile eagle @-@ owls that were not their own . 
 A study from southern France found the mean fledgling number of fledgling per nest was 1 @.@ 67 . In central Europe , the mean number of fledglings per nest averages between 1 @.@ 8 and 1 @.@ 9 . The mean fledgling rate in the Italian Alps was 1 @.@ 89 , thus being similar . In the Italian Alps it was found that heavier rainfall during breeding decreased fledgling success because it inhibited the ability of the parents to hunt and potentially exposed nestlings to hypothermia . In the reintroduced population of eagle @-@ owls in Eifel Germany , occupied territories produced an average of 1 @.@ 17 fledglings but not all occupying pair attempted to breed , with about 23 % of those attempting to breed being unsuccessful . In slightly earlier studies , possibly due to higher persecution rates , the mean number of young leaving the nest was often lower , such as 1 @.@ 77 in Bavaria , Germany , 1 @.@ 1 in lower Austria and 0 @.@ 6 in southern Sweden . While sibling owls are close in the stage between leaving the nest and fully fledge , about 20 days after leaving the nest , the family unit seems to dissolve and the young disperse quickly and directly . All told , the dependence of young eagle @-@ owls on their parents last for 20 to 24 weeks . Independence in central Europe is from September to November . The young leave their parents care normally on their own but are also sometimes chased away by their parents . The young Eurasian eagle @-@ owls reach sexual maturity by the following year , but do not normally breed until they can establish a territory at around two or three years old . Until they are able to establish their own territories , young eagle @-@ owls spend their life as nomadic " floaters " and , while they also call , select inconspicuous perch sites unlike breeding birds . Male floaters are especially wary about intrusion into an established territory to avoid potential conspecific aggression . 
 = = Status = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl has a very wide range across much of Europe and Asia , estimated to be about 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . In Europe there are estimated to be between 19 @,@ 000 and 38 @,@ 000 breeding pairs and in the whole world around 250 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 individual birds . The population trend is thought to be decreasing because of human activities , but with such a large range and large total population , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has rated the bird as being of " least concern " . Although roughly equal in adaptability and wideness of distribution , the great horned owl , with a total estimated population of up to 5 @.@ 3 million individuals , apparently has a total population that is roughly twice that of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl . Numerous factors , including a shorter history of systematic persecution , lesser sensitivity to human disturbance while nesting , somewhat greater ability to adapt to marginal habitats and widespread urbanization and slightly smaller territories , may play into the horned owls greater numbers in modern times . 
 = = = Longevity = = = 
 The eagle owl can live for up to 20 years in the wild . At one time the oldest ringed eagle @-@ owl was considered a 19 @-@ year @-@ old specimen . However , another banded specimen was subsequently found to be 27 years and 9 months old . Like many other bird species in captivity they can live much longer without having to endure difficult natural conditions , and have possibly survived up to 68 years in zoo collections . Healthy adults normally have no natural predators and are thus considered apex predators . The leading causes of death for this species are man @-@ made : electrocution , traffic accidents and shooting frequently claim the life of eagle @-@ owls . 
 = = = Anthropogenic mortality = = = 
 Electrocution was the greatest cause of mortality in 68 % of 25 published studies and accounted , on average , for 38 @.@ 2 % of the reported eagle @-@ owl deaths . This was particularly true in the Italian Alps , where the number of dangerous , non @-@ insulated pylons near nests was extremely high , but is highly problematic almost throughout the species ’ European distribution . In one telemetry study , 55 % of 27 dispersing young were electrocuted within 1 year of their release from captivity , while electrocution rates of wild @-@ born young are even higher . Mortality in the Swiss Rhine Valley was variable , in radio @-@ tagged , released individuals , most died as a result of starvation ( 48 % ) rather than human @-@ based causes but 93 % of the wild , un @-@ tagged individuals found dead were due to human activities , 46 % due to electrocution and 43 % due to collision with vehicles or trains . It was concluded there that insulation of pylons would result in a stabilization of the local population due to floaters taking up residence in non @-@ occupied territories that formerly held deceased eagle @-@ owls . Eurasian eagle @-@ owls from Finland also were found to primary die due to electrocution ( 39 % ) and collisions with vehicles ( 22 % ) . Wind turbine collisions can also be a serious cause of mortality locally . 
 Eagle @-@ owl has been singled out historically as a threat to game species and thus to the economic well @-@ being of landowners , game @-@ keepers and even governmental agencies and as such has been singled out for widespread persecution . Local extinctions of Eurasian eagle @-@ owls have been primarily due to persecution . Examples of this including northern Germany in 1830 , the Netherlands sometimes in the late nineteenth century , Luxembourg in 1903 , Belgium in 1943 and central and western Germany in the 1960s . In trying to determine causes of death for 1476 eagle @-@ owls from Spain , most were unknown and undetermined types of trauma . The largest group that could be determined , 411 birds , was due to collisions , more than half of which were from electrocution , while 313 were due to persecution and merely 85 were directly attributable to natural causes . Clearly , while pylon safety is perhaps the most serious factor to be addressed in Spain , persecution continues to be a massive problem for Spanish eagle @-@ owls . Of seven European nations where modern Eurasian eagle @-@ owl mortality is well @-@ studied , continual persecution is by far the largest problem in Spain , although also continues to be serious ( often comprising at least half of studied mortality ) in France . From France and Spain , nearly equal numbers of eagle @-@ owls are poisoned ( for which raptors might not be the main target ) and are shot ( which is obvious very intentional persecution ) . 
 = = = Conservation and re @-@ introductions = = = 
 While the eagle @-@ owl remains reasonably numerous in some parts of its habitat where nature is still relatively little disturbed by human activity , such as the sparsely populated regions of Russia and Scandinavia , concern has been expressed about the future of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl in western and central Europe . There , very few areas are not heavily modified by human civilization , thus exposing the birds to the risk of collisions with deadly man @-@ made objects ( e.g. pylons ) and a depletion of native prey numbers due to ongoing habitat degradation and urbanization . 
 In Spain , long @-@ term governmental protection of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl seems to have no positive effect on reducing the persecution of eagle @-@ owls . Therefore , Spanish conservationists have recommended to boost education and stewardship programs in order to protect eagle @-@ owls from direct killing by local residents . 
 <unk> , biologists studying eagle @-@ owl mortality and conservation factors have recommended to proceed with the proper insulation of electric wires and pylons in areas where the species is present . As this measure is labour @-@ intensive and therefore rather expensive , few efforts have actually been made to insulate pylons in areas with few fiscal resources devoted to conservation such as rural Spain . 
 In Sweden , a mitigation project was launched in order to insulate transformers that are frequently damaged by eagle owl electrocution . 
 Large reintroduction programs were instituted in Germany after the eagle @-@ owl was deemed extinct in the country as a breeding species by the 1960s , as a result of a long period of heavy persecution . 
 The largest reintroduction there occurred from the 1970s to the 1990s in the Eifel region , near the border to neighbouring Belgium and Luxembourg . However , the success of this measure , consisting in more than a thousand eagle @-@ owls being reintroduced at an average cost of $ 1 @,@ 500 US dollars per bird , is a subject of controversy . It appears that those eagle @-@ owls reintroduced in the Eifel region which are able to breed successfully , enjoy a nesting success comparable with wild eagle @-@ owls from elsewhere in Europe . On the other hand , mortality levels in the Eifel region appear to remain quite high due to anthropogenic factors . There are also concerns about a lack of genetic diversity of the species in this part of Germany . 
 Apparently , the German reintroductions have allowed eagle @-@ owls to repopulate neighbouring parts of Europe , as the breeding populations now occurring in the Low Countries ( Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg ) are believed to be the result of influx from regions further to the east . Smaller reintroductions have been done elsewhere and the current breeding population in Sweden is believed to be primarily the result of a series of reintroductions . 
 Conversely to numerous threats and declines incurred by Eurasian eagle @-@ owls , areas where human @-@ dependent non @-@ native prey species such as brown rats ( Rattus norvegicus ) and rock pigeons ( Columba livia ) have flourished , have given the eagle @-@ owls a primary food source and allowed them occupy regions where they were once marginalized or absent . 
 = = = Occurrence in Great Britain = = = 
 The Eurasian eagle @-@ owl at one time did occur in Great Britain as a naturally occurring species . Some , including the RSPB have claimed that this was probably by about 10 @,@ 000 @-@ 9 @,@ 000 years ago after the last ice age but fossil remains found in Meare Lake Village have indicated the eagle @-@ owl occurring as recently as roughly 2 @,@ 000 years ago in the fossil record . The lack of presence of the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl in British folklore or writings in recent millennium may indicate the lack of occurrence by this species there . The flooding of the land bridge between Britain and continental Europe may have been responsible for their extirpation as they only disperse over limited distances , although early human persecution presumably played a role as well . Some <unk> of eagle @-@ owls in Britain have been revealed to actually be great horned owls or Indian eagle @-@ owls , the latter a particularly popular owl in falconry circuits . However , some breeding pairs do still occur in Britain , the exact number of pairs and individuals is not definitely known . The World Owl Trust stated that they believe some eagle @-@ owls occurring in North England and Scotland are naturally occurring , making the flight of roughly 350 to 400 km ( 220 to 250 mi ) from the west coast of Norway to Shetland and the east coast of Scotland , as well as possibly from the coasts of the Netherlands and Belgium to the south . Although not migratory , eagle @-@ owls can disperse some notable distances in young birds seeking a territory . However , prior studies of eagle @-@ owl distribution have indicated a strong reluctance to cross large bodies of water in the species . Many authorities state that the Eurasian eagle @-@ owls occurring in Britain are individuals that have escaped from captivity . While , until 19th century , wealthy collectors may have released unwanted eagle @-@ owls , despite press to the contrary , there is no evidence of any organization or individual intentionally releasing eagle @-@ owls recently with the intent to establish a breeding population . Many feel that the eagle @-@ owl would be classified as an " alien " species . Due to its predatory abilities , many , especially those in the press , have expressed alarm of their effect on " native " species . From 1994 to 2007 , 73 escaped eagle @-@ owls were not registered as returned , while 50 escapees were re @-@ captured . Several recorded breeding attempts have been studied and most were unsuccessful , due in large part to incidental disturbance by humans and some due to direct persecution , with eggs having been smashed . 
 = = = Effect on conservation @-@ dependent species = = = 
 As a highly opportunistic predator , the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl will hunt almost any appropriately sized prey they encounter . Most often they take what ever prey is locally common and can take a large number of species considered harmful to human financial interests such as rats and mice . However , Eurasian eagle @-@ owls do take rare or endangered species as well . Even small numbers of losses can be heavily damaging . Among the species considered at least vulnerable ( up to critically endangered as in the mink and eel , both heavily overexploited by humans ) to extinction known to be hunted by Eurasian eagle @-@ owls are Russian <unk> ( <unk> moschata ) Pyrenean <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , barbastelle ( <unk> <unk> ) , European ground squirrel ( <unk> <unk> ) , southwestern water vole ( Arvicola sapidus ) , European mink ( Mustela <unk> ) , marbled polecat ( <unk> <unk> ) , lesser white @-@ fronted goose ( Anser <unk> ) , Egyptian vulture ( Neophron percnopterus ) , greater spotted eagle ( <unk> clanga ) , eastern imperial eagle ( Aquila <unk> ) , saker falcon ( Falco cherrug ) , <unk> bustard ( <unk> undulata ) , great bustard ( Otis tarda ) , spur @-@ thighed tortoise ( Testudo graeca ) , Atlantic cod ( <unk> <unk> ) , European eel ( Anguilla anguilla ) and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = American Airlines Flight 191 = 
 American Airlines Flight 191 was a regularly scheduled passenger flight operated by American Airlines from O 'Hare International Airport in Chicago to Los Angeles International Airport . A McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 @-@ 10 used for this flight on May 25 , 1979 , crashed moments after takeoff from Chicago . All 258 passengers and 13 crew on board were killed , along with 2 people on the ground . It is the deadliest aviation accident to have occurred in the United States . 
 Investigators found that as the jet was beginning its takeoff rotation , engine number one , on the left wing , separated and flipped over the top of the wing . As the engine separated from the aircraft , it severed hydraulic fluid lines that locked the wing leading edge slats in place , and it damaged a three @-@ foot section of the left wing 's leading edge . Air loads on the wing resulted in an uncommanded retraction of the outboard slats . As the jet began to climb , the damaged left wing , with no engine , produced far less lift stalled than the right wing , with its slats still deployed and its engine running at full takeoff speed . The extremely disrupted and unbalanced aerodynamics of the aircraft caused it to roll to the left until it was partially inverted , reaching a bank angle of 112 degrees , before crashing in an open field by a trailer park near the end of the runway . The engine separation was attributed to damage to the pylon rigging structure holding the engine to the wing , caused by faulty maintenance procedures at American Airlines . 
 While maintenance issues and not the actual design of the aircraft were ultimately found responsible for the crash , the accident and subsequent grounding of all DC @-@ 10s by the Federal Aviation Administration added to an already unfavorable reputation of the DC @-@ 10 aircraft in the eyes of the public , caused by several other incidents and accidents involving the type . The investigation also revealed other DC @-@ 10s with damage caused by the same faulty maintenance procedure . The faulty procedure was banned , and the aircraft type went on to have a long passenger career . It has since found a second career as a cargo airplane . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The aircraft involved was a McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 10 @-@ 10 registered <unk> . It had been delivered on February 25 , 1972 , and at the time of the crash had logged just under 20 @,@ 000 hours of flight over seven years . The jet was powered by three General Electric CF6 @-@ 6D engines . A review of the aircraft 's flight logs and maintenance records showed that no mechanical discrepancies were noted for May 11 , 1979 . On the day of the accident , in violation of standard procedure , the records were not removed from the aircraft , and were destroyed in the accident . 
 = = = Flight crew = = = 
 Captain Walter Lux , 53 , had been flying the DC @-@ 10 since its introduction eight years earlier . He had logged around 22 @,@ 000 flying hours , of which about 3 @,@ 000 were in a DC @-@ 10 . He was also qualified to pilot 17 other aircraft , including the DC @-@ 6 , DC @-@ 7 , and Boeing 727 . First Officer James Dillard , 49 , and Flight Engineer Alfred <unk> , 56 , were also highly experienced : 9 @,@ 275 hours and 15 @,@ 000 hours respectively , and between them they had 1 @,@ 830 hours flying experience in the DC @-@ 10 . 
 = = Accident = = 
 The weather was clear , with a northeast wind at 22 knots ( 25 mph ; 41 km / h ) . At 2 : 50 CDT , Flight 191 pushed back from gate K5 and was cleared to taxi to runway 32R . Maintenance crews present at the gate did not notice anything unusual during pushback , engine start , or taxi . 
 Everything looked normal as the flight began its takeoff roll at 3 : 02 . 
 Just as the aircraft hit takeoff speed , the number one engine and its pylon assembly separated from the left wing , ripping away a 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) section of the leading edge with it . The combined unit flipped over the top of the wing and landed on the runway . Robert Graham , supervisor of maintenance for American Airlines , stated : " As the aircraft got closer , I noticed what appeared to be vapor or smoke of some type coming from the leading edge of the wing and the No. 1 engine pylon . I noticed that the No. 1 engine was bouncing up and down quite a bit and just about the time the aircraft got opposite my position and started rotation , the engine came off , went up over the top of the wing , and rolled back down onto the runway ... Before going over the wing , the engine went forward and up just as if it had lift and was actually climbing . It didn 't strike the top of the wing on its way , rather it followed the clear path of the airflow of the wing , up and over the top of it , then down below the tail . The aircraft continued a fairly normal climb until it started a turn to the left . And at that point , I thought he was going to come back to the airport . " 
 It is not known what was said in the cockpit in the 50 seconds leading up to final impact , as the cockpit voice recorder lost power when the engine detached . The only crash @-@ related audio collected by the recorder is a thumping noise ( likely the sound of the engine separating ) , followed by First Officer Dillard exclaiming " Damn ! " , at which point the recording ends . This may also explain why Air Traffic Control was unsuccessful in their attempts to radio the crew and inform them that they had lost an engine . This loss of power did , however , prove useful in the subsequent investigation , serving as a marker of exactly what circuit in the DC @-@ 10 's labyrinthine electrical system had failed . 
 In addition to the engine 's failure , several related systems failed . The number one hydraulic system , powered by the number one engine , failed but continued to operate via motor pumps that mechanically connected it to hydraulic system three . Hydraulic system three was also damaged and began leaking fluid but maintained pressure and operation up until impact . Hydraulic system two was undamaged . The number one electrical bus , whose generator was attached to the number one engine , failed , causing several electrical systems to go offline , most notably the captain 's instruments , his stick shaker , and the slat disagreement sensors . While a switch in the overhead panel would have allowed the captain to restore power to his instruments , it was not used . It might have been possible for the flight engineer to reach the backup power switch ( as part of an abnormal situation checklist – not as part of their take @-@ off emergency procedure ) in an effort to restore electrical power to the number one electrical bus . That would have worked only if electrical faults were no longer present in the number one electrical system . Furthermore , to reach the switch the flight engineer would have needed to rotate his seat , release his safety belt , and stand up . Since the aircraft never got higher than 350 feet ( 110 m ) above ground and was in the air for only 50 seconds between when the engine separated and when it crashed , there was not sufficient time to take such an action . In any event , the first officer was flying the airplane and his instruments continued to function normally . As the wings and engines were not visible from the cockpit , the crew likely had no idea that an engine had fallen off , only that one had failed . 
 Since it was no longer possible to abort the takeoff at this point , the crew followed the standard operating procedure for an " engine out " climb . This procedure is to climb at the takeoff safety airspeed ( V2 ) and attitude ( angle ) , as directed by the flight director . The partial electrical power failure ( produced by the separation of the left No. 1 engine ) meant that neither the stall warning or slat retraction indicator were operative . The crew was therefore unaware that the slats on the left wing were retracting . This retraction significantly raised the stall speed of the left wing . By following the takeoff safety airspeed , the left wing stalled while the right wing was still producing lift , so the aircraft banked sharply and uncontrollably to the left . Later , in simulator recreations of the accident , it was determined that by climbing at a higher airspeed the crash could have been averted . 
 The aircraft climbed to about 325 feet ( 99 m ) above ground level while spewing a white mist trail of fuel and hydraulic fluid from the left wing . The first officer had followed the flight director and raised the nose to 14 degrees , which reduced the airspeed from 165 knots ( 190 mph ; 306 km / h ) to the takeoff safety airspeed ( V2 ) of 153 knots ( 176 mph ; 283 km / h ) , the speed at which the aircraft could safely climb after sustaining an engine failure . However , the engine separation had severed the hydraulic fluid lines that controlled the leading edge slats on the left wing and locked them in place , causing the outboard slats ( immediately left of the No. 1 engine ) to retract under air load . The retraction of the slats raised the stall speed of the left wing to approximately 159 knots ( 183 mph ; 294 km / h ) , 6 knots ( 6 @.@ 9 mph ; 11 km / h ) higher than the prescribed takeoff safety airspeed ( V2 ) of 153 knots ( 176 mph ; 283 km / h ) . As a result , the left wing entered a full aerodynamic stall . At 325 feet ( 99 m ) above ground level , the resulting asymmetric lift caused the aircraft to commence rolling rapidly to the left and to enter a steep dive from which it could not recover , despite maximum opposite control inputs by the first officer . The aircraft continued rolling until it was partially inverted at a 112 @-@ degree bank angle , right wing over left wing . It then slammed into a field approximately 4 @,@ 600 ft ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) from the end of the runway . Large sections of aircraft debris were hurled by the force of the impact into an adjacent trailer park , destroying five trailers and several cars . The DC @-@ 10 had also crashed into an old aircraft hangar located at the edge of the airport at the former site of Ravenswood Airport , which was used for storage . The nearly full fuel load ignited in a huge fireball almost immediately . The aircraft was almost completely destroyed , with no significant pieces of the fuselage remaining . The only sizable components left were the landing gear , the two engines that were still attached to the aircraft at impact , the engine that separated from the aircraft , and the tail section . 
 A fireman assisting at the scene of the crash later stated , " We didn 't see one body intact , just trunks , hands , arms , heads , and parts of legs . And we can 't tell whether they were male or female , or whether they were adult or child , because they were all charred . " Another first responder on the scene stated , " It was too hot to touch anybody and I really couldn 't tell if they were men or women . Bodies were scattered all over the field . " 
 In addition to the 271 people on board the aircraft , two employees at a nearby repair garage were killed and two more severely burned . At 273 victims , this was the deadliest accident in US aviation history . Of the victims , only about a dozen bodies were found intact . Three additional residents were injured from falling aircraft debris . The crash scene was in a field northwest of the intersection of <unk> Avenue ( Illinois Route 72 ) and Mount Prospect Road on the border of the suburbs of Des Plaines and Mount Prospect , Illinois . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The National Transportation Safety Board was responsible for investigating the crash and determining what caused the engine to separate from the aircraft and the reason why the aircraft was unable to remain airborne on its two remaining engines . 
 The loss of the engine by itself should not have been enough to cause the crash ; the aircraft should have been capable of returning to the airport using its remaining two engines . Unlike other aircraft designs , however , the DC @-@ 10 did not include a separate mechanism to lock the extended leading edge slats in place , relying instead solely on the hydraulic pressure within the system . In response to the accident , slat relief valves were mandated to prevent slat retraction in case of hydraulic line damage . 
 The wreckage was too severely fragmented to determine the exact position of the rudders , elevators , flaps , and slats prior to impact and examination of eyewitness photographs showed only that the right wing flaps were fully extended as the crew tried unsuccessfully to correct the steep roll they were in . The left wing flaps could not be determined from the blurry color photographs , so they were sent to a laboratory in Palo Alto , California for digital analysis , a process that was pushing the limits of 1970s technology and necessitated large , complicated , and expensive equipment . The photographs were reduced to black @-@ and @-@ white , which made it possible to distinguish the flaps from the wing itself and thus proved that they were retracted . In addition , it was also verified that the tail section of the aircraft was undamaged and the landing gear was down . 
 Wind tunnel and flight simulator tests were conducted to help to understand the trajectory of the aircraft after the engine detached and the left wing slats retracted . Those tests established that the damage to the wing 's leading edge and retraction of the slats increased the stall speed of the left wing from 124 knots ( 143 mph ) to 159 knots ( 183 mph ) . 
 The DC @-@ 10 incorporates two warning devices that might have alerted the pilots to the impending stall : the slat disagreement warning light , which should have illuminated after the uncommanded retraction of the slats , and the stick shaker on the captain 's control column , which activates close to the stall speed . Both of these warning devices were powered by an electric generator driven by the number one engine . Both systems became inoperative after the loss of that engine . The first officer 's control column was not equipped with a stick shaker ; the device was offered by McDonnell Douglas as an option for the first officer , but American Airlines chose not to have it installed on its DC @-@ 10 fleet . Stick shakers for both pilots became mandatory in response to this accident . 
 = = = Engine separation = = = 
 Witnesses were in universal agreement that the aircraft had not struck any foreign objects on the runway and no pieces of the wing or other aircraft components were found with the engine , proving that nothing had broken off and hit it . The engine separation thus could only have come from an internal failure . From an examination of the detached engine the NTSB concluded that the pylon attachment had separated as the result of damage incurred before the crash . Investigators looked at the aircraft 's maintenance history and found that its most recent service was eight weeks before the crash , during which this particular engine had been removed from the aircraft for repairs . The pylon , the rigging holding the engine onto the wing , had been damaged during the procedure . The procedure recommended by McDonnell @-@ Douglas called for the engine to be removed from the pylon before detaching the pylon itself , but American Airlines , along with Continental Airlines and United Airlines , had begun to use a procedure that saved approximately 200 man @-@ hours per aircraft and " more importantly from a safety standpoint , it would reduce the number of disconnects ( of systems such as hydraulic and fuel lines , electrical cables , and wiring ) from 72 to 27 . " The new procedure involved mechanics removing the engine and pylon as a single unit . A large forklift was used to support the engine while it was being detached from the wing – a procedure that was found to be extremely difficult to execute successfully , due to difficulties with holding the engine assembly straight while it was being removed . 
 The field service representative from McDonnell @-@ Douglas said the company would " not encourage this procedure due to the element of risk " and had so advised American Airlines . McDonnell @-@ Douglas , however , " does not have the authority to either approve or disapprove the maintenance procedures of its customers . " 
 The accident investigation also concluded that the design of the pylon and adjacent surfaces made the parts difficult to service and prone to damage by maintenance crews . There were two different approaches to the one @-@ step procedure : using an overhead hoist or using a forklift . United Airlines used the hoist ; American and Continental Airlines used the forklift . Inspection of the DC @-@ 10 fleets of the three airlines showed that while United Airlines ' hoist approach seemed to work , there were several DC @-@ 10s at both Continental and American with severe and potentially fatal damage to their pylon mounts . 
 The forklift method had some setbacks : If the forklift was incorrectly positioned , as with the procedure used by American , the engine would rock like a see @-@ saw and jam against the pylon attachment points . The forklift operator was guided only by hand and voice signals ; the positioning had to be perfect or damage could result . The maintenance work on <unk> did not go smoothly . Aircraft mechanics started to disconnect the engine and pylon , but there was a shift change halfway through . When work was resumed , the pylon was jammed on the wing and the forklift had to be repositioned . 
 After the crash , an examination of the pylon attachment points on the engine revealed damage to the wing 's pylon mounting bracket that matched the shape of the pylon 's rear attachment fitting . This meant that the pylon attachment fitting had struck the mounting bracket . This was important evidence because the only way the pylon fitting could strike the wing 's mounting bracket in the observed manner was if the bolts that held the pylon to the wing were removed and if the engine was being supported by something other than the aircraft . Hence investigators were able to determine that the observed damage to the rear pylon mount existed before the crash , rather than being caused by it . 
 The damage was not enough to cause an immediate failure . However , a fatigue crack developed and expanded slightly with each takeoff and landing over eight weeks until Flight 191 , when the damaged rear pylon mount reached the breaking point and failed . Without this fitting in place , the engine , at full takeoff thrust , rotated upward on its still @-@ attached forward pylon mount . The structure surrounding the forward pylon mount then overloaded and failed , and the engine broke off . 
 = = Media reaction = = 
 The disaster and investigations received widespread coverage in the media , assisted by new news gathering technologies . The impact on the public was increased by the dramatic effect of an amateur photo taken of the aircraft rolling that was published on the front page of the Chicago Tribune on the Sunday two days after the crash . 
 There were some early reports that a collision with a small aircraft had been the cause of the crash . This apparently was the result of the discovery of small @-@ aircraft parts among the wreckage at the crash site . National Transportation Safety Board vice @-@ chairman Elwood T. Driver , in a press briefing , was photographed holding a broken bolt and nut , implying these parts were a cause of the accident . The small @-@ plane parts were subsequently determined to have been on the ground at the time of the crash , at the former general aviation Ravenswood Airport , a facility that had been out of service for a few years . An owner there had been selling used aircraft parts from a remaining hangar building . 
 The crash of Flight 191 brought strong criticism from the media regarding the DC @-@ 10 's safety and design . The DC @-@ 10 had been involved in two accidents related to the design of its cargo doors , American Airlines Flight 96 ( 1972 ) and Turkish Airlines Flight 981 ( 1974 ) . The separation of engine one from its mount , the widespread publication of the dramatic images of the airplane missing its engine seconds before the crash , and a second photo of the fireball resulting from the impact , raised widespread concerns about the safety of the DC @-@ 10 . The final blow to the airplane 's reputation was dealt two weeks after the crash , when the aircraft was grounded by the FAA . Although the aircraft itself was later exonerated , the damage in the public 's eye was already done . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The findings of the investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board were released on December 21 , 1979 : 
 The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this accident was the asymmetrical stall and the ensuing roll of the aircraft because of the uncommanded retraction of the left wing outboard leading edge slats and the loss of stall warning and slat disagreement indication systems resulting from maintenance @-@ induced damage leading to the separation of the No. 1 engine and pylon assembly at a critical point during takeoff . The separation resulted from damage by improper maintenance procedures which led to failure of the pylon structure . 
 Contributing to the cause of the accident were the vulnerability of the design of the pylon attach points to maintenance damage ; the vulnerability of the design of the leading edge slat system to the damage which produced asymmetry ; deficiencies in Federal Aviation Administration surveillance and reporting systems which failed to detect and prevent the use of improper maintenance procedures ; deficiencies in the practices and communications among the operators , the manufacturer , and the FAA which failed to determine and disseminate the particulars regarding previous maintenance damage incidents ; and the intolerance of prescribed operational procedures to this unique emergency . 
 The NTSB determined that the damage to the left wing engine pylon had occurred during an earlier engine change at the American Airlines aircraft maintenance facility in Tulsa , Oklahoma , on March 29 and 30 , 1979 . 
 = = DC @-@ 10s afterward = = 
 In response to this accident , American Airlines was fined $ 500 @,@ 000 by the U.S. government for improper maintenance procedures . 
 On June 6 , 1979 , two weeks after the crash , the Federal Aviation Administration suspended the type certificate for the DC @-@ 10 , thereby grounding all DC @-@ 10s under its jurisdiction . It also enacted a special air regulation banning the DC @-@ 10 from U.S. airspace , which prevented foreign DC @-@ 10s not under the jurisdiction of the FAA from flying within the country . This was done while the FAA investigated whether or not the airplane 's engine mounting and pylon design met relevant requirements . Once the FAA was satisfied that maintenance issues were primarily at fault and not the actual design of the aircraft , the type certificate was restored on July 13 and the special air regulation repealed . However , the type certificate was amended , stating that " ... removal of the engine and pylon as a unit will immediately render the aircraft <unk> . " 
 The crash of another DC @-@ 10 at the end of November , Air New Zealand Flight 901 , exactly six months after Flight 191 , added to the DC @-@ 10 's negative reputation . The crash of Flight 901 , an Antarctic sightseeing flight which hit a mountain , was caused by several human and environmental factors not related to the airworthiness of the DC @-@ 10 , and the aircraft was later completely exonerated in that accident . 
 Yet another DC @-@ 10 , performing Western Airlines Flight <unk> , crashed in Mexico City after a red @-@ eye flight from Los Angeles barely 5 months after the crash of American Airlines flight 191 . The Western Airlines DC @-@ 10 's crash , however , was due to low visibility and an attempt to land on a closed runway . 
 Ironically , the crash of yet another DC @-@ 10 , United Airlines Flight 232 , ten years later restored some of the aircraft 's reputation . Despite losing an engine and all flight controls and crash @-@ landing in a huge fireball ( which was caught on video by a local news crew ) , 185 people survived the accident . Experts praised the DC @-@ 10 's sturdy construction as partly responsible for the high number of survivors , though the efforts of the crew were primarily responsible . 
 Despite initial safety concerns , the DC @-@ 10 continued to serve with passenger airlines for over 30 years after the crash of Flight 191 . In the end , it was newer , more fuel @-@ efficient twin @-@ engined airplanes from Boeing and Airbus and not safety concerns that ultimately ended the passenger career of the DC @-@ 10 . Many retired passenger DC @-@ 10s have since been converted to all @-@ cargo use . DC @-@ 10 freighters , along with its derivative , the MD @-@ 11 , form the backbone of the FedEx Express fleet . The DC @-@ 10s have been upgraded with the glass cockpit from the MD @-@ 11 , thereby turning them into MD @-@ 10s . American Airlines retired its last DC @-@ 10s in 2000 after 29 years of service . In February 2014 , Biman Bangladesh Airlines operated the final DC @-@ 10 passenger flights . 
 = = Notable victims = = 
 Some notable victims in the crash of Flight 191 were : 
 Itzhak <unk> , Israeli biomedical inventor ( the cardiac catheter ) and New Age author ( Stalking the Wild Pendulum and A Cosmic Book ) . 
 Sheila Charisse , the daughter @-@ in @-@ law of movie actress Cyd Charisse . 
 Leonard <unk> , music business manager / promoter / producer / executive for California Jam and California Jam II , <unk> , The Cowsills , Sam the Sham , Tommy James & The Shondells , Redbone , Gentle Giant , and other musical groups . Coincidentally , <unk> 's parents had earlier perished on American Airlines Flight 1 . 
 Several people connected to Playboy magazine : 
 Several members of the American Booksellers Association who were on their way to their annual convention at the Los Angeles Convention Center , where they were to have a joint party organized by Playboy founder Hugh Hefner . This included Judith Bennett , author of the book Sex Signs : Every Woman 's Astrological and Psychological Guide to Love , Health , Men and More . 
 Victoria Haider , magazine editor for Playboy magazine ( and sometimes editor of Harlan Ellison ) . 
 Judith Wax and her husband , Sheldon Wax . Judith Wax frequently contributed to Playboy ( Sheldon was its managing editor ) , notably the annual " Christmas cards " piece that " presented " short satirical poems to various public figures . In her 1979 book , Starting in the Middle , she had written about her fear of flying on page 191 . 
 Robert Walton Vaughan , Professor of Chemical Engineering , California Institute of Technology , leading researcher in nuclear magnetic resonance and catalysis . 
 John B. Wear , Jr . , M.D. , Professor & Chairman of <unk> , University of Wisconsin Medical School . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 For 32 years there was no permanent memorial to the victims . Funding was obtained for a memorial in 2009 , through a two @-@ year effort by the 6th grade class of Decatur Classical School in Chicago . The memorial , a 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) concave wall with interlocking bricks displaying the names of the crash victims , was formally dedicated in a ceremony on October 15 , 2011 . The memorial is located in a park two miles east of the crash site . 
 A now @-@ faded banner reading " In Remembrance of American Airlines Flight 191 May 25 , 1979 " is situated on a fence at the corner of West <unk> Avenue and South Mt . Prospect Road , near the site of the crash . 
 = = In other media = = 
 The cable / satellite TV channel The National Geographic Channel produced a documentary on the crash , and an episode from Seconds from Disaster titled " Chicago Plane Crash " detailed the crash and included film of the investigation press conferences . 
 The Smithsonian Channel 's television series Air Disasters profiled the crash in the episode " Catastrophe at O 'Hare . " 
 The television series Mayday profiled the crash in the episode " Catastrophe at O 'Hare " . 
 After the crash and the media attention that was focused on the DC @-@ 10 , American Airlines replaced all " DC @-@ 10 <unk> " logos on the fuselage with a more generic " American Airlines <unk> " . 
 In the days following the crash , a man named Clarence Bean , Jr . , claimed that his pregnant girlfriend , Diane <unk> , was on the flight , but Cook County medical examiners assigned the task of identifying the crash victims later disproved this . Bean was found guilty of her murder in 2001 . 
 Chicago folk singer Steve Goodman wrote the song " Ballad of Flight 191 ( They Know Everything About It ) " in response to the crash and the subsequent investigation as the inaugural song for a series of topical songs which aired on National Public Radio in 1979 . 
 Chicago post @-@ hardcore punk band The Effigies wrote the song " Body Bag " about the crash . The lyrics included " Plane just left O 'Hare / On time flight one @-@ nine @-@ one / Disaster in the air / Starboard engine 's gone " ( although it was the port engine that was actually lost ) . 
 The Michael Crichton novel Airframe described the incident in detail as an example to the reader how a " good airplane ( DC @-@ 10 ) " could be " destroyed by bad press " . 
 = St Pabo 's Church , Llanbabo = 
 St Pabo 's Church , Llanbabo is a medieval church in Llanbabo , in Anglesey , North Wales . Much of the church dates to the 12th century , and it is regarded as a good example of a church of its period that has retained many aspects of its original fabric . The church houses a tombstone slab from the 14th century , depicting a king with crown and sceptre , bearing the name of Pabo Post Prydain , the reputed founder of the church . However , there is no evidence that Pabo , a 5th @-@ century prince , lived in the area and the tradition that he founded the church has little supporting basis . 
 The church is still in use , as part of the Church in Wales , although services are only held here occasionally . It is a Grade II * listed building , a designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , because it is a medieval church that has been little altered . 
 = = History and location = = 
 The date of foundation of the church in Llanbabo , Anglesey , is unknown , but it is known that there was a church here before 1254 as it is recorded in the Norwich Valuation of that year . According to tradition , it was founded by Pabo Post Prydain ( Pabo the " Pillar of Britain " ) , a 5th @-@ century prince from North Britain who was driven out in 460 and settled thereafter in Anglesey . He is also said to have been buried in the area . A stone slab gravestone dating from the late 14th century , made from Flintshire sandstone , was found in about 1680 : according to the 17th @-@ century Welsh historian Lewis Morris , it was unearthed by a sexton digging a grave in the churchyard . The rectangular slab ( from the same workshop as one at Bangor Cathedral and one of St Iestyn at St Iestyn 's Church , Llaniestyn , given the similarities between them ) has a shallowly engraved full @-@ length image of a bearded man wearing a crown and a loose , pleated tunic over a garment reaching to his wrists . He holds a sceptre in his right hand ; his head is on a cushion underneath an arch , and the background is decorated with flowers . The effect is somewhat like a monumental brass in stone ; the slab is now displayed vertically inside the church . The inscription , which is incomplete , reads " Hic <unk> Pa [ bo ] Post <unk> " ( or " Prud " ) – " Here lies Pabo the Pillar of Britain " . Additional letters have been interpreted as denoting the name of the donor of the monument . Apart from this , the tradition linking Pabo to the church is not recorded in writing until the Welsh antiquarian Henry Rowlands in the 18th century , nor is there evidence that Pabo devoted himself to religion or died in Anglesey ; accordingly , modern writers suggest that there is no link between him and the church . 
 The church stands alongside a minor road between <unk> and Rhosgoch , near the Llyn Alaw reservoir . It is part of the Church in Wales , although it is only used for services occasionally . It is one of nine churches in the combined parish of Bodedern with Llanfaethlu , and forms part of the deanery of <unk> and Talybolion , within the archdeaconry of Bangor in the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2012 , there has been no incumbent priest since September 2009 . The village of Llanbabo takes its name from the church : the prefix llan originally meant " enclosure " and then came to mean " church " , and " ‑ babo " is a modified form of the saint 's name . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church is built from rubble masonry , dressed with freestone . It measures 45 feet by 14 feet 6 inches ( 14 by 4 @.@ 4 metres ) . The building is largely 12th @-@ century in construction , with the walls and a narrow lancet window in the south wall dating from that time ; another window at the east end of the south wall is rectangular and dates from the late 14th or early 15th centuries , with a more modern window in between . The east wall and window , with stone tracery and an ogee @-@ topped light in a pointed arch , are from the 14th century . Some of the windows use atypical green glass , and some have frames made out of wood . 
 Chevron @-@ carved voussoirs ( wedges ) and three stone human heads , weathered by time and also probably from the 12th century , have been repositioned over the doorway , which is at the west end of the south side of the church . The wedges probably come from a former chancel arch and apse , removed ( as in other churches in Anglesey ) to make the chancel larger . The doorway has been enlarged at some point , most likely during the early part of the 19th century . On the north side , a doorway was added in the 18th century , but it was subsequently blocked and a window inserted instead . One writer has speculated that this might have been a leper niche and window . There are two other modern windows in the north wall , and all three are at different heights . There is a bellcote at the west end , housing a bell ( probably from the 18th century ) . The roof has been described as being " clearly one of the earliest on the island " . 
 Inside , as well as the Pabo monument on the north wall , there are medieval arched trusses and two 18th @-@ century marble memorials . The font , which is probably 12th @-@ century in date , is a circular bowl about 1 foot ( 30 cm ) in height . There is no division between the nave and chancel , and there is one step from the chancel into the sanctuary , which is marked with a simple rail . The altar is made of wood . The fittings , including plain pews , were added in 1911 . There is a carved head above the doorway inside the church , in similar style to those on the outside . " The Llanbabo Devil " ( <unk> Llanbabo ) , a stone previously set in the wall of the churchyard and thought to represent a Celtic deity , is now kept inside the church . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church is a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest ( of three ) grade of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed because it is " a good , scarcely altered simple Medieval church which retains a great deal of the Medieval fabric , including decorate fragments of probable 12th century date , and a fine later Medieval roof . " According to Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales ) , St Pabo 's Church " can be considered an important survivor " , as many other old churches on Anglesey were either rebuilt or restored during the 19th century . Some restoration work , including replacement of some of the timbers in the roof , was carried out in 1909 under the architect Harold Hughes , but overall " the church has not suffered from excessive restoration . " 
 = Bay Area Rapid Transit = 
 Bay Area Rapid Transit ( BART ) is a public transportation system serving the San Francisco Bay Area . The rapid transit elevated and subway system connects San Francisco with cities in the East Bay and suburbs in northern San Mateo County . BART 's rapid transit system operates five routes on 104 miles ( 167 km ) of line , with 44 stations in four counties ; additionally , BART operates a 3 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 1 km ) AGT line to Oakland Airport which adds a forty @-@ fifth station to the system . Further spur lines under BART jurisdiction within individual counties utilize other rail technologies . With an average of 423 @,@ 120 weekday passengers and 126 million annual passengers in fiscal year 2015 , BART is the fifth @-@ busiest heavy rail rapid transit system in the United States . The name is spoken as an acronym instead of an initialism ; it is referred to as " Bart " , not " B @-@ A @-@ R @-@ T " . 
 BART is operated by the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District , a special @-@ purpose transit district that was formed in 1957 to cover San Francisco , Alameda County , and Contra Costa County . 
 BART combines the aesthetics and carrying capacity of a metro system with the logistics and pricing model of commuter rail . It is an alternative to highway transportation , especially to avoid congestion on the San Francisco Bay Bridge , which connects San Francisco to the East Bay suburbs and the city of Oakland . As of 2016 , the BART system is being expanded to San Jose with the consecutive Warm Springs and Silicon Valley BART extensions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development and origins = = = 
 Some of the Bay Area Rapid Transit System 's current coverage area was once served by an electrified streetcar and suburban train system called the Key System . This early 20th @-@ century system once had regular trans @-@ bay traffic across the lower deck of the Bay Bridge . By the mid @-@ 1950s , that system had been dismantled in favor of highway travel . A new rapid @-@ transit system was proposed to take the place of the Key System during the late 1940s , and formal planning for it began in the 1950s . Some funding was secured for the BART system in 1959 , and construction began a few years later . Passenger service began on September 11 , 1972 , initially just between MacArthur and Fremont . 
 The new BART system was hailed as a major step forward in subway technology , although questions were asked concerning the safety of the system and the huge expenditures necessary for the construction of the network . All nine Bay Area counties were involved in the planning and envisioned to be connected by BART . 
 In addition to San Francisco , Alameda , and Contra Costa Counties , Santa Clara County , San Mateo County , and Marin County were initially intended to be part of the system . Santa Clara County Supervisors opted out in 1957 , preferring instead to build expressways . In 1961 , San Mateo County supervisors voted to leave BART , saying their voters would be paying taxes to carry mainly Santa Clara County residents . Although Marin County originally voted in favor of BART participation at the 88 % level , the district @-@ wide tax base was weakened by the withdrawal of San Mateo County . Marin County withdrew in early 1962 because its marginal tax base could not adequately absorb its share of BART 's projected cost . Another important factor in Marin 's withdrawal was an engineering controversy over the feasibility of running trains across the Golden Gate Bridge . 
 The extension of BART into Marin was forecast as late as three decades after the 1972 start . Initially , a lower level under the Golden Gate Bridge was preferred . In 1970 , the Golden Gate Transportation Facilities Plan considered a tunnel under the Golden Gate or a new bridge parallel to the Richmond @-@ San Rafael Bridge but neither of these plans was pursued . 
 Extensions were completed to Colma and Pittsburg / Bay Point in 1996 , Dublin / Pleasanton in 1997 , SFO / <unk> in 2003 , and the automated guideway transit spur line that connects BART to Oakland International Airport in 2014 . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s , BART has been trying to modernize its system . The fleet rehabilitation is part of this modernization ; in 2009 , fire alarms , fire sprinklers , yellow tactile platform edge domes , and cemented @-@ mat rubber tiles were installed . The rough black tiles on the platform edge mark the location of the doorway of approaching trains , allowing passengers to wait at the right place to board . All faregates and ticket vending machines were replaced . 
 In 2007 , BART stated its intention to improve non @-@ peak ( night and weekend ) headways for each line to 15 minutes . The current 20 @-@ minute headways at these times is viewed as a psychological barrier to ridership . In mid @-@ 2007 , BART temporarily reversed its position stating that the shortened wait times would likely not happen due to a $ 900 @,@ 000 state revenue budget shortfall . Nevertheless , BART eventually confirmed the implementation of the plan by January 2008 . Continued budgetary problems halted the expanded non @-@ peak service and returned off @-@ peak headways to 20 minutes in 2009 . 
 In 2008 BART announced that it would install solar power systems on the roofs of two yards and maintenance facilities in addition to car ports with rooftop solar panels at the Orinda station . The board lamented not being able to install them at all stations but it stated that Orinda was the only station with enough sun for them to make money from the project . 
 In 2012 The California Transportation Commission announced they would provide funding for expanding BART facilities , through the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority , in anticipation of the opening of the Silicon Valley Berryessa Extension . $ 50 million would go in part to improvements to the Hayward Maintenance Complex . 
 = = = Earthquake safety = = = 
 A 2010 study shows that along with some Bay Area freeways , some of BART 's overhead structures could collapse in a major earthquake , which has a significant probability of occurring within three decades . Seismic <unk> has been carried out in recent years to address these deficiencies , especially in the Transbay Tube . 
 = = = Extensions underway = = = 
 Construction of eBART in Pittsburg and Antioch is underway as of 2016 . The extension to Silicon Valley is under construction in Warm Springs , Milpitas and Berryessa . 
 = = = = Expansion strategy and proposals = = = = 
 BART 's current focus is on improving service and reliability in its core system ( where density and ridership is highest ) , rather than extensions into far @-@ flung suburbia . In 2007 , these plans included : a line that would continue from the Transbay Terminal through the South @-@ of @-@ Market , northwards on Van Ness and terminating in western San Francisco along the Geary corridor , the Presidio , or North Beach ; a line along the Interstate Highway 680 corridor ; and a fourth set of rail tracks through Oakland . However , BART maps still show a planned extension to Livermore , in the fringe of Alameda County , and the Antioch eBART extension is under construction . 
 Further expansion has been proposed , contingent upon the allocation of funding . This includes the second phase of the Silicon Valley extension to downtown San Jose and Santa Clara , the Livermore extension , and ' <unk> ' : I @-@ 80 / West Contra Costa Corridor ( extension to Hercules ) ; in addition , at least four infill stations such as Irvington and Calaveras have been proposed . 
 As of 2013 , long @-@ range plans included a new four @-@ bore Transbay Tube beneath San Francisco Bay that would run parallel and south of the existing tunnel and emerge at the Transbay Transit Terminal to connect to Caltrain and the future California High Speed Rail system . The four @-@ bore tunnel would provide two tunnels for BART and two tunnels for conventional / high @-@ speed rail . The BART system and conventional U.S. rail use different and incompatible rail gauges and different loading gauges . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 The entirety of the system runs in exclusive right @-@ of @-@ way . BART 's rapid transit revenue routes cover 104 miles ( 167 km ) with 44 stations . On the main lines , approximately 37 miles of lines run through underground sections with 23 miles on elevated tracks . The main system uses a 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 676 mm ) Indian gauge and mostly <unk> track . It also uses flat @-@ edge rail , rather than typical rail that angles slightly inward . ( A new spur line will utilize conventional 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge rail in the future . ) This has complicated maintenance of the system , as it requires custom <unk> , brake systems , and track maintenance vehicles . 
 DC electric current at 1 @,@ 000 volts is delivered to the trains over a third rail . In stations the third rail is on the side away from the passenger platform , except the middle platform at the San Francisco International Airport station . This reduces the danger of a passenger falling on the third rail or stepping on it to climb back to the platform after falling off . On ground @-@ level tracks , the third rail alternates from one side of the track to the other , providing breaks in the third rail to allow for emergency evacuations . Underground tunnels , aerial structures and the Transbay Tube have evacuation walkways and passageways to allow for train evacuation without exposing passengers to contact with the third rail , which is located as far away from these walkways as possible . 
 The maximum speed trains can travel is 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) , but BART does not typically operate trains at that speed except to help a train make up time . The maximum speed BART uses during normal operations is 70 mph . 
 Trains length ranges from four cars to a maximum of ten cars , which fills the 700 @-@ foot ( 213 m ) length of a platform . At its maximum length of 710 feet ( 216 m ) , BART has the longest trains of any metro system in the United States . The system also features car widths of 10 @.@ 5 feet ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) ( the same width as a Budd Metroliner ) , a maximum gradient of four percent , and a minimum curve radius of 394 feet ( 120 m ) on the main lines . 
 <unk> headways are limited due to the merging of four lines through the Transbay Tube and San Francisco , as well as the lack of sidings necessary for overtaking trains . 
 Many of the original system 1970s @-@ era BART stations , especially the aerial stations , feature simple , Brutalist architecture , while the newer stations are a mix of <unk> and Postmodern architecture . The additional double tracked four mile long upper deck of the Market Street Subway and its four underground stations were built by BART for the S.F. Municipal Railway as specified by the system 's original plan . 
 An automated guideway transit line and a 45th station were opened in 2014 and utilize off @-@ the @-@ shelf cable car technology developed by DCC Doppelmayr Cable Car : the Cable Liner . 
 = = = Routes = = = 
 All routes pass through Oakland , and all but the Richmond – Fremont route pass through the Transbay Tube into San Francisco and beyond to Daly City . Most segments of the BART system carry trains of more than one route . 
 Trains regularly operate on five routes . Unlike most other rapid transit and rail systems around the world , BART lines are generally not referred to by shorthand designations – they are only occasionally referred to officially by color names . However , future train cars will display line colors more prominently . 
 The five BART lines are generally identified on maps , schedules , and signage by the names of their termini : 
 Richmond – Fremont : Follows a former Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway right @-@ of @-@ way from Richmond to Berkeley , and a former Western Pacific Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way from Oakland to Fremont . Operates daily . 
 Pittsburg / Bay Point – SFO / Millbrae : Follows SR 4 , a former Sacramento Northern Railway right @-@ of way , and SR 24 from Pittsburg to Oakland , and extends beyond Daly City to San Francisco International Airport . This is the longest point @-@ to @-@ point line in the BART system . Operates daily , with the line extending from the airport to Millbrae on weeknights and weekends . 
 Fremont – Daly City : <unk> with the Richmond @-@ Fremont line from Fremont to Oakland . Operates until early evening Mondays through Saturdays . 
 Richmond – Daly City / Millbrae : <unk> with the Richmond @-@ Fremont line from Richmond to Oakland , and extends beyond Daly City to Millbrae following a former Southern Pacific Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way , which is also served by Caltrain beyond San Bruno . Operates until early evening Mondays through Saturdays , with the line terminating at Daly City on Saturdays . 
 Dublin / Pleasanton – Daly City : Follows Interstate 580 via Castro Valley to San Leandro , where it coincides with the Fremont @-@ Daly City line . Operates daily . 
 In addition BART also operates a separate automated guideway transit line : 
 Coliseum – Oakland Int 'l Airport : Travels along <unk> Road from the Oakland International Airport to the BART system at Coliseum station . Operates daily . 
 = = = = Discontinued = = = = 
 San Francisco : Between the openings of the Market Street Subway on November 5 , 1973 and the Transbay Tube on September 16 , 1974 , a dedicated line was run from Montgomery Street to Daly City . This was discontinued with commencement of through service to Oakland after the opening of the Transbay Tube . 
 Millbrae – SFO Shuttle : When service to the SFO station began on June 22 , 2003 , there was originally a shuttle service connecting the Millbrae and SFO stations . This service facilitated a direct rail link between Caltrain and the airport . The shuttle trains usually had 5 cars and ran every 20 minutes . The shuttle line was discontinued in 2004 due to poor ridership . BART changed its routing so that existing lines ran to the airport and to Millbrae . Direct service between these two stations is not always available , but they can be reached via transfer . 
 = = = Automation = = = 
 BART was one of the first U.S. systems of any size to have substantial automated operations . The trains are computer @-@ controlled via BART 's Operations Control Center ( OCC ) and headquarters at the Kaiser Center in Downtown Oakland and generally arrive with regular punctuality . Train operators duties may include , but are not limited to , the following : 
 Monitors console and radio communications to ensure that vehicles are operating within established guidelines ; 
 <unk> and detects problems with passengers entering and exiting train doors and takes corrective action ; observes and detects hazards on the track , in the station or platforms , or the train itself , reports them to Operations Control Center personnel via radio , and take necessary corrective action ; 
 Make announcements to passengers regarding station arrivals , transfer points , delays , and emergencies and answers passenger questions ; 
 In yards , on test tracks , turntables and wash facilities , follows directions from Tower personnel and operates console to move trains as directed ; 
 Takes prescribed action such as evacuating passengers , administer first aid , and using a fire extinguisher during emergencies ; 
 Reports basic equipment malfunctions of mechanical or electrical nature to Operations Control Center ; works with <unk> and technicians to isolate reported problems ; 
 <unk> logs of work activities ; completes forms to report unusual circumstances and action taken ; 
 Uses a variety of communication equipment , including a public address system , two ‑ way radios and emergency telephones ; 
 Monitors and learns to apply changes in operating and emergency procedures ; 
 <unk> and upgrades knowledge of policies and procedures as required . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 = = = Car types = = = 
 BART operates four types of cars , built from three separate orders , totaling 662 cars . 
 To run a typical peak morning commute , BART requires 579 cars . Of those , 535 are scheduled to be in active service ; the others are used to build up four spare trains ( essential for maintaining on @-@ time service ) . At any one time , the remaining 90 cars are in for repair , maintenance , or some type of planned modification work . 
 The A and B cars were built from 1968 to 1971 by Rohr Industries , an aerospace manufacturing company that had recently started mass @-@ transit equipment manufacturing . The A cars were designed as leading or trailing cars only , with an aerodynamic fiberglass operator 's cab housing train control equipment and BART 's two @-@ way communication system , and extending 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 52 m ) longer than the B- and C @-@ cars . A and B cars can seat 60 passengers comfortably , and under crush load , carry over 200 passengers . B cars have no operator 's cab and are used in the middle of trains to carry passengers only . Currently , BART operates 59 A cars and 389 B cars . The BART A cars have a larger cab window than the C cars , allowing riders to look out of the front or the back of the train . 
 The C cars feature a fiberglass operator 's cab and control and communications equipment like the A cars , but do not have the aerodynamic nose , allowing them to be used as middle cars as well . This allows faster train @-@ size changes without having to move the train to a switching yard . C cars can seat 56 passengers and under crush load accommodate over 200 passengers . The first C cars , referred to as C1 cars , were built by Alstom between 1987 and 1989 . The second order of C cars , built by Morrison @-@ Knudsen ( now Washington Group International ) , are known as C2 cars . The C2 cars were identical to the C1 cars but featured an interior with a blue / gray motif . At the time of their construction , the C2 cars also featured flip @-@ up seats which could be folded to accommodate wheelchair users ; these seats were later removed during refurbishment . Currently , BART operates 150 C1 cars and 80 C2 cars . The " C " cars have a bright white segment as the final approximately two feet ( 61 cm ) of the car at their cab end . 
 = = = Refurbishments = = = 
 Prior to the introduction of the C2 cars , the seats and carpeted flooring in all the cars were brown . In 1995 , BART contracted with ADtranz ( acquired by Bombardier Transportation in 2001 ) to refurbish and overhaul the 439 original Rohr A- and B @-@ cars , updating the old brown fabric seats to less @-@ toxic and easier @-@ to @-@ clean , light @-@ blue polyurethane seats and bringing the older cars to the same level of interior amenities as the C2 fleet . The project was completed in 2002 . The A , B , and C cars were all given 3 @-@ digit numbers originally , but when refurbished 1000 was added to the number of each individual A / B car ( e.g. car 633 would become 1633 ) . The C2 cars are numbered in the 2500 series ; the C / C1 cars still have 3 @-@ digit numbers . 
 Because one of the original design goals was for all BART riders to be seated , the older cars had fewer provisions such as grab bars for standing passengers . In the late 2000s BART began modifying some of the C2 cars to test features such as hand @-@ straps and additional areas for luggage , wheelchairs and bicycles . These new features were later added to the A , B , and C1 cars . 
 Prior to 2012 , all BART cars featured upholstered seats . It was reported in 2011 that several strains of molds and bacteria were found on fabric seats on BART trains , even after wiping with antiseptic . These included bacteria from fecal contamination . In April , BART announced it would spend $ 2 million in the next year to replace the dirty seats . The new seats would feature vinyl @-@ covered upholstery which would be easier to clean . The transition to the new seats was completed in December 2014 . 
 Originally all the cars had carpeted flooring . Due to similar concerns regarding cleanliness , the carpeting in all of the cars has been removed . The A and B , and C2 cars now feature vinyl flooring in either grey or blue coloring , while the C1 cars feature a spray @-@ on composite flooring . 
 = = = Traction motors = = = 
 Prior to rebuilding , the Direct Current ( DC ) traction motors used on the 439 Rohr BART cars were model 1463 with chopper controls from Westinghouse , who also built the automatic train control system for BART . The Rohr cars were rebuilt with ADtranz model <unk> 3 @-@ phase alternating current ( AC ) traction motors with insulated @-@ gate bipolar transistor ( IGBT ) inverters . The Westinghouse motors are still in use on the Alstom C ( C1 ) and Morrison @-@ Knudsen C2 cars and the motors that were removed from the Rohr cars were retained as spare motors for use on them . Cars have a starting accelerating of 3 @.@ 0 mph / s or 4 @.@ 8 km / ( h · s ) and are capable of holding that acceleration up to 31 mph ( 50 km / h ) . Residual acceleration at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) is 0 @.@ 78 mph / s or 1 @.@ 26 km / ( h · s ) . Braking rates range from 0 @.@ 45 mph / s or 0 @.@ 72 km / ( h · s ) up to 3 @.@ 0 mph / s or 4 @.@ 8 km / ( h · s ) ( full service rate ) . 
 The HVAC system on the Rohr BART cars before rehabilitation were built by <unk> King , when it was a subsidiary of Westinghouse ; it is now a subsidiary of Ingersoll Rand . The current HVAC systems on the rebuilt Rohr @-@ built Gen 1 cars were built by <unk> and possibly also ADtranz who had subcontracted the HVAC system to <unk> . 
 = = = Noise = = = 
 Many BART passengers have noted that the system is noisy , with a 2010 survey by the San Francisco Chronicle measuring up to 100 decibels ( comparable to the noise level of a jackhammer ) in the Transbay Tube between San Francisco and Oakland , and still more than 90 decibels in 23 other locations . According to BART , the noise in the tunnel used to be " compared to banshees , screech owls , or Doctor Who 's TARDIS run amok " . 
 However , then @-@ chief BART spokesperson Linton Johnson stated that BART averages 70 – 80 dB , below the danger zone , and according to a 1997 study by the National Academy of Sciences , BART ranks as among the quietest transit systems in the nation . Critics have countered that this study analyzed straight , above @-@ ground portions of different systems throughout the country at 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , which is not representative of actual operating conditions . Much of BART is under ground and curvy , even in the Transbay Tube , and has much higher peak operating speeds than many other systems in the country . 
 Train noise on curves is caused by the wheels slipping along the rails . This slippage also causes noise and surface damage called corrugation . The process by which the noise and corrugation occur is : 
 Pairs of wheels are attached to one another with an axle such that they must have the same rotational speed , but on a curve the distances the outer and inner wheels travel are different . As a result , the wheels must slip along the rails . 
 This slippage causes the wheel and track to wear and become uneven ( corrugated ) . 
 This corrugation causes more noise and corrugation , not only in the original location but elsewhere in the system . 
 In 2015 , after replacing 6 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 981 m ) and grinding down ( smoothing ) 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of rail in the tube , BART reported a reduction of noise there and positive feedback from riders . BART also announced that the new train cars expected to enter service in December 2016 ( see below ) will be quieter , thanks to " ' micro @-@ plug ' doors [ that ] help seal out noise " . 
 = = = AGT fleet = = = 
 The Coliseum – Oakland International Airport line uses a completely separate and independently operated fleet as it uses cable car @-@ based automated guideway transit technology . It uses four Cable Liner trains built by DCC Doppelmayr Cable Car , arranged as three @-@ car sets , but the system can accommodate four @-@ car trains in the future . 
 = = = Future railcars = = = 
 To speed up rider entry and exit at stations , BART is preparing to introduce new 6 @-@ door cars . BART received proposals from five suppliers , and on May 10 , 2012 awarded a $ 896 @.@ 3 million contract to Canadian railcar manufacturer Bombardier Transportation with an order for 410 new cars , split into a base order of 260 cars and a first option order of 150 additional cars . The car was designed by Morelli Designers , an industrial design firm based in Montréal , Canada . On November 21 , 2013 , BART purchased 365 more cars , for a total fleet size of 775 new railcars , while also accelerating the delivery schedule by 21 months ( from 10 cars per month up to 16 cars per month ) and lowering procurement costs by approximately $ 135 million . According to the contract , at least ⅔ of the contract ’ s amount must be spent on U.S.-built parts . 
 There will be two different types of car configurations for the new fleet ; a cab car ( D @-@ cars ) , which will make up 40 % of the fleet , or , 310 cars , and a non @-@ cab car ( E @-@ cars ) , which will make up the remainder of the fleet , or , 465 cars . All cars are to be equipped with bike racks , new vinyl seats ( 54 per car ) , and a brand new passenger information system which will display next stop information . 
 Due to potential access issues for people with disabilities , the pilot car layout was modified by the BART board in February 2015 to include two wheelchair spaces in the center of the car , as well as alternative layouts for bike and flexible open spaces . The first test car was unveiled in April 2016 . Upon approval , the first 10 cars were expected to be in service in December 2016 , and at least 60 by December 2017 . Delivery of all 775 cars is expected to be completed by September 2021 . 
 The vehicle procurement for eBART includes eight Stadler GTW trains , with two options to procure six more . The first will be delivered in June 2016 . The Stadler GTW trains are diesel multiple units with 2 / 6 articulated power units , and are based on models previously used in Austin , Dallas and New Jersey . 
 = = Travelling = = 
 = = = Hours of operation = = = 
 BART has five rapid transit lines ; most of each line 's length is on track shared with other lines . Trains on each line run every 15 minutes on weekdays and 20 minutes during evenings , weekends and holidays ; stations on the section of track between Daly City and West Oakland are serviced by four lines and therefore see 16 trains an hour on each track . 
 BART service begins around 4 : 00 am on weekdays , 6 : 00 am on Saturdays , and 8 : 00 am on Sundays . Service ends every day near midnight with station closings timed to the last train at station . Two of the five lines , the Fremont – Daly City and Richmond – Daly City / Millbrae lines , do not have night ( after 7 : 00 pm & 9 : 00 pm , respectively ) or Sunday service , but all stations remain accessible by transfer from the other lines . The separate Coliseum – Oakland International Airport AGT line runs every 6 minutes , with approximately the same operating hours as the five rapid transit lines . 
 All <unk> bus service runs when BART is closed . 30 out of 44 BART stations are served either directly or within a few blocks . BART tickets are not accepted on these buses , with the exception of BART Plus tickets ( which are no longer accepted on AC Transit , Muni , SamTrans , or VTA beginning in 2013 ) , and each of the four bus systems that provide All @-@ <unk> service charges its own fare , which can be up to $ 3 @.@ 50 ; a four @-@ system ride could cost as much as $ 9 @.@ 50 as of 2007 . 
 = = = Fares = = = 
 Fares on BART are comparable to those of commuter rail systems and are higher than those of most subways , especially for long trips . The fare is based on a formula that takes into account both the length and speed of the trip . A surcharge is added for trips traveling through the Transbay Tube , to Oakland International Airport , and / or through San Mateo County ( which access to includes San Francisco International Airport ) , which is not a BART member . Passengers can use refillable paper @-@ plastic @-@ composite tickets , on which fares are stored via a magnetic strip , to enter and exit the system . The exit faregate prints the remaining balance on the ticket each time the passenger exits the station . A paper ticket can be refilled at a ticket machine , the remaining balance on any ticket can be applied towards the purchase of a new one , or a card is captured by the exit gate when the balance reaches zero ; multiple low value cards can be combined to create a larger value card but only at specific ticket exchange locations , located at some BART stations . 
 BART relies on unused ticket values on discarded low @-@ value cards for additional revenue , as much as $ 9 @.@ 9 million . The paper ticket technology is identical to the Washington Metro 's paper fare card , though the BART system does not charge higher fares during rush hour . Both systems were supplied by Cubic Transportation Systems , with contract for BART being awarded in 1974 . 
 Clipper , a contactless smart card accepted on all major Bay Area public transit agencies , may be used in lieu of a paper ticket . 
 The minimum fare is $ 1 @.@ 95 ( except San Mateo County trips ) under 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . The maximum one @-@ way fare including all possible surcharges is $ 15 @.@ 70 , the journey between San Francisco International Airport and Oakland International Airport . The farthest possible trip , from Pittsburg / Bay Point to Millbrae , costs less because of the $ 4 additional charge added to SFO trips and $ 6 additional charge added to OAK trips . Entering and exiting the same station within three hours accrues an excursion fare of $ 5 @.@ 75 . Passengers without sufficient fare to complete their journey must use a cash @-@ only <unk> machine to pay the remaining balance in order to exit the station . 
 BART uses a system of five different color @-@ coded tickets for regular fare , special fare , and discount fare to select groups as follows : 
 Blue tickets – General : the most common type 
 Red tickets – Disabled Persons and children aged 4 to 12 : 62 @.@ 5 % discount , special ID required ( children under the age of 4 ride free ) 
 Green tickets – Seniors age 65 or over : 62 @.@ 5 % discount , proof of age required for purchase 
 Orange tickets – Student : special , restricted @-@ use 50 % discount ticket for students age 13 – 18 currently enrolled in high or middle school 
 BART Plus – special high @-@ value ticket with ' flash @-@ pass ' privileges with regional transit agencies . Effective January 1 , 2013 , the <unk> ( Muni ) , as well as SamTrans and VTA , no longer participate in the BART Plus Program . AC Transit stopped participating in the BART Plus program in 2003 . The BART Plus ticket is being phased out in favor of the Clipper system , as the only Bay Area transit agencies that still participate in the BART Plus program do not yet accept Clipper cards . 
 Unlike many other rapid transit systems , BART does not have an unlimited ride pass , and the only discount provided to the public is a 6 @.@ 25 % discount when " high value tickets " are purchased with fare values of $ 48 and $ 64 , for prices of $ 45 and $ 60 respectively . Amtrak 's Capitol Corridor and San <unk> trains sell $ 10 BART tickets on board in the café cars for only $ 8 , resulting in a 20 % discount . A 62 @.@ 5 % discount is provided to seniors , the disabled , and children age 5 to 12 . Middle and high school students 13 to 18 may obtain a 50 % discount if their school participates in the BART program ; these tickets are intended to be used only between the students ' home station and the school 's station and for transportation to and from school events . The tickets can be used only on weekdays . These School Tickets and BART Plus tickets have a last @-@ ride bonus where if the remaining value is greater than $ 0 @.@ 05 , the ticket can be used one last time for a trip of any distance . Most special discounted tickets must be purchased at selected vendors and not at ticket machines . The Bart Plus tickets can be purchased at the ticket machines . 
 The San Francisco Muni " A " monthly pass provides unlimited rides within San Francisco , with no fare credit applied for trips outside of the City . San Francisco pays $ 1 @.@ 02 for each trip taken under this arrangement . 
 Fares are enforced by the station agent , who monitors activity at the fare gates adjacent to the window and at other fare gates through closed circuit television and faregate status screens located in the agent 's booth . All stations are staffed with at least one agent at all times . 
 Proposals to simplify the fare structure abound . A flat fare that disregards distance has been proposed , or simpler fare bands or zones . Either scheme would shift the fare @-@ box recovery burden to the urban riders in San Francisco , Oakland and Berkeley and away from suburban riders in East Contra Costa , Southern Alameda , and San Mateo Counties , where density is lowest , and consequently , operational cost is highest . 
 = = = Ridership levels = = = 
 During the fiscal year ending June 30 , 2015 , BART recorded an average weekday ridership of 423 @,@ 120 , the highest in its history , making BART the fifth @-@ busiest heavy rail rapid transit system in the United States . During fiscal year 2015 , the busiest station was Embarcadero with 45 @,@ 460 average weekday exits , followed by Montgomery Street with 44 @,@ 333 . The busiest station outside of San Francisco was 12th Street Oakland City Center with 13 @,@ 921 riders , followed by Downtown Berkeley with 13 @,@ 744 . The least busy station was North Concord / Martinez with 2 @,@ 766 weekday exits . 
 BART 's one @-@ day ridership record was set on Halloween of 2012 with 568 @,@ 061 passengers attending the San Francisco Giants ' victory parade for their World Series championship . This surpassed the record set two years earlier of 522 @,@ 198 riders in 2010 for the Giants ' 2010 World Series victory parade . Before that , the record was 442 @,@ 100 riders in October 2009 , following an emergency closure of the Bay Bridge . During a planned closure of the Bay Bridge , there were 475 @,@ 015 daily riders on August 30 , 2013 , making that the third highest ridership . On June 19 , 2015 , BART recorded 548 @,@ 078 riders for the Golden State Warriors championship parade , placing second on the all @-@ time ridership list . 
 BART set a Saturday record of 419 @,@ 162 riders on February 6 , 2016 , coinciding with Super Bowl 50 events and a Golden State Warriors game . That easily surpassed the previous Saturday record of 319 @,@ 484 riders , which occurred in October 2012 , coinciding with several sporting events and Fleet Week . BART set a Sunday ridership record of 292 @,@ 957 riders in June 2013 , in connection with the San Francisco Gay Pride Parade , surpassing Sunday records set the previous two years when the Pride Parade was held . 
 High gasoline prices pushed ridership to record levels during 2012 . Prior to 2013 , five of BART 's top ten ridership days of all time occurred in September and October 2012 . 
 = = = Connecting services = = = 
 Two BART stations have connections to Amtrak regional rail services : Coliseum / Oakland Airport and Richmond . Capitol Corridor trains run from Sacramento to San Jose from both stations . Additionally , Richmond has connections to the San Joaquin and nationally @-@ serviced California Zephyr . 
 Caltrain , which provides service between San Francisco , San Jose and Gilroy , has a cross @-@ platform interchange at at the Millbrae Station . 
 Connections to San Francisco 's local light rail system , the Muni Metro , are facilitated primarily through the twin @-@ level Market Street subway . Plans from 1960 called for BART trains to traverse the Twin Peaks Tunnel , but the upper level of the subway was turned over to Muni and both agencies share the Embarcadero , Montgomery Street , Powell and Civic Center stations . Some Muni Metro lines connect with ( or pass nearby ) the BART system at the Balboa Park and Glen Park stations . 
 Complimentary shuttle bus service connects BART to the Altamont Commuter Express commuter rail at the Fremont , Dublin / Pleasanton and West Dublin / Pleasanton stations . 
 Under @-@ construction extensions will allow for a connection to Santa Clara County 's VTA light rail in 2017 . Future , <unk> plans call for further rail connections in San Jose and Santa Clara . 
 = = = Connecting services via bus = = = 
 Bus transit services connect to BART , which , while managed by separate agencies , are integral to the successful functioning of the system , including the San Francisco Municipal Railway ( Muni ) , AC Transit , SamTrans , County Connection , and the Golden Gate Bridge , Highway and Transportation District ( Golden Gate Transit ) . Until 1997 , BART ran its own " BART Express " connector buses , which ran to eastern Alameda County and far eastern and western areas of Contra Costa County ; these routes were later devolved to sub @-@ regional transit agencies such as Tri Delta Transit and the Livermore Amador Valley Transit Authority ( <unk> ) or , in the case of Dublin / Pleasanton service , replaced by a full BART extension . 
 Other services connect to BART including the Emery Go Round ( Emeryville ) , <unk> ( north @-@ western Contra Costa County ) , San Leandro <unk> , Napa <unk> , Rio Vista Delta Breeze , Dumbarton Express , <unk> , Union City Transit , and the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority in Silicon Valley . 
 Several commuter and interregional bus services connect to BART , including the San Joaquin RTD Commuter ( Stockton ) , Tri Delta Transit ( Contra Costa County ) , Greyhound , California Shuttle Bus , Valley of the Moon Commute Club , Amtrak Thruway Motorcoach , and Modesto Area Express BART Express . 
 = = = Cars = = = 
 Many BART stations offer parking , however , under @-@ pricing causes station parking lots to overflow in the morning . Pervasive congestion and under @-@ pricing forces some to drive to distant stations in search of parking . 
 BART hosts car sharing locations at many stations , a program pioneered by City <unk> . Riders can transfer from BART and complete their journeys by car . BART offers long @-@ term airport parking through a third @-@ party vendor at most East Bay stations . Travelers must make an on @-@ line reservation in advance and pay the daily fee of $ 5 before they can leave their cars at the BART parking lot . 
 = = = Airports = = = 
 BART connects directly to the San Francisco International Airport ; connections are available to AirTrain for those not departing or arriving from the international terminal . 
 The Coliseum – Oakland International Airport line , or BART to OAK Airport , is an automated guideway transit line that directly connects BART and Amtrak at the Coliseum station to the terminal buildings at Oakland International Airport . Unlike similar services at other airports , it is integrated into the BART fare system but with BART ticket gates located at the Coliseum end of the people mover . The connector 's automated guideway transit ( <unk> ) vehicles are cable @-@ propelled and operate on a fixed , elevated guideway 3 @.@ 2 miles ( 5 @.@ 1 km ) long . The people movers arrive at the Coliseum BART station every 6 to 20 minutes , and are designed to transport travelers to the airport in about eight minutes . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 = = = = Cell phone and Wi @-@ Fi = = = = 
 In 2004 , BART became the first transit system in the United States to offer cellular telephone communication to passengers of all major wireless carriers on its trains underground . Service was made available for customers of Verizon Wireless , Sprint / Nextel , AT & T Mobility , and T @-@ Mobile in and between the four San Francisco Market Street stations from Civic Center to Embarcadero . In 2009 , service was expanded to include the Transbay Tube , thus providing continuous cellular coverage between West Oakland and Balboa Park . In 2010 , service was expanded to all underground stations in Oakland ( 19th Street , 12th Street / Oakland City Center , and Lake Merritt ) . Uninterrupted cellular coverage of the entire BART system is a goal . As of 2012 passengers in both the Berkeley Hills tunnel and the Berkeley subway ( Ashby , Downtown and North Berkeley ) received cell service . The only section still not covered by cell service is a short tunnel that leads to Walnut Creek BART , and San Mateo County subway stations ( including service to SFO and Millbrae ) . 
 In 2007 , BART ran a beta test of Wi @-@ Fi Internet access for travelers . It initially included the four San Francisco downtown stations : Embarcadero , Montgomery , Powell , and Civic Center . It included above ground testing to trains at BART 's Hayward Test Track . The testing and deployment was extended into the underground interconnecting tubes between the four downtown stations and further . The successful demonstration provided for a ten @-@ year contract with WiFi Rail , Inc. for the services throughout the BART right of way . In 2008 the Wi @-@ Fi service was expanded to include the Transbay Tube . BART terminated the relationship with Wi @-@ Fi Rail in December 2014 , citing that WiFi Rail had not submitted an adequate financial or technical plan for completing the network throughout the BART system . 
 In 2011 during the Charles Hill killing and aftermath BART disabled cell phone service to hamper demonstrators . The ensuing controversy drew widespread coverage , that raised legal questions about free speech rights of protesters and the federal telecommunications laws that relate to passengers . In response , BART released an official policy on cutting off cell phone service . 
 = = = = Library @-@ a @-@ Go @-@ Go = = = = 
 Since 2008 the district has been adding Library @-@ a @-@ Go @-@ Go book vending machines . The Contra Costa County Library machine was added to the Pittsburg / Bay Point station in 2008 . The $ 100 @,@ 000 machine , imported from Sweden , was the first in the nation and was followed by one at the El Cerrito del Norte station in 2009 . Later in 2011 a Peninsula Library System machine was added at the Millbrae Station . 
 = = Organization and management = = 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 The San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District is a special district consisting of Alameda County , Contra Costa County , and the City and County of San Francisco . San Mateo County , which hosts six BART stations , is not part of the BART District . A nine @-@ member elected Board of Directors represents nine districts . BART has its own police force . 
 While the district includes all of the cities and communities in its jurisdiction , some of these cities do not have stations on the BART system . This has caused tensions among property owners in cities like Livermore who pay BART taxes but must travel outside the city to receive BART service . In areas like Fremont , the majority of commuters do not commute in the direction that BART would take them ( many <unk> commute to San Jose , where there is currently no BART service ) . This would be alleviated with the completion of a BART @-@ to @-@ San Jose extension project and the opening of the Berryessa Station in San Jose . 
 = = = Budget = = = 
 In 2005 , BART required nearly $ 300 million in funds after fares . About 37 % of the costs went to maintenance , 29 % to actual transportation operations , 24 % to general administration , 8 % to police services , and 4 % to construction and engineering . In 2005 , 53 % of the budget was derived from fares , 32 % from taxes , and 15 % from other sources , including advertising , station retail space leasing , and parking fees . BART reported a farebox recovery ratio of 75 @.@ 67 % in February 2016 , up from 2012 's 68 @.@ 2 % . BART " train operators and station agents have a maximum annual salary of $ 62 @,@ 000 with an average of $ 17 @,@ 000 a year in overtime pay " . ( For its part , BART management claims that in as of 2013 , union train operators and station agents average about $ 71 @,@ 000 in base salary and $ 11 @,@ 000 in overtime annually , and also pay a $ 92 monthly fee for health insurance . ) 
 = = Comparison with other rail transit systems = = 
 BART , like other transit systems of the same era , endeavored to connect outlying suburbs with job centers in Oakland and San Francisco by building lines that paralleled established commuting routes of the region 's freeway system . The majority of BART 's service area , as measured by percentage of system length , consists of low @-@ density suburbs . Unlike the Chicago " L " or the London Underground , individual BART lines were not designed to provide frequent local service , as evidenced by the system 's current maximum achievable headway of 13 @.@ 33 minutes per line through the quadruple interlined section in San Francisco . Within San Francisco city limits , Muni provides local light rail surface and subway service , and runs with smaller headways ( and therefore provides more frequent service ) than BART . 
 BART could be characterized as a " commuter subway , " since it has many characteristics of a regional commuter rail service , somewhat similar to S @-@ Bahn services in Germany , Denmark , Austria and Switzerland , such as lengthy lines that extend to the far reaches of suburbia , with significant distances between stations . BART also possesses some of the qualities of a metro system in the urban areas of San Francisco and downtown Oakland ; where multiple lines converge , it takes on the characteristics of an urban metro , including short headways and transfer opportunities to other lines . Urban stations are as close as one @-@ half mile ( 800 m ) apart , and have combined 2 ½ - to 5 @-@ minute service intervals at peak times . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 = = = Automatic Train Control failure = = = 
 In the 1970s , three BART engineers developed concerns about the safety of the Automatic Train Control ( ATC ) system , but were unable to get their supervisors to consider them . Together , they went to the BART Board of Directors . An investigation started , and the BART management retaliated by firing the engineers . Investigation into the ATC and related design and management issues was still underway when , on October 2 , 1972 , a BART train overran a station due to ATC failure and injured several passengers . During the litigation process , the IEEE filed an amicus curiae brief in support of the engineers , and in 1978 the IEEE recognized the engineers with an ethics award . The " BART case " is now widely used in courses on engineering ethics . 
 = = = Fatal electrical fire = = = 
 In January 1979 , an electrical fire occurred on a train as it was passing through the Transbay Tube . One firefighter ( Lt. William Elliott , 50 , of the Oakland Fire Department ) was killed in the effort to extinguish the blaze . Since then , safety regulations have been updated . 
 = = = Death of worker James Strickland = = = 
 On October 14 , 2008 , track inspector James Strickland was struck and killed by a train as he was walking along a section of track between the Concord and Pleasant Hill stations . Strickland 's death started an investigation into BART 's safety alert procedures . At the time of the accident , BART had assigned trains headed in opposite directions to a shared track for routine maintenance . BART came under further fire in February 2009 for allegedly delaying payment of death benefits to Strickland 's family . 
 = = = Shooting of Oscar Grant III = = = 
