 On January 1 , 2009 , a BART Police officer , Johannes Mehserle , fatally shot Oscar Grant III . 
 Eyewitnesses gathered direct evidence of the shooting with video cameras , which were later submitted to and disseminated by media outlets and watched hundreds of thousands of times in the days following the shooting . Violent demonstrations occurred protesting the shooting . 
 Mehserle was arrested and charged with murder , to which he pleaded not guilty . Oakland civil rights attorney John Burris filed a US $ 25 million wrongful death claim against the district on behalf of Grant 's daughter and girlfriend . Oscar Grant III 's father also filed a lawsuit claiming that the death of his son deprived him of his son 's companionship . 
 Mehserle 's trial was subsequently moved to Los Angeles following concerns that he would be unable to get a fair trial in Alameda County . On July 8 , 2010 , Mehserle was found guilty on a lesser charge of involuntary manslaughter . He was released on June 13 , 2011 and is now on parole . 
 = = = Shooting of Charles Hill = = = 
 On July 3 , 2011 , two officers of the BART Police shot and killed Charles Hill at Civic Center Station in San Francisco . Hill was allegedly carrying a knife . 
 On August 12 , 2011 , BART shut down cellphone services on the network for three hours in an effort to hamper possible protests against the shooting and to keep communications away from protesters at the Civic Center station in San Francisco . The shutdown caught the attention of Leland Yee and international media , as well as drawing comparisons to the former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak in several articles and comments . <unk> Bryant , the union president for BART , added that , " BART have lost our confidence and are putting rider and employee safety at risk . " 
 Members of Anonymous broke into BART 's website and posted names , phone numbers , addresses , and e @-@ mail information on the Anonymous website . 
 On August 15 , 2011 , there was more disruption in service at BART stations in downtown San Francisco . The San Francisco Examiner reported that the protests were a result of the shootings , including that of Oscar Grant . Demonstrations were announced by several activists , which eventually resulted in disruptions to service . The protesters have stated that they did not want their protests to results in closures , and accused the BART police of using the protests as an excuse for disruption . Protesters vowed to continue their protests every Monday until their demands were met . 
 On August 29 , 2011 , a coalition of nine public interest groups led by Public Knowledge filed an Emergency Petition asking the U.S. Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) to declare " that the actions taken by the Bay Area Rapid Transit District ( “ BART ” ) on August 11 , 2011 violated the Communications Act of 1934 , as amended , when it deliberately interfered with access to Commercial Mobile Radio Service ( “ CMRS ” ) by the public " and " that local law enforcement has no authority to suspend or deny CMRS , or to order CMRS providers to suspend or deny service , absent a properly obtained order from the Commission , a state commission of appropriate jurisdiction , or a court of law with appropriate jurisdiction " . 
 In December 2011 BART adopted a new " Cell Service Interruption Policy " that only allows shutdowns of cell phone services within BART facilities " in the most extraordinary circumstances that threaten the safety of District passengers , employees and other members of public , the destruction of District property , or the substantial disruption of public transit service " . According to a spokesperson for BART , under the new policy the wireless phone system would not be turned off under circumstances similar to those in August 2011 . Instead police officers would arrest individuals who break the law . 
 In February 2012 , the San Francisco District Attorney concluded that the BART Police Officer that shot and killed Charles Hill at the Civic Center BART station the previous July " acted lawfully in self defense " and will not face charges for the incident . A federal lawsuit filed against BART in January by Charles Hill 's brother was proceeding . 
 In March 2012 , the FCC requested public comment on the question of whether or when the police and other government officials can intentionally interrupt cellphone and Internet service to protect public safety . 
 = = = Employee fatalities = = = 
 On the afternoon of October 19 , 2013 , a BART employee and a contractor , who were inspecting tracks , were struck and killed near Walnut Creek by a train being moved for routine maintenance . A labor strike by BART 's two major unions was underway at the time , which caused a significant disruption to Bay Area commuters ' daily lives and cost millions of dollars in lost productivity . The operator of the train was a BART manager and had been a train operator two decades prior . 
 = = = Berkeley Hills Tunnel breakdown = = = 
 On December 4 , 2013 , a BART train suffered mechanical braking problems and made an emergency stop in the Berkeley Hills Tunnel near <unk> station . Eleven people were treated for smoke inhalation . 
 = Palisades Interstate Parkway = 
 The Palisades Interstate Parkway ( PIP ) is a 38 @.@ 25 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 61 @.@ 56 km ) limited @-@ access highway in the U.S. states of New Jersey and New York . The parkway is a major commuter route into New York City from Rockland and Orange counties in New York and Bergen County in New Jersey . The southern terminus of the route is at the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee , New Jersey , where it connects to Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) , U.S. Route 1 – 9 ( US 1 – 9 ) , US 46 and Route 4 . Its northern terminus is at a traffic circle in Fort Montgomery , New York , where the PIP meets US 9W and US 202 at the Bear Mountain Bridge . At exit 18 , the PIP forms a concurrency with US 6 for the remaining duration of its run . 
 The route is named for the New Jersey Palisades , a line of cliffs rising along the western side of the Hudson River . The PIP is designated , but not signed as Route 445 in New Jersey and New York State Route 987C ( NY 987C ) , an unsigned reference route , in New York . As with most parkways in the New York metropolitan area , commercial traffic is prohibited from using the PIP . The Palisades Interstate Parkway was built from 1947 – 1958 , and fully opened to traffic on August 28 , 1958 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The main line of the parkway is designated as Route 445 in New Jersey and NY 987C in New York . The latter is one of New York 's reference routes . A 0 @.@ 42 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 68 km ) spur connecting the parkway to US 9W in Fort Lee , New Jersey , is designated Route <unk> . All three designations are unsigned and used only for inventory purposes . The parkway is owned and maintained by the Palisades Interstate Park Commission but occasional maintenance is performed by the New Jersey and New York state departments of transportation . Commercial vehicles are prohibited on the entire length of the Palisades Interstate Parkway . 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 The Palisades Interstate Parkway begins at the George Washington Bridge ( GWB ) in Fort Lee , New Jersey . Passengers from the upper level of the GWB can directly get on the PIP northbound , while passengers from the lower level of the bridge must travel through GWB Plaza on US 9W before getting on the parkway . Passengers riding northbound on the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) must be in local lanes to directly get on the PIP . Once the PIP leaves the GWB , it proceeds north along the New Jersey Palisades , past the Englewood Cliffs Service Area . Unlike service areas further north along the parkway , there are two in Englewood , one for northbound drivers and one for southbound drivers . The others are in the center median shared by drivers going in both directions . There are also three different scenic lookout points over the Palisades near the northern tip of the island of Manhattan at the Harlem River . After this , the PIP parallels US 9W and the Hudson River for its entire run in New Jersey . All four exits in New Jersey are either with US 9W , or within mere feet of the route . The PIP leaves New Jersey into New York in the borough of Rockleigh . 
 The entire New Jersey portion of the Palisades Interstate Parkway is within Bergen County . It is designated as a state scenic byway known as the Palisades Scenic Byway . The PIP and the New Jersey Turnpike are the only highways that use sequential exit numbering in New Jersey ; all others in the state are based on mileage , except for the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector in Atlantic City , which uses lettered exits ( no numerals ) . 
 = = = New York = = = 
 = = = = Rockland County = = = = 
 The Palisades enters Rockland County in the hamlet of Palisades . At about the border the PIP changes direction from due north along the Hudson River to a north @-@ west direction . Shortly after the Kings Ferry Service Area in the center median , the first two exits in New York are key exits for two colleges in Rockland County . Exit 5 provides a link to St. Thomas Aquinas College , and exit 6 provides a link to Dominican College . In West Nyack , the PIP has a key interchange with the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 287 ) . This intersection is about seven miles ( 11 km ) west of the Tappan Zee Bridge . After the PIP 's interchange with the NY Thruway , the PIP turns slightly north @-@ east and its speed limit increases to 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) . From the GWB to the NY Thruway it is exclusively 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . At exit 13 , the PIP intersects US 202 as the route crosses south of Harriman State Park in Mount Ivy . This is the first of two meetings between the PIP and US 202 . At exit 15 , the PIP has its last busy intersection in Rockland County with County Route 106 ( CR 106 , formerly part of NY 210 ) in Stony Point . From here , the PIP enters Harriman State Park , and at exit 16 , the PIP intersects Lake Welch Parkway , which is one of several parkways commissioned within the park . 
 = = = = Orange County = = = = 
 The Palisades enters Orange County north of Lake Welch Parkway at exit 16 and south of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission Visitor Center , located in the center median in what was originally a parkway service area . The first interchange in Orange County is exit 17 at Anthony Wayne Recreation Area . At exit 18 , the PIP intersects US 6 and Seven Lakes Drive . US 6 west heads toward the Thruway and NY 17 five miles ( 8 km ) west in Harriman . US 6 east forms the PIP 's only concurrency for the last two miles ( 3 km ) of the PIP 's run . Seven Lakes Drive joins the two routes for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before departing at exit 19 . The two routes then enter Bear Mountain State Park in an eastern direction . Finally , the Palisades Interstate Parkway meets its end at US 9W and US 202 at a traffic circle inches from the Hudson River and the Bear Mountain Bridge . US 6 and US 202 head east over the bridge , while US 9W heads north toward the United States Military Academy in West Point . ( Southbound US 9W , breaking off to the right , is the same road as westbound US 202 . ) 
 = = History = = 
 In 1933 – 34 , the first thoughts of a Palisades Interstate Parkway were developed by engineer and environmentalist William A. Welch , who was general manager and chief engineer of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission . The plan was to build a parkway to connect the New Jersey Palisades with the state parks along the Hudson River in Rockland and Orange counties . Welch would soon garner the support of John D. Rockefeller , who donated 700 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 km2 ) of land along the New Jersey Palisades overlooking the Hudson River in 1933 . With this favorable momentum for the new route , the proposed route was accepted as a Civil Works Administration project under Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal coalition . However , the New Jersey Highway Commission did not support construction , so the idea of a parkway was put on hold . 
 During the 1940s , Rockefeller renewed the push for a parkway along the New Jersey Palisades , and teamed with ultimate PIP planner , Robert Moses , to establish and design the parkway . The plan originally was to have the PIP stretch from the Garden State Parkway , along the Hudson River , to the George Washington Bridge , and then north along its present @-@ day route ending at the Bear Mountain Bridge . This southern extension was never built , but construction began on the current PIP in New York on April 1 , 1947 . Construction on the New Jersey portion began about one year later . Construction was delayed twice due to material shortages , but that did not stop the PIP from being opened in stages during the 1940s and 1950s . The route was completed in New Jersey in 1957 , and on August 28 , 1958 , the final piece of the PIP was completed between exits 5 and 9 in southern Rockland County . 
 The PIP is known for its stone arch overpasses throughout its route and its several scenic overlooks in New Jersey . All sorts of unique trees and flowers can be seen along the route as well . In 1998 , because of all the natural and constructed beauty , the PIP was designated as a national landmark by the National Park Service . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = The War of the Simpsons = 
 " The War of the Simpsons " is the twentieth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 2 , 1991 . In the episode , Homer gets drunk at a party and embarrasses his wife Marge , so she decides to sign them up for a marriage counseling retreat . Homer finds out that the retreat will be held near a lake and packs his fishing equipment , despite Marge telling him that all they will be doing is resolving their differences . At the lake the next morning , Homer tries to sneak away to go fishing , but Marge catches him and he takes a walk instead . On the dock , Homer grabs hold of a fishing pole only to be yanked onto a small rowboat by the fish . When he notices an upset Marge is looking at him , he immediately lets the fish go to prove his love for her . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Mark Kirkland . It was the last episode Kirkland directed during his first year on the show . Although not named until season three 's " Black Widower " , the character Snake Jailbird appeared for the first time in this episode . " The War of the Simpsons " features cultural references to songs such as Tom Jones 's " It 's Not Unusual " , Dusty Springfield 's " The Look of Love " , KC and the Sunshine Band 's " That 's the Way ( I Like It ) " , and Glen Campbell 's " Wichita Lineman " . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a party thrown by himself and his wife Marge , Homer humiliates himself by getting drunk , telling off strangers , and leering at Maude Flanders ' cleavage . The following day at church , Marge signs up for a weekend retreat of marriage counseling hosted by Reverend Lovejoy and his wife Helen . Homer finds out that the retreat will be held at Catfish Lake and packs his fishing equipment , despite Marge telling him that all they will be doing is resolving their differences . On the way to the retreat , Homer stops at a bait shop and learns of the legendary catfish General Sherman . 
 Back at home , Grampa babysits Bart and Lisa , who trick their grandfather into letting them throw their own party . At the lake the next morning , Homer tries to sneak away to go fishing , but Marge wakes up first . Marge is upset that Homer would choose fishing over their marriage , which Homer fails to understand as he visualizes Marge turning into a catfish . Homer takes a walk instead of returning to bed . On the dock , he finds an abandoned fishing pole . The pole , with General Sherman on the line , yanks him off the pier into a small rowboat , and onto the lake . From their cabin window , Marge watches Homer battle General Sherman and gets frustrated . At home , Bart and Lisa 's party has ended and the house is a total mess . Watching Grampa cry and fearing that he will get in trouble , they frantically clean up the house for him . 
 Marge attends the workshops alone while Homer triumphantly rows in with General Sherman . When he returns , Marge tells him their marriage is in serious trouble if he values fishing more than her . To prove his love for her , he lets the fish ( still alive ) go and they return home . Once home , Marge congratulates Grampa on how clean the house is , to which he reveals his secret is " pretending to cry " . Grampa laughs as he reveals to a shocked Bart and Lisa that he tricked them as he leaves , and Bart swears he will never trust an old person again . At the bait shop , General Sherman is still uncaught , but tales are told of a near @-@ mythical figure who almost succeeded : " Went by the name of Homer . Seven feet tall he was , with arms like tree trunks . His eyes were like steel : cold , hard . Had a shock of hair , red , like the fires of Hell . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , and it was the last episode Mark Kirkland directed during his first year on the show . Kirkland and his animation team were relatively new to animation when they began working on the show , and to make the animation in this episode the best they had ever done , they incorporated all the techniques they had learned during their first year into it . Kirkland said animating Homer drunk was a challenge for him as he had to analyze how people behave when they are intoxicated by alcohol . He said of the animation : " I shifted [ Homer 's ] eyes open and close , they 're not working in sync . And of course Homer can 't keep his balance so that 's why he 's shifting back and forth . " Kirkland was raised in New York in an environment similar to the one where the marriage retreat was held . He therefore enjoyed drawing and overseeing the scenery for the episode , and the bait shop was based on the bait shops he visited when he grew up . Snake Jailbird , Springfield 's resident recidivist felon , appeared for the first time on the show in this episode , though he was not named until season three 's " Black Widower " . He appears at Bart and Lisa 's wild house party . A woman named Gloria who seeks marriage counseling at the retreat was voiced by Julie Kavner . It is one of the few times in the history of the show that Kavner has voiced a character other than Marge and her relatives . Gloria 's hair was based on Kirkland 's assistant director Susie Dietter 's hair . 
 The Simpsons writer Mike Reiss said on the episode 's DVD audio commentary that while the episode was " full of funny moments " , it caused " nothing but trouble " to the staff of the show . One of the troubles was that after the episode had been written by Swartzwelder , an unsolicited writer sent the staff a script which contained a virtually identical story . To avoid a lawsuit , the staff paid him US $ 3000 and went forward with the episode . Material cut from the episode 's script included many couples who were supposed to be at the retreat instead of the Flanders family , such as Mr. Burns and his mail @-@ order bride , and Mrs. Krabappel trying to reunite with her estranged husband Ken Krabappel . Reiss said the scene played out " horribly badly " , and it appeared as if Mr. Burns 's mail @-@ order bride was a prostitute . The Ken Krabappel character was supposed to be based on singer Dean Martin , but somehow he ended up with a southern accent that made him sound like a hick . The whole scene was rewritten with help from producer James L. Brooks and it was completed after several hours . A scene in which Moe asked Dr. Hibbert to cure his discolored feces was also removed during the first reading of the script after a complaint by Brooks . Series creator Matt Groening later expressed an objection to the ending , which sees General Sherman jumping out of the water and winking at the camera , believing it to be overly cartoony . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The way Ned Flanders prepares the cocktails at the party is similar to actor Tom Cruise 's bartending stunts in the 1988 film Cocktail . Songs heard at the party include Tom Jones 's " It 's Not Unusual " ( 1965 ) , Dusty Springfield 's " The Look of Love " ( 1967 ) , KC and the Sunshine Band 's " That 's the Way ( I Like It ) " ( 1975 ) , and Glen Campbell 's " Wichita Lineman " ( 1968 ) . Homer 's false memory of the party the following day ( in which he imagines himself as being erudite and witty instead of drunk ) is a reference to the Algonquin Round Table , a group of New York City writers , critics , actors , and wits . The " Mexican Hat Dance " song is heard when Marge turns on the radio in the car to mute the conversation between her and Homer so that the children cannot hear them fight . When Homer comes into the church late , while looking for his chair , a character who strikes a resemblance to Adolf Hitler is seen . In a flashback sequence , Bart remembers chasing away a screaming babysitter with the car as a toddler . This sequence and the music in it are references to a scene in the 1976 film The Omen , in which the Devil 's child Damien makes animals shriek in terror as Damien approaches . The picture of General Sherman at the bait shop is a reference to the famous hoax picture of the Loch Ness Monster . John and Gloria are a reference to George and Martha from Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? Homer 's attempt at catching General Sherman , his bludgeoning of the fish and the line " I love you but I have to kill you " are all based on Santiago 's fight with the marlin in Ernest Hemingway 's novel The Old Man and the Sea . The battle between Homer and General Sherman is also reminiscent of Captain Ahab 's battle with the white whale Moby @-@ Dick in the novel Moby @-@ Dick . As Homer triumphantly returns with the captured General Sherman , he sings Queen 's " We Are The Champions " ( 1977 ) , altering the lyrics to " I am the champion . " The title of the episode is a reference to the 1989 film The War of the Roses , which tells the story of a divorce battle between a married couple . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The War of the Simpsons " finished fortieth in the ratings for the week of April 29 to May 5 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 8 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the twelfth best episode of the show with a sports theme ( sport fishing ) . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought the Homer vs. Marge plot was " good on its own " , but it was also " Grampa 's big moment . His final revelation to Bart and Lisa is inspired . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said the main concern with the episode " stemmed from its start . The scenes at the party were so terrific that the episode could have tanked after that . Happily , it didn ’ t , as the show provided a consistently high level of entertainment . Between Homer ’ s excesses at marriage camp and the kids ’ antics while Grampa watches them , the program packed in a ton of great gags . " 
 In a review of the second season , Bryce Wilson of Cinema Blend said " The War of the Simpsons " felt " a bit flat " , but " even in [ its ] lowest points , humor is easy to find . " Jeremy Kleinman of DVD Talk said it was " another great episode , featuring first , a new level of Homer 's debauchery after drinking way too much at a party the Simpsons host , Reverend Lovejoy 's marital retreat , and an epic battle with a legendary fish named General Sherman . Each of these portions of the episode are filled with laughs , perhaps the funniest being Homer 's distorted high @-@ society recollection of the previous night 's events in which he is hailed as charming and a jolly good fellow . " 
 = Washington State Route 529 = 
 State Route 529 ( SR 529 , officially the Yellow Ribbon Highway ) is a Washington state highway that connects the cities of Everett and Marysville . The 7 @.@ 88 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 12 @.@ 68 km ) roadway extends north from an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) , numbered exit 193 , past the western terminus of U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) , its spur route , Downtown Everett and Naval Station Everett to cross the Snohomish River onto Smith Island . After crossing the Steamboat Slough , the road encounters an interchange with I @-@ 5 , numbered exit 198 , before crossing the Ebey Slough and entering Marysville . In Marysville , SR 529 ends at SR 528 . Before being realigned in 1991 , SR 529 started at exit 192 of I @-@ 5 and traveled north as Broadway through Downtown Everett to Marysville . 
 A map published in 1895 of the Snohomish area showed the current and former routes in Everett already complete . By 1898 , citizens of both Everett and Marysville were interested in a road that would traverse the Snohomish River delta . A 1911 map of the Mount Vernon area showed the route in Marysville , but the bridges between Everett and Marysville were railroad bridges . The roads were combined with other highways to form the Pacific Highway in 1913 , which became State Road 1 in 1923 and US 99 in 1926 , but the cutoff actually opened in 1927 . State Road 1 became Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) in 1937 and PSH 1 became US 99 in 1964 . After US 99 was decommissioned , SR 529 was established in 1971 . Naval Station Everett was opened in 1991 and SR 529 was realigned on Everett Avenue and Marine View Drive to serve the new naval base . The former route of the highway , now named Broadway , had an interchange with I @-@ 5 that was reconstructed between 2005 and 2008 to include high @-@ occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes and now includes a single @-@ point urban interchange with 41st Street . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 529 ( SR 529 ) begins at an interchange , numbered exit 193 , with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and Pacific Avenue in Everett . The interchange only has two ramps , an offramp from I @-@ 5 northbound to SR 529 and a metered on @-@ ramp from SR 529 to I @-@ 5 southbound . From the interchange , the highway travels west as Pacific Avenue and north as Maple Street to intersect two streets that are the westernmost segments of U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) , Hewitt Avenue and California Street . 
 The roadway serves as the western terminus of US 2 and turns west to become Everett Avenue , which continues east to I @-@ 5 as SR 529 Spur . Everett Avenue then travels west through Downtown Everett and intersects various streets including Broadway , which was once SR 529 and US 99 , Hoyt Avenue , which is the location of the Everett Public Library , listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and Marine View Drive , where the road turns north to parallel a BNSF Railway route and serve the Everett waterfront , which includes Naval Station Everett and Jetty Island , accessed via a ferry near 10th Street . 
 Leaving the waterfront , SR 529 parallels the Snohomish River southeast to a partial cloverleaf interchange with Broadway , which was SR 529 before 1991 and US 99 , and Marine View Drive , which continues southeast to I @-@ 5 at exit 195 . The highway travels over the Snohomish River onto Smith Island , part of the Delta neighborhood of Everett that is named after the delta of the Snohomish River located to the southwest . The Snohomish River crossing was the busiest segment of SR 529 in 2007 , with an estimated daily average of 33 @,@ 000 motorists . Crossing the Steamboat Slough as a freeway , SR 529 interchanges with I @-@ 5 northbound as exit 198 and enters Marysville after crossing the Ebey Slough . Now named State Avenue , the street passes through the waterfront area of Downtown Marysville and the Marysville Mall before ending at the intersection with Fourth Street , signed as SR 528 while State Avenue continues north to Smokey Point . 
 = = = Former route ( 1971 – 1991 ) = = = 
 Prior to 1991 , SR 529 was 1 @.@ 19 miles ( 1 @.@ 92 km ) shorter and extended from I @-@ 5 and 41st Street ( exit 192 ) to Marysville via Broadway . The former and current routes both used the same route from the Marine View Drive intersection to Marysville . The former southern terminus was a large interchange with I @-@ 5 and 41st Street , which was SR 526 until 1969 , that had an underpass under I @-@ 5 southbound for a northbound I @-@ 5 offramp to Broadway and connections to I @-@ 5 northbound were accessed via 41st Street prior to 2005 . Broadway continued north past the Everett Memorial Stadium , home of the Everett AquaSox , Everett Avenue ( current SR 529 ) and the Everett Community College to join current SR 529 at the Marine View Drive interchange . Between 2005 and 2008 , exit 192 on I @-@ 5 was reconstructed . A new flyover ramp from I @-@ 5 northbound to Broadway northbound was added and the 41st Street interchange was transformed into a single @-@ point urban interchange . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 529 was established in 1971 , but the road 's history predates that . Citizens of both Everett and Marysville proposed that a road between the two cities via the Snohomish River delta was needed , but the proposed roadway was rejected . A subsequent map published in 1911 showed the Everett and Marysville segments complete , but the bridges over the Snohomish River delta were railroad bridges . In 1913 , the Pacific Highway was added to the state highway system and used Broadway ( former SR 529 ) in Everett and State Avenue in Marysville to travel between Seattle and the Canada – US border . The Pacific Highway between Everett and Marysville , named the Vernon Road , was paved in 1916 and paid by a county road bond issue . The highway was later signed as State Road 1 in 1923 , which became the Washington segment of U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) during the creation of the United States Numbered Highways in 1926 . Since the bridges over the Snohomish River delta weren 't complete at the time of planning , US 99 used present @-@ day US 2 , SR 204 and Sunnyside Boulevard to connect Everett and Marysville . The bridges were completed in 1926 and opened on August 23 , 1927 , after the creation of US 99 . 
 State Road 1 was replaced by Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) in the Primary state highways , which was created in 1937 . US 99 fully replaced PSH 1 during the 1964 highway renumbering . Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) later replaced US 99 between 1966 and 1970 . SR 529 was created in 1971 and ran from what was SR 526 until 1969 , now 41st Street , north on old US 99 ( Broadway ) to SR 528 in Marysville . In May 1983 , the location of a new home port for the United States Navy was narrowed down to Everett and Seattle , as proposed by Senator Henry M. Jackson ( D ) , who died later that September . Everett was selected in April 1984 and the groundbreaking ceremony was held on November 9 , 1987 . On September 5 , 1991 , the new navy base was opened and SR 529 was shortened and rerouted to serve the new base , later named Naval Station Everett . A new spur route to serve as a connector between SR 529 and I @-@ 5 northbound in 1991 . The highway was declared the Yellow Ribbon Highway in November 2009 by the Legislature after a successful campaign led by Everett resident Nathan Olson . The sign unveiling ceremony was attended by WSDOT , elected officials , Naval Station Everett and community members on November 5 , 2009 . The 4 @-@ lane fixed bridge over Ebey Slough that connects SR 529 from Everett to Marysville was fully completed in 2013 , replacing a two @-@ lane swing bridge that was 87 years old . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Snohomish County . 
 = = Spur route = = 
 SR 529 also has a 0 @.@ 20 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) long spur route in Everett that extends from SR 529 to Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) northbound , numbered exit 194 . Since exit 193 , the southern terminus of SR 529 , only serves I @-@ 5 southbound , the spur route was established in 1991 to complete the interchange . Exit 194 also serves U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) , which terminates at SR 529 . In 2007 , the highway had a daily average of 17 @,@ 000 motorists . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Everett , Snohomish County . 
 = Poppy Meadow = 
 Poppy Meadow is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Rachel Bright . She was introduced by executive producer Bryan Kirkwood on 11 January 2011 as the best friend of established character Jodie Gold ( Kylie Babbington ) in scenes filling in for those cut from a controversial baby @-@ swap storyline . Poppy returned to the series in June 2011 as a supporting character and comedy element , in a move that was generally welcomed by the tabloid press ; her storylines focused on her friendship with Jodie and their intertwined love lives . Both Jodie and Poppy left the series on 14 November 2011 , but the possibility was left open for Poppy to return in the future . In June 2012 Bright reprised her role as Poppy , moving into Walford and resuming her employment at the local beauty salon , this time as a regular character . Poppy 's storylines became more prominent , her sister Tansy ( Daisy Wood @-@ Davis ) was introduced , along with the development of a romantic relationship with Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) . The character was axed in September 2013 by new executive producer Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins , and Poppy departed on 30 January 2014 . 
 Poppy was introduced into the series in what critics described as " bizarre and utterly irrelevant " and " pointless " scenes , which substituted for cut scenes of the dead baby 's parents at the graveside . The Guardian critic Stuart Heritage considered Poppy to be " perhaps the greatest television bit @-@ part character of the modern age " and several Daily Mirror writers gave Poppy positive reviews upon both of her returns . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Poppy arrives in Walford as the best friend of Jodie Gold ( Kylie Babbington ) , chatting in The Queen Victoria about their daily lives and current affairs . Jodie tries to arrange a date for Poppy with Tamwar Masood ( Himesh Patel ) , until Tamwar 's mother , Zainab ( Nina Wadia ) , interferes with her plans . Poppy returns to Walford some months later , now dating Jodie 's ex @-@ boyfriend Julian . When Poppy loses her job , Jodie suggests she work at the Walford beauty salon as a receptionist . Tyler Moon ( Tony Discipline ) flirts with Poppy , who initially rejects his advances , but after she reveals that her relationship with Julian is problematic she decides to date Tyler , to make Julian jealous . Off @-@ screen she ends her relationship with Julian . Jodie and her boyfriend Darren ( Charlie G. Hawkins ) become engaged ; she asks Poppy , Lauren Branning ( Jacqueline Jossa ) and Lauren 's sister Abi ( Lorna Fitzgerald ) to be her bridesmaids . Darren is anxious that if Jodie finds out he had a " drunken encounter " with Lauren at his stag party she may cancel the wedding , but Poppy discovers his secret and threatens to tell Jodie if they do not . Jodie subsequently admits that she already knows and still wants to get married , but Darren calls off the wedding and leaves Walford . Poppy moves out of her mother 's home and into a flat with Jodie , which they rent from Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) . After he increases their rent they refuse to pay , which leads to their eviction , and the girls move in with Tyler and his brother , Anthony ( Matt Lapinskas ) ; it soon becomes clear that Poppy is attracted to Anthony . He asks her out on a date , despite admitting to his brother that he has stronger feelings for Jodie , whom he later kisses . <unk> , Jodie decides to leave London . She admits the kiss to Poppy , who is furious and refuses to speak to her . Tyler tricks the two girls into meeting up , and they are able to repair their friendship . Poppy also decides to leave London and goes to live with her mother in Essex , while Jodie goes to find Darren . 
 Poppy returns months later to help Tanya Branning ( Jo Joyner ) , who is hired by Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) to do her hair and make up for her wedding . Poppy tells Janine and Tanya about her " plush " new lifestyle , but when she arrives home her living arrangements are far from glamorous , and there is an eviction notice on her front door . Poppy is subsequently evicted from her bedsit , but Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) offers her a place to stay , and Tanya offers Poppy a permanent job at the salon . Poppy then moves into Dot Cotton 's ( June Brown ) house after being offered a room by Cora Cross ( Ann Mitchell ) . Poppy forgives Anthony , and begins a new friendship with Alice Branning ( Jasmyn Banks ) . She starts a relationship with Fatboy , after her sister Tansy Meadow 's ( Daisy Wood @-@ Davis ) visit , where Fatboy acts as Poppy 's " high @-@ flying " businessman boyfriend in front of Tansy , in an effort to make herself look good in front of her younger " successful " sister . Although it is revealed that Tansy is not that successful , she tells Poppy that Fatboy loves her . The two start a relationship and later declare their love for each other . After a few months , Poppy sees text messages on Fatboy 's phone from a girl called Chloe ( Siobhan <unk> ) , and suspects he is cheating on her , and is further upset when she sees them together . However , Fatboy reveals that Chloe is his colleague and he has started working at McKlunkies again . Poppy is then made redundant when owner Sadie Young ( Kate <unk> ) decides to leave Walford after discovering that her husband Jake Stone ( Jamie Lomas ) has been having an affair with Lauren Branning ( Jacqueline Jossa ) , which causes Poppy to act cold towards Lauren . 
 Poppy interferes in Dot 's relationship with her son , Nick ( John Altman ) , telling him that his mother does not want to speak to him . She then allows Fatboy to stay with her after Tamwar throws him out . Poppy is then devastated to learn that Fatboy shared a passionate kiss with Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) , after hearing the pair whispering about it . She then learns that Fatboy and Denise had slept together before he was even in a relationship with Poppy . This infuriates Poppy , who storms over to the Minute Mart and confronts Denise , leading to the two women clashing in the shop . Poppy then returns home and tells Fatboy that she has forgiven him , but she needs to move away from Walford so that they can have a fresh start . Fatboy refuses to move and says he wants to end their relationship . She packs her bags and leaves Walford for Hemel Hempstead , but not before posting a letter through Ian 's letterbox , detailing about his wife 's infidelity . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = 2011 introduction , return and departure = = = 
 Poppy initially appeared as a guest character in two episodes , broadcast on 11 and 13 January 2011 , in " filler " scenes that were substituted for those cut from a controversial baby @-@ swap storyline in which Ronnie Branning ( Samantha Womack ) ' s son James dies of sudden infant death syndrome , and she secretly swaps him with Kat Moon ( Jessie Wallace ) ' s son , Tommy . A spokeswoman for EastEnders claimed that although some of the baby @-@ swap scenes had been edited in response to reaction from viewers , none had been removed : " Given the audience response to this storyline , we felt on this occasion that it was appropriate to respond and make some changes . The vast majority of material remains intact and we don 't believe that those trims we have made will weaken or detract from the overall storyline for viewers " . In an interview with the Daily Mirror , Bright stated that her first scene was her favourite throughout her tenure , as " all [ she ] could think was , ' I 'm sitting on a bench in the Square ! ' " Babbington , who played Jodie , revealed in May 2011 that Bright was to reprise her role . Bright made her return on 30 June 2011 . 
 In 19 September 2011 episode , Poppy discovers that Jodie 's fiance Darren ( Hawkins ) has cheated on her . Hawkins assessed the situation Poppy was in : " as everyone knows , Poppy 's loyalties lie with Jodie – they 're super best friends ! Poppy wants Darren to own up straight away , because she feels that if he doesn 't , she 'll be lying to Jodie as well " . He explained , " Poppy doesn 't want to see Jodie in pain , but she can 't keep the secret " . Poppy and Jodie were reportedly used to add humour to the soap , in the style of reality @-@ drama series The Only Way Is Essex , but The Sun assessed that the attempt had " flopped " . On 24 October 2011 it was announced that the pair were to leave the show . Her departure storyline saw her to start to date Anthony ( Lapinskas ) , who considered his character to be " pleased that somebody likes him " . He added that while his character was also interested in Jodie , he did what he thought was expected of him in asking Poppy out . After he and Jodie kissed , Lapinskas revealed that Jodie would be angry with herself for betraying Poppy . An Inside Soap writer predicted that Anthony was heading for trouble , and that he was " playing with fire " by kissing both Poppy and Jodie . A source told RTÉ , " [ Jodie ] and Poppy have never let a man come between them . Poppy may have something to say to Jodie when she finds out they have kissed " . The Digital Spy 's Daniel Kilkelly and the Daily Star 's Susan Hill confirmed that Poppy would forgive Jodie , and they made their final appearance on 14 November 2011 . According to an EastEnders spokesperson , there was potential for Poppy to return in the future ; in an interview with Inside Soap , EastEnders executive producer Bryan Kirkwood said : " We may see Poppy pop up as I 'm a big fan of Rachel Bright and the character , but Kylie is keen to pursue other roles " . 
 = = = 2012 return and 2014 departure = = = 
 On 18 May 2012 Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy confirmed that Bright would be reprising her role and returning to EastEnders . On her return , Bright said that it was " really exciting to be asked back " , saying that it was " nice to just slot back in " , adding , " I feel really lucky " . Talking to Inside Soap 's Allison Jones and Laura @-@ Jayne Tyler , Bright said of her return , " The door was always left open for Poppy , but it was a big surprise to be asked back so quickly . I thought it might be further down the track , so when my agent rang , I was like , ' Yes — no problem ! ' " . Bright stated that " fear crept over " when she was filming her first scene since her departure , as it was without Babbington . She added that she felt " safe working with Kylie " , but felt that without her the audience might get to know Poppy better . In Poppy 's return storyline on 12 June , she arrived back in Walford to help Tanya ( Joyner ) with Janine 's ( Brooks ) wedding preparations . A spokesperson for the show claimed that Poppy had become " a successful nail artist " since her departure , but as Poppy 's storylines progress that is revealed to be untrue ; Poppy was trying to impress Tanya . Bright said in an Inside Soap interview of Poppy 's storylines , " I think her job in Walford is to keep things light , and right now Poppy 's in a happy place . She 'll carry on dipping in and out of storylines , but viewers can expect to see more of her soon . I 'm excited about that ! " . The magazine added that Poppy had made a " welcome return " . Poppy begins a new friendship with Alice ( Banks ) , who was stated to be a replacement for Jodie . Bright said of this new friendship , " They are polar opposites , but that works . I think Poppy almost mothers Alice by looking after her and giving her good advice . Or at least it 's what Poppy thinks is good advice ! " . 
 Many viewers and fans of EastEnders expected Poppy 's return to be only temporary , and thought that she would depart soon after her return . However , it was announced on 24 October that Kirkwood 's successor Lorraine Newman decided that Bright will remain with EastEnders for the foreseeable future as a regular character . Upon this news , Digital Spy announced that Wood @-@ Davis had been cast as Tansy Meadow , Poppy 's younger sister , who appeared for one episode . Poppy is " less than enthusiastic " to hear about her sister 's visit . In 30 October 2012 episode , Poppy , along with Fatboy ( Norwood ) host a Halloween ghost tour of the Square organised showing people where former residents have died . A BBC representative said , " The backroom staff had a lot of fun planning this one " . Newman stated in an interview in November 2012 that there is " plenty more on the table " for Poppy adding , " We 'll see Poppy become involved in a relationship very soon , which is progressing very well in the material we 're working on at the moment . She 'll become far more involved in the Square and the friendships within those groups " . Digital Spy also revealed Poppy 's new relationship , adding that " viewers will have to wait and see who she falls for and how things pan out as the new plot develops " . This was confirmed as Fatboy , and the two kiss in 22 November 's episode . The pair " grow close " after Tansy 's visit , where Fatboy acts as Poppy 's " high @-@ flying " businessman boyfriend in front of Tansy , trying to make herself look good in front of her " successful sibling " . Bright said of their relationship , " It 's really sweet . I don 't think Poppy or Fatboy realised they liked each other as they 've been friends for a while . She 's unsure at first because she doesn 't want to ruin a friendship . She 's also been unlucky in love , so she 's a little bit wary . But I think she can trust Fatboy " . Bright expressed her delight at working with Norwood upon her return , after being disappointed she did not work with him during her first stint . In an interview with Metro she said , " Before I started the show Fatboy was one of my favourite characters . I was gutted I didn ’ t work with him the first time round so when I came back and they told me about Poppy and Fatboy ’ s relationship , I was just so excited . Their characters are perfect for each other . Poppy and Fatboy are a little bit of light in a lot of gloom around the Square . It ’ s important to have a bit of comedy between everything else . I ’ m very lucky " . She also expressed her wish for the two to get married , adding that their relationship " looks long term " . 
 The couple were at the center of a Red Button spin @-@ off episode , featuring how Poppy and Fatboy spent their Christmas together . The spinoff , entitled " All I Want for Christmas " , featured the characters of Alice , Tyler ( Discipline ) and Tamwar ( Patel ) , with Wood @-@ Davis reprising her role as Tansy , whilst Keith Parry guest starred as " Santa Tramp " . Bright said of the spinoff , " Poppy spends the day with Fatboy . She is under pressure to go back to her family , but realises she doesn 't want that . Her and Fatboy have a romantic day , but you don 't see anything on screen [ in the Christmas episode ] because it is dominated by the Brannings . There will be an interactive section where viewers can press the red button and see a ten @-@ minute film of how Poppy and Fatboy spent their day " . Bright discussed their relationship in an interview with TV Guide , calling them the " jolliest couple in Walford " . She said , " It 's all very sweet for them both at the moment . I reckon they 're going to be one of those couples who you want to shout ' Get a room ! ' at . They 're characters who need to be loved . Poppy certainly hopes she 's found her Prince Charming " . 
 On 24 September 2013 , it was announced that Poppy , along with three other characters — Kirsty Branning ( Kierston Wareing ) , AJ Ahmed ( Phaldut Sharma ) and Carl White ( Daniel Coonan ) — had been axed from the series by the new executive producer Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins . It was reported that Treadwell @-@ Collins was " determined to get EastEnders back to its best " and subsequently increase ratings . A EastEnders source added that Treadwell @-@ Collins " didn 't feel the characters who are leaving fit with the direction he is taking the show " , leading to these characters being written out . The source continued ; " He has only been in a month but he is already making big changes . He knows what he wants for EastEnders and is putting plans in place quickly " . An EastEnders spokesperson confirmed this saying , " We can confirm these actors will be leaving EastEnders . We wish them all the best " . Bright filmed her final scenes before Christmas 2013 and Poppy departed in the last week of January 2014 , after her relationship with Fatboy ended . 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Poppy , Jodie 's best friend , is a beautician . The EastEnders website describes Poppy as " a little bit ' uncomplicated ' " , but " no push over " and that she " brings out the best in everyone " . Several critics have described Poppy as " ditzy " . Sarah Dempster of The Guardian deemed her " dumb " , and RTÉ 's Sarah Hardy called her " insanely grating " . In a press release announcing Poppy and Jodie 's departure , they were described as " giggly girls " ; Digital Spy 's Daniel Kilkelly , the Daily Star and The List have similarly referred to them as a " ditzy duo " . Bright stated in an interview that in real life she is " nothing like Poppy " but did later add , when asked if she would be a good beautician in real life , " I 'm quite a perfectionist and I think Poppy is too " . 
 Commenting on Poppy 's 2012 return the BBC added , " The lure of Walford was too great and she 's back to spread sunshine in Albert Square again " . Bright called her " fabulous " , " cool " and " <unk> " compared to her in real life . Writers of Inside Soap called her " bubbly " and " perky " , calling her an " aspiring beautician " . The Sun 's Anne Richardson called Poppy a " soap siren " adding that Poppy has " flower power " . In 2012 , Bright said that the public ask her why she is talking differently from Poppy , adding that she is " definitely one of a kind , so fans tend to be quite shocked when they realise I 'm completely different from her " . Bright said she both loves and hates Poppy 's dress sense , as she has some items of clothing that are " really cute " but " the way she puts things together is slightly crazy ! It 's eccentric , but that suits Poppy " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Poppy 's introduction to EastEnders in what Jody Thompson of the Daily Mail described as " a bizarre and utterly irrelevant chat " was criticised by Daniella Graham of the Metro , who said that " viewers were left questioning why on earth anyone thought this pointless sub @-@ plot was necessary " . In contrast , The Press and Journal 's Derek Lord deemed Poppy to have been " a welcome addition to the show " ; he wrote that , " as a double act , [ Jodie and Poppy are ] no Morecambe and Wise , but at least they bring an element of something approaching humour to the otherwise soul @-@ destroying drabness of the London soap " . Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror labelled Poppy the " Optimist of the week " for her line " I bet it 's really nice here when they ain 't having a funeral " , and " Delicate flower of the week " for her " That is so well tragic <unk> ? " when commenting on Tommy Moon 's death . Stuart Heritage from guardian.co.uk said that Poppy made an impact in her two episodes , branding her as " perhaps the greatest television bit @-@ part character of the modern age " . Heritage added that she had " the name of a Bond girl , the hair of a Winkleman and the voice of a Katie Price robot running low on batteries " ; describing her as " electrifying " , he hoped that she would return . Katy Moon from Inside Soap discussed Poppy 's original two episode stint : 
 What I 've always loved about soaps is that element of surprise ... and last week I was genuinely taken aback by Jodie and her best mate Poppy in EastEnders ... There 's been so much darkness in the show what it really needed was some light relief . The dialogue was excellently written – very The Only Way Is Essex – and made me laugh out loud . Before last week , I could take or leave Jodie Gold . But Poppy changed all that . Having watched the girls bounce off each other I have a much better idea of what Jodie is about . Now , I 'm hoping that we get to find out more about Poppy . Perhaps she 's got an interesting family who could relocate from Shepherd 's Bush and brighten up the Square ? 
 Upon Poppy 's return in 2011 , she and Jodie were widely known as a " double act " . Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury welcomed Poppy 's return , observing that " Walford needs all the humour it can get these days " . The Daily Mail 's Jaci Stephen loved Poppy and Jodie 's scenes : " Great girls , excellent pairing and very funny . More , please ! " In the Daily Mirror , Jennifer Rodger called them a " refreshing change " , and Tony Stewart deemed them " The daftest girls in Soapland and probably the funniest " . Stewart was one of several critics to express displeasure over their axing , describing it as " a shame " . Jane Simon and Brian McIver of the Daily Record described them as " an adorable female double act [ and ] E20 's answer to 2 Shoes " , and wrote of their departure , " apparently there just isn 't enough room for sunny , funny , glass @-@ half @-@ full types in Walford " . The Sun 's Colin Robertson noted that Jodie , Poppy and Norman Simmonds ( George Layton ) , who was axed at the same time as the duo , were EastEnders ' " three funniest characters " ; a critic writing for The Huffington Post suggested that they had " injected some humour into the famously gloomy soap " . The Daily Mirror 's Rodger said that she was " sad " that the duo had left , saying that she " found their scenes together hilarious " , hoping that she would see both Bright and Babbington in a new show together . Bright stated that during her main stint in 2011 , she received mail telling her saying how much fans liked the double act between Poppy and Jodie , and that they were a " breath of fresh air " . 
 Upon Bright 's return in 2012 , she was still named " one half of Poppy and Jodie double @-@ act " , with the Daily Mirror 's Simon adding that Poppy was returning " just in time because some people in Walford are in dire need of a make @-@ under " . Inside Soap predicted that Albert Square would be a " cheerier place for the foreseeable future as bubbly Poppy Meadow makes a welcome return " . Radio Times made a similar comment about Poppy 's return saying that , " In happier news , the glorious Poppy Meadow is back . That is sooo lovely ! " . Although Stewart did not particularly aim this at Poppy , Stewart did complain about the younger characters in the cast , using Poppy as one of the examples . He said , " While there are some talented and award @-@ winning young actors in the cast , you can 't help but suspect that colouring books and crayons are handed out with the scripts at times " . A Daily Mirror writer said that Poppy , played by the " excellent Rachel Bright " , is " one of the comedy delights in this soap " . The writer stated that she was " even more Essex than former <unk> star Amy Childs " . 
 = HD 40307 b = 
 HD 40307 b is an extrasolar planet orbiting the star HD 40307 , located 42 light @-@ years away in the direction of the southern constellation Pictor . The planet was discovered by the radial velocity method , using the European Southern <unk> 's HARPS apparatus , in June 2008 . It is the second smallest of the planets orbiting the star , after HD 40307 e . The planet is of interest as this star has relatively low metallicity , supporting a hypothesis that different metallicities in protostars determine what kind of planets they will form . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 As with many other extrasolar planets , HD 40307 b was discovered by measuring variations in the radial velocity of the star it orbits . These measurements were made by the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher ( HARPS ) spectrograph at the Chile @-@ based La Silla Observatory . The discovery was announced at the astrophysics conference that took place in Nantes , France between 16 and 18 June 2008 . HD 40307 b was one of three found here at the time . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 HD 40307 b is the second lightest planet discovered in the system , with at least 4 @.@ 2 times the mass of the Earth . The planet orbits the star HD 40307 every 4 @.@ 3 Earth days , corresponding of its location at approximately 0 @.@ 047 astronomical units from the star . The eccentricity of the planet 's orbit was found to not differ significantly from zero , meaning that there is insufficient data to distinguish the orbit from an entirely circular one . 
 The star around which HD 40307 b orbits has a low metallicity , compared to other planet @-@ bearing stars . This supports a hypothesis concerning the possibility that the metallicity of stars during their births may determine whether a protostar 's accretion disk forms gas giants or terrestrial planets . 
 The Arizonan astronomer Rory Barnes 's mathematical model , in 2009 , found that " Planet b ’ s orbit must be more than 15 <unk> from face @-@ on " ; however it cannot be much more . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 HD 40307 b does not transit and has not been imaged . More specific characteristics , such as its radius , composition , and possible surface temperature cannot be determined . 
 With a lower mass bound of 4 @.@ 2 times the mass of the Earth , HD 40307 b is presumably too small to be a jovian planet . This concept was challenged in a 2009 study , which stated that if HD 40307 b is terrestrial , the planet would be highly unstable and would be affected by tidal heating in a manner greater than Io , a volcanic satellite of planet Jupiter ; restrictions that seem to bind terrestrial planets , however , do not restrict ice giant planets like Neptune or Uranus . 
 As strong tidal forces often result in the destruction of larger natural satellites in planets orbiting close to a star , it is unlikely that HD 40307 b hosts any satellites . 
 HD 40307 b , c , and d are presumed to have migrated into their present orbits . 
 = Caspian expeditions of the Rus ' = 
 The Caspian expeditions of the Rus ' were military raids undertaken by the Rus ' between 864 and 1041 on the Caspian Sea shores , of what are nowadays Iran , Dagestan , and Azerbaijan . Initially , the Rus ' appeared in Serkland in the 9th century traveling as merchants along the Volga trade route , selling furs , honey , and slaves . The first small @-@ scale raids took place in the late 9th and early 10th century . The Rus ' undertook the first large @-@ scale expedition in 913 ; having arrived on 500 ships , they pillaged in the Gorgan region , in the territory of present @-@ day Iran , and more to the west , in Gilan and Mazandaran , taking slaves and goods . On their return , the northern raiders were attacked and defeated by the Khazar in the Volga Delta , and those who escaped were killed by the local tribes on the middle Volga . 
 During their next expedition in 943 , the Rus ' captured Bardha 'a , the capital of Arran , in the modern @-@ day Republic of Azerbaijan . The Rus ' stayed there for several months , killing many inhabitants of the city and amassing substantial plunder . It was only an outbreak of dysentery among the Rus ' that forced them to depart with their spoils . Sviatoslav , prince of Kiev , commanded the next attack , which destroyed the Khazar state in 965 . Sviatoslav 's campaign established the Rus 's hold on the north @-@ south trade routes , helping to alter the demographics of the region . Raids continued through the time period with the last Scandinavian attempt to reestablish the route to the Caspian Sea taking place in 1041 by Ingvar the Far @-@ Travelled . 
 = = Background and early raids = = 
 The Rus ' first penetrated to the Muslim areas adjacent to the Caspian Sea as traders rather than warriors . By the early 9th century , the Norsemen settled in northwestern Russia , where they established a settlement called <unk> ( Slavic : Ladoga ) about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south of the Volkhov River entry into Lake Ladoga . From there , they began trading with the Byzantine Empire along the Dnieper trade route and with the Muslim lands around the Caspian Sea along the Volga trade route . In the late 9th century , ibn Khordadbeh described the Rus ' buying goods from the Khazars in the market areas on the lower Volga and selling them on the markets of Caspian towns ; these merchants brought furs , honey , and slaves . Small groups of the Rus ' even went on camels as far as Baghdad to sell their goods ; their European slaves interpreted for them . 
 Thomas Schaub Noonan suggested that the Rus ' reached Baghdad as early as 800 ; this argument is supported by the finding of Sassanid , Arab , and Arabo @-@ Sassanid dirham coins dated no later than 804 – 805 at Peterhof , near Saint @-@ Petersburg . In ibn Khordadbeh 's account , the Rus ' are described as " a kind of the <unk> " , a term usually used to refer to Slavs , and anti @-@ <unk> scholars have interpreted this passage as indicative of the Rus ' being Slavs rather than Scandinavians . In the interpretation of the <unk> scholars , the word <unk> was also frequently applied to all fair @-@ haired , ruddy @-@ complexioned populations of Central , Eastern , and Northeastern Europe , so ibn Khordadbeh 's language is ambiguous here . 
 The first Caspian raid of the Rus ' occurred sometime in the reign of Hasan ibn Zaid , ruler of Tabaristan between 864 and 884 . The Rus ' sailed into the Caspian Sea and unsuccessfully attacked its eastern shore at Abaskun . This raid was probably on a very small scale . The second raid took place in 909 or 910 and was likewise aimed at Abaskun ; just like the previous attack , this expedition was a minor one with only sixteen ships participating in it . The third minor raid took place in 911 or 912 . 
 = = Raid of 913 = = 
 The Rus ' launched the first large @-@ scale raid in 913 . A fleet of 500 ships reached the southern shores of the Caspian Sea through the country of the Khazars . In order to secure a peaceful passage through the land of the Khazars , the Rus ' promised the Khazars half of their spoils . They sailed down the Dnieper River into the Black Sea , then into the Sea of Azov , then up the Don River past the Khazar city of Sarkel , and then by a portage reached the Volga , which led them into the Caspian Sea . 
 The Rus ' attacked in the Gorgan region around Abaskun , as well as Tabaristan , pillaging the countrysides as they went . An attempt to repel them as they lay in anchor near islands in the southwestern part of the Caspian Sea proved unsuccessful ; and they were then able to roam and raid at will . Across the sea they raided at Baku , penetrating inland a distance of three days ' journey , and plundering the regions of Arran , Tabaristan , <unk> , and Shirvan . Everywhere they looted as much as they could , taking women and children as slaves . The news of their outrages preceded them as they headed homeward and , in the Volga Delta , the Rus ' were attacked by Khazars , as well as by some Christians , apparently with the acquiescence of the Khazar ruler . According to al @-@ Masudi , those who escaped were finished off by the <unk> and Volga Bulgars . 
 = = Raid of 943 = = 
 The second large @-@ scale campaign is dated to 943 , when Igor was the supreme leader of the Rus ' , according to the Primary Chronicle . During the 943 expedition , the Rus ' rowed up the Kura River , deep into the Caucasus , defeated the forces of Marzuban bin Muhammad , and captured Bardha 'a , the capital of Arran . The Rus ' allowed the local people to retain their religion in exchange for recognition of their overlordship ; it is possible that the Rus ' intended to settle permanently there . According to ibn <unk> , the local people broke the peace by stone @-@ throwing and other abuse directed against the Rus ' , who then demanded that the inhabitants evacuate the city . This ultimatum was rejected , and the Rus ' began killing people and holding many for ransom . The slaughter was briefly interrupted for negotiations , which soon broke down . The Rus ' stayed in Bardha 'a for several months , using it as a base for plundering the adjacent areas , and amassed substantial spoils . 
 The city was saved only by an outbreak of dysentery among the Rus ' . Ibn <unk> writes that the Rus ' " indulged excessively in the fruit of which there are numerous sorts there . This produced an epidemic among them . . . and their numbers began thereby to be reduced . " Encouraged by the epidemic among the Rus ' , the Muslims approached the city . The Rus ' , their chief riding on a donkey , made an unsuccessful sally after which they lost 700 warriors , but evaded encirclement and retreated to the Bardha 'a fortress , where they were besieged by the Muslims . Exhausted by the disease and the siege , the Rus ' " left by night the fortress in which they had established their quarters , carrying on their backs all they could of their treasure , gems , and fine raiment , boys and girls as they wanted , and made for the Kura River , where the ships in which they had issued from their home were in readiness with their crews , and 300 Russes whom they had been supporting with portions of their booty . " The Muslims then exhumed from the Rus ' graves the weapons that had been buried beside the warriors . 
 George Vernadsky proposed that Oleg of Novgorod was the donkey @-@ riding chief of the Rus ' who attacked Bardha 'a . Vernadsky identified Oleg with Helgu , a figure mentioned in the Schechter Letter . According to that document , Helgu went to Persia by boat and died there after a failed attack on Constantinople in 941 . On the other hand , Lev Gumilev , drawing on the name of the Rus ' leader ( as recorded in Arabian sources ) , hypothesizes that this leader was <unk> , a Varangian chieftain whose wealth was noted in the Primary Chronicle under 945 . 
 = = Destruction of Khazaria = = 
 The sources are not clear about the roots of the conflict between Khazaria and Rus ' , so several possibilities have been suggested . The Rus ' had an interest in removing the Khazar hold on the Volga trade route because the Khazars collected duties from the goods transported by the Volga . Byzantine incitement also apparently played a role . Khazars were the allies of the Byzantines until the reign of Romanus I Lecapenus , who persecuted the Jews of his empire . According to the Schechter Letter , the Khazar ruler Joseph responded to the persecution of Jews by " doing away with many Christians " and Romanus retaliated by inciting Oleg of Novgorod ( called Helgu in the letter ) against Khazaria . 
 The conflict may also have been spurred by the Khazars ' decision to close passage down the Volga in response to the raid of 943 . In the Khazar Correspondence , written around 950 – 960 , the Khazar ruler Joseph reported his role as defender of the Muslim polities of the Caspian region against Rus ' incursions : " I have to wage war with them [ Rus ] , for if I would give them any chance at all they would lay waste the whole land of the Muslims as far as Baghdad . " Earlier conflict between Muslim elements of the Khazar army and Rus ' marauders in c . 912 may have contributed to this arrangement and the hostility of the Rus ' against Khazaria . 
 In 965 , Sviatoslav I of Kiev finally went to war against Khazaria . He employed Oghuz and Pecheneg mercenaries in this campaign , perhaps to counter the Khazars ' superior cavalry . Sviatoslav destroyed the Khazar city of Sarkel around 965 , and possibly sacked ( but did not occupy ) the Khazar city of Kerch on the Crimea . He subsequently ( probably in 968 or 969 ) destroyed the Khazar capital of Atil . A visitor to Atil wrote soon after Sviatoslav 's campaign : " The Rus ' attacked , and no grape or raisin remained , not a leaf on a branch . " Ibn Hawqal is the only author who reports the sack of <unk> , after which the Rus ' departed for " Rûm and al @-@ Andaluz " . 
 Sviatoslav 's campaign brought the prosperity and independence of Khazaria to an abrupt end . The destruction of Khazar imperial power paved the way for Kievan Rus ' to dominate north @-@ south trade routes through the steppe and across the Black Sea , routes that formerly had been a major source of revenue for the Khazars . Moreover , Sviatoslav 's campaigns led to increased Slavic settlement in the region of the Saltovo @-@ Mayaki culture , greatly changing the demographics and culture of the transitional area between the forest and the steppe . 
 = = Later expeditions = = 
 In 987 , Maymun , emir of Derbent , asked the Rus ' to help him against local chiefs . The Rus ' , many of whom appear to have been professional soldiers , arrived on 18 ships . Uncertain of their reception , they sent only one ship to reconnoitre the situation . When its crew were massacred by the local population , the Rus ' went on to loot the city of <unk> . In 989 , this same Maymun is reported to have refused the demand of a local preacher to turn over his Rus ' mercenaries to him for either conversion to Islam or death . In the ensuing struggle , Maymun was driven from the city and forced to surrender the Rus ' soldiers , but he returned in 992 . 
 In 1030 , the Rus ' raided the region of Shirvan ; the ruler of Ganja then paid them much money to help suppress a revolt in <unk> . Afterwards , the Rus ' returned home . According to one source , in November 1031 the Rus ' returned , but were defeated near Baku and expelled . The year of 1032 saw another Rus ' raid into Shirvan ; they were joined by the Alans and <unk> . Local Muslims defeated the Rus ' in 1033 . It is unclear to which Rus ' grouping these raiders belonged . Omeljan Pritsak suggests that they operated out of a base near the Terek estuary and had their principal home in <unk> . Pritsak also speculated that the Rus ' , operating from the Caspian basin , shortly thereafter lent support to the Oghuz in a power struggle in Khwarezm . 
 The legendary saga <unk> saga <unk> describes the last expedition of the Vikings into the Caspian , dated to 1041 and possibly connected with the Georgian @-@ Byzantine Battle of <unk> in which a Varangian force participated around the same time ; in the saga much legend is conflated with the historical facts . This expedition was launched from Sweden by Ingvar the Far @-@ Travelled , who went down the Volga into the land of the Saracens ( Serkland in Norse ) . There are no less than twenty @-@ six Ingvar Runestones , twenty @-@ three of them being in the Lake Mälaren region of Uppland in Sweden , referring to Swedish warriors who went out with Ingvar on his expedition to the Saracen lands , an expedition whose purpose was probably to reopen old trade routes , now that the Bulgars and the Khazars no longer proved obstacles . A stone to Ingvar 's brother indicates that he went east for gold but that he died in the Saracen land . Afterwards , no attempts were made by the Norsemen to reopen the route between the Baltic and Caspian seas . 
 Khaqani tells about the invasion of Shirvan in 1173 or 1174 . In his odes , Khaqani names the Rus ' and Khazars , Rus ' and Alans , Rus ' and <unk> as the invaders . Peter Golden argued that the Rus ' mentioned by Khaqani were Volga pirates who came in 73 ships . Yevgeni <unk> and Vladimir Minorsky thought the invasion was initiated by the ruler of <unk> , Bek @-@ Bars b . Muzaffar . According to Minorsky , " the initiative of Bek @-@ Bars was independent of Kiev , and he must have used bands of free @-@ lances ( <unk> ) who were roaming in the south , as a prototype of the future Cossacks " . The <unk> <unk> I turned to the Georgian king , George III for aid and a combined army , which also included the future Byzantine emperor Andronikos Komnenos , defeated the invaders and recaptured the fortress of <unk> . Georgian sources speak of the Khazars , but do not mention Rus ' in connection with this event . 
 = R. Madhavan = 
 Ranganathan Madhavan ( born 1 June 1970 ) is an Indian actor , writer and film producer . Madhavan has received two Filmfare Awards , an award from the Tamil Nadu State Film Awards alongside recognition and nominations from other organisations . He has been described as one of the few actors in India who is able to achieve pan @-@ Indian appeal , appearing in films from seven different languages . 
 Madhavan began his acting career with television guest appearances , including a role on the Zee TV prime @-@ time soap opera <unk> <unk> Baat in 1996 . After appearing in commercials and in small roles , he later gained recognition in the Tamil film industry through Mani Ratnam 's successful romance film Alaipayuthey ( 2000 ) . Madhavan soon developed an image as a romantic hero with notable roles in two of 2001 's highest grossing Tamil films , Gautham Menon 's directorial debut Minnale and Madras Talkies ' Dumm Dumm Dumm . He worked with Mani Ratnam again in the critically acclaimed 2002 film Kannathil Muthamittal playing the father of an adopted girl , whilst he achieved commercial success with his role in N. Linguswamy 's action film , Run ( 2002 ) . 
 Madhavan was cast alongside Kamal Haasan in the 2003 drama Anbe Sivam , which earned him two notable awards for Best Supporting Actor . In 2004 , he gave a critically acclaimed performance as the antagonist in the multi @-@ starrer <unk> Ezhuthu and the film secured him his first Filmfare Award for the intense portrayal of a rogue . In the mid @-@ 2000s , Madhavan also actively pursued a career in Hindi films , by appearing in supporting roles in three highly successful productions , Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra 's Rang De Basanti ( 2006 ) , Mani Ratnam 's biopic Guru ( 2007 ) and Rajkumar Hirani 's 3 Idiots ( 2009 ) , which went on to become the highest grossing Indian film of all time upon release . He simultaneously worked on Tamil films , gaining critical acclaim for his portrayal of a vigilante in his home production Evano Oruvan ( 2007 ) and for the successful bilingual horror film , Yavarum Nalam ( 2009 ) . After appearing in further box office hits , Tanu Weds Manu ( 2011 ) and Vettai ( 2012 ) , Madhavan took a break from acting . Returning after a three @-@ year sabbatical in 2015 , his comeback films , the romantic @-@ comedy Tanu Weds Manu Returns ( 2015 ) and the sports drama Irudhi Suttru ( 2016 ) , both won critical and commercial acclaim . 
 In addition to his acting career , Madhavan has worked as a writer on his films , hosted television programmes and has been a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products . He has also worked as a film producer , first making Evano Oruvan with Leukos Films , before setting up Tricolour Films to produce Saala Khadoos ( 2016 ) . Madhavan is noted for his philanthropic activities and promotes various causes such as environment , health and education . He is particularly vocal about the protection of animals and was awarded PETA 's Person of the Year recognition in 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Madhavan was born on 1 June 1970 in Jamshedpur , Bihar ( now in Jharkhand ) , India , to a Tamil family . His father Ranganathan was a management executive in Tata Steel and his mother , Saroja was a manager in the Bank of India . His younger sister , Devika , is a software engineer settled in the United Kingdom . He had a Tamil @-@ speaking upbringing in Bihar . 
 In 1988 , Madhavan gained a scholarship to represent India as a cultural ambassador from <unk> College , Kolhapur and spent a year in Stettler , Alberta , Canada as part of an exchange programme . He returned to Kolhapur and completed his education , graduating with a degree in electronics . During his college years , Madhavan became actively involved in extra @-@ curricular military training and at 22 , he was recognised as amongst the leading NCC cadets in Maharashtra , which allowed him to make a trip with seven others as NCC cadets to England . As a result of this opportunity , he received training with the British Army , the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force , which he had , at a point , considered joining . However he missed the age cut @-@ off by six months and was subsequently unable to join the programme . After he lost out on the place , he began teaching courses on public speaking and personality development skills in Kolhapur and the satisfaction he gained through teaching , prompted him to pursue a post @-@ graduation in public speaking at <unk> <unk> College in Mumbai . During the period , he also won the Indian Championship for Public Speaking and subsequently represented India at the Young Businessmen Conference in Tokyo , Japan in 1992 . During his stint in Mumbai , he opted to create a portfolio and submit it to a modelling agency . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 In early 1996 , Madhavan worked on a sandalwood talc advertisement directed by Santosh Sivan , who later recommended him to Mani Ratnam to take part in a screen test for a role in Iruvar ( 1997 ) . Madhavan was auditioned for the leading role of <unk> amongst several other more established actors , but Mani Ratnam eventually left him out of the project citing that he thought his " eyes looked too young " for a senior role . As his film career failed to take off , Madhavan went on to feature in Hindi television serials , appearing as a crook in his first venture Yule Love Stories . He appeared in leading roles in Zee TV 's <unk> <unk> Baat and Ghar Jamai , while he gained further popularity portraying the character of Shekhar in Saaya . He also went on to act as a ship 's captain in Sea Hawks , as a convict in Yeh Kahan Aa Gaye Hum and as worked as a television anchor in Tol Mol Ke Bol amongst other television appearances . His first appearance in a feature film role came through a small role in Is Raat Ki Subah Nahin ( 1996 ) , where he portrayed a singer in a bar . 
 In 1997 , Madhavan appeared in a supporting role as an Indian police officer in Fred Olen Ray 's English film , Inferno , which was shot in India . His first chance in Indian cinema came in the form of Shanti Shanti Shanti ( 1998 ) , a Kannada film , in which he appeared as a carefree youngster alongside actor Abbas . However , the film failed to make an impact and went unnoticed at the box office . During the period , Hindi film director Vinod Pandey launched Madhavan as a Bollywood hero , with a project titled Akeli , however the film was shelved before the production process had been completed . 
 = = = 1999 – 2003 = = = 
 In 1999 , leading Indian director Mani Ratnam selected Madhavan to feature in the leading role of his Tamil romantic film , Alaipayuthey ( 2000 ) and the film 's subsequent critical and commercial success gave Madhavan his breakthrough as an actor . Portraying the character of Karthik <unk> , a young husband experiencing difficulties with his marriage , Madhavan revealed that he studied the technical aspects of film @-@ making from the director and learned the entire script of the film , irrespective of whether he was in the scene or not . He became the first débutante actor to be cast by Mani Ratnam in the lead role of a film , and revealed that when he found out that he was set to work with the director he was overcome with a " mixture of excitement , awe , fear and expectations " . Featuring alongside actress Shalini , Madhavan 's performance was well received by critics and the film 's success led to it developing " classic " status . A critic from The Hindu , described that Madhavan " sails through the litmus test with ease " , whilst another review cited that Madhavan was a " promising debutant " into the film industry . After the success of his first Tamil film , the producers of his previous Kannada film , Shanti Shanti Shanti , dubbed the film into Tamil and released it as Relax , to capitalise on Madhavan 's new @-@ found success . Madhavan 's next film , <unk> ( 2000 ) , garnered mixed reviews although Madhavan 's portrayal was praised as the " mainstay " of the film , with claims that the film for him was a " merely a prosaic exercise " . 
 Madhavan 's first release of 2001 , Gautham Menon 's directorial debut Minnale , opened to critical and commercial acclaim . Featuring a popular soundtrack by Harris Jayaraj and marketed as a Valentine 's Day release , Minnale further built on the actor 's image as a romantic hero and was later listed as a " classic romantic film " from the Tamil film industry . He then collaborated with Mani Ratnam for the second time by appearing in the director 's production venture , the romantic comedy Dumm Dumm Dumm ( 2001 ) , alongside Jyothika . Appearing as an unhappy groom trying to halt his wedding , the film won positive acclaim and became a commercial success , with Madhavan establishing himself as a bankable actor in South India . Madhavan then again appeared as a husband in a tumultuous marriage in <unk> <unk> ( 2001 ) , the hundredth venture of veteran director K. Balachander . Despite featuring amongst an ensemble cast and being highly anticipated prior to release , the film failed at the box @-@ office , with critics citing that Madhavan looked " rather bored " with the proceedings . Similarly his first lead role in a Hindi film , <unk> Hai Tere Dil Mein ( 2001 ) , a remake of his Minnale , was also unsuccessful at the box office , with the film and Madhavan 's performance receiving mixed reviews . However , the film belatedly gained popularity through screenings on television and subsequently developed a cult following amongst young audiences . 
 In 2002 , Madhavan played the role of a novelist in Mani Ratnam 's Kannathil Muthamittal alongside actresses Keerthana , Simran and Nandita Das . In the film , he was shown as the role of the father of an adopted child , who wishes to return to her native homeland amidst the Sri Lankan civil war . The film received widespread critical acclaim and went on to win six National Awards as well as over ten awards at various International Film Festivals . Madhavan gained acclaim for his portrayal with a critic citing " he lived the role of the character he portrays " , with the film seeing him move away from the romantic hero image for the first time into a more serious , performance @-@ orientated role . The good performance of the film internationally also helped him develop an overseas market for his films . Madhavan 's next large success came with Run , a film recognised for its screenplay , with Madhavan appearing in an action film for the first time in his career . In regard to his performance , The Hindu 's critic noted " he manages to portray action with élan in Run and actually looks fit and comfortable in the role " , with the film helping him make a breakthrough as an action hero . Despite another unsuccessful Hindi venture with the musical , Dil Vil Pyar <unk> ( 2002 ) , the success of his previous films helped him secure the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Actor for 2002 , being jointly recognised for both films . 
 Madhavan was cast alongside Kamal Haasan in Anbe Sivam ( 2003 ) , which told the story of an unexpected journey from Bhubaneswar to Chennai of two men who are polar opposites . Madhavan revealed his elation at working with an experienced actor like Kamal Haasan , while noting that a human drama film like Anbe Sivam was important for his career as an actor as it came after a successful masala film in Run . Portraying a young frustrated filmmaker with capitalist beliefs who travels with a handicapped communist played by Kamal Haasan , Madhavan 's performance was described as a " milestone in his career " and that " his portrayal will remain with the viewer for long " by a critic from The Hindu . The film opened in January 2003 to positive reviews , but became a surprise box @-@ office failure . Post @-@ release , the film has garnered belated critical acclaim from critics and television audiences and is considered as one of the " cult classics " of Tamil cinema . Film critic Baradwaj Rangan wrote that the film " was leagues ahead of the average Tamil and Indian film " , though felt that " the masses were unwilling to accept the experimental nature of the film " , while talking about the film 's box office failure . Post @-@ filming , Kamal Haasan revealed that he was impressed with Madhavan 's enthusiasm and concentration during the making of the film and thus subsequently signed him on to appear in his production venture , Nala Damayanthi ( 2003 ) , where he played a Brahmin cook lost in Australia . In 2003 , the actor also appeared in Vikraman 's family drama <unk> <unk> as a budding cricketer , Saran 's romantic comedy Jay Jay and made a guest appearance in Priyadarshan 's Lesa Lesa as a jailed teacher . The three films made average returns at the box office , though Madhavan 's performances were appreciated by critics . 
 = = = 2004 – 2008 = = = 
 Madhavan played an imposter gangster in K. S. Ravikumar 's comedy <unk> ( 2004 ) before being selected to feature in his fourth Mani Ratnam production , Aaytha Ezhuthu ( 2004 ) , which featured him in an ensemble cast including Suriya , Siddharth , Meera Jasmine , Esha Deol and Trisha . Madhavan portrayed the character of <unk> Sekhar , a hitman living in the slums of Chennai , whose path crosses with the characters portrayed by Suriya and Siddharth . His role also featured him in a struggling marriage , where his wife desperately tries to claw him away from his profession . Madhavan bulked up and sported a shaven look for the first time in his career to resemble the character of a ruffian and shot for the film through the sync sound technique . He received widespread praise for his depiction , with Baradwaj Rangan of The Hindu claiming that Madhavan outplayed Abhishek Bachchan 's interpretation of the character in the Hindi version of the bilingual , Yuva . Madhavan went on to win the Filmfare Award for the Best Tamil Supporting Actor , whilst another critic from The Hindu cited that he " sparkles as an anti @-@ hero " and that the " character ought to find a very special place in his repertoire " . Similarly , a critic from <unk> stated " Madhavan 's daring decision to play a negative character , who gets beaten up black and blue at the end , putting his ' hero ' image in peril , has paid off , as he walks away with top honours " , while a reviewer from Sify.com labelled him as " terrific " . In late 2004 , Madhavan worked on Rajiv <unk> 's English @-@ Malayalam crossover film Nothing But Life ( 2005 ) and completed his work in a single schedule across Las Vegas and Albuquerque . Portraying an orphaned youth with suicidal tendencies being treated by a Malayali psychiatrist in the USA , the film and his portrayal opened to mixed reviews . He then appeared in another marriage drama film , <unk> ( 2005 ) co @-@ starring Sadha – with the pair playing an estranged husband and wife . The film received praise for the lead pair 's performances with Madhavan being praised as " top class " , while it also became the first Tamil film to be dubbed into Zulu . 
 From 2005 onwards , Madhavan increased his work in Hindi films and starred and wrote the Hindi dialogues for the comedy Ramji <unk> ( 2005 ) , a remake of his earlier film Nala Damayanthi . Critics described his performance as " a master stroke " , though the film fared averagely at the box office due to the release of other big budget films during the period . He experienced box office success in Hindi films for the first time through his role in Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra 's Rang De Basanti ( 2006 ) . Featuring in an ensemble cast led by Aamir Khan , Madhavan essayed the guest role of flight lieutenant , whose death triggers a revolutionary movement against corruption . The film was subsequently nominated for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 2006 BAFTA Awards , while it was also chosen as India 's official entry for the Golden Globe Awards and the Academy Awards for the Best Foreign Language Film category . Madhavan then collaborated with Mani Ratnam for the fifth time with in the biopic Guru ( 2007 ) , co @-@ starring Abhishek Bachchan , Aishwarya Rai and Vidya Balan . His role of Shyam Saxena was inspired from the life of real @-@ life journalist S. <unk> , who was a challenger to the business tycoon , Dhirubhai Ambani , whose life drew allusions with Bachchan 's role . The film became a blockbuster and also received critical acclaim , with a reviewer citing that Madhavan acts with " extreme , believable sincerity " dubbing him as " truly a poster boy for India " , whilst another claimed he performed " a weak role with élan " . 
 His Tamil film , Thambi ( 2006 ) directed by Seeman , had a delayed release but became a profitable venture in town and village centres . Madhavan 's portrayal of a rustic do @-@ gooder , received positive reviews from critics though a reviewer from The Hindu claimed the actor was " unable to shed off his classy looks " . He then appeared in Sundar C 's comedy film Rendu ( 2006 ) , where he played dual roles for the first time and in the long @-@ delayed romantic comedy <unk> ( 2007 ) , appearing as a medical student . Madhavan wrote the dialogues , produced and featured in the lead role in <unk> Kamat 's Evano Oruvan ( 2007 ) , playing a middle class bank employee who becomes so disgusted with the corruption he faces in his day @-@ to @-@ day life that he becomes a vigilante . After setting up a production studio , Leukos Films , he helped promote the film in international film festivals before the theatrical release in December 2007 . Critics called the film a " must watch " and a reviewer from The Hindu stated that the film was " Madhavan 's best performance to date " , while he also went on to win the <unk> Best Actor Award for his depiction . However Evano Oruvan and his subsequent release , Seeman 's <unk> ( 2008 ) did not perform well at the box office , while another completed film titled Naan Aval <unk> failed to have a theatrical release . Madhavan 's final release of the year was the docudrama Mumbai Meri Jaan , based upon the 2006 Mumbai Bombings . The film , which featured him alongside Soha Ali Khan , Irrfan Khan and Kay Kay Menon became critically acclaimed with Madhavan 's portrayal of a man with a post @-@ traumatic stress disorder being appreciated by reviewers . 
 = = = 2009 – 2014 = = = 
 Madhavan won positive acclaim for playing the lead role of an engineer experiencing eerie events in Vikram Kumar 's bilingual horror film , Yavarum Nalam ( 2009 ) . The film , which became a commercial and critical success , prompted a reviewer from the Times of India to suggest " he carried the film on his shoulders " while he was also nominated in the Best Actor category at the Vijay Awards . His following two films , the romantic comedy Guru En Aalu ( 2009 ) and the action film Sikandar ( 2009 ) in which he played a supporting role of an army officer , both fetched mixed reviews . Madhavan then portrayed one of three leading roles in Rajkumar Hirani 's coming of age comedy @-@ drama film , 3 Idiots ( 2009 ) , alongside Aamir Khan and Sharman Joshi . Upon release , the film received positive reviews and went on to become the highest @-@ grossing Indian film of all time , before being overtaken in 2013 . Madhavan 's portrayal as a young engineer with a passion for photography earned him nominations for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor and for the IIFA Best Supporting Actor Award during 2010 . Film critic Taran Adarsh from Bollywood Hungama described the actor 's performance as " incredible " , while Madhavan claimed that the film changed how he was viewed as an actor in Hindi films for the better . He later turned down an offer of reprising the same role in the Tamil remake of the film helmed by Shankar . In 2010 , Madhavan appeared alongside actors Amitabh Bachchan and Ben Kingsley in Teen Patti ( 2010 ) as a young professor , with Adarsh again rating his performance as " excellent " , but the film failed at the box office . His two guest appearances in the year also received mixed feedback with his performance in the Telugu anthology film Om Shanti ( 2010 ) being praised , whilst a role in the John Abraham @-@ starrer <unk> Hi Sahi ( 2010 ) drew him criticism . Madhavan then collaborated again with Kamal Haasan and K. S. Ravikumar in the romantic comedy , Manmadan Ambu ( 2010 ) , playing a wealthy businessman who hires a spy to follow his actress girlfriend on a European cruise tour . The film opened to positive reviews with Madhavan 's performance being described by Rediff.com as " excellent " , while Sify.com labelled him the " scene stealer " . 
 His only release in 2011 was the romantic drama film , Tanu Weds Manu alongside Kangana Ranaut , which saw him play the role of a sensible doctor hoping to get an arranged marriage with a girl , who has a dramatically diverse personality to him . Prior to release , the film 's promotional campaign created anticipation and upon release , the film became a large success at the box office . Madhavan 's portrayal of Manoj " Manu " Sharma won positive acclaim , with a reviewer citing that his performance was " real , restrained , yet forceful " and another claiming he was " perfectly cast " . Madhavan next appeared as a police officer in Linguswamy 's Tamil film Vettai ( 2012 ) , an action entertainer featuring an ensemble cast of Arya , Amala Paul and Sameera Reddy . The film opened to positive reviews in January 2012 and went on to become a commercial success , with critics praising Madhavan 's decision to accept the role of a timid cop , while a critic noted that he had " an uncanny talent for comedy " . He then featured in Jodi Breakers ( 2012 ) , a Hindi romantic comedy film shot in Greece alongside Bipasha Basu , though the film did not perform well commercially . In 2012 , Madhavan took a sabbatical and was based in Chicago resting his knee , which he injured during the making of Vettai , causing him to suffer from <unk> <unk> . During the period , he felt he had to " reinvent himself " and had to work on films which would appeal to the " new generation of audiences " , so took a decision to work on a single film at a time . During a period of three years without any theatrical releases , his long @-@ delayed Hindi film <unk> <unk> directed by Rituparno Ghosh in 2006 , premièred at the 19th Kolkata International Film Festival in 2013 , while his first Hindi film Akeli , shot in 1997 , was released online during the following year . During his recovery period and sabbatical in 2013 , Madhavan signed on to appear in Simon West 's Night of the Living Dead : Darkest Dawn , in which he appeared as a former marine personnel and shot for the project in California . The computer animated film , where Madhavan provided voice work , premièred in San Diego during July 2015 . 
 = = = 2015 – present = = = 
 Madhavan 's first theatrical release after his sabbatical was Anand L. Rai 's Tanu Weds Manu Returns , a sequel to the 2011 film , which released in May 2015 . Prior to the film 's release , Madhavan stated that the " content of the film was more important than the stars " and acknowledged that the popularity of Kangana Ranaut would help the film gain a good opening at the box office . Reprising his role as Manu , Madhavan won acclaim for his restrained performance and the film went on to become a critical and commercial success . The critic from Bollywood Hungama wrote " Madhavan excels in his role despite it being a restrained one , which was anyways the call of his character " and added " he is very endearing who never tries to overshadow anyone and emerges a winner " , while Sify.com stated he gives a " subtle and restrained performance " . Tanu Weds Manu Returns earned ₹ 243 crore ( US $ 36 million ) worldwide at the end of its theatrical run , to become one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films in 2015 . 
 During his sabbatical , Madhavan also worked extensively on the pre @-@ production of the bilingual sports film , Irudhi Suttru ( 2016 ) directed by Sudha Kongara . After being impressed with Sudha 's script , he helped find the project producers in Tamil and chose to produce the film in Hindi alongside <unk> and Rajkumar Hirani . Madhavan also met and convinced mixed martial artist Ritika Singh to act in the film after contacting her through Raj <unk> , while he was also credited for contributing as an additional screenplay writer . He also went through a body conditioning regime in Los Angeles prior to joining the film 's set and learnt boxing to essay the role of a former boxer . For dubbing purposes , Madhavan wore metal braces inside his teeth , in order to create the effect of having a lisp that most boxers have from sporting injuries . Madhavan won praise for his work during the marketing campaign , having travelled throughout Tamil Nadu to promote the film , with The Hindu stating it was " unlike other film promotions in the South " . For Irudhi Suttru , Madhavan received widespread critical acclaim for his portrayal with Sify.com stating " he is outstanding and carries the proverbial burden of the project on his shoulder " . A critic from The Hindu stated that he was " quietly effective " , while a reviewer from Behindwoods.com wrote that Madhavan gives his " best performance " and is " excellent " at depicting his " characterization from being subtle to being outright effervescent " . His portrayal in the Hindi version , Saala Khadoos , received similar praise with critic Subhash K. Jha stating " this is Madhavan ’ s career @-@ defining performance , he sinks so deep into his role both physically and emotionally , that the actor becomes one with the act " . 
 In June 2016 , Madhavan signed on to appear in the Tamil remake of the successful Malayalam film , Charlie ( 2015 ) , after being impressed by the original . Directed by Vijay and produced by Shruti <unk> , the film will commence production in November 2016 . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 = = = Film and television work = = = 
 Madhavan was first credited as a part of the technical crew for his work in Ramji <unk> , an adaptation of his Tamil film Nala Damayanthi . Apart from portraying the lead role , Madhavan worked on the film as a dialogue writer and played an active role in determining the crew of the movie . In October 2007 , Madhavan founded the production company , Leukos Films , and consequently bought the rights of his film , Evano Oruvan , from producers Abbas @-@ Mustan and K. Sera Sera . Securing sponsorship deals with HSBC and <unk> , Madhavan premièred the film across North America and the Middle East before its Indian theatrical release , with the promotion method being used for the first time in Tamil cinema . However , since the relative box office failure of the project , Madhavan downplayed future involvement in production ventures . The film , which Madhavan referred to as a " part of his life " during 2007 , also saw him write the dialogues for the film along with Seeman by translating lines from the project 's original version in the Marathi language . Madhavan then chose to become actively involved in the production of his 2016 bilingual films , Irudhi Suttru in Tamil and Saala Khadoos in Hindi , in order to ensure the film completed filming and had a theatrical release . Impressed by the strength of Sudha Kongara 's script for the Tamil film , Madhavan felt that the story had pan @-@ Indian appeal and took the film 's script to Rajkumar Hirani , who agreed to produce and supervise work on the film 's Hindi version . Madhavan co @-@ produced the Hindi version of the film through his new production house , Tricolor Films , while leading the film 's pan @-@ Indian marketing campaign . The actor also helped finalise the film 's lead actress , Ritika Singh , and was also credited as an additional screenplay writer in the films . 
 Madhavan has appeared as host for television programmes on Hindi channels , while he has also been a host at film award functions . During his television career in the 1990s , Madhavan first worked as a host on Tol Mol Ke Bol . He was announced as the host of Sony Entertainment Television 's Deal Ya No Deal , the Indian version of the American game show Deal Or No Deal , in October 2005 . However , Madhavan quit as the lead anchor of the show in January 2006 claiming he was unhappy with the way the shoot schedules were handled by the production house . According to the actor , when he took on the show , he had made it clear that he would continue with his South Indian film assignments , and as the show was being filmed in Mumbai , he had found it hard to keep travelling throughout India from Chennai to film the ten days a month he had signed up for . Madhavan added that he was restricted by the producers to spend one day rehearsing technically , which left him with fatigue . Mandira Bedi subsequently replaced Madhavan as the anchor in February for Series 2 of the game show . In June 2010 , Madhavan made a comeback to the game show format by accepting a contract with Imagine TV 's Big Money show , signing on to host a single season , and then hosted an episode of the crime show <unk> India in January 2016 . Furthermore , he has been a guest judge in the Indian television show , Fame <unk> . In 2016 , Madhavan stated that he would only take part in television commitments for money , while he does not consider his payment when signing on to appear in films . Madhavan has also hosted live events , notably the National Film Awards in 2013 with Huma Qureshi . He was also the host of the 55th Filmfare Awards South in Chennai in 2008 and then also the Vijay Awards in 2013 . 
 = = = Brand ambassador = = = 
 Madhavan is amongst the leading brand ambassadors for products in India . His early work involved advertisements for brands including Bajaj , Ponds , Fair and Lovely and TVS , before signing a major endorsing deal with Pepsi and marketing company , IMG . In 2007 , Madhavan endorsed <unk> , a multi @-@ brand mobile phone retail chain owned by <unk> Telecommunications India Pvt Ltd . Madhavan signed a contract with the mobile phone network , Airtel for promotions in South India before being promoted as the pan @-@ Indian ambassador for the brand a year later . His advertisements with Vidya Balan for Airtel won critical acclaim , and brought in film offers for the pair to feature together . In June 2010 , marketers from Arun <unk> promoted a housing project in <unk> , Chennai in a similar fashion to the release of a new film featuring Madhavan . With film @-@ inspired posters and billboards put up around Chennai , the advertisement campaign attracted huge curiosity and the project became a success . His long @-@ term work with jewellery brand , Joy <unk> , led to the company creating life size wax models of him to place in their showrooms from January 2011 . Maruti Suzuki , for whom Madhavan is the brand ambassador , launched a special edition of the Suzuki Wagon R car calling it the Madhavan Signature Edition in September 2013 . In 2015 , online market place Snapdeal signed on Aamir Khan and Madhavan to be the company 's ambassadors , with Snapdeal attempting to use Madhavan 's popularity in South India to marker their services . 
 = = = Humanitarian causes = = = 
 Madhavan , who is a vegetarian , endorses the brand , PETA . Since joining them after starring in his first film , he has appeared voluntarily in several advertisements and released an E @-@ Card for the brand . In July 2006 , Madhavan was voted the " cutest male vegetarian " by an online poll conducted by the NGO , People for Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , while Kareena Kapoor won the female award respectively . In turn he cited that his success in the competition was due to his " healthy vegetarian diet " . In October 2010 , he wrote a letter to the CEO of Kentucky Fried Chicken , on behalf of PETA , urging them to stop mistreatment of birds by the fast @-@ food industry outlets and the killing of animals . He requested the boycott of KFC in India over animal welfare and conditions and was joined by Raveena Tandon and Rakhi Sawant in supporting the work of PETA in India . In addition , Madhavan was named PETA India ’ s 2012 " Person Of The Year " , while his son won PETA India 's " Compassionate Kid award " in December 2014 . 
 Madhavan has lent his support for the Chennai @-@ based charity , The Banyan , and appeared in the charity musical Netru , Indru , Naalai directed by Mani Ratnam for the cause . He appeared as a guest cook and newly launched restaurant in Chennai and cooked <unk> for auction for the charity , helping raise forty five thousand rupees . He has been a part of an AIDS awareness programme initiated by Richard Gere in India and helped advertise the A Time for Heroes campaign appearing in a short film . Similarly Madhavan featured in a four @-@ minute film produced by <unk> Foundation , <unk> ? <unk> ? , campaigning for educational awareness alongside Suriya , Vijay and Jyothika . In 2010 , along with his cast and crew from 3 Idiots , he helped raise Rs . 2 @.@ 5 million for the renovation of the school in Leh , which was damaged by flash floods . Madhavan laid bricks and tiles at the London Business School in July 2011 , building a symbolic house to represent the 100 @,@ 000 houses that will be built in India by 2015 as a part of Habitat for Humanity 's campaign to improve substandard houses in India . During the 2015 South Indian floods , Madhavan worked alongside other Indian actors in coordinating the relief efforts . In 2016 , <unk> India signed him to work as a goodwill ambassador in helping promote action against leprosy . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Madhavan is one of the few actors in India who garners pan @-@ Indian appeal , with his success in establishing himself in the North and the South Indian film industries , seeing him receive multiple offers as a brand ambassador . Furthermore , it has led to producers offering him lead roles in bilingual films such as the English @-@ Malayalam crossover film Nothing But Life and the Hindi @-@ Tamil projects , Yavarum Nalam and Irudhi Suttru . Moreover , most of his Tamil films are dubbed into Telugu , where he has created a box office market without appearing in a single straight Telugu film as a lead actor . Madhavan holds a significant female fan following , which developed after his romantic roles in Alaipayuthey and Minnale . Madhavan has also been active in keeping in contact with fans , maintaining a fan email account , a Facebook fan page and a Twitter account as well as being one of the first actors of Tamil films to turn blogger with entries in the year 2000 . 
 He has appeared at functions as a special guest , and has enjoyed particularly close links with technology company , Sify , whom he signed on as his media partner for all his future releases after expressing satisfaction at the website they created for Rendu . Madhavan sat amongst a six @-@ man jury for the selection of CNN @-@ IBN Indian of the Year 2006 . He inaugurated the Chennai International Film Festival in 2007 , taking the opportunity to deliver a message on preserving the environment . 
 A gaming company , Paradox Studios Limited , launched a new game compatible with mobile phones in July 2006 , with Madhavan as the lead character . The company released two mobile game titles featuring Madhavan as their lead character . The first of the two games , Madhavan 's MIG , featured the actor making a reprise of his Rang De Basanti pilot 's role . In the other game titled Madhavan , the player had to help the actor get to the première of his latest movie evading the paparazzi . In 2007 , prominent entrepreneur N. R. Narayana Murthy requested Madhavan to be his interviewer at the India @-@ Singapore Exposition and Madhavan went on to claim that the experience was " unforgettable " as Murthy was an idol to him . Madhavan has also attended conferences as a motivational speaker , talking about issues including situational awareness and confidence , with a speech delivered at <unk> Academy of Management , Coimbatore going viral online . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Madhavan 's parents are Ranganathan Seshadri and Saroja . Despite Madhavan 's ambition of wanting to join the army , his parents insisted he go to management school and pursue a degree in electronics . After completing the degree , he went on to teach communication and public speaking at workshops around India . At the Maharashtra workshop , he encountered his wife Sarita <unk> for the first time during 1991 , when she attended his class on the recommendation of her cousins . Sarita was able to use the skills she had learned from Madhavan 's classes to pass an interview to become an air hostess and after completing the course , the pair began dating . They later married in 1999 , before Madhavan entered mainstream films . The pair 's successful marriage has been covered by the media , with Madhavan citing that advise from his mentor Mani Ratnam was useful . Sarita has worked as a costume designer in a few of Madhavan 's films , most notably for Guru En Aalu ( 2009 ) when she worked along with Erum Ali , the wife of Madhavan 's co @-@ star , Abbas , for their respective husbands . Their son , <unk> was born in August 2005 , which eventually led to relocating to the boat @-@ club area in Chennai from <unk> , where Madhavan 's parents lived with him as well as his parents @-@ in @-@ law . In 2009 , he relocated to Kandivali , Mumbai with his wife and son , as he pursued a career in Hindi films ahead of films in the South Indian industries . 
 Madhavan has maintained close links with fellow actors and has described actor Suriya as his best friend in the film industry . The actor also is close friends with actresses Shilpa Shetty and Bipasha Basu , as well as actors Aamir Khan and Abhishek Bachchan . He is closely associated with actor Kamal Haasan , after their appearance together in Anbe Sivam , and has revealed that he considers the actor as his inspiration . He has also collaborated multiple times with directors Mani Ratnam , Rajkumar Hirani and <unk> Rai , citing that the film makers " understand him well " and share a good " comfort level " . He has also helped out actresses Reemma Sen , Sadha and Nisha Kothari by signing them on for roles in his films , when they were going through a barren spell . 
 Madhavan announced a sabbatical from films in late 2010 citing he would take the time off to visit London , lose weight , play golf , take treatment for his knee injury and spend time with family . Though he kept away from starting new projects , during the period he was involved in the promotional activity of two of his releases , Manmadan Ambu and Tanu Weds Manu . He later made a comeback , earlier than anticipated , after director Linguswamy convinced him to work on Vettai . The actor later took an extended sabbatical from 2012 onwards to work on his fitness and get into shape for his role as a retired boxer in Irudhi Suttru . Madhavan is a keen golf player , having played for pleasure alongside actor Amitabh Bachchan and director Mani Ratnam , while also appearing in a celebrity charity event in 2007 . He also made an appearance for Chennai Rhinos in the 2011 Celebrity Cricket League , playing against Karnataka Bulldozers . His experiences flying Cessna planes when he was with National Cadet Corps , also led to a passion for aero @-@ modelling , with the actor stating it " justified his decision " to pursue a degree in electronics . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Alkaline diet = 
 Alkaline diet ( also known as the alkaline ash diet , alkaline acid diet , acid ash diet , and the acid alkaline diet ) describes a group of loosely related diets based on the belief that certain foods can affect the acidity and pH of bodily fluids , including the urine or blood , and can therefore be used to treat or prevent diseases . Due to the lack of credible evidence supporting any benefits of this diet , it is generally not recommended by dietitians and other health professionals . 
 The relationship between diet and acid @-@ base homeostasis , or the regulation of the acid @-@ base status of the body , has been studied for decades , though the medical applications of this hypothesis have largely focused on changing the acidity of urine . Traditionally , this diet has advocated for avoiding meat , poultry , cheese , and grains in order to make the urine more alkaline ( higher pH ) , changing the environment of the urine to prevent recurrent urinary tract infections ( UTIs ) and kidney stones ( nephrolithiasis ) . However , difficulties in effectively predicting the effects of this diet have led to medications , rather than diet modification , as the preferred method of changing urine pH . The " acid @-@ ash " hypothesis has been considered a risk factor for osteoporosis by various scientific publications , though more recently , the available weight of scientific evidence does not support this hypothesis . 
 The term " alkaline diet " has also been used by alternative medicine practitioners , with the proposal that such diets treat or prevent cancer , heart disease , low energy levels as well as other illnesses . These claims are not supported by medical evidence and make incorrect assumptions about how alkaline diets function that are contrary to modern understanding of human physiology . 
 = = Medical aspects = = 
 = = = Diet composition = = = 
 According to the traditional hypothesis underlying this diet , acid ash is produced by meat , poultry , cheese , fish , eggs , and grains . Alkaline ash is produced by fruits and vegetables , except cranberries , prunes and plums . Since the acid or alkaline ash designation is based on the residue left on combustion rather than the acidity of the food , foods such as citrus fruits that are generally considered acidic are actually considered alkaline producing in this diet . 
 = = = Current hypotheses = = = 
 It has been suggested that diets high in " acid ash " ( acid producing ) elements will cause the body to try to buffer ( or counteract ) any additional acid load in the body by breaking down bone , leading to weaker bones and increased risk for osteoporosis . Conversely , " alkaline ash " ( alkaline producing ) elements will hypothetically decrease the risk of osteoporosis . This hypothesis has been advanced in a position statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics , in a publication of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences , as well as other scientific publications , which have stated foods high in potassium and magnesium such as fruits and vegetables may decrease the risk of osteoporosis through increased alkaline ash production . This acceptance of the acid @-@ ash hypothesis as a major modifiable risk factor of osteoporosis by these publications , however , was largely made without significant critical review by high quality systematic analysis . 
 Recent systematic reviews have been published which have methodically analyzed the weight of available scientific evidence , and have found no significant evidence to support the acid @-@ ash hypothesis in regard to prevention of osteoporosis . A meta @-@ analysis of studies on the effect of dietary phosphate intake contradicted the expected results under the acid @-@ ash hypothesis with respect to calcium in the urine and bone metabolism . This result suggests use of this diet to prevent calcium loss from bone is not justified . Other meta @-@ analyses which have investigated the effect of total dietary acid intake have also found no evidence that acid intake increases the risk for osteoporosis as would be expected under the acid @-@ ash hypothesis . A review looked at the effects of dairy product intake , which have been hypothesized to increase the acid load of the body through phosphate and protein components . This review found no significant evidence suggesting dairy product intake causes acidosis or increases risk for osteoporosis . A meta @-@ analysis on the effects of alkaline potassium salts on calcium metabolism and bone health found that supplementation with alkaline potassium salts reduces loss of calcium in urine and reduces acid secretion . 
 It has also been speculated that this diet may have an effect on muscle wasting , growth hormone metabolism or back pain , though there is no conclusive evidence to confirm these hypotheses . Given an aging population , the effects of an alkaline diet on public health may be worth considering , though there is little scientific evidence in this area . 
 = = Alternative medicine = = 
 Alternative medicine practitioners who have promoted the alkaline diet have advocated its use in the treatment of various medical conditions including cancer . These claims have been mainly promoted on websites , magazines , direct mail , and books , and have been mainly directed at a lay audience . While it has been proposed that this diet can help increase energy , lose weight , and treat cancer and heart disease , there is no evidence to support any of these claims . This version of the diet , in addition to avoiding meats and other proteins , also advocates avoiding processed foods , white sugar , white flour , and caffeine , and can involve specific exercise and nutritional supplement regimens as well . 
 = = = Evidence base = = = 
 Advocates for alternative uses of an alkaline diet propose that since the normal pH of the blood is slightly alkaline , the goal of diet should be to mirror this by eating a diet that is alkaline producing as well . These advocates propose that diets high in acid @-@ producing elements will generally lead the body to become acidic , which can foster disease . This proposed mechanism , in which the diet can significantly change the acidity of the blood , goes against " everything we know about the chemistry of the human body " and has been called a " myth " in a statement by the American Institute for Cancer Research . Unlike the pH level in the urine , a selectively alkaline diet has not been shown to elicit a sustained change in blood pH levels , nor to provide the clinical benefits claimed by its proponents . Because of the body 's natural regulatory mechanisms , which do not require a special diet to work , eating an alkaline diet just can , at most , change the blood pH minimally and transiently . 
 A similar proposal by those advocating this diet suggests that cancer grows in an acidic environment , and that a proper alkaline diet can change the environment of the body to treat cancer . This proposal ignores the fact that while cancer tissue does grow in acidic environment , it is the cancer that creates the acidity . The rapid growth of cancer cells creates the acidic environment ; the acidic environment does not create cancer . The proposal also neglects to recognize that it is " virtually impossible " to create a less acidic environment in the body . " Extreme " dietary plans such as this diet have more risks than benefits for patients with cancer . 
 Other proposed benefits from eating an alkaline diet are likewise not supported by scientific evidence . Although it has been proposed that this diet will increase " energy " or treat cardiovascular disease , there is no evidence to support these assertions . A version of this diet has also been promoted by Robert O. Young as a method of weight loss in his book The pH Miracle . According to the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics , portions of his diet such as the emphasis on eating green leafy vegetables and exercise would likely be healthy . However , the " obscure theory " on which his diet is based and the reliance on complicated fasting regimens and nutritional supplements means that this diet " is not a healthy way to lose weight . " It has also been proposed that acid causes rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis , and that an alkaline diet can be used to treat these conditions . There is no evidence to support this proposal . 
 Urinary and / or saliva testing for acidity has been proposed as a way to measure the body 's acidity level and therefore the level of risk for diseases . However , there is no correlation between the urinary pH measured in home " test kits " and the acidity of the body . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 Because the alkaline diet promotes excluding certain families of foods , it could result in a less @-@ balanced diet with resulting nutrient deficiencies such as essential fatty acids and <unk> . Many websites and books promoting this diet sell courses of supplements and foods ; it should not be necessary to purchase any of these products . The level of effort needed to use this diet is considered " High " as there are many foods that need to be excluded in this diet . 
 = = History = = 
 The role of the diet and its influence on the acidity of urine has been studied for decades , as physiologists have studied the kidney 's role in the body 's regulatory mechanisms for controlling the acidity of body fluids . The French biologist Claude Bernard provided the classical observation of this effect when he found that changing the diet of rabbits from an herbivore ( mainly plant ) diet to a carnivore ( mainly meat ) diet changed the urine from more alkaline to more acid . Spurred by these observations , subsequent investigations focused on the chemical properties and acidity of constituents of the remains of foods combusted in a bomb calorimeter , described as ash . The " dietary ash hypothesis " proposed that these foods , when metabolized , would leave a similar " acid ash " or " alkaline ash " in the body as those oxidized in combustion . 
 Nutrition scientists began to refine this hypothesis in the early 20th century , emphasizing the role of negatively charged particles ( anions ) and positively charged particles ( cations ) in food . Diets high in chloride , phosphate and sulfate ( all of which are anions ) were presumed to be acid forming , while diets high in potassium , calcium and magnesium ( all of which are cations ) were presumed to be alkaline forming . Other investigations showed specific foods , such as cranberries , prunes and plums had unusual effects on urine pH . While these foods provided an alkaline ash in the laboratory , they contain a weak organic acid , hippuric acid , which caused the urine to become more acidic instead . 
 = = = Historical uses = = = 
 Historically , the medical application of this diet has largely focused on preventing recurrence of kidney stones as well as the prevention of recurrent urinary tract infections , by relying on the recognized ability of this diet to affect urinary pH . Years ago , this diet was used to adjust the acidity of the urinary environment that the stones formed in , and could hypothetically help prevent stones from forming or the development of UTIs . However , the analytical methods that attempted to precisely calculate the effects of food on urinary pH were not precise except in very general terms , making effective use of this diet difficult . Therefore , medications , which can more reliably alter the urine pH , rather than diet modification , have been the treatment of choice when trying to alter the pH of the urine . While there have been recent improvements in recognizing different variables that can affect acid excretion in the urine , the level of detail needed to predict the urinary pH based on diet is still daunting . Precise calculations require very detailed knowledge of the nutritional components of every meal as well as the rate of absorption of nutrients , which can vary substantially from individual to individual , making effective estimation of urine pH still not currently feasible . 
 = Operation Windsor = 
 Operation Windsor ( 4 – 5 July 1944 ) , was a Canadian attack , which was part of the Battle of Normandy during the Second World War . The attack was undertaken by the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division to take Carpiquet and the adjacent airfield , from troops of the 12th SS @-@ Panzer Division Hitler Jugend of Panzergruppe West . The attack was originally intended to take place during the later stages of Operation Epsom , to protect the eastern flank of the main assault but was postponed for a week . 
 On 4 July , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade and an attached battalion of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division attacked Carpiquet , supported on the flanks by the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade . The village was captured by mid @-@ afternoon but German resistance in the south defeated two attacks on the airfield , despite significant Allied tank and air support . Next day the Canadians repulsed German counter @-@ attacks and held the village , which served as a base for Operation Charnwood , a Second Army attack on Caen , involving the rest of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division on 8 July and the airfield was captured by the Canadians on 9 July . 
 = = Background = = 
 Caen was an Operation Overlord goal for I Corps of the Anglo @-@ Canadian Second Army , which landed forces on two Norman beaches on 6 June 1944 , to capture the city and the Carpiquet area . German resistance prevented the town from being captured on D @-@ Day , a result considered possible by Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey the Second Army commander . For the next three weeks , positional warfare took place around Caen as both sides attacked and counter @-@ attacked for minor tactical advantage on the Anglo @-@ Canadian front and as part of a strategic intent to force the Germans to keep their most powerful armoured units away from the US First Army , as it captured Cherbourg and then pushed southwards through the bocage towards St. Lô . 
 From 26 – 30 June , the Second Army conducted Operation Epsom , with the VIII Corps which had recently arrived from Britain , to outflank Caen from the west and seize the high ground across the Orne near Bretteville @-@ sur @-@ Laize to the south . VIII Corps advanced 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) through extensive field fortifications but the Germans were able to contain the offensive , after committing their last reserves . Depending on the success of VIII Corps , the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division and the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade were to capture the village and airfield of Carpiquet in Operation Ottawa , which was postponed . 
 After the Allied advance to the west of Caen , the I SS Panzer Corps held positions to the north and west of the city . Field defences on the River Orne and the vicinity of Carpiquet , 3 @.@ 5 mi ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) north @-@ west of the Caen town centre , obstructed an advance toward Caen from the north . The village was made an objective of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division , under the command of Major @-@ General R. F. L. Keller . The Allied need for additional airfields on the Norman mainland , ensured that the capture of the Carpiquet area was a priority for the Allies and an equally important defensive position for the Germans . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = German defences = = = 
 Carpiquet airfield was on a 1 @.@ 2 mi ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) expanse of level ground , which offered a " killing ground " for the defenders . The airfield had been fortified with minefields , field gun and machine gun emplacements , manned by I Battalion , SS @-@ Panzergrenadier Regiment 26 , an anti @-@ aircraft battery and fifteen tanks . 
 = = = Allied forces = = = 
 Keller selected the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade , comprising the The Queen 's Own Rifles of Canada ( QRC ) , Le Régiment de la Chaudière and The North Shore ( New Brunswick ) Regiment ; The Royal Winnipeg Rifles ( RWR ) were attached from the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade to lead the assault . Tank and machine @-@ gun support was to be provided by Canadian 10th Armoured Regiment ( The Fort Garry Horse ) , The Sherbrooke Fusiliers and the Cameron Highlanders Support Battalion . Two squadrons of Hawker Typhoon fighter @-@ bombers and three squadrons of specialized tanks from the British 79th Armoured Division were added later . On the evening of 3 July , the battleship HMS Rodney bombarded the buildings around Carpiquet from the Bay of the Seine at 26 @,@ 200 yards ( 24 @,@ 000 m ) range , with fifteen shells from its 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) guns . 
 Operation Windsor was planned to commence at 05 : 00 on 4 July , following a bombardment by 21 artillery regiments , with Le Régiment de la Chaudière and The North Shore Regiment attacking Carpiquet , as a squadron of the Sherbrooke Fusiliers protected the northern flank with a diversionary attack on <unk> . To the south , the RWR was to advance and seize the hangars of Carpiquet airfield . At the same time as the Canadian attack , the 43rd Division was to attack further south down the north side of the Odon to capture Verson . Once the regiments had captured Carpiquet , the <unk> would push through and take control of the airfield control buildings . The capture of the airfield would enable further Anglo @-@ Canadian attacks against Caen . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = 4 July = = = 
 As dawn broke on 4 July the artillery regiments opened fire on German positions in and around Carpiquet , firing a creeping barrage 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide and 400 yd ( 370 m ) deep . At 05 : 00 two Canadian infantry battalions advanced on Carpiquet , while the Sherbrooke Fusilier squadron staged the diversion to the north . The <unk> Fusiliers broke through the German minefields and attacked Chateau @-@ St @-@ <unk> and <unk> before withdrawing but the defensive positions of SS Panzergrenadier Regiment 26 remained intact and continued to fire on the North Shores . In the centre , the Chaudières avoided much of the fire directed at the North Shores as they advanced on Carpiquet . By 06 : 32 , both battalions had reached the outskirts of the village and met tanks of the 12th SS Panzer Division . In the village , a house @-@ to @-@ house fight began and tanks of the 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment assisted the infantry in overrunning German positions . 
 To the south , the RWR advanced slowly towards the airfield , with German mortar fire inflicting many casualties on the infantry and tanks . With a squadron of the Fort Garry Horse only available for indirect fire , it took the RWR ninety minutes to advance the 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from <unk> to the airfield hangars , under fire from the south bank of the Odon . Several Sherman tanks were knocked out and by mid @-@ day the RWR were forced to withdraw halfway to their original positions . 
 Unaware that the RWR had failed to gain control of the airfield , Keller sent the QRC to begin the second phase of the assault . The battalion moved forward into Carpiquet village , which was occupied by the Chaudières and The North Shore , who attacked German strong points bypassed in the initial assault . Infantry attacks , flame @-@ throwers , petard @-@ tanks ( Churchill tanks mounted with a 290 mm ( 11 in ) spigot mortar ) and the immolation of one strong point forced twelve surviving defenders to surrender ; the remaining garrison surrendered after determined resistance . The QRC reached the edge of Carpiquet as the RWR withdrew and was ordered to hold their positions until the RWR reorganized for a second attack . 
 For the second attack on the airfield , Keller obtained the support of two squadrons of Typhoon fighter @-@ bombers . The survivors of the RWR were ordered to " execute a sweeping attack by the lower ground around the enemy 's left flank " , with tank and artillery support , under the impression that the 43rd Division had reached Verson , although this position could not prevent a counter @-@ attack from the south @-@ east . In the late afternoon , the RWR resumed the attack on the airfield and reached the hangars but were unable to dislodge the German defenders . The Fort Garry tanks encountered a battlegroup of Panther tanks and was overwhelmed , the RWR was ordered to withdraw to their start @-@ line under the cover of darkness . In Carpiquet , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade rapidly consolidated its positions , which were the closest to Caen of any Allied unit . Although the Canadians had control of Carpiquet and the northern hangars , the southern hangars and control buildings remained in German hands . 
 = = = 5 July = = = 
 Less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the outskirts of Caen , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade posed a threat to German positions in the town . With most of the defence concentrated north of Caen and by the River Odon , it was feared that Anglo @-@ Canadian forces could attack from Carpiquet and bypass the majority of the defences . Despite growing misgivings about the effectiveness of immediate counter @-@ attacks , Kurt Meyer ordered the SS to retake Carpiquet . Units from the 1st SS @-@ Panzer Division prepared to counter @-@ attack Carpiquet from <unk> with tanks , artillery , mortars and infantry . 
 Shortly after midnight , the first of the SS counter @-@ attacks began and although thirteen tanks had been lost the previous day , the 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment and the mortars of the Cameron Highlanders , defeated the attack and inflicted many casualties . By dawn , almost no ground had been gained by the attackers and by noon , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade and 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment had defeated three counter @-@ attacks , with the assistance of artillery and Typhoon fighter @-@ bombers . The village remained firmly in Canadian occupation , although subject to frequent Nebelwerfer and mortar bombardment . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Windsor was the first set @-@ piece attack by the 3rd Canadian Division and left the Germans in control of Carpiquet airport , which obliged the 43rd Division to retire from Verson and Fontaine @-@ <unk> . In 2005 , Reid wrote that the attack should have been made by two brigades rather than one and an extra battalion . The attached battalion managed to reach the hangars and fight their way through them but were ordered to withdraw twice . The success of the Germans defenders in maintaining their hold on the airfield , except for the north end and Carpiquet village , left the Canadians in a salient which was counter @-@ attacked several times . The failure of the brigade to reach all its objectives , led to doubts about the fitness of Keller for his command , although the preparations for Operation Charnwood might have been the reason for Keller delegating planning for Operation Windsor to the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade commander , Brigadier K. G. Blackader . 
 Three days after Operation Windsor , the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division took part in Operation Charnwood . On 9 July , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade captured Carpiquet airfield and by nightfall , the northern half of Caen had been captured . On 18 July British and Canadian forces launched Operation Atlantic and Operation Goodwood in which the Canadians captured the Caen districts on the south bank and the British captured ground to the east and south of the city . Canadian forces then attacked German positions on Verrières Ridge in Operation Spring . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Canadian casualties for the operation totalled 377 , of which 127 men were killed , most on 4 July . The RWR and The North Shores each lost 132 casualties . The 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment lost 17 tanks and an unknown number of tanks were lost by the Sherbrooke Fusiliers . The I Battalion , Panzer @-@ grenadier Regiment 26 had 155 infantry casualties and the 1st SS @-@ Panzer Division ( Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler ) , which counter @-@ attacked on 5 July , lost c . 20 tanks . II Battalion , Panzer @-@ grenadier Regiment 1 had 115 casualties . 
 = Limbo ( video game ) = 
 Limbo is a puzzle @-@ platform video game developed by independent studio Playdead . The game was released in July 2010 as a platform exclusive title on Xbox Live Arcade , and was later re @-@ released as part of a retail game pack along with Trials HD and ' Splosion Man in April 2011 . Ports of the game to the PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows were created by Playdead , released after the year @-@ long Xbox 360 exclusivity period was completed . An OS X version was released in December 2011 , followed by Linux port in June 2014 . Ports for PlayStation Vita and iOS were also released in June and July 2013 , respectively . An Xbox One port was given away for free on 23 November 2014 to the majority of customers who purchased an Xbox One on its original launch day , and a PlayStation 4 version was released on 24 February 2015 . 
 Limbo is a 2D sidescroller , incorporating the physics system <unk> to govern environmental objects and the player character . The player guides an unnamed boy through dangerous environments and traps as he searches for his sister . The developer built the game 's puzzles expecting the player to fail before finding the correct solution . Playdead called the style of play " trial and death " , and used gruesome imagery for the boy 's deaths to steer the player from unworkable solutions . 
 The game is presented in black @-@ and @-@ white tones , using lighting , film grain effects and minimal ambient sounds to create an eerie atmosphere often associated with the horror genre . Journalists praised the dark presentation , describing the work as comparable to film noir and German Expressionism . Based on its aesthetics , reviewers classified Limbo as an example of video games as an art form . Limbo received positive reviews , but its minimal story polarised critics ; some critics found the open @-@ ended work to have deeper meaning that tied well with the game 's mechanics , while others believed the lack of significant plot and abrupt ending detracted from the game . A common point of criticism from reviewers was that the high cost of the game relative to its short length might deter players from purchasing the title , but some reviews proposed that Limbo had an ideal length . The title was the third @-@ highest selling game on the Xbox Live Arcade service in 2010 , generating around $ 7 @.@ 5 million in revenue . The title won several awards from industry groups after its release , and was named as one of the top games for 2010 by several publications . Playdead released Inside in 2016 , supported financially by the success of Limbo and revisiting many of the same themes from it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The primary character in Limbo is a nameless boy , who awakens in the middle of a forest on the " edge of hell " ( the game 's title is taken from the Latin <unk> , meaning " edge " ) . While seeking his missing younger sister , he encounters only a few human characters who either attack him , run away , or are dead . At one point during his journey , he encounters a female character , who abruptly vanishes before he can reach her . The forest eventually gives way to a crumbling city environment . On completion of the final puzzle , the boy is thrown through a pane of glass and back into the forest . He walks a short distance until he again encounters a girl , who , upon his approach , stands up , startled . At this point , the game abruptly ends . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls the boy throughout the game . As is typical of most two @-@ dimensional platform games , the boy can run left or right , jump , climb onto short ledges or up and down ladders and ropes , and push or pull objects . Limbo is presented through dark , greyscale graphics and with minimalist ambient sounds , creating an eerie , haunting environment . The dark visuals also hide numerous environmental and physical hazards , such as deadly bear traps on the forest floor , or lethal monsters hiding in the shadows , such as a giant spider . Among the hazards are glowing worms , which attach themselves to the boy 's head and force him to travel in only one direction unless bright light comes in contact with it , which changes the direction of the player until it is removed by static NPCs . 
 The game 's second half features mechanical puzzles and traps using machinery , electromagnets , and gravity . Many of these traps are not apparent until triggered , often with deadly consequences . The player is able to restart at the last encountered checkpoint , with no limits placed on how many times this can occur . Some traps can be avoided and used later in the game ; one bear trap is used to clamp onto an animal 's carcass , hung from the end of a rope , tearing the carcass off the rope and allowing the branch and rope to retract upwards and allow the boy to climb onto a ledge otherwise out of reach . As the player will likely encounter numerous deaths before they solve each puzzle and complete the game , the developers call Limbo a " trial and death " game . Some deaths are animated with images of the boy 's dismemberment or beheading , although an optional gore filter blacks out the screen instead of showing these deaths . Game achievements ( optional in @-@ game goals ) include finding hidden insect eggs and completing the game with five or fewer deaths . 
 = = Development = = 
 According to Playdead Co @-@ founder and CEO , Dino Patti and lead designer Jeppe Carlsen , Playdead 's game director , Arnt Jensen , conceived Limbo around 2004 . At that time , as a concept artist at IO Interactive , Jensen became dissatisfied with the increasingly corporate nature of the company . He had sketched a " mood image " of a " secret place " to get ideas , and the result , similar to the backgrounds of the final game , inspired Jensen to expand on it . Jensen initially tried on his own to program the game in Visual Basic around 2004 , but found he needed more help and proceeded to create an art style trailer by 2006 . He had only intended to use the trailer as a means to recruit a programmer to help him , but the video attracted substantial interest in the project from across the Internet , eventually leading him to meet with Patti , who was also dissatisfied with his job . Their collaboration led to the founding of Playdead . Although Patti helped in the first few months with programming , he realised that the project was much larger than the two of them could handle , and Patti developed the business around the game 's expanded development . 
 Initial development was funded personally by Jensen and Patti along with Danish government grants , including funding from the Nordic Game Program , while large investors were sought later in the development cycle . Jensen and Patti did not want to commit to major publishers , preferring to retain full creative control in developing the title . Jensen originally planned to release Limbo as a free Microsoft Windows title , but by this point , Jensen and Patti decided to make the game a retail title . 
 Playdead chose to ignore outside advice from investors and critics during development , such as to add multiplayer play and adjustable difficulty levels , and to extend the game 's length . According to Patti , Playdead felt these changes would break the integrity of Jensen 's original vision . Patti also felt that the investors " tried to control the company with no usable knowledge or respect " , citing that after Microsoft raised concerns about the death of the boy , " one of the investors suggested we make him appear older by giving him a moustache . " Numerous iterations of the game took place during a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year development cycle , including changes Jensen had demanded to polish the title , some elements being added two months prior to the game 's release . Patti stated that they " trashed 70 % " of the content they had developed , due to it not fitting in well with the context of the game . The core development team size was about 8 developers , expanding to 16 at various stages with freelancers . Playdead developed the design tools for Limbo in Visual Studio ; Patti commented they would likely seek third @-@ party applications for their next project given the challenges in creating their own technology . Patti later revealed they had opted to use the Unity engine for their next project , citing the development of their custom engine for Limbo as a " double product , doing both engine and game " , and that their Limbo engine is limited to monochromatic visuals . 
 Limbo was released on 21 July 2010 on the Xbox Live Arcade service , as the first title in the yearly " Summer of Arcade " promotion . Although the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) had listed entries for Limbo for the PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows platforms , Playdead confirmed that this was a mistake on ESRB 's part , and that they had no plans for the game on these systems . Patti later clarified that they had planned on Windows and PlayStation 3 versions alongside the Xbox 360 version initially , but after reviewing their options , decided to go with Xbox 360 exclusivity , in part that " Microsoft provided us with an excellent opportunity , which included a lot of support for the title which in the end would mean a better visibility for Limbo " . According to producer Mads <unk> , part of their decision not to release for the Windows platform was to avoid issues with software piracy , something they could control on the Xbox 360 . Patti stated that staying exclusive with the Xbox platform was an assurance that they would be able to recoup their investment in the game 's development . Sony Computer Entertainment executive Pete Smith stated later that while they had tried to vie with Microsoft for exclusivity for Limbo , Playdead refused to relinquish its intellectual property to Sony as part of the deal . Patti affirmed that Limbo would not be released for another console , but that their next game , already in development as of October 2010 , may see wider release . 
 However , in June 2011 , users found that a trailer for Limbo appeared on the Steam software service , which video game publications such as PC Gamer took as a preliminary sign that a Microsoft Windows version would be released . Similarly , a possible PlayStation 3 version was projected based on the title appearing on the Korea Media Rating Board in June 2011 . On 30 June 2011 , Playdead announced their ports of the game to the PlayStation 3 via the PlayStation Network , and to Microsoft Windows via Steam , later set for 19 July and 2 August 2011 , respectively . Patti clarified that their change of mind from their earlier Xbox 360 @-@ exclusive approach was because " we want as many people to play our games as possible " . The release was set for nearly a year after the original availability of the Xbox 360 version , after the expiration of the Xbox 360 exclusivity rights for the game . Both the PlayStation 3 and Windows versions of the game have additional secret content , according to Patti ; it is unknown if this content will be added in a patch to the Xbox 360 version . Playdead has since published a Mac OS X version of the game through the Mac App Store in December 2011 , fulfilling their promise to release the title before the end of 2011 ; though they had wanted to also release the Mac Steam version by then , this version was ultimately delayed to mid January 2012 . A Linux version of the game , based on a Wine @-@ encapsulated package prepared by <unk> , premiered in the Humble Indie Bundle V charitable sales event in May 2012 . A native port for Linux was later released on 19 June 2014 , with porter Ryan C. Gordon bringing over the Wwise audio middleware that previously prevented a native port from being possible . The PlayStation Vita version of the game was developed by Playdead with assistance from the UK studio Double Eleven , and was released in June 2013 . The Vita version does not use the handheld 's touchpad features ; Patti stated that they " didn 't feel it would suit Limbo at all " and wanted to provide the " original experience " of the game to Vita players . The Vita version has Cross @-@ play support with the PlayStation 3 version , allowing the user to buy the game once to play on either platform . The iOS version of the game was announced shortly before its release in July 2013 , and was designed to optimize the game for use on the touchscreen devices . 
 In April 2011 , an Xbox 360 retail distribution of Limbo alongside other indie games Trials HD and ' Splosion Man was released . Playdead began selling a " Special Edition " physical copy of Limbo for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X , which included art cards , the game 's soundtrack , and anaglyph stereoscopic glasses that work with a special version of the game to simulate three dimensions . The title was later ported to the Xbox One console and released in December 2014 , with early adopters of the console getting the title for free ; Microsoft 's Phil Spencer called the title a " must have played " game that affected their decision to give the game to the majority of early adopters . There is some confusion as not all early adopters received the game . A PlayStation 4 version of the game was released in February 2015 . 
 = = = Story , art and music direction = = = 
 From the game 's inception , Jensen set out three goals for the final Limbo product . The first goal was to create a specific mood and art style . Jensen wanted to create an aesthetic for the game without resorting to highly detailed three @-@ dimensional models , and instead directed the art towards a minimalistic style to allow the development to focus its attention on the gameplay . Jensen 's second goal was to only require two additional controls — jumping and grabbing — outside of the normal left @-@ and @-@ right movement controls , to keep the game easy to play . Finally , the finished game was to present no tutorial text to the player , requiring players to learn the game 's mechanics on their own . The game was purposely developed to avoid revealing details of its content ; the only tagline the company provided was , " Uncertain of his sister 's fate , a boy enters Limbo . " This was chosen so that players could interpret the game 's meaning for themselves . 
 Some aspects of Limbo bore out from Jensen 's own past , such as the forest areas that were similar to forests around the farm where he grew up , and the spider coming from Jensen 's arachnophobia . Jensen drew inspiration from film genres , including works of film noir , to set the art style of the game ; the team 's graphic artist , Morten <unk> , is credited with recreating that art style . Much of the game 's flow was storyboarded very early in development , such as the boy 's encounters with spiders and mind @-@ controlling worms , as well as the overall transition from a forest to a city , then to an abstract environment . As development progressed , some of the original ideas became too difficult for the small team to complete . The storyline also changed ; originally , the spider sequences were to be present near the end of the game , but were later moved to the first part . In retrospect , Jensen was aware that the first half of the game contained more scripted events and encounters , while the second half of the game was lonelier and puzzle @-@ heavy ; Jensen attributed this to his lack of oversight during the latter stages of development . Jensen purposely left the game with an open ending though with a specific interpretation only he knew , though noted after the game 's release that some players , posting in forum boards , had suggested resolutions that were " scary close " to his ideas . 
 The game 's audio was created by Martin Stig Andersen , a graduate from the Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus . Andersen 's specialisation was in acousmatic music , non @-@ traditional music created from generated sounds that have no apparent visual source . He was drawn to work with Jensen on the game after seeing the initial trailer , having been drawn in by the expressions of the boy character ; Andersen compared the early visuals to his acousmatic music : " you have something recognizable and realistic , but at the same time it 's abstract " . Andersen sought to create acousmatic music exclusively incorporating the sound effects of the game 's environments . Two examples he pointed to was the use of electricity noises while in the presence of a ruined neon " <unk> " sign , and silencing the wind sound as the spider approached the boy in the forest . Andersen avoided the use of easily recognizable sounds , distorting them when needed as to allow players to interpret the sounds ' meanings for themselves . Andersen constructed most of the game 's sounds through a number of " grains " instead of longer sound loops , allowing him to adjust the playback to give better feedback to the player without sounding repetitious ; one example he cites was the use of separate sounds for the boy 's toe and heel when they make contact with the ground , giving a more realistic sound for movement . Many reviews for the game stated that there was no music in Limbo , but Andersen countered that his sound arrangements helped to evoke emotions ; the acousmatic music was intended to leave room for interpretation by the player in the same manner as the game 's art and story . Andersen noted that this helps with immersion within the game by making no attempt to control the emotional tone ; " if [ the players are ] scared it will probably make them more scared when there 's no music to take them by the hand and tell them how to feel " . Due to fans ' requests , Playdead released the game 's soundtrack on iTunes Store on 11 July 2011 . 
 = = = Gameplay direction = = = 
 The gameplay was the second element created for the game , following the graphics created by Jensen . The gameplay was created and refined using rudimentary graphic elements to establish the types of puzzles they wanted to have , but aware of how these elements would be presented to the player in the released version . Limbo was designed to avoid the pitfalls of major titles , where the same gameplay mechanic is used repeatedly . Carlsen , initially brought aboard as a programmer for the custom game engine , became the lead designer after Playdead found him to be capable at creating puzzles . Carlsen stated that the puzzles within Limbo were designed to " [ keep ] you guessing all the way through " . Jensen also wanted to make the puzzles feel like a natural part of the environment , and to avoid the feeling that the player was simply moving from puzzle to puzzle through the course of the game . Carlsen identified examples of puzzles from other games that he wanted to avoid . He wanted to avoid simple puzzles that gave the player little satisfaction in its solution , such as a puzzle in Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves that involved simply moving a sun @-@ lit mirror to specific points in a room . In contrast , Carlsen wanted to avoid making the puzzle so complex with many separate parts that the player would resort to trial @-@ and @-@ error and eventually come out with the solution without thinking about why the solution worked ; Carlsen used an example of a puzzle from the 2008 Prince of Persia game that had seven different mechanics that he never bothered to figure out himself . Carlsen designed Limbo 's puzzles to fall between these limits , demonstrating one puzzle that only has three elements : a switch panel , an electrified floor , and a chain ; the goal — to use the chain to cross the electrified floor — is immediately obvious to the player , and then tasks the player to determine the right combination of moves and timing to complete it safely . They often had to strip away elements to make the puzzles more enjoyable and easier to figure out . The decision to provide little information to the player was an initial challenge in creating the game . From their initial pool of about 150 playtesters , several would have no idea of how to solve certain puzzles . To improve this , they created scenarios before troublesome spots that highlighted the appropriate actions ; for example , when they found players did not think about pulling a boat onto shore to use as a platform to reach a higher ledge , they presented the player with a box @-@ pulling puzzle earlier to demonstrate the pulling mechanics . 
 The team developed the game 's puzzles by first assuming the player was their " worst enemy " , and made puzzles as devious as possible , but then scaled back their difficulty or added visual and audible aids as if the player was a friend . One example given by Carlsen is a puzzle involving a spider early in the game ; the solution requires pushing a bear trap to snare the spider 's legs in it . Early designs of this puzzle had the bear trap on the same screen as the spider , and Playdead found playtesters focused too much on the trap . The developers altered the puzzle to put the trap in a tree in an earlier off @-@ screen section when facing the spider ; the spider 's actions would eventually cause this trap to drop to the ground and become a weapon against the spider . Carlsen stated that this arrangement created a situation where the player felt helpless when initially presented with the deadly spider , but then assisted the player through an audible cue when the trap had dropped , enabling the player to discover the solution . 
 One animator was dedicated full @-@ time during three years of the game 's development to work out the boy 's animations , including animations that showed anticipation on the player 's actions or events in the game , such as reaching out for a cart handle as the player moved the boy near it . Jensen felt this was important as the character was always at the center of the player 's screen , and the most important element to watch . Playdead included gruesome death sequences to highlight incorrect solutions and discourage players from repeating their mistakes . While they expected players to run the boy into numerous deaths while trying solutions , Carlsen stated that their goal was to ensure death wasn 't a penalty in the game , and made the death animations entertaining to keep the player interested . Carlsen noted several early puzzles were too complex for the game , but they would end up using a portion of these larger puzzles in the final release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Limbo 's initial release on the Xbox 360 has received acclaim from video game critics and journalists ; the subsequent release of the game for the PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows platforms received similar praise , holding Metacritic aggregate scores of 90 / 100 and 88 / 100 , respectively , compared to the 90 / 100 earned by the Xbox 360 version . Some journalists compared Limbo to previous minimalist platform games such as Another World , Flashback , Heart of Darkness , Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee , Ico , Portal and Braid . Reviews consistently noted Limbo 's short length for its higher selling price : two to five hours of gameplay for 15 euros or 15 U.S. dollars . Reviewers asserted this length @-@ to @-@ price ratio was the largest drawback for the game , and would be a deterrent for potential buyers . Some journalists contended that the length of the game was ideal ; The Daily Telegraph 's Tom Hoggins considered the short game to have a " perfectly formed running time " , while Daemon Hatfield of IGN commented that " it 's better for a game to leave us wanting more than to overstay its welcome " . Numerous independent game developers , in an organised " Size Doesn 't Matter " effort , commented on the critical response to Limbo 's length @-@ to @-@ price ratio . The independent developers questioned the need to quantify that ratio , and noted that it only seems to be used as a factor in judging video games and not other forms of entertainment such as films . 
 Limbo was generally praised for its puzzle design and the simplicity of its controls . Jake Gaskill of G4 TV was impressed by the complexity of the puzzles based on the two simple actions of jumping and grabbing onto objects , similar to LittleBigPlanet , with a variety of elements to assure " you 're always facing something new and challenging " during the game . Game Informer 's Matt Miller commented that part of the success of Limbo is that " every one of these [ puzzles ] stands alone " ; the game accomplishes this in Miller 's opinion by varying the elements throughout the game , and preventing the player from getting too accustomed to similar solutions since " everything changes " . GameSpy 's Ryan Scott believed that the game empowered the player to work through solutions themselves , and its puzzle design , " with its elegant simplicity , offers up what feels like a world of meaningful possibilities " . The frequency of death was not considered a distraction from the game ; not only were the deaths seen as necessary as part of learning and overcoming each obstacle , but reviewers found the checkpoints where the player would restart to be plentiful throughout the game . Will Freeman of The Guardian praised the game but noted that beyond the " smoke and mirrors " of Limbo 's artwork , the game is " undermined by the title 's lack of innovative gameplay " , which he says has been seen in earlier platform games . 
 = = = Presentation = = = 
 Limbo 's graphical and audio presentation were considered by reviewers as exceptional and powerful elements of the game . The monochrome approach , coupled with film grain filter , focusing techniques and lighting , were compared to both film noir and dreamlike tableaus of silent films , allowing the visual elements of the game to carry much of the story 's weight . Cian Hassett of PALGN likened the effect to watching the game through an old @-@ fashioned film projector that creates " one of the most unsettling and eerily beautiful environments " in video gaming . Garrett Martin of the Boston Herald compared the art style and game design decisions to German Expressionism with " dreamlike levels that twist and spin in unexpected angles " . The art style itself was praised as minimalistic , and considered reminiscent of the art of Lotte <unk> , Edward Gorey , Fritz Lang , and Tim Burton . The use of misdirection in the visuals were also praised , such as by using silhouettes to avoid revealing the true nature of the characters or shadows , or by showing human figures across a chasm who disappear once the player crossed the chasm . 
 Reviewers found the sound effects within the game critical to the game 's impact . Sam Machkovech , writing for The Atlantic , called the sound direction , " far more colorful and organic than the fuzzed @-@ out looks would lead you to believe " . Edge magazine 's review noted that the few background noises " [ do ] little else than contribute towards Limbo ’ s tone " , while the sound effects generated by moving the boy character " are given an eerie clarity without the presence of a conventional soundtrack to cover them " . 
 IGN 's Hatfield concluded his review by stating , " Very few games are as original , atmospheric , and consistently brilliant as Limbo " . Chad <unk> of The Globe and Mail summarised his opinion of the game 's atmosphere as an " intensely scary , oddly beautiful , and immediately arresting aesthetic . " Limbo is said to be the first game to attempt a mix of the horror fiction genre with platform games . The game has been considered an art game through its visual and audio elements . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game 's story and its ending have been open to much interpretation ; the ending was purposely left vague and unanswered by Playdead . It was compared to other open @-@ ended books , films and video games , where the viewer is left to interpret what they have read or seen . Some reviews suggested that the game is a representation of the religious nature of Limbo or purgatory , as the boy character completes the journey only to end at the same place he started , repeating the same journey when the player starts a new game . Another interpretation suggested the game is the boy 's journey through Hell to reach Heaven , or to find closure for his sister 's death . Another theory considers that either the boy or his sister or both are dead . Some theories attempted to incorporate details from the game , such as the change in setting as the boy travels through the game suggesting the progression of man from child to adult to elder , or the similarities and differences between the final screen of the game where the boy meets a girl and the main menu where what could be human remains stand in their places . 
 The absence of direct narrative , such as through cutscenes or in @-@ game text , was a mixed point for reviewers . John Teti of Eurogamer considered the game 's base story to be metaphorical for a " story of a search for companionship " , and that the few encounters with human characters served as " emotional touchstones " that drove the story forward ; ultimately , Teti stated that these elements make Limbo " a game that has very few humans , but a surplus of humanity " . Hatfield praised the simplicity of the game 's story , commenting that , " with no text , no dialogue , and no explanation , it manages to communicate circumstance and causality to the player more simply than most games " . Both Teti and Hatfield noted that some of the story elements were weaker in the second half of the game , when there are almost no human characters with whom the player comes into contact , but that the game ends with an unexpected revelation . GameSpot 's Tom <unk> found no issues with the game posing questions on " death versus life and reality versus dream " , but purposely providing no answers for them , allowing the player to contemplate these on their own . <unk> also considered that the brief but gruesome death scenes for the boy helped to create an " emotional immediacy that is difficult to forget " . The New York Daily News ' Stu Horvath noted that Limbo " turns its lack of obvious narrative into one of the most compelling riddles in videogames " . 
 Other reviews disliked the lack of story or its presentation within Limbo . Justin Haywald of 1UP.com was critical of the lacking narrative , feeling that the game failed to explain the purpose of the constructed traps or rationale for how the game 's world worked , and that the final act left him " more confused than when [ he ] began " . Haywald had contrasted Limbo to Braid , a similar platform game with minimalistic elements which communicates its metaphorical story to the player through in @-@ game text . Roger Hargreaves of Metro stated that the game has " very little evidence that [ Playdead ] really knew where they were going with the game " , citing the second half , when the player is traveling through a factory @-@ type setting and where he felt the game became more like a typical two @-@ dimensional platform game , and led to an anticlimactic ending ; Hargreaves contrasted this to more gruesome elements of the first half , such as encountering corpses of children and having to use those as part of the puzzle @-@ solving aspects . 
 = = = Sales and accolades = = = 
 Before its release , Limbo was awarded both the " Technical Excellence " and " Excellence in Visual Art " titles at the Independent Games Festival during the 2010 Game Developers Conference . At E3 2010 — about a month before its release — Limbo won GameSpot 's " Best Downloadable Game " , and was nominated for several other " Best of Show " awards , including " Best Platformer " by IGN , " Most Original Game " by G4 TV , and " Best Puzzle Game " by GameSpot . The game was nominated as one of 32 finalists at the 2010 IndieCade festival for independent developers , ultimately winning the " Sound " award . 
 Following its release , Limbo was named " Game of the Year " , " Best Indie Game " , and " Best Visual Art " at the 2010 European <unk> Awards during the Paris Game Show in September 2010 . Game Informer named Limbo their Game of the Month for August 2010 . Limbo was awarded the " Best Indie Game " at the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards . The game received the most nominations for the 11th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards , earning seven nominations including for the " Best Debut Game " , " Innovation " , and " Game of the Year " awards , and ultimately won for " Best Visual Art " . The title won the " Adventure Game of the Year " and " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design " Interactive Achievement Awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences and was nominated for " Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction " and " Outstanding Innovation in Gaming " . The Academy also named Limbo as the winner of the 2010 Indie Game Challenge award in the " Professional " category , along with a $ 100 @,@ 000 prize . The game was selected as the 2010 Annie Award for Best Animated Video Game . Limbo was named as one of ten games for the publicly voted 2011 " Game of the Year " BAFTA Video Game Awards . In addition , the game was nominated for the committee @-@ determined BAFTA awards for " Artistic Achievement " , " Use of Audio " , " Gameplay " and " Best Game " . The inclusion of the independently developed Limbo among other larger commercially backed games such as Assassin 's Creed : Brotherhood and Call of Duty : Black Ops for such " Best Game " awards is considered an indication that the video game industry has started to give more recognition to these smaller titles . 
 Several publications , including Time , Wired and the Toronto Sun placed Limbo as one of the top ten video games of 2010 . IGN named it the third best Xbox Live Arcade title of all time in two lists , published in 2010 and 2011 , in both cases following Shadow Complex and Pac Man Championship Edition . Limbo was spoofed by the comedy <unk> <unk> during the 2011 Game Developers Conference , and later by the CollegeHumor sister website , Dorkly . 
 Within two weeks of its release on Xbox Live Arcade , Limbo gained more than 244 @,@ 000 players to the global leaderboards — a rough measure of full sales of the game — which was considered an " incredibly impressive feat " compared to previous Xbox Live Arcade titles , according to <unk> ' Ryan Langley . Within a month of its release , more than 300 @,@ 000 copies of the game were sold . By the end of August 2010 , the number of players on the global leaderboard grew to 371 @,@ 000 , exceeding the number of players of other Summer of Arcade games released in 2009 , and approaching the number of lifetime players of Braid , released two years earlier . Langley , who had expected Limbo 's sales to fall " due to the lack of repeatable content and being a strictly single player experience " , considered that these figures had " beaten everyone ’ s expectations " . Phil Spencer , the Vice @-@ President of Microsoft Game Studios , stated in September 2010 that Limbo was " our number one Summer of Arcade game by a long stretch " , and further posed that Limbo represents a shift in the type of game that gamers want out of online on @-@ demand game services ; " it 's becoming less about iconic [ intellectual property ] that people know and it 's becoming more diverse " . Limbo was the third @-@ highest selling Xbox Live Arcade title in 2010 , selling 527 @,@ 000 and generating about $ 7 @.@ 5 million in revenue . In March 2011 , Microsoft listed Limbo as the 11th @-@ highest selling game to date on Xbox Live . Playdead stated that more than two million users on the Xbox 360 service played through the demo within the year of the game 's release . 
 The developers announced that as of November 2011 , they had sold over 1 million copies of the game across the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Microsoft Windows platforms . By June 2013 , just prior to the iOS release , Playdead announced that total sales of Limbo across all platforms exceeded 3 million . The PlayStation 3 version was the top selling third @-@ party downloadable game on the PlayStation Network service in 2011 . The PlayStation 3 version was also voted " Best Indie Game " in the 2012 PSN Gamers ' Choice Awards . The Mac OS X version of Limbo was awarded with Apple 's Design Award in 2012 . 
 Applications for grants from the Nordic Game Program , which had funded Limbo 's initial development , increased 50 % in the second half of 2010 , believed to be tied to the game 's success . Playdead was able to buy itself back from its investors in August 2011 from the revenue made from sales of Limbo . Playdead 's followup title , Inside , first released in June 2016 , is visually and thematically similar to Limbo , and includes some elements that were cut from Limbo 's development . 
 = Red Auerbach = 
 Arnold Jacob " Red " Auerbach ( September 20 , 1917 – October 28 , 2006 ) was an American basketball coach of the Washington Capitols , the Tri @-@ Cities Blackhawks and the Boston Celtics . After he retired from coaching , he served as president and front office executive of the Celtics until his death . As a coach , he won 938 games ( a record at his retirement ) and nine National Basketball Association ( NBA ) championships in ten years ( a number surpassed only by Phil Jackson , who won 11 in twenty years ) . As general manager and team president of the Celtics , he won an additional seven NBA titles , for a grand total of 16 in a span of 29 years , making him one of the most successful team officials in the history of North American professional sports . 
 Auerbach is remembered as a pioneer of modern basketball , redefining basketball as a game dominated by team play and defense and for introducing the fast break as a potent offensive weapon . He groomed many players who went on to be inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame . Additionally , Auerbach was vital in breaking down color barriers in the NBA . He made history by drafting the first African @-@ American NBA player , Chuck Cooper in 1950 , introduced the first African @-@ American starting five in 1964 , and hired the first African @-@ American head coach in North American sports ( Bill Russell in 1966 ) . Famous for his polarizing nature , he was well known for smoking a cigar when he thought a victory was assured , a habit that became , for many , " the ultimate symbol of victory " during his Boston tenure . 
 In 1967 , the NBA Coach of the Year award , which he had won in 1965 , was named the " Red Auerbach Trophy , " and Auerbach was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1969 . In 1980 , he was named the greatest coach in the history of the NBA by the Professional Basketball Writers Association of America , and was NBA Executive of the Year in 1980 . In addition , Auerbach was voted one of the NBA 10 Greatest Coaches in history , was inducted into the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame , and is honored with a retired number 2 jersey in the TD Garden , the home of the Boston Celtics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arnold Jacob Auerbach was one of the four children of Marie and Hyman Auerbach . Hyman was a Russian Jewish immigrant from Minsk , Russia , and Marie Auerbach , née Thompson , was American @-@ born . Auerbach Sr. had left Russia when he was 13 , and the couple owned a delicatessen store and later went into the dry @-@ cleaning business . Little Arnold spent his whole childhood in Williamsburg , Brooklyn , playing basketball . With his flaming red hair and fiery temper , Auerbach was soon nicknamed " Red . " 
 Amid the Great Depression , Red played basketball at PS 122 and in the Eastern District High School , where he was named " Second Team All @-@ Brooklyn " by the World @-@ Telegram in his senior year . Auerbach received an athletic scholarship to the basketball program of Bill Reinhart at George Washington University in Washington , D.C .. Auerbach was a standout basketball player and graduated with a M.A. in 1941 . In those years , Auerbach began to understand the importance of the fast break , appreciating how potent three charging attackers against two back @-@ pedalling defenders could be . 
 = = First coaching years ( 1941 – 1950 ) = = 
 In 1941 , Auerbach began coaching basketball at the St. Albans School and Roosevelt High School in Washington , D.C. Two years later , he joined the US Navy for three years , coaching the Navy basketball team in Norfolk . There , he caught the eye of Washington millionaire Mike <unk> , who hired him to coach the Washington Capitols in the newly founded Basketball Association of America ( BAA ) , a predecessor of the NBA . 
 In the 1946 @-@ 47 BAA season , Auerbach led a fast break @-@ oriented team built around early BAA star Bones McKinney and various ex @-@ Navy players to a 49 – 11 win – loss record , including a standard @-@ setting 17 @-@ game winning streak that stood as the single @-@ season league record until 1969 . In the playoffs , however , they were defeated by the Chicago Stags in six games . 
 The next year the Capitols went 28 – 20 but were eliminated from the playoffs in a one @-@ game Western Division tie @-@ breaker . In the 1948 @-@ 49 BAA season , the Caps won their first 15 games and finished the season at 38 – 22 . The team reached the BAA Finals , but were beaten by the Minneapolis Lakers , who were led by Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame center George Mikan . In the next season , the BAA and the rival league National Basketball League merged to become the NBA , and Auerbach felt he had to rebuild his squad . However , owner <unk> declined his proposals , and Auerbach resigned . 
 Auerbach was then approached by Ben Kerner , owner of the Tri @-@ Cities Blackhawks . After getting a green light to rebuild the team from scratch , Auerbach traded more than two dozen players in just six weeks , and the revamped Blackhawks improved , but ended the 1949 – 50 NBA season with a losing record of 28 – 29 . When Kerner traded Auerbach 's favorite player John <unk> , an angry Auerbach resigned again . 
 = = Boston Celtics ( 1950 – 2006 ) = = 
 = = = The early years ( 1950 – 56 ) = = = 
 Prior to the 1950 – 51 NBA season , Walter Brown , owner of the Boston Celtics , was desperate to turn around his struggling and financially strapped franchise , which was reeling from a 22 – 46 record . Brown , in characteristic candor , said to a gathering of local Boston sportswriters , " Boys , I don 't know anything about basketball . Who would you recommend I hire as coach ? " The group vociferously answered that he get the recently available Auerbach , and Brown complied . In the 1950 NBA Draft , Auerbach made some notable moves . First , he famously snubbed Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame New England point guard Bob Cousy in the 1950 NBA Draft , infuriating the Boston crowd . He argued that the flashy Cousy lacked the poise necessary to make his team , taunting him as a " local yokel " . Second , he drafted African @-@ American Chuck Cooper , the first black player to be drafted by an NBA club . With that , Auerbach effectively broke down the color barrier in professional basketball . 
 In that year , the core of the Celtics consisted of Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame center Ed Macauley , Auerbach 's old favorite McKinney , and an unlikely addition , Cousy . Cousy had refused to report to the club that had drafted him ( ironically , the Blackhawks , Auerbach 's old club ) , and because his next team ( the Chicago Stags ) folded , he ended up with the Celtics . With Auerbach 's fast @-@ break tactics , the Celtics achieved a 39 – 30 record but lost in the 1951 NBA Playoffs to the New York Knicks . However , the relationship between Auerbach and Cousy improved when the coach saw that the " Houdini of the Hardwood " — as the spectacular dribbler and flashy passer Cousy was lovingly called — became the first great playmaker of the fledgling NBA . 
 In the following 1951 – 52 NBA season , Auerbach made a remarkable draft pick of future Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame guard Bill Sharman . With the high @-@ scoring Macauley , elite passer Cousy , and new prodigy Sharman , Auerbach had a core that provided high @-@ octane fast @-@ break basketball . Other notable players who joined the Celtics were forwards Frank Ramsey and Jim Loscutoff . In the next years until 1956 , the Celtics would make the playoffs every year , but never won the title . In fact , the Celtics often choked in the playoffs , going a mere 10 – 17 in the postseason from 1951 through 1956 . As Cousy put it : " We would get tired in the end and could not get the ball . " As a result , Auerbach sought a defensive big man who could both get easy rebounds , initiate fast breaks , and close out games . 
 = = = The dynasty ( 1956 – 66 ) = = = 
 Before the 1956 NBA Draft , Auerbach had already set his sights on defensive rebounding center Bill Russell . Via a draft @-@ day trade that sent Macauley and rookie Cliff Hagan to the rival St. Louis Hawks , he acquired a center in Russell , who would go on to become one of the greatest basketball players of all time . In the same draft , Auerbach picked up forward Tom Heinsohn and guard K.C. Jones , also two future Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers . Emphasizing team play rather than individual performances , and stressing that defense was more important than offense , Auerbach drilled his players to play tough defense and force opposing turnovers for easy fast @-@ break points . Forward Tom Sanders recalled that the teams were also regularly among the best @-@ conditioned and toughest squads . 
 Anchored by defensive stalwart Russell , the tough Celtics forced their opponents to take low @-@ percentage shots from farther distances ( there was no three @-@ point arc at the time ) ; misses were then often grabbed by perennial rebounding champion Russell , who then either passed it on to elite fast @-@ break distributor Cousy or made the outlet pass himself , providing their sprinting colleagues opportunities for an easy slam dunk or layup . Auerbach also emphasized the need for role players like Frank Ramsey and John Havlicek , who became two of the first legitimate sixth men in NBA history , a role later succeeded in by Don Nelson . Auerbach 's recipe proved devastating to the opposition . From 1957 to 1966 , the Celtics won nine of ten NBA championships . This included eight consecutive championships — which is the longest championship streak in North American sports — and six victories over the Los Angeles Lakers of Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers Elgin Baylor and Jerry West in the NBA Finals . The streak also denied perennial scoring and rebounding champion Wilt Chamberlain a title during Auerbach 's coaching reign . 
 Flowing from Auerbach 's emphasis on teamwork , what was also striking about his teams was that they never seemed to have a dominant scorer : in the 1960 – 61 NBA season , for instance , the Celtics had six players who scored between 15 and 21 points per game , but none made the Top 10 scoring list . In 1964 , he sent out the first @-@ ever NBA starting five consisting of an African @-@ American quintet , namely Russell , Willie Naulls , Tom Sanders , Sam Jones , and K. C. Jones . Auerbach would go a step further in the 1966 – 67 NBA season , when he stepped down after winning nine titles in 11 years , and made Bill Russell player @-@ coach . Auerbach also popularized smoking a victory cigar whenever he thought a game was already decided , a habit that became cult @-@ like in popularity in the Boston area . Furthermore , having acquired a reputation as a fierce competitor , he often got into verbal altercations with officials , receiving more fines and getting ejected more often than any other coach in NBA history . 
 All in all , Auerbach coached nine championship teams directly and mentored 4 players — Russell , Sharman , Heinsohn and K.C. Jones — who would go on to win an additional 7 NBA championships as coaches ( two each for Russell , Heinsohn and Jones , all with the Celtics , and one for Sharman with the Lakers ) . Ten players who played for Auerbach have been inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame — Macauley , Ramsey , Cousy , Sharman , Heinsohn , Russell , K. C. Jones , Havlicek , Sam Jones and Bailey Howell . Although Don Nelson played for Auerbach only during his last year as coach , his influence was profound : Nelson would later join Auerbach as one of the 10 Greatest Coaches in NBA history . Sharman and Heinsohn would become two of only four people to be inducted into the Hall of Fame as both a player and a coach . Few , if any , coaches can match Auerbach 's record of wins and successful mentorship of his players . 
 = = = General manager ( 1966 – 84 ) = = = 
 Prior to the 1965 @-@ 66 NBA season , Auerbach announced the coming year would be his last as coach , stating to the rest of the league , " This is your chance to take your last shot at me . " After losing game 1 of the 1966 finals to the Lakers , he publicly named his successor , center Bill Russell . The Celtics won the series in seven games , sending Auerbach out on top . Russell then took over as a player @-@ coach , and so became the first African @-@ American head coach ever in the four major North American professional team sports . While his pupil led the Celtics to two further titles in 1968 and 1969 , Auerbach rebuilt the aging Celtics with shrewd draft picks , among them Jo Jo White and future Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers Dave Cowens , Paul Westphal , and Don Chaney . With his ex @-@ player Tom Heinsohn coaching the Celtics and led by former sixth man John Havlicek , Auerbach 's new recruits won the Atlantic Division every year from 1972 to 1976 , winning the NBA title in 1974 and 1976 . Auerbach also signed veteran forward / center Paul Silas and ex @-@ ABA star Charlie Scott . 
 However , Auerbach could not prevent the Celtics from going into a slump at the end of the 1970s . He traded away both Silas and Westphal because they wanted salary increases that would have made them higher earners than the best player on the Celtics ( Cowens ) , which was not acceptable to Auerbach . While the Westphal trade to the Phoenix Suns in exchange for Charlie Scott was considered a success due to the Celtics ' 13th title in 1976 , Auerbach later admitted he erred in letting Silas go , even after Cowens personally begged him to give Silas a new deal . When scoring champion Havlicek retired in 1978 , the Celtics went 61 – 103 in two seasons . In the summer of 1978 , after the worst in a string of contentious clashes with several different owners after Walter Brown 's passing in 1964 , Auerbach hopped into a taxi to take him to Logan Airport , where he was to board a flight to New York to consider a lucrative contract offer from Knicks owner Sonny Werblin . However , the cab driver pleaded with him to stay , emphasizing how much Bostonians loved him and considered him family . Soon after , heading a team press conference , and with his typical bravado , Auerbach puffed on his trademark cigar and stated simply , " I 'm not going anywhere . We 're going to sign Larry Bird , and we 're going to be on top again . " Despite knowing that Bird , a talented young player from unheralded Indiana State , had a year of college eligibility remaining , he had drafted Bird as a junior eligible in the 1978 NBA Draft and waited for a year until the future Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame forward Bird arrived , finally setting aside his team salary rules when it became clear that his choices were paying Bird a record @-@ setting rookie salary or watch him simply re @-@ enter the 1979 draft . Bird then became the highest @-@ paid Celtic as a rookie , with a $ 650 @,@ 000 @-@ per year deal . Auerbach knew that the brilliant , hardworking Bird would be the cornerstone of a new Celtics generation . 
 In 1980 , Auerbach achieved another great coup , which was dubbed " The Steal of The Century " . He convinced the Golden State Warriors to trade him a # 3 overall pick and future Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame center Robert Parish in exchange for two picks in the 1980 NBA Draft : # 1 overall Joe Barry Carroll , who went on to have an unremarkable career , and the # 13 pick Rickey Brown . With the # 3 pick , Auerbach selected the player he most wanted in the draft , Kevin McHale , who would also be inducted into the Hall of Fame . The frontcourt of Parish @-@ McHale @-@ Bird became one of the greatest front lines in NBA history . Auerbach hired head coach Bill Fitch who led the revamped Celtics to the 1981 title . 
 In 1983 , Auerbach named former Celtics player K.C. Jones coach of the Celtics . Starting in 1984 , Jones coached the Celtics to four straight appearances in the NBA Finals , winning championships in 1984 and 1986 . 
 = = = President and vice chairman ( 1984 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In 1984 , Auerbach relinquished his general managing duties and became president and later vice @-@ chairman of the Boston Celtics . In a surprising move after winning their 15th title , he traded popular guard Gerald Henderson , the game 2 hero in the finals against the Lakers , for Seattle 's first round draft pick in 1986 . Two years later , after the Celtics defeated Houston in the finals for their 16th championship , he used the second overall pick in the 1986 draft , the pick acquired from Seattle , to take college prodigy Len Bias from Maryland , arguably the most brilliant coup in Auerbach 's stellar career . With the team 's star players still in their prime , the defending champions appeared set to compete at the top for years . However , tragedy struck just two days later , when Bias died of a cocaine overdose . Several years later , Celtics star player Reggie Lewis died suddenly in 1993 , and without any league compensation for either loss , the team fell into decline , not seeing another Finals in Auerbach 's lifetime . 
 In an interview , Auerbach confessed that he lost interest in big @-@ time managing in the early 1990s , preferring to stay in the background and concentrating on his pastimes , racquetball and his beloved cigar @-@ smoking . He would , however , stay on with the Celtics as president until 1997 , as vice chairman until 2001 , and then became president again , a position he held until his death , although in his final years , he was weakened by heart problems and often used a wheelchair . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Auerbach was one of four children of American @-@ born Marie Auerbach and Russian Jewish immigrant Hyman Auerbach in Brooklyn . His brother Zang Auerbach , four years his junior , was a respected cartoonist and portraitist at the Washington Star . He married Dorothy Lewis in the spring of 1941 . The couple had two daughters , Nancy and Randy . 
 Auerbach was known for his love for cigar smoking . Because Red made his victory cigars a cult in the 1960s , Boston restaurants would often say " no cigar or pipe smoking , except for Red Auerbach " . In addition , Auerbach was well known for his love of Chinese food . In an interview shortly before his death , he explained that since the 1950s , Chinese takeout was the most convenient nutrition : back then , NBA teams travelled on regular flights and had a tight time schedule , so filling up the stomach with heavier non @-@ Chinese food meant wasting time and risking travel @-@ sickness . Over the years , Auerbach became so fond of this food that he even became a part @-@ owner of a Chinese restaurant in Boston . Despite a heart operation , he remained active in his 80s , playing racquetball and making frequent public appearances . 
 Despite his fierce nature , Auerbach was popular among his players . He recalled that on his 75th birthday party , 45 of his former players showed up ; and when he turned 80 , his perennial 1960s victim Wilt Chamberlain showed up , a gesture which Auerbach dearly appreciated . 
 In an interview with ESPN , Auerbach stated that his all @-@ star fantasy team would consist of Bill Russell — who in the former 's opinion was the ultimate player to start a franchise with — as well as Bob Pettit , Elgin Baylor , Oscar Robertson and Jerry West , with John Havlicek as the sixth man . Regarding greatest basketballers of all time , Auerbach 's candidates were Russell , Larry Bird , Magic Johnson , Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , Michael Jordan , and Robertson . " 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Auerbach died of a heart attack on October 28 , 2006 at the age of 89 . NBA commissioner David Stern said , " the void caused by his death will never be filled " and players Bill Russell , K.C. Jones , John Havlicek and Larry Bird , as well as contemporaries like Jerry West , Pat Riley , and Wayne Embry universally hailed Auerbach as one of the greatest personalities in NBA history . Bird stated " Red shared our passion for the game , our commitment to excellence , and our desire to do whatever it takes to win . " Auerbach was survived by his two daughters , Nancy and Randy . Auerbach was interred in Falls Church , Virginia at King David Memorial Gardens within National Memorial Park on October 31 , 2006 . Attendees included basketball dignitaries Bill Russell , Kevin McHale , Danny Ainge , and David Stern . 
 During the 2006 – 07 NBA season , NBA TV and NBA.com aired reruns of Auerbach 's four @-@ minute instructional videos known as " Red on Roundball " previously aired during NBA on CBS halftime shows in the 1970s and 1980s , and as a testament to his importance in the Boston sports world , the Boston Red Sox honored Auerbach at their April 20 , 2007 game against the New York Yankees by wearing green uniforms and by hanging replicated Celtics championship banners on the " Green Monster " at Fenway Park . Boston won 7 – 6 . 
 Prior to Boston 's season opener against the Wizards , his signature was officially placed on the parquet floor near center court , thereby naming the court as " Red Auerbach <unk> Floor . " The ceremony was attended by his daughter Randy and some of the Celtics legends . The signature replaced the Red Auerbach memorial logo used during the 2007 season . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Auerbach was the author of seven books . His first , Basketball for the Player , the Fan and Coach , has been translated into seven languages and is the best @-@ selling basketball book in print . His second book , co @-@ authored with Paul Sann , was Winning the Hard Way . He also wrote a pair of books with Joe Fitzgerald : Red Auerbach : An Autobiography and Red Auerbach On and Off the Court . In October 1991 M.B.A. : Management by Auerbach was co @-@ authored with Ken Dooley . In 1994 , Seeing Red was written with Dan Shaughnessy . In October 2004 , his last book , Let Me Tell You A Story , was co @-@ authored with sports journalist John Feinstein . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Among Auerbach 's accomplishments during his 20 @-@ year professional coaching career were eleven Eastern Division titles ( including nine in a row from 1957 – 65 ) , 11 appearances in the finals ( including ten in a row from 1957 – 66 ) , and nine NBA championships . With a total of 16 NBA championship rings in a span of 29 years ( 1957 – 86 ) as the Celtics coach , general manager , and team president , Auerbach is the most successful team official in NBA history . He is credited with creating several generations of championship Boston Celtics teams , including the first Celtics dynasty with Bill Russell , which won an NBA record eight titles in a row ( 1959 – 66 ) . As Celtics general manager , he created championship @-@ winning teams around Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers Dave Cowens in the 1970s and Larry Bird in the 1980s . 
 In addition to coaching , Auerbach was a highly effective mentor ; several players coached by Auerbach would become successful coaches themselves . Bill Russell won two titles as Auerbach 's successor , Tom Heinsohn won a pair of championships as a Celtics coach in the 1970s , K.C. Jones led the Celtics to two further titles in the 1980s , and Bill Sharman coached the Los Angeles Lakers to their first title in 1972 . In addition , prototypical sixth man Don Nelson had a highly successful coaching career and joined his mentor Auerbach as one of 10 Greatest Coaches in NBA history . 
 Throughout his coaching tenure in Boston , Auerbach served several other roles including , but not limited to , general manager , head of scouting , personnel director and travel agent . [ < <unk> / 2006 / <unk> / 29 / local / me @-@ <unk> > ] In the early offseasons , he would take the Celtics on barnstorming tours around New England , promoting the still fledgling NBA . At the end of every season , regardless of their on @-@ court success , he would approach owner Brown and ask , " Walter , are our last paychecks going to clear ? " to which Brown would always positively respond , and they would . Despite Brown 's own close association with the NHL 's Boston Bruins , whose owners also possessed the Boston Garden , the Celtics were fleeced on concessions and profits as tenants . During this era , when most team owners not only thought of , but also treated their players as cattle and / or slaves , athletes from all the four major professional sports leagues were fighting for their rights and economic fairness . As Auerbach represented management of the Celtics , team members frustrated with their salaries had only him to complain to , or about , in their role in the formation of the players ' union . These interpersonal dynamics are construed as follows by journalist David Halberstam : 
 The hard core of the union came from the Celtics . That was not surprising ; Red Auerbach went after the players of the highest intelligence and character , and then of course paid them horribly . That made the Celtics a mass of contradictions . They had great coherence as a team , great personal loyalty to each other , great respect and love for Auerbach , who had created this unique institution and honored each of them by making him a part of it , and then of course great anger at him for paying them so little . 
 Pertaining to the above , it should be noted that Walter Brown was not rich ; also that as Auerbach was as tough at the negotiating table as he was on the practice court and in the locker room , it was always for the purpose of getting the most out of his players . In the summer of 1984 , with much trepidation , Auerbach reluctantly signed former finals MVP Cedric Maxwell to a lucrative guaranteed contract to stay with the Celtics . Then , Auerbach 's worst fears came true when Maxwell arrived that fall out of shape , and , suffering from various injuries , provided little contribution as the team lost a playoff for the first time ever to the Lakers in the 1985 Finals . Two subsequent facts are perhaps most relevant in evaluating Auerbach 's legacy : First , he was able to trade Maxwell to San Diego in exchange for former MVP Bill Walton , who was a major contributor to the team winning its 16th title in 1986 , the last of Auerbach 's career . Second , Maxwell continues to be embraced as a beloved member of the Celtics family , including having his number retired alongside the team 's legendary greats . 
 In Auerbach 's honor , the Celtics have retired a number @-@ 2 jersey with the name " <unk> , " memorializing his role as the second most important Celtic ever , behind founder Walter Brown , in whose honor the number @-@ 1 " <unk> " jersey is retired . 
 His story is documented in The First Basket , the first and most comprehensive documentary on the history of Jews and Basketball . He is also featured as an interviews subject for the film . 
 = = = Coaching pioneer = = = 
 From his early days , Auerbach was convinced that the fast break , where a team used a quick outlet pass to fast guards who run <unk> and score before the opponent had re @-@ established position , was a potent tactical weapon . This new strategy proved lethal for the opposition . Further , Auerbach moved emphasis away from individual accolades and instilled the teamwork element into his players . He also invented the concept of the role player and of the sixth man , stating : " Individual honors are nice , but no Celtic has ever gone out of his way to achieve them . We have never had the league 's top scorer . In fact , we won seven league championships without placing even one among the league 's top 10 scorers . Our pride was never rooted in statistics . " 
 While Auerbach was not known for his tactical bandwidth , famously restricting his teams to just seven plays , he was well known for his psychological warfare , often provoking opposing players and officials with unabashed trash talk . For his fiery temper , he was ejected more often and received more fines than any other coach in NBA history . Age did nothing to diminish his fire ; in 1983 , after star Larry Bird was ejected from a preseason game against Philadelphia at the Garden along with the Sixers ' role player Marc <unk> , Auerbach stormed onto the court and after taking the officials to task , screamed nose @-@ to @-@ nose with the 6 ' 10 " 260 @-@ pound Moses Malone . Concerning his own team , Auerbach was softer . Earl Lloyd , the first black player to play in the NBA , said : " Red Auerbach convinced his players that he loved them [ ... ] so all they wanted to do was please him . " 
 = = = No color barrier = = = 
 Auerbach was known for choosing players for talent and motivation , with disregard for skin color or ethnicity . In 1950 , he made NBA history by drafting the league 's first African @-@ American player , Chuck Cooper . He constantly added new black players to his squad , including Bill Russell , Tom Sanders , Sam Jones , K.C. Jones , and Willie Naulls . In 1964 , these five players became the first African @-@ American starting five in the NBA . When Auerbach gave up coaching to become the Celtics general manager in 1966 , he appointed Bill Russell as his successor . Russell became the first black NBA coach , and was the first black coach of a professional sports organization since Fritz Pollard in 1925 . Similarly , in the 1980s , as the Celtics GM , Auerbach fielded an earnest , hardworking team that was derided as being " too white . " While the 1980s Celts were , in actuality , neither predominantly white nor black , the NBA at the time was predominately black . White players like Larry Bird , Kevin McHale , Danny Ainge , and Bill Walton played alongside Tiny Archibald , Dennis Johnson , Robert Parish , and Cedric Maxwell to bring three more championships in the ' 80s under coaches Bill Fitch ( white ) and K.C. Jones ( black ) . 
 Auerbach is prominently featured in the documentary film , " The First Basket " about Jewish basketball history . 
 = = = Arnold " Red " Auerbach Award = = = 
 To honor Auerbach , the Celtics created the Arnold " Red " Auerbach award in 2006 . It is an award given annually to the current Celtic player or coach who " best exemplifies the spirit and meaning of what it is to be a Celtic . This award is named in honor of the legendary Coach , General Manager and President of the organization , Arnold ' Red ' Auerbach . " 
 Winners : 
 = = = NBA Coach of the Year Award = = = 
 The NBA gives out an annual coach of the year award to honor the league 's best coach as voted by a panel of sportswriters . The trophy is named the ' Red Auerbach trophy ' and has a figure of Auerbach sitting on a bench . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = Agathaeromys = 
 Agathaeromys is an extinct genus of oryzomyine rodents from the Pleistocene of Bonaire , West Indies . Two species are known , which differ in size and some details of tooth morphology . The larger A. donovani , the type species , is known from hundreds of teeth , found in four localities that are probably 900 @,@ 000 to 540 @,@ 000 years old . A. praeuniversitatis , the smaller species , is known from 35 teeth found in a single fossil site , which is probably 540 @,@ 000 to 230 @,@ 000 years old . 
 Although material of Agathaeromys was first described in 1959 , the genus was not formally named and diagnosed until 2010 . It probably belongs to " clade D " within the oryzomyine group , together with many other island @-@ dwelling species . The molars of both species possess several accessory crests in addition to the main cusps . In addition to some differences in features of the chewing surface of the molars , A. donovani has more roots on its lower molars than does A. praeuniversitatis . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Material of Agathaeromys was first described by Dirk <unk> in 1959 in the same paper that first named the extinct giant rat of Curaçao , Megalomys curazensis . <unk> described a few fossil teeth and jaws from Fontein , Bonaire , as an indeterminate species of Thomasomys ( " Thomasomys sp . " ) and considered them to be similar to species now placed in Delomys . In his 1974 monograph on the geology of the ABC islands ( Aruba , Bonaire , and Curaçao — three Dutch islands off northwestern Venezuela ) , Paul Henri de <unk> listed Thomasomys sp. from additional fossil sites on Bonaire and additionally mentioned Oryzomys sp. from a different Bonaire site , Seroe Grandi . Although the Bonaire material represented one of the few fossil records of Thomasomys , it was only rarely mentioned in the literature . 
 In 2010 , Jelle Zijlstra , Anneke <unk> , and Lars van den Hoek Ostende reviewed the material . They considered it unlikely that the Bonaire " Thomasomys " would belong to the southern Brazilian genus Delomys or to Thomasomys , which occurs only in the mountains of the Andes . Using a cladistic analysis of the Sigmodontinae , they provided evidence that the Bonaire material belonged to the tribe Oryzomyini , rather than Thomasomyini ( which includes Thomasomys ) . They carried out another cladistic analysis focused on Oryzomyini , which suggested that the Bonaire " Thomasomys " and the material from Seroe Grandi ( De <unk> 's " Oryzomys sp . " ) were closely related , but distinct from any recognized oryzomyine genus . Therefore , they named a new oryzomyine genus , Agathaeromys , with two species : Agathaeromys donovani ( type species ) for the material previously identified as Thomasomys ; and Agathaeromys praeuniversitatis for the material from Seroe Grandi . The name Agathaeromys combines the Greek words <unk> <unk> " good " , <unk> <unk> " air " , and μυς mys " mouse " , referring to the name of the island of Bonaire and to the " fresh air " that contributions by Marcelo Weksler and colleagues brought to the classification of Oryzomyini . The name donovani honors Stephen Donovan for his contributions to the scientific knowledge of the Caribbean and praeuniversitatis refers to Leiden University 's Pre @-@ University College , which provided an opportunity for Zijlstra to participate in the project that led to the identification of Agathaeromys . 
 Although Zijlstra and colleagues could not precisely determine the position of Agathaeromys within Oryzomyini , their results suggest that it occupies a position near the base of " clade D " , one of the major subgroups of Oryzomyini . This clade contains a number of species only occurring on islands — including members of Aegialomys , Agathaeromys , Megalomys , Nesoryzomys , Noronhomys , Oryzomys , and Pennatomys . Zijlstra and colleagues suggested that this is related to the high proportion of semiaquatic and non @-@ forest species in clade D — most other oryzomyines are forest dwellers . However , subsequent phylogenetic studies based on variations of the same data set used by Zijlstra and colleagues did not corroborate this placement . In their 2012 description of Megalomys <unk> , Turvey and colleagues recovered Agathaeromys outside each of the major groups of Oryzomyini . Zijlstra placed Agathaeromys within " clade C " in a clade with Oligoryzomys <unk> and an undescribed fossil species of Oligoryzomys from Aruba in his 2012 paper naming <unk> . 
 As a whole , Oryzomyini includes over a hundred species in about thirty genera . Oryzomyini is one of several tribes within the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the family Cricetidae , which encompasses hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents , distributed chiefly in Eurasia and the Americas . 
 = = Description = = 
 Agathaeromys is characterized mainly on the basis of features of the molar teeth . As usual in muroid rodents , there are three molars on both sides of the upper jaw ( referred to as M1 , M2 , and M3 from front to back ) and lower jaw ( referred to as m1 , m2 , and m3 ) . Agathaeromys is generally similar to other oryzomyines , but differs from other genera in a variety of details of the molar crowns . Agathaeromys donovani ( M1 length 2 @.@ 03 – 2 @.@ 84 mm ) is substantially larger than A. praeuniversitatis ( M1 length 1 @.@ 77 – 1 @.@ 94 mm ) . 
 = = = Upper dentition = = = 
 The cusp at the front of M1 , the anterocone , is separated into two smaller cusps by an indentation . In A. donovani , a ridge generally connects the two cusps at the front margin of the tooth , so that the indentation separating them is closed at the front ( an anteromedian fossette ) , but in A. praeuniversitatis , it is open toward the front ( an anteromedian flexus ) . An additional crest , the anteroloph , is present behind the anterocone . Further to the back , there is a pair of cusps — the protocone at the lingual , or inner , side and the paracone at the labial , or outer , side . A crest issues from the paracone and is attached to the front or middle part of the protocone . Behind the paracone , the mesoloph crest is present ; an additional crest usually connects the two . At the back of the tooth , there are two additional large cusps — the hypocone ( lingual ) and metacone ( labial ) — and a prominent crest , the posteroloph , issues from the hypocone and is located behind the metacone . In A. donovani , the metacone is generally connected to the posteroloph , but in A. praeuniversitatis , it is directly connected to the hypocone . The valleys that separate the cusps extend from the lingual and labial margins to about the midline of the molar . In addition to a large root at the front and two large roots at the back ( one labial , one lingual ) there is a small additional labial root . 
 There is no anterocone on M2 , but a large anteroloph is present in front of the paracone . There is a <unk> — an indentation in the crown in front of the protocone . As in M1 , the paracone is connected to the front or middle of the protocone , the mesoloph is well @-@ developed , and the valleys meet at the midline of the tooth . There are three roots : two at the labial and one at the lingual side . 
 M3 is a small , triangular tooth . There is large basin in the middle , and a mesoloph is present . At the back of the tooth , there is a distinct posteroloph . In A. donovani , there are two roots at the front ( labial and lingual ) and one at the back . There are no M3 of A. praeuniversitatis with preserved roots . 
 = = = Lower dentition = = = 
 The anteroconid — the cusp at the front of m1 — is usually divided in two by a central indentation ( the anteromedian fossettid ) in A. donovani , but this fossettid is absent in A. praeuniversitatis . Behind the anteroconid is the protoconid — metaconid pair of cusps . There is an anterolabial cingulum — a crest at the front labial margin , in front of the protoconid . There is a long crest behind the metaconid , a mesolophid . There is usually no corresponding crest ( an ectolophid ) behind the protoconid . Another pair of cusps — the hypoconid and the entoconid — is located at the back of the tooth . The entoconid , the lingual cusp of the two , is oriented forwards . There is always a large root at the front of the tooth and another at the back . A. donovani usually has a small labial root between the two large roots and often also another small root at the lingual side , but only one of four A. praeuniversitatis <unk> even has the labial <unk> . 
 There is no anteroconid in m2 and the tooth lacks an additional crest ( the anterolophid ) in front of the metaconid , but there is an anterolabial cingulum in front of the protoconid . There is a mesolophid . In addition to a large root at the back , there are two roots at the front in A. donovani , which are sometimes partially fused , but only one in A. praeuniversitatis . 
 The anterolabial cingulum and anteroconid are both absent on m3 . The mesolophid is usually absent . As in m2 , there are two roots at the front in A. donovani and only one in A. praeuniversitatis , but the front roots are usually fused in A. donovani . 
 = = = Jaws = = = 
 The maxilla ( upper jaw ) is known only for A. donovani . In these fossils , the back margin of the incisive foramen ( an opening in the palate ) is about at the same level as the front of M1 , and the back margin of the zygomatic plate ( a bony plate at the side of the skull , connected to the zygomatic arch ) is also close to the front of M1 . Mandibles ( lower jaws ) of both species are known . The mental foramen ( an opening in the front of the jaw bone ) opens towards the labial side of the bone , except in one mandible of A. praeuniversitatis , in which its opening is located higher . There is a well @-@ developed capsular process — a raising in the bone that houses the root of the lower incisor . The masseteric ridges ( two ridges on the labial side of the bone that anchor some of the chewing muscles ) are joined into a single crest towards the front and reach to a point below the front of m1 . 
 A single mandible from Porto <unk> ( one of the sites where fossils of A. donovani have been found ) , without preserved molars , differs from all Agathaeromys dentaries and is thought to represent an unknown different sigmodontine rodent . This jaw is more slender than A. donovani dentaries , has a shorter diastema ( gap ) between the incisors and molars , has the incisor less shifted lingually relative to the molars , and has more roots under the molars , as shown by the preserved alveoli . 
 = = Age and range = = 
 Agathaeromys donovani is known from four fossil sites — Fontein , Porto <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , and " 80 m above sea level " — that have yielded 259 , 148 , 54 , and 5 molars , respectively . Agathaeromys praeuniversitatis is known from 35 molars from a single site ( Seroe Grandi ) . Although the deposits have not been precisely dated , Zijlstra and colleagues suggested on the basis of correlations with similar deposits on nearby Curaçao and sea level fluctuations that the material of A. praeuniversitatis is likely 540 @,@ 000 to 230 @,@ 000 years old and that of A. donovani is likely 900 @,@ 000 to 540 @,@ 000 years old . Similarly aged fossil sites are also known from the nearby islands of Curaçao and Aruba , but these contain various other rodents , including Megalomys curazensis and <unk> <unk> on Curaçao and species of Oligoryzomys , Sigmodon , and Zygodontomys on Aruba . Agathaeromys probably descends from an unknown oryzomyine that migrated to the island from mainland Venezuela sometime during the Pleistocene . 
 = 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Game = 
 The 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Game was an exhibition basketball game played on February 15 , 2009 at US Airways Center in Phoenix , Arizona , home of the Phoenix Suns . The game was the 58th edition of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) All @-@ Star Game and was played during the 2008 – 09 NBA season . This was the third time that Phoenix had hosted the All @-@ Star Game ; the city had previously hosted the event in 1975 and 1995 . Phoenix was awarded the All @-@ Star Game in an announcement by commissioner David Stern on November 8 , 2007 . The other reported contenders for the 2009 contest were Air Canada Centre at Toronto , Madison Square Garden at New York City , Oracle Arena at Oakland and Bradley Center at Milwaukee . 
 The All @-@ Star Weekend began on Friday , February 13 , 2009 with the Celebrity Game and the Rookie Challenge , a game between the league 's best rookies and second @-@ year players . On Saturday , the event continued with the All @-@ Star Saturday Night , which featured the Shooting Stars Competition , Skills Challenge , Three @-@ Point Shootout and Slam Dunk Contest . The H – O – R – S – E Competition was first introduced and was played before the All @-@ Star Saturday Night . The third D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game and the second D @-@ League Dream Factory Friday Night , the latter of which was modeled after the NBA All @-@ Star Saturday Night , also took place during the All @-@ Star Weekend . The D @-@ League Dream Factory Friday Night was held on Friday and the D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game was held on Saturday . 
 The Western Conference All @-@ Star team defeated the Eastern Conference All @-@ Star team 146 – 119 . West 's Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O 'Neal were named joint @-@ winners of the game 's MVP . In the Rookie Challenge , the Sophomores defeated the Rookies , with Sophomores ' Kevin Durant named as the game MVP . In the All @-@ Star Saturday Night events , Nate Robinson won his second Slam Dunk Contest while Daequan Cook and Derrick Rose won the Three @-@ Point Shootout and Skills Challenge respectively . Team Detroit won their second Shootings Stars Competition , beating the home team , Team Phoenix in the final round . Kevin Durant also took home another trophy by winning the inaugural H – O – R – S – E Competition . 
 = = All @-@ Star Game = = 
 = = = Coaches = = = 
 The coaches for the All @-@ Star game are the head coaches who currently lead the teams with the best winning percentage in their conference through the Sunday two weeks before the All @-@ Star game . The head coaches from the previous year , Doc Rivers and Byron Scott were not eligible for selection . 
 The coach for the Western Conference team was Los Angeles Lakers head coach Phil Jackson . This was the fourth time Jackson was selected to be an All @-@ Star coach , after previously selected in 1992 , 1996 and 2000 . The Lakers entered the All @-@ Star break with 42 – 10 record , the best winning percentage in the Western Conference and in the league . 
 The coach for the Eastern Conference team was Cleveland Cavaliers head coach Mike Brown . This was the first time Brown was selected to be an All @-@ Star coach . He became only the second Cavaliers coach to lead an All @-@ Star team , after Lenny Wilkens in 1989 . The Cavaliers entered the All @-@ Star break with 40 – 11 record , the second best winning percentage in the Eastern Conference , behind Doc Rivers ' Boston Celtics . 
 = = = Players = = = 
 The rosters for the All @-@ Star Game is chosen in two ways . The starters were chosen via a fan ballot . Two guards , two forwards and one center who receive the highest vote were named the All @-@ Star starters . The reserves were chosen by votes among the NBA head coaches in their respective conferences . The coaches were not permitted to vote for their own players . The reserves consists of two guards , two forwards , one center and two players regardless of position . If a player is unable to participate due to injury , the commissioner will select a replacement . 
 Dwight Howard of the Orlando Magic topped the All @-@ Star Ballots with 3 @,@ 150 @,@ 181 votes , which earned him a starting position in the Eastern Conference team . He became the first player to get more than 3 million votes from the fans . LeBron James , Dwyane Wade , Kevin Garnett and Allen Iverson completed the Eastern Conference starting position . The Eastern Conference reserves includes 4 first @-@ time selections , Danny Granger , Devin Harris , Jameer Nelson and Mo Williams , who was named as a replacement for the injured Chris Bosh . Jameer Nelson was unable to participate due to injury and Ray Allen was named to replace him . Both Boston Celtics and Orlando Magic were represented by three players on the roster . 
 The Western Conference leading vote @-@ getter was Kobe Bryant with 2 @,@ 805 @,@ 397 votes . Yao Ming , Tim Duncan , Amar 'e Stoudemire and Chris Paul completed the Western Conference starting position . The Western Conference roster includes five international players in Yao Ming ( China ) , Tim Duncan ( U.S. Virgin Islands ) , Pau Gasol ( Spain ) , Dirk Nowitzki ( Germany ) and Tony Parker ( France ) . Shaquille O 'Neal returned to the All @-@ Star game after one @-@ year absence with his 15th selection , the second most selection in NBA history , behind Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar with 19 All @-@ Star selections . This also marked the first time O 'Neal and Bryant were in the same team since their much publicized feud . Bryant and O 'Neal also reunited with coach Phil Jackson . The three of them won three successive NBA championship together with the Los Angeles Lakers in early 2000s . 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 = = = Game = = = 
 Phoenix Suns ' Shaquille O 'Neal marked his return to the NBA All @-@ Star Game after one @-@ year absence with an unusual entry to the game . O 'Neal , the last reserve called during the player introduction , came out with a white mask and began dancing with the dance group JabbaWockeeZ before finally opening his mask and joining the rest of the players on the court . O 'Neal and previous year 's regular season MVP Kobe Bryant led the West to a 146 – 119 victory and were named co @-@ MVPs . This was the third All @-@ Star Game MVP award for both players . 
 The East led 20 – 10 early in the game before West coach , Phil Jackson decided to send O 'Neal to the court . With O 'Neal and Bryant on the court for the first time since 2004 NBA Finals , the West embarked on a 19 – 0 run to take the lead . The West continued to extend the lead in the second half and finally won the game by 27 points . Bryant finished with 27 points while Chris Paul added a game high 14 assists . Previous year 's All @-@ Star Game MVP LeBron James led the East with 20 points , but was unable to prevent the loss . 
 = = = Guest performances = = = 
 Five @-@ time Grammy Award @-@ winning singer and songwriter John Legend and 17 @-@ time Latin Grammy winner Juanes performed during the halftime . Both singers collaborated in the extended version of Legend 's song " If You 're Out There " , a song about hope and inspiration . The extended version includes Spanish lyrics which was sung by Juanes . A special taped message from the United States President , Barack Obama , also aired during the halftime . In the message , President Obama encouraged people to do more public service for the community . A ring ceremony to honor the gold medalists at the 2008 Olympics was also held during the halftime . Six members of USA men 's national basketball team , Chris Bosh , Kobe Bryant , Dwight Howard , LeBron James , Chris Paul and Dwyane Wade , and two members of USA women 's national basketball team , Lisa Leslie and Tina Thompson were awarded with their ring at the ceremony . 
 The national anthem of both the United States and Canada were sung before the game . Arizona native and American Idol winner Jordin Sparks sang U.S. national anthem , " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . The Canadian national anthem , " O Canada " were sung by Tamia , Canadian singer who is also the wife of Phoenix Suns player Grant Hill . The pre @-@ game introduction included a dance performance by the America 's Best Dance Crew winner , the Jabbawockeez . Grammy @-@ nominated singer Chris Brown was originally scheduled to appear during the pre @-@ game introductions . He , however , withdrew from the performance due to an ongoing domestic violence case against him . 
 Other musical guests during the All @-@ Star Weekend were singers Corbin Bleu and Kevin Rudolf . Bleu performed " Moments That Matter " at the halftime of the Rookie Challenge on Friday while Rudolf performed " Let It Rock " during the NBA All @-@ Star Saturday Night . 
 = = All @-@ Star Weekend = = 
 = = = Rookie Challenge = = = 
 The T @-@ Mobile Rookie Challenge featured a team of standout first @-@ year players ( ' Rookies ' ) against a team of standout second @-@ year players ( ' Sophomores ' ) . The game was divided into two twenty @-@ minute halves , similar to college basketball . The participating players were chosen by voting among the league 's assistant coaches . The Rookies team includes the first overall draft pick in 2008 NBA Draft , Derrick Rose . The rest of the Rookies team consists of five of the top ten pick in the 2008 Draft and three players from the 2007 NBA Draft who were in their first NBA season . The three players are the first overall draft pick Greg Oden and two Spanish players Rudy Fernández and Marc Gasol . The Sophomores team features four players from the previous Rookie Challenge game which are Kevin Durant , Jeff Green , Al Horford and Luis Scola . 
 The head coaches for the Rookies and Sophomores teams were the lead assistants from the 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Game coaching staffs , Kurt Rambis from the Los Angeles Lakers and John <unk> from the Cleveland Cavaliers . For the first time in the game 's history , two active NBA players were selected as leading assistant coach . Two All @-@ Star starters Dwyane Wade and Dwight Howard were selected as the assistant coaches for the Rookies and Sophomores team respectively . 
 This year , the first ever EA Sports Jersey Creator Contest was held to design the jerseys for both the rookie and the sophomore team . The contest called for the participants to come up with a computer @-@ generated jersey design that would replace the individual team jerseys worn by the players during the Rookie Challenge . Of 12 @,@ 000 participants , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Tim Ahmed , a freshman at Baruch College , won the contest . Ahmed won a free trip to Phoenix and a chance to meet players . This marks the first time that a fan @-@ designed uniform has ever been worn during an NBA game or NBA event . The Sophomores wore fan @-@ designed white jerseys and the Rookies wore fan @-@ designed purple jerseys in the game . 
 The Sophomores won the game 122 – 116 with Sophomore 's Kevin Durant named as the Rookie Challenge MVP . Durant scored a record 46 points in the game , breaking Amar 'e Stoudemire 's 36 points in 2004 . The Rookies led by 3 at halftime , but Durant took over in the second half , scoring 30 of his 46 points in the second half as the Sophomores outscored the Rookies by 6 points to win the game . The game marked the seventh consecutive loss for the Rookies team . 
 = = = Slam Dunk Contest = = = 
 The Sprite Slam Dunk Contest was contested by defending champion Dwight Howard , 2006 champion Nate Robinson , 2005 contestant J. R. Smith and rookie Rudy Fernández . Fernández won the online voting on NBA.com to determine the fourth contestants , beating fellow rookies Joe Alexander and Russell Westbrook . This was the first time a dunk contestant was chosen by the fans . Fernández also became the first ever international player to participate in the contest . Smith was named as a late replacement for Rudy Gay , who was forced to withdraw from the contest due to injury . 
 Each contestant performed two slam dunks in each round . The two best contestants in the first round , as rated by the panel of judges , advanced to the final round , where the winner was determined by fan voting . The panel of judges for this year contest consists of five former Phoenix Suns players , the inaugural Slam Dunk champion Larry Nance , 1992 champion Cedric Ceballos , 1987 All @-@ Star Game MVP Tom Chambers and three @-@ time All @-@ Stars , Kevin Johnson and Dan Majerle . 
 Dwight Howard began his title defence with two 50 @-@ point dunks to advance to the final round with a perfect score . One of his dunks employed a 12 @-@ foot high hoop . Howard also used a prop phone booth to change into his Superman cape before completing the dunk on the 12 @-@ foot hoop . Nate Robinson also advanced to the final round with 87 points , beating Smith and Fernández who had 85 and 84 points respectively . 
 In the final round , Robinson changed his uniform into the New York Knicks ' green uniform originally designed for Saint Patrick 's Day . The green uniform symbolized Kryptonite , a fictional substance known to have detrimental effect on Superman . The <unk> @-@ Nate vs. Superman theme continued when Robinson , in his final dunk , used a green basketball and leaped over the 6 ' 11 " Howard who wore his Superman cape . Robinson ended up with 52 % of fan vote to win his second dunk title . He joined Michael Jordan , Dominique Wilkins , Harold Miner and Jason Richardson as the only two @-@ time winners of the contest . 
 = = = Three @-@ Point Shootout = = = 
 The Foot Locker Three @-@ Point Shootout was contested by six players . Two @-@ time winner Jason Kapono returned to defend his title along with two former contestants , Rashard Lewis and Mike Bibby . They were joined by three first @-@ time contestants , Daequan Cook , Danny Granger and Roger Mason . In this contest , contestants attempt to make as many three @-@ point field goals as possible from five shooting stations behind the three @-@ point arc in one minute . Players begin shooting from one corner of the court , and move from station to station along the three @-@ point arc until they reach the other corner . Each station has four standard balls , worth one point each , and one specially colored " money ball " , worth two points . 
 Cook won the first round with 18 points as he advanced to the final round along with Lewis and Kapono . The second round was a tight contest between Cook and Lewis , both tied at 15 points , and Kapono , with 14 . Because of the tied score , Cook and Lewis played an extra tiebreaker round . Cook went on to beat his first round score with 19 points , while Lewis finished with 7 points . 
 = = = Skills Challenge = = = 
 The PlayStation Skills Challenge was contested by four players . Derrick Rose , the first overall draft pick in 2008 NBA Draft , was joined by three All @-@ Star guards , Devin Harris , Jameer Nelson and Tony Parker . However , Nelson was injured and was subsequently replaced by All @-@ Star Mo Williams . In this contest , the contestants have to complete an " obstacle course " consisting of dribbling , passing and shooting stations . A contestant who finish the course with the fastest time wins the contest . All contestants must comply with basic NBA ball @-@ handling rules while completing the course . 
 Rose led all the contestants with 33 @.@ 3 seconds in the first round , 3 @.@ 3 seconds ahead of Harris . Williams was eliminated after recording 37 @.@ 5 seconds , 4 @.@ 2 seconds behind the lead . Parker was eliminated with the slowest time in the Skills Challenge history with 50 @.@ 8 seconds . He previously held the slowest time of 45 @.@ 5 points during the 2003 competition . In the second round , Harris went first and finished the course with 39 @.@ 6 seconds , 3 @.@ 1 seconds worse than his previous attempt . Rose went on to win the contest by recording a 35 @.@ 3 seconds time while finishing the course with a dunk . Rose also became the first rookie winner of the Skills Challenge competition . 
 = = = Shooting Stars Competition = = = 
 The Haier Shooting Stars Competition was competed between four teams of three players , with each team representing a city which has both NBA and WNBA teams . Each team consisted of one current NBA player , one current WNBA player , and one NBA legend . Team San Antonio , the defending champion , was joined by the inaugural champion , Team Los Angeles , 2005 champion , Team Phoenix and 2007 champion , Team Detroit . In this competition , each team must make six shots from six shooting locations of increasing difficulties . The team who makes all six shots with the fastest time wins the competition . 
 In the first round , the defending champion , Team San Antonio was eliminated along with Team Los Angeles . Both teams took over 15 shots from the half court location to score . Team Detroit and Team Phoenix both advanced to the final round . Team Phoenix recorded the fastest completion time in the first round with 53 @.@ 3 seconds , six seconds faster than Team Detroit . In the final round , Team Detroit made the first five shots in 13 attempts and used only 7 attempts to make the half court shot with a time of 58 @.@ 4 seconds . Team Phoenix responded by making their first five shots in a single attempt each . However , they needed 22 attempts to make the half @-@ court shot , finishing with a time of 1 minute and 19 seconds . Team Detroit won their second Shooting Stars title , joining Team San Antonio as the only two @-@ time winners of the competition . Detroit Pistons legend and Detroit Shock head coach , Bill Laimbeer also became the first person to win the Shooting Stars Competition twice ; he won his first title with Team Detroit in 2007 . 
 = = = H – O – R – S – E Competition = = = 
 On February 5 , 2009 , TNT announced the addition of H – O – R – S – E to its All @-@ Star Weekend coverage . The competition was held outdoors on a half @-@ sized court during the special Inside the NBA show prior to the All @-@ Star Saturday Night events . The objective of this competition is to accrue as few of the five letters as possible . A player is given a letter every time they fail to duplicate the shot of another player . Each player was given 24 seconds to make or duplicate the shot ( dunking was prohibited ) . Each player who fails to duplicate five shots was eliminated from the competition . An NBA referee was assigned to rule whether the shot was done properly . 
 The inaugural H – O – R – S – E Competition was sponsored by American auto insurance company GEICO and hence the word G – E – I – C – O was used in replacement of H – O – R – S – E. Three NBA players , Kevin Durant , Joe Johnson and O. J. Mayo were selected to compete in the H – O – R – S – E competition . Johnson was the first to be eliminated , having failed to duplicate Mayo 's shot from the free @-@ throw line . Durant then made a series of three @-@ point shots to eliminate Mayo to win the inaugural H – O – R – S – E Competition . 
 = = = Celebrity Game = = = 
 The 2009 McDonald 's NBA All @-@ Star Celebrity Game was played on Friday , February 13 at the Phoenix Convention Center . A total of 16 celebrities took part in the game , including several former NBA players . Basketball Hall of Famers Magic Johnson and Julius Erving , who combined for 23 NBA All @-@ Star appearances , served as coaches for the celebrity teams . NBA legends , Dominique Wilkins and Clyde Drexler , were joined by former players , Dan Majerle and Rick Fox , in the celebrity team roster . WNBA stars Lisa Leslie and Kara Lawson also participated in the game along with four Harlem Globetrotters players . 
 Previous year 's MVP , Terrell Owens scored a game @-@ high 17 points and led the East Sunrisers to a 60 – 57 victory over the West <unk> . Owens , an American football star for Dallas Cowboys , was also named as the Celebrity Game MVP for the second successive year . The game was marked by a surprise appearance by another Hall of Famer Nancy Lieberman in the middle of the game , where she joined and played with the East Sunrisers . ESPN play @-@ by @-@ play commentator Mike Breen also made a surprise appearance as the referee for the game . 
 = = D @-@ League All @-@ Star = = 
 = = = D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game = = = 
 Twenty of the NBA Development League 's top players were selected to the D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game rosters by a combination of fan balloting on the official D @-@ League website and voting by the 16 head coaches of D @-@ League teams . The selections were divided up into two teams , the Red Team and the Blue Team , by members of the NBA and NBA D @-@ League 's Basketball Operations staff . Players who have been selected by coaches and fans must be on an active roster of a D @-@ League team . Iowa Energy head coach Nick Nurse and Austin Toros head coach Quin Snyder were selected as the coach for the Red Team and the Blue Team respectively . Both coaches earned the honor by securing the best records in the D @-@ League through January 27 . 
 In the third annual D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game , the Red Team defeated the Blue team 113 – 103 . The Red Team trailed by 8 points at the half , but managed to outscore the Blue Team 70 – 52 in the second half to secure the win . Dakota 's guard Blake Ahearn scored 13 points and dished 13 assists while Iowa 's center Courtney Sims scored 15 points and grabbed 8 rebounds . Both players were named Co @-@ MVPs of the D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = = D @-@ League Dream Factory Friday Night = = = 
 = = = = Slam Dunk Contest = = = = 
 James White won the second annual D @-@ League Slam Dunk Contest , beating Keith Clark in the final round with a perfect score of 100 . Defending champion Brent <unk> was unable to repeat his last year 's performance and was eliminated in the first round along with <unk> Jeffers . 
 = = = = Three @-@ Point Shootout = = = = 
 Blake Ahearn won the second annual D @-@ League Three @-@ Point Shootout , beating Ernest Scott in the final round by a score of 22 – 19 . Ahearn scored four of the five money balls in the last stations . For the first time , the last station consists of five " money balls " , instead of four standard balls and one " money ball " . Gary Forbes and Trey Johnson were eliminated in the first round . 
 = = = = H – O – R – S – E Competition = = = = 
 Will Conroy won the second annual D @-@ League H – O – R – S – E Competition , beating the defending champion Lance Allred with a through @-@ the @-@ legs @-@ off @-@ the @-@ backboard lay @-@ up . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 Turner Broadcasting Network ( TNT ) broadcast the All @-@ Star Game for the sixth straight year in the United States while The Sports Network ( TSN ) broadcast the All @-@ Star Game in Canada . TNT also broadcast the Rookie Challenge and the All @-@ Star Saturday Night events . The Celebrity Game was broadcast by ESPN and the D @-@ League All @-@ Star events were broadcast by NBA TV . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Aside from TNT and TSN in United States and Canada , the following television channels also broadcast the All @-@ Star game all around the world . 
 = A Room with No View = 
 " ' A Room With No View " is the twentieth episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on April 24 , 1998 . The episode was written by Ken Horton , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " A Room With No View " featured an appearance by recurring guest star Sarah @-@ Jane Redmond . 
 Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) learns that a figure from his past has been abducting students , seemingly in an attempt to quash their hopes and aspirations . The episode was Horton 's first script for the series , and saw the return of villain Lucy Butler ( Redmond ) , who appeared sporadically throughout the series . " A Room With No View " received positive feedback from television critics , and was viewed by approximately 4 @.@ 7 million households in its initial broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young man tunnels out of a farmhouse in Oregon City , Oregon , escaping into the night . He finds an abandoned car and attempts to hot @-@ wire it ; someone inside starts the engine and run him off the road , injuring his ankle . A woman , face obscured , and her male accomplice exit the car and throw the man into its trunk . 
 In Seattle , two friends argue about applying for college . Landon Bryce ( Christopher Kennedy Masterson ) tells his friend Howard Gordon ( Michael R. Coleman ) to apply , but Gordon has been convinced by school counselor Teresa Roe ( <unk> Pino ) that his progress is too mediocre to make it worthwhile . Bryce accosts Roe , calling her a failure . That night , Gordon is killed , and Bryce is kidnapped . Millennium Group criminal profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) learns that Gordon died of a heart attack , which the coroner believes was caused by fear . Black visits the crime scene , and sees visions of Lucy Butler ( Sarah @-@ Jane Redmond ) , a woman who killed his friend and colleague Bob Bletcher ( in season one 's Lamentation ) . Meanwhile , Bryce is bound and gagged in a remote farmhouse , then left in a room with the would @-@ be escapee . The woman from earlier tells Bryce she loves him . 
 Black speaks to fellow Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) about his Butler vision . Watts informs Black that a Group member , Olson , has been tasked with monitoring Butler since her release . Watts and Black travel to Butler 's last known address and find Olson 's long @-@ dead body . They realize Butler had been filing her own surveillance reports in Olson 's name . Meanwhile , Bryce attempts to escape , but is subdued and later comforted by Lucy Butler . Black interviews Roe , suspecting her involvement when she continually refers to Bryce in the past tense . He later discovers that in every school she has worked for , students have been kidnapped ; all the victims resembled Bryce in being average students who showed signs of promise . 
 Bryce learns about the tunnel from his cellmate , and the two escape again . Emerging from the tunnel , they are met by Butler and a dog that attacks Bryce . After being brought back to the farmhouse , Bryce is told to accept that he is mediocre and ordinary . Elsewhere , Black and Watts interview Roe again , who seems to espouse the same mindset . Black reveals that he knows Roe was once a promising student , and accuses her of being cowed by a fear of failure . Frightened , she reveals the location of Butler 's farm . Police raid the farm , freeing several captive youths , including Bryce , but Butler is nowhere to be found . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Room With No View " was directed by Thomas J. Wright , who helmed a total of twenty @-@ six episodes across all three seasons . Wright would also go on to direct " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . " A Room With No View " was the first to have been written by producer Ken Horton , and his only solo writing credit . Horton would pen a further two episodes in the third season , both with Chip Johannessen . 
 " A Room With No View " saw the third appearance of recurring villain Lucy Butler , who had previously appeared in " Lamentation " and " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " , and would return for the third season episodes " Antipas " and " Saturn Dreaming of Mercury " . Redmond , a fan of series creator Chris Carter and recurring series director David Nutter , had initially auditioned for another episode of the first season which would have been directed by Nutter . Redmond did not get the part she auditioned for but was instead contacted about portraying a minor recurring role instead , which led to her casting as Butler . The episode features the repeated use of the song " Love Is Blue " , performed by Paul Mauriat . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " A Room With No View " was first broadcast on the Fox network on April 24 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 8 during its original broadcast , meaning that 4 @.@ 8 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 4 @.@ 7 million households , and left the episode the eighty @-@ second most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode has received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode an " A " , finding it to be a particularly well @-@ executed version of kidnapping trope in crime thrillers . Handlen also praised the development of the Lucy Butler character , feeling positively that her scenes did not seem like " rote horror " but made use of clear motives and characterization . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , praising the dialogue and the use of " Love Is Blue " . However , Gibron felt that the episode did little to move the series along , not exploring any of the season 's themes or mythology . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " A Room With No View " five stars out of five . Shearman felt the episode was the season 's most frightening installment , as it dispensed with the wider theological trappings that he felt lessened the impact of other episodes . He also praised the decision to bring back Redmond as Lucy Butler , finding the character to be a good balance between the different depictions of evil depicted throughout the series . 
 = Little Miss Obsessive = 
 " Little Miss Obsessive " is a song recorded by American singer Ashlee Simpson for her third studio album , Bittersweet World ( 2008 ) . It features uncredited guest vocals from Tom Higginson , the lead singer of the Plain White T 's . The song was written by Simpson , Jim Beanz , Victor Valentine and Karl Berringer . " Little Miss Obsessive " was produced by Jack Joseph Puig and Berringer , with vocal production by Beanz . The song was released as the " first official single " from Bittersweet World on March 11 , 2008 , following the commercial disappointment of its predecessor , " Outta My Head ( Ay Ya Ya ) " . 
 " Little Miss Obsessive " is a pop rock power ballad that chronicles the " ostensibly aural dance " of a couple " who break up to make up – and like it " . Simpson looked to herself for inspiration when writing the song . Music critics were divided on " Little Miss Obsessive " ; some critics felt the song was impressive , while others were critical of Simpson 's vocals and the song 's lyrics . The song only managed to chart on the national charts of Canada and the United States , where it peaked at 72 and 96 , respectively . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " Little Miss Obsessive " was written by Ashlee Simpson , Jim Beanz , Victor Valentine and Karl Berringer . The song was produced by Jack Joseph Puig and Berringer . Simpson 's vocals , which were produced by Beanz , were recorded at Archon Studios in Los Angeles and at Chalice Studios in Hollywood by Aris <unk> and Tal Herzberg , respectively . Tom Higginson , the lead singer of the Plain White T 's , performed guest vocals in the song , as well as background vocals alongside Simpson and Mateo Laboriel , who also provided programming for the song . The guitar was played by Ray Brady , while Joey <unk> played the bass guitar and Abe Laboriel , Jr played the drums in the song . Dean Nelson engineered the song , while Puig mixed the song at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood . 
 Simpson looked to herself for inspiration when writing " Little Miss Obsessive " , which chronicles the " ostensibly aural dance " of a couple " who break up to make up – and like it " . Of the song 's concept , Simpson commented : " It 's what we can all become in a relationship sometimes . We put our foot in our mouths and we wish we didn 't — ' No , I didn 't mean to say it . I take it back . I take it back . ' " According to Simpson , the song " kind of relates to the last album [ I Am Me ] , but it grew with the new record . And every girl has gone through that situation . You put your foot in your mouth and you go , ' Wait , why did I do that ? ' We 're on our phones writing and texting too much ! " 
 = = Composition and critical response = = 
 " Little Miss Obsessive " is a pop rock power ballad , with a duration of three minutes and forty @-@ two seconds ( 3 : 42 ) . The song features " crashing " guitars , " drum thuds " , " confused Avril @-@ style rants " and a " swelling chorus " . " Little Miss Obsessive " begins with a mid @-@ tempo piano line , before transcending into a " more rollicking " chorus , which sees Simpson sing : " Little miss obsessive , can 't get over it " . Lyrically , Simpson laments about a breakup with the " youthful fervor of a late @-@ night text message " . 
 Sophie Bruce of BBC Music wrote that the song is the " standout success " of Bittersweet World and that is " deserves to take Ashlee to the forefront of female pop " . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt called " Little Miss Obsessive " a " well @-@ wrought breakup anthem " . Jennifer Cady of E ! Online cited the song as sounding " more like her older stuff " and wrote that it will probably be " more attractive to radio stations " , than " Outta My Head ( Ay Ya Ya ) " , the first single from Bittersweet World . Nick Levine of Digital Spy called " Little Miss Obsessive " a " decent enough tune , not a million miles away from ' Pieces of Me ' , but we can 't see it reviving the album 's fortunes " . 
 Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy wrote that despite a " surging power @-@ pop chorus " , " Little Miss Obsessive " lacks " the wow factor " required to " get people talking about Simpson 's music again " . Glenn Gamboa of Newsday called " Little Miss Obsessive " a " passable <unk> pop " song , but stated that it isn 't enough to keep Bittersweet World from " going sour " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy wrote that Simpson 's voice is " insufficiently meaty " to be able to sing the song . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the song " quite awful " , writing that exploring " the endless possibilities of the word ' over ' in the chorus " is " a bit of a slog " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Simpson premiered " Little Miss Obsessive " on the KISS FM <unk> Morning Show in Chicago on February 21 . The song was later announced to be the " first official single " from Simpson 's third studio album Bittersweet World . It was speculated that the song was labelled as the album 's " first official single " because " Outta My Head ( Ay Ya Ya ) " , had performed below expectations . The song was released for digital download in the United States on March 11 , 2008 . It was sent to mainstream radio in the United States on March 18 , 2008 . Simpson performed " Little Miss Obsessive " for the first time on MTV 's Total Request Live on April 15 , for the episode that aired on April 17 . She also performed it on The Today Show on April 18 . " Little Miss Obsessive " was released in the United Kingdom on August 4 , 2008 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bittersweet World . 
 Locations 
 Vocals recorded at Archon Studios , Los Angeles , California and Chalice Studios , Hollywood , California 
 Mixed at Ocean Way Recording , Hollywood , California 
 Personnel 
 = Burn ( Usher song ) = 
 " Burn " is a song by American R & B singer Usher , which he wrote with American songwriters Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox . The song was produced by Dupri and Cox for Usher 's fourth studio album , Confessions ( 2004 ) . " Burn " is about breakup in a relationship , and the public referred to it as an allusion to Usher 's personal struggles . Originally planned as the album 's lead single , " Burn " was pushed back after favorable responses for the song " Yeah ! " . " Burn " was released as the second single from the album on March 21 , 2004 . 
 " Burn " topped various charts around the world , including the Billboard Hot 100 for eight non @-@ consecutive weeks ; it succeeded " Yeah ! " at number one . Both singles gave Usher nineteen consecutive weeks at the top spot , longer than any solo artist of the Hot 100 era . " Burn " was certified platinum in Australia and United States , and gold in New Zealand . The song was well received by critics and garnered award nominations . In 2009 it was named the 21st most successful song of the 2000s , on the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of the Decade . This song won the 2005 Kids ' Choice Award for Favorite Song . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Usher planned to make a new record after his third album , 8701 ( 2001 ) , he decided to not branch out that much with musical collaborators and continue building music with his previous producers . Usher again enlisted record @-@ producer Jermaine Dupri , who had collaborated on his two previous albums , along with The Neptunes , R. Kelly , among others to work on his fourth studio album Confessions ( 2004 ) . Dupri contacted his frequent collaborator Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , who had also made hits like the 2001 single " U Got It Bad " for Usher . During the early session for the album , Dupri and Cox talked about a situation which later became " Burn " . At that time , Usher 's two @-@ year relationship with TLC 's Chilli was flaming out . They said , " Yo , you gotta let that burn ... That 's a song right there " , and started writing . 
 = = Release = = 
 Usher submitted the album to his label Arista Records after he felt it was already completed . After he and the company 's then @-@ president Antonio " LA " Reid listened to the songs , they felt the album needed a first single and that they needed one or two more songs to create , which caused the postponement of the album 's release . Usher went back to the studio and collaborated with Lil Jon who said , " He needed a single . They had ' Burn , ' ' Burn ' was hot , but they needed that first powerful monster . That 's when I came in . " They worked for few more tracks , including " Red Light " , which was not included in the first release of the album , and " Yeah ! " , which features Ludacris and Lil Jon . 
 However , everybody in the label was scared to decide what to consider as the lead single . Reid was choosing whether " Yeah ! " would be released then , considering that they had " Burn " . Usher was also doubtful if the former was the right choice , after he wanted an R & B record . Until " Yeah ! " was leaked , " Burn " was chosen as the official first single from Confessions . " Yeah ! " , which was intended as a promotional song and a teaser for Usher 's fans , was released to street DJs and mixtapes . However , the song 's favorable responses led to another direction ; " Yeah ! " was pursued to be the lead single and " Burn " was set as its follow @-@ up . " Burn " was released in the United States on July 6 , 2004 as a CD single and 7 " single . 
 = = Lyrical interpretation = = 
 Usher decided about the new material " to let it all hang out by singing about some of his own little secrets , as well as a few bones from his homies ' skeleton @-@ filled closets . " The public speculated that the material in the new album he was referring to was his recent personal struggles in which he promised a " real talk " on it . In early 2004 , Usher broke up with Chilli due to " irreconcilable differences and because they found it almost impossible to make compromises . " Usher said in an interview : " It 's unfortunate when you have to let a situation go because it 's not working " , which added reference to the breakup . It was later revealed that chilli , in fact broke up with usher because of cheating and the media said otherwise because of the lyrics in the song , which was not based on their relationship . Dupri , however , confessed that his personal life is the real story of the album . Usher said he took inspirations collectively by looking at his friends ' personal situations that they gone through . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Burn " is a slow jam , combining R & B and ballad genres . The song is performed with a moderate groove . It is composed in the key of C @-@ sharp major . The melody line of the song has influences from " Ignition ( Remix ) " by R. Kelly and " How to Deal " by Frankie J. " Burn " <unk> has a combination of robotic noises , synthesized strings and guitar lines . 
 The lyrics are constructed in the traditional verse @-@ chorus form . The song starts a spoken intro , giving way to the first verse . It continues to the chorus , following the second verse and chorus . The bridge follows , leading to a break and finalizing in the chorus . " Burn " was considered a " window to Usher 's inner thoughts " , along with the controversial track " Confessions " and " Confessions Part II " . The song is about breakups and ending relationships . According to Matt Cibula of Popmatters , " Burn " is constructed from " two @-@ step concept " . In the lyrics " You know that it 's over / You know that it was through / Let it burn / Got to let it burn " , Usher breaks up with his woman but found her sad about feeling bad about what happened to their relationship . However , Usher says that she must deal with it before she can accept the truth . For the lines " It 's been fifty @-@ eleven days / <unk> hours / I 'm gonna be <unk> ' / Till you return " , the direction changes after Usher realized that breaking up with her was a huge mistake and that he wanted her back to him . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Burn " was lauded by contemporary music critics . Jem Aswad of Entertainment Weekly complimented Dupri and Cox for producing what he called the " best song " from the album , along with " Confessions Part II " which they also produced . Aswad found the songs feature " mellifluous melodies " . Laura Sinagra of Rolling Stone found Usher 's singing a " sweet falsetto on the weepy breakup song " , adding , it " convincingly marries resolve and regret , but when it comes to rough stuff , there 's still no ' u ' in p @-@ i @-@ m @-@ p . " Cibula called the song brilliant and considers its step one and step two technique a hit . Jon Caramanica of Blender complimented the song for living up as the only " serviceable " among all ballad @-@ influenced songs in the album which " often drown in their own inanity . " Ande Kellman of Allmusic considered " Burn " as one of the Usher 's best moments in the album , together with " Caught Up " , the final single from Confessions . Steve Jones of USA Today stated that Usher is singing about a relationship that cannot be saved because of the " flame has simply died " . 
 " Burn " was nominated at the 47th Grammy Awards for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance and Best R & B Song . The song earned British record company EMI the " Publisher of the Year " at the American Society of Composers , Authors , and Publishers 2005 Pop Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Burn " was another commercial success for Usher . In the United States , the single debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number sixty @-@ five , months prior to its physical release . It reached the top spot on May 29 , 2004 , replacing " Yeah ! " ' s twelve @-@ week run at number one . The single was beaten by Fantasia 's 2004 single " I Believe " , which propelled on the chart on its debut . It returned to number one for one last week , before it was finally knocked off by the album 's third single " Confessions Part II " . The single failed to remain on the top spot as long as " Yeah ! " did , staying only for eight non @-@ consecutive weeks . " Burn " was the fifth most @-@ played song in 2004 for earning 355 @,@ 228 total plays , alongside " Yeah ! " which topped the tally for 496 @,@ 805 spins . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipping 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units . It became the second best @-@ selling single in the United States , behind Usher 's single " Yeah ! " . This gives him the distinction , alongside The Beatles in 1964 , to have 2 of his singles occupying the top 2 spots on the Billboard Year @-@ End Chart . Like " Yeah ! " , " Burn " helped Confessions remain on the top spot . 
 Internationally , several music markets responded equally well . In the United Kingdom , the single debuted at number one and stayed for two weeks . Across European countries , the single performed well , reaching the top ten in Denmark , Ireland , Norway , the Netherlands , and Switzerland . It entered the top twenty in Austria , Belgium , Germany and Sweden . In Australia , the single debuted at number three and peaked at number two . The single was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for selling 70 @,@ 000 units . At the 2004 year ender charts , " Burn " became the thirty @-@ first best @-@ selling single in Australia . In the New Zealand , it peaked at number one for three weeks , and remained on the chart for twenty @-@ three weeks . The single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The music video for " Burn " was directed by Jake Nava , who had produced a wide array of videos for Atomic Kitten , Beyoncé Knowles , among others . It was shot at the former Hollywood house of American popular singer Frank Sinatra . The video features model Jessica Clark . In the July 2008 issue of Vibe magazine , Usher told writer Mitzi Miller , " Women have started to become lovers of each other as a result of not having enough men . " On June 26 , 2008 , AfterEllen.com writer Sarah Warn revealed that Jessica Clark , the lead in Usher 's " Burn " music video , was in fact an openly gay model . In the article , Warn writes , " Maybe it 's not a lack of men that 's turning women gay , <unk> it 's you ! " 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video starts with Usher sitting on a sofa with a backdrop of his girlfriend . When the verse starts , Usher went to a wide glass window pane , looking at his girlfriend swimming in the pool . The surface aflame after she immersed in the water . The next scene continues to Usher with his mistress having sex . While sitting on the edge of the bed , Usher reminisces the moments he and his girlfriend were having an intimate moment in the same bed . The bedsheets burns , following to Usher riding a silver right @-@ hand drive Aston Martin DB5 with a British registration - EGF <unk> ( the car was featured in the TV series Fastlane ) . The video cuts with the backdrop also burning . Continuing to the car scene , Usher stops as he sees his imaginary girl again . He went out and dances , executing various hand routines . Video intercuts follow and the video ends with Usher standing with his back . Also , right before the last chorus , the screen changes from a small screen , to a full one with no framework . 
 The music video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number six on May 4 , 2004 , the same debut with " Confessions Part II " . The video reached the top spot and remained on the countdown for thirty @-@ three days . " Burn " topped MuchMusic 's Countdown on July 24 , 2004 , and remained on the chart for fifteen weeks . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Besides from Usher , Cox has benefited for co @-@ creating Confessions , as well as from the success of " Burn " . He has been doing records for Alicia Keys , B2K , Mariah Carey and Destiny 's Child , but he felt 2004 introduced him to another landscape in the music industry . His contribution to the song has elevated him to fame , as well as people looking back to his past records . " Burn " earned him two Grammy nominations . Cox stated , " Everybody who does this for a living , dreams about being nominated . It 's the ultimate accomplishment . I 've always been the silent guy — I come in , do my job and head out . I like to leave all the glory and shine to others , but this is the validation that means the most to me . It also makes me want to work harder to get that same recognition again . " 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Other versions = = 
 An a cappella version was created by South Asian fusion a cappella group Stanford <unk> . 
 = Cri @-@ Zelda Brits = 
 Cri @-@ Zelda Brits , also written <unk> Brits and Cri @-@ <unk> Brits ( born 20 November 1983 ) is an international cricketer . A right @-@ handed batsman and right @-@ arm medium @-@ fast bowler , Brits was originally called up to the South Africa national women 's cricket team as an opening bowler in 2002 . She developed into an all @-@ rounder , and since 2005 has established herself as a specialist batsman . She captained South Africa in 23 matches in 2007 and 2008 , but was replaced as captain in 2009 in order to " concentrate entirely on her own performance . " She was reappointed as captain for the 2010 ICC Women 's World Twenty20 . Between 2007 and 2011 she captain South Africa a total of 36 times ( 1 Test , 23 One Day Internationals and 12 Twenty20 Internationals ) . 
 She is one of South Africa women 's most prolific batsmen ; being the first South African woman to have scored a half @-@ century in a Twenty20 International , and one of only six women to have scored a century for South Africa in a One Day International ( ODI ) . She is the leading South African run @-@ scorer in ODI with 1622 runs . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Rustenburg , Transvaal , Brits began her cricket career aged 11 when she entered the sport playing in boys ' teams . At the age of 14 , Brits made two appearances for South Africa Under @-@ 21s women against the touring England side in 1998 , playing as wicket @-@ keeper during two 50 @-@ over contests . In the first , an eight run victory for South Africa , she claimed a stumping and a catch but was not required to bat . For the second match , she was promoted up the order from number eight to number five and made 14 runs off 13 balls as South Africa lost by 42 runs . 
 Four years later , Brits made her full international debut in a One Day International against India women . Brits was selected as a bowler , placed at number nine in the batting order , and opening the bowling for South Africa . The match was first shortened and then abandoned , and Brits only bowled two overs , conceding two runs , before the conclusion . Brits retained this role in the second ODI , claiming two wickets as South Africa won by 29 runs using the Duckworth – Lewis method . She claimed three further wickets in the final two ODIs of the series . In the fourth ODI , she was promoted up the batting order to number five , though she only managed to score ten runs as South Africa failed to chase down an Indian total of 160 . At the conclusion of the ODI series , the two sides played a Test match , with Brits reprising her role as opening bowler . She took two wickets and conceded 91 runs ( 2 / 91 ) as India amassed 404 / 9 declared in their first @-@ innings . Despite her move up the batting order in the shorter format of the game , Brits batted as part of the tail during the Test match , scoring nine runs at number eleven in the first @-@ innings and then as South Africa were forced to follow @-@ on , she made eleven runs from number ten in the second @-@ innings . 
 = = = England series : 2003 , 2003 – 04 = = = 
 She reprised this role for South Africa during their 2003 tour of England . During three 50 @-@ over warm @-@ up matches , Brits claimed four wickets and scored 33 runs while opening the bowling and batting as part of the tail . During the first Test , Brits showed her ability with the bat , scoring 32 runs as part of a 59 @-@ run partnership with fellow tail @-@ ender Sune van Zyl . She claimed two wickets in England 's response , claiming the wickets of opener Charlotte Edwards and captain Clare Connor . In the following ODIs , she claimed three wickets , all in the second match , as England claimed the series 2 – 1 . <unk> to bat during South Africa 's solitary victory , she made ducks in both the other matches . She continued her string of ducks in the first @-@ innings of the second Test , falling leg before wicket ( lbw ) facing her eighth delivery . However , after claiming two English wickets , Brits top @-@ scored for South Africa in the second @-@ innings , making 61 off 67 balls , including 13 fours . Despite this innings , South Africa lost the match by an innings and 96 runs . 
 In the South African summer of 2003 – 04 , England women toured South Africa , playing five ODIs . In the first match , Brits claimed three wickets as England were restricted to 151 , a total South Africa passed with the last ball of the allocated 50 overs . Brits went wicket @-@ less in the next two matches , both England victories , but claimed another three wickets in the fourth match of the series . Despite her wickets , England set South Africa a total of 242 to chase , and Brits was moved up the batting order to open the innings alongside Terblanche . The tactic failed : South Africa needed to score almost five runs an over to win the match , and when Brits was dismissed in the fourteenth over for 20 , the pair had only scored 38 runs , roughly two and a half runs an over . South Africa finished on 142 / 9 , over a hundred runs short of their target . For the 2004 season , Brits joined Kent women , playing in all five of their Women 's County Championship matches . She finished the competition with eight wickets , including a four @-@ wicket haul against Yorkshire in her final match . 
 = = = Women 's Cricket World Cup in South Africa : 2005 = = = 
 Brits was named as part of the South African squad to compete in the 2005 Women 's Cricket World Cup . Prior to the tournament , South Africa played two ODIs against England . Brits opened the innings alongside Terblanche in both matches , as she would continue to do throughout the World Cup , and made scores of 23 and 11 . She enjoyed more success during the tournament itself , finishing as South Africa 's leading run @-@ scorer with 206 runs , 92 more than her closest compatriot , <unk> Fritz . Her five wickets ranked her second among South African women behind Alicia Smith . During South Africa 's second round @-@ robin match , against the West Indies women , Brits made both her highest score of the tournament , making 72 , and her best bowling analysis , taking four wickets . She received the man of the match award for her achievement , as South Africa won the match by one run . Though she did not make any further half @-@ centuries during the tournament , she was twice dismissed in the forties , scoring 49 against Australia women and 46 against England women . 
 Despite Brits ' relative success in the tournament , the win against the West Indies women was South Africa 's only victory , and they finished the group stage in seventh place , meaning that they failed to qualify for the knockout phase . A three match ODI series was hastily arranged against the West Indies women , who had also been eliminated . By this stage , Brits was starting to bowl less frequently . She had opened the bowling in three of South Africa 's World Cup fixtures , but did not bowl at all against England women , and was used as the fourth @-@ change bowler against Sri Lanka women , bowling only four overs . Against the West Indies women , Brits bowled two overs in the first match , being used as the first @-@ change bowler , and has only bowled once in ODI cricket since . Her good form with the bat continued against the West Indies women as she passed 50 in two of the three matches , 2004 / 05 though the West Indies won the series 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Pakistan series , Afro @-@ Asia Cup : 2006 – 07 , 2007 = = = 
 An injury to Fritz , who had been selected as South African captain for the home series against Pakistan in 2006 – 07 , saw Brits named as her replacement eight days before the first ODI . South Africa women won the first match of the series by 98 runs , with Brits scoring 39 runs from 42 balls , including 6 fours , in " an attractive cameo " . She top @-@ scored for South Africa in the second and third matches with half @-@ centuries , helping to secure the series victory . South Africa eventually won the series 4 – 0 , and Brits was named as player of the series , having scored 183 runs and captained South Africa to their first series win since beating India women in 2002 . Brits was subsequently named as captain of the African women side to compete in a Twenty20 match against an Asian women XI during the 2007 Afro @-@ Asia Cup . The side , which contained four South Africans , lost by 60 runs . Brits was one of ten African players to be dismissed with a single @-@ figure score , and five members of the team were dismissed for ducks . 
 = = = European tour : 2007 = = = 
 South Africa began their preparation for the 2008 Women 's World Cup Qualifying series with a tour of Europe , beginning with a Test match and an ODI series against Netherlands women , and then moving into England for more ODIs . Brits remained as South African captain for the tour , and became the only South African to captain her side to a woman 's Test victory , as they beat Netherlands by 159 runs . Although Brits had only managed a score of 21 in the first @-@ innings of the Test match , and had declared with herself unbeaten on 5 in the second , she showed her continued form with the bat by scoring 46 in the first ODI and 59 in the second , partnering <unk> Terblanche in a 131 @-@ run third wicket stand , a South African record for that wicket . A century from <unk> <unk> in the final ODI helped South Africa secure a 3 – 0 series whitewash . 
 Once in England , South Africa played two 50 @-@ over contests against an England Development Squad , each side taking one win apiece , Brits top @-@ scoring in South Africa 's victory with 78 runs . This was followed by South Africa 's first two Twenty20 Internationals , against New Zealand women and England women at the County Ground , Taunton . The first match , against New Zealand , was marked by a spate of run outs , each team having four players dismissed in this fashion . South Africa lost by 97 runs , with Brits one of only three players to make it into double @-@ figures , scoring 23 at just under a @-@ run @-@ a @-@ ball . In the second match , held on the same day , South Africa again struggled for runs , with Brits this time being one of four players to make it out of single figures as South Africa lost by 86 runs . 
 = = = World Cup Qualifying Series : 2007 / 08 = = = 
 In order to qualify for the 2009 Women 's Cricket World Cup in Australia , South Africa had to compete in the qualifying series , which they hosted in Stellenbosch , the event having been postponed and then cancelled in Pakistan due to security concerns . Brits was not required to bat in the first match , a ten @-@ wicket victory over Bermuda in which eight of the <unk> failed to score a run , and the remaining three were all dismissed for just one apiece . After scoring 17 in the second match , against Papua New Guinea , Brits made her highest score in One Day International cricket in the next match , against Netherlands . Coming in at number three after opener <unk> Terblanche had been dismissed for a duck after five balls of the match , Brits batted through the remainder of the innings and finished on 107 not out . Brits only managed 3 in the victory against Ireland in the semi @-@ finals which guaranteed South Africa a place in the 2009 World Cup , and was dismissed for a duck in the final as South Africa easily overcame Pakistan to win the competition . Brits was named as the 2008 CSA Women 's Cricketer of the Year . 
 = = = United Kingdom tour : 2008 = = = 
 Brits represented Central women during the <unk> Women 's <unk> 's in 2008 , and finished the tournament with 103 runs , trailing only Highveld 's Mignon du Preez , who scored the competition 's only half @-@ century . Upon the completion of the competition , the national team flew over to Ireland to begin their tour of the United Kingdom which started with an ODI just four days later . South Africa enjoyed a comfortable ten @-@ wicket victory in the tour opener , with Brits bowling an expensive two overs , conceding 17 runs including eight wides . She had not bowled in international cricket since 2005 , and has not again since . After making 13 in the Twenty20 match against the Irish , Brits fell for successive ducks in a 20 @-@ over match against England Academy and the first ODI against England . She continued to struggle with the bat in the remaining three ODIs , failing to pass 20 as England eased to a 4 – 0 series win . She dropped down the order for the Twenty20 matches , batting at five and six , but after remaining 20 not out at the close of play in the first match , she was dismissed for 2 in both the following games . 
 = = = Cricket World Cup , World Twenty20 : 2009 = = = 
 Following their successful qualifying campaign , South Africa were one of eight women 's teams represented in the 2009 Women 's Cricket World Cup . Prior to the tournament , it had been announced that <unk> Loubser would replace Brits as captain of the national team . Denise Reid , the <unk> of selectors , stated that the change had been made in order for Brits to " concentrate entirely on her own performance " as " [ South Africa ] require her undivided attention at the role assigned to her " . During her time as captain , Brits had averaged 32 @.@ 07 with the bat , however twelve of her sixteen matches were against Ireland , Pakistan and Netherlands women , both teams that South Africa had beaten easily in the World Cup Qualifying Series ; against the more competitive England side , she had averaged a much lower 8 @.@ 75 with the bat . Brits made modest totals in the two warm @-@ up matches against India and Pakistan , but averaged 33 @.@ 00 in the World Cup matches , second among the South African team behind Trisha Chetty . After scoring 7 against the West Indies in their first match , she made 36 against reigning World Champions Australia . South Africa finished the group @-@ stage winless when they suffered a 199 run defeat to New Zealand in the final group match ; chasing 250 , South Africa only managed to make 51 , with Brits ' score of 25 making her the only South African to make it into double figures . Brits remained 31 not out in the seventh place play @-@ off as South Africa successfully chased down the Sri Lankan score of 75 with over 20 overs to spare . 
 Brits finished the 2009 ICC Women 's World Twenty20 as South Africa 's top @-@ scorer with 71 runs . Her half @-@ century against New Zealand in the second match is the highest score by a South African woman in a Twenty20 International , surpassing the record of 38 set only four days earlier by du Preez . Despite her record , South Africa lost to the New Zealanders by 6 wickets , though Brits had the small consolation of being named man of the match . Brits scored seven runs in each of the other matches for South Africa , both defeats , against West Indies and Australia respectively . 
 = = = West Indies series : 2009 – 10 = = = 
 South Africa and Brits had a point to prove during their 2009 – 10 series against the West Indies , and were keen to improve on their recent performances . Brits top @-@ scored for the South Africans in the first of four ODIs with 48 , but an unbeaten century from West Indies opener <unk> Taylor helped the tourists to chase down the total and win with 51 balls remaining . Brits made 31 in the second match as South Africa levelled the series , and then scored a match @-@ winning 60 not out in the third match to give South Africa the lead in the series . During this innings , she became only the second South African woman to pass 1 @,@ 000 career ODI runs . Brits missed the following Twenty20 series with bronchitis . 
 = Quinceañera ( film ) = 
 Quinceañera ( English : " Fifteen @-@ year @-@ old " , referring to a coming @-@ of @-@ age ceremony in Latin American communities ) is a 2006 American independent drama film written and directed by Richard Glatzer and Wash Westmoreland . Set in Echo Park , Los Angeles , the film follows the lives of two young Mexican American cousins who become estranged from their families — Magdalena ( played by Emily Rios ) because of her unwed teenage pregnancy and Carlos ( Jesse Garcia ) because of his homosexuality — and are taken in by their elderly great @-@ uncle Tomas ( Chalo González ) . 
 The film was inspired by Glatzer and Westmoreland 's experience as a white gay couple moving into the gentrifying neighborhood of Echo Park , a predominantly Latino working @-@ class community . They wrote , cast and filmed Quinceañera over four months in 2005 after securing a US $ 400 @,@ 000 budget from investors . It was filmed in Echo Park with the assistance of Glatzer and Westmoreland 's neighbors and a cast of largely nonprofessional actors . It premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 23 , 2006 , where it won the Grand Jury Prize and the Audience Award . It was released in the United States on August 2 , 2006 , to mostly positive reviews and earned $ 2 @.@ 5 million at the box office . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Magdalena , a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old girl from a working @-@ class Mexican American family in Echo Park , Los Angeles , attends her cousin Eileen 's quinceañera , an extravagant coming @-@ of @-@ age ceremony to celebrate her fifteenth birthday . Eileen 's older brother Carlos — who has been disowned by his family due to his homosexuality and now lives with his great @-@ uncle Tomas — arrives at the celebrations but is forced to leave by his father . Magdalena herself is about to turn fifteen but her parents cannot afford to host a quinceañera as lavish as Eileen 's , and they deny her repeated requests to hire a Hummer limousine for the occasion . While preparing for her quinceañera , Magdalena learns that she is pregnant by her friend Herman although they had only once engaged in non @-@ penetrative intercourse . Her Christian father is furious , believing that Magdalena has had premarital sex despite her protestations that she is still a virgin . She leaves her family to move in with Tomas and Carlos and continues to see Herman until she discovers that his mother has sent him away to live with relatives to prevent him from seeing Magdalena . 
 Carlos becomes sexually involved with the Caucasian gay couple , James and Gary , who recently bought Tomas 's property and are now his landlords and neighbors , but he eventually begins a secret affair with Gary without James 's knowledge . With Magdalena 's pregnancy progressing , Carlos offers to financially support her and to act as a surrogate father for the child once it is born . When James discovers his partner 's affair with Carlos he feels betrayed and Tomas soon receives a letter notifying him that his landlords are evicting him . Tomas , Magdalena and Carlos struggle to find an affordable place to live due to the gentrification of the area and the rising real estate prices , but Tomas dies in his sleep shortly before they are due to be evicted . In the aftermath , Magdalena is reunited with her mother and together they visit a gynecologist , who confirms that Magdalena conceived without having penetrative sex . Magdalena 's father apologizes to her at Tomas 's funeral , believing her conception to be a miracle , and she forgives him . 
 Magdalena eventually receives the quinceañera she had wished for , complete with a Hummer limousine , with her parents in attendance and Carlos as her escort . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Emily Rios as Magdalena 
 Jesse Garcia as Carlos 
 Chalo González as Tio Tomas 
 J.R. Cruz as Herman 
 David W. Ross as Gary 
 Alicia <unk> as Eileen 
 Jesus Castaños @-@ Chima as Ernesto 
 Jason L. Wood as James 
 <unk> Guzman @-@ Rico as Maria 
 = = Production = = 
 Quinceañera was written and directed by Richard Glatzer and Wash Westmoreland , filmmaking partners and a romantic couple . They conceived the idea for the film in January 2005 , based on their own experiences as a white gay couple moving into the predominantly Latino working @-@ class neighborhood of Echo Park , Los Angeles , as the area underwent gentrification . They were inspired to make a film about the traditional quinceañera celebration after being invited to their fifteen @-@ year @-@ old neighbor 's ceremony . With producer Anne Clements , they pitched the idea to three investors — immigrants to the United States from Greece and Israel — who agreed to provide $ 300 @,@ 000 to finance the project . ( The budget was later raised to $ 400 @,@ 000 . ) Glatzer and Westmoreland then wrote the screenplay over three weeks in February . 
 Casting for the film took place over March 2005 through the internet , a Los Angeles @-@ based organization for Latino actors , and word of mouth . Glatzer and Westmoreland chose to cast non @-@ union actors ; none of the cast except Chalo González belonged to the Screen Actors Guild . Most of the actors were nonprofessional and had never acted in a film before . Emily Rios 's only experience before playing the lead role of Magdalena was in a school play , while Jesse Garcia had only acted in commercials . The film 's own casting director , Jason L. Wood , ended up playing the character of James , and Glatzer and Westmoreland cast their cleaning lady in a small role . They borrowed props from their cleaner 's niece , who had recently had a quinceañera , and mimicked her video of the ceremony to create part of the film . Although the script called for the actors to speak " Spanglish " — a mixture of English and Spanish — neither Glatzer nor Westmoreland were fluent in Spanish , so many of the actors translated their own lines from English . The teenage cast members also improvised dialogue for some scenes and provided their own clothes to wear in character . 
 The film was shot over eighteen days in April 2005 . It was filmed on location in Echo Park inside Glatzer and Westmoreland 's house and in three houses on their block that their neighbors allowed them to use for little or no money . Many of Glatzer and Westmoreland 's Echo Park neighbors also stood in as extras . Due to California 's child labor laws , they could only film with the underage cast members for six hours a day , so cinematographer Eric <unk> used a hand @-@ held camera with few accessories to maximize the time they could spend filming . <unk> filmed the project in high @-@ definition video format , which was converted to film during post @-@ production . The film 's soundtrack included reggaeton songs as well as music composed by Westmoreland 's brother as a favor since the filmmakers could afford little else . Robin Katz finished editing the film in August 2005 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Quinceañera premiered on January 23 , 2006 , at the Sundance Film Festival , where it won both the Grand Jury Prize and the Audience Award in the dramatic feature category . Its U.S. distribution rights were bought by Sony Pictures Classics while its international rights were purchased by Celluloid Dreams . The film was later screened at the Berlin International Film Festival before its theatrical release . 
 The film opened in limited release in the United States on August 4 , 2006 , earning $ 95 @,@ 400 on its opening weekend from eight theatres . It gradually expanded over the next three weeks , achieving a widest release of 96 theatres by its fourth weekend . Its theatrical run lasted for 14 weeks , concluding with a total gross of $ 1 @,@ 692 @,@ 693 . It grossed $ 830 @,@ 094 internationally , making a total box office gross of $ 2 @,@ 522 @,@ 787 . 
 It was released in DVD format on January 9 , 2007 . Extra features on the DVD included an audio commentary with Glatzer , Westmoreland and the film 's actors , a " making @-@ of " featurette , and a mock quinceañera home video made by Glatzer and Westmoreland . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Quinceañera received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 86 % , based on 95 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " This slice @-@ of @-@ life story of a teenage girl in Echo Park is both a sweet crowd @-@ pleaser and a perceptive look at socioeconomic community issues . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 72 out of 100 , based on reviews from 31 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Variety critic David Rooney summarized Quinceañera as " a fresh , spirited drama , charming and unpretentious " as well as a " small gem of a movie with a stirring soul " . He praised the " subdued , natural performances " of the inexperienced teenaged actors as well as Chalo González 's portrayal of Tomas . Stephen Holden of The New York Times described the film as " smart and warmhearted " with " a wonderfully organic feel for the fluid interaction of cultures and generations " in Los Angeles . Slate 's Dana Stevens commended the film for avoiding clichés and for its " sharp @-@ eyed analysis of class conflict " . She singled out the performance of Emily Rios , whom she said " carries the movie on her square broad shoulders " . Claudia Puig of USA Today awarded the film three out of four stars and described it as " spirited and poignant " , with Rios ' performance providing " the heart of the film " . Wesley Morris , writing for The Boston Globe , found the film to be " a modest but remarkably poignant comedy " and believed that , despite the predictability of the broader story , " somehow it feels authentic in all its small details " . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Ruthe Stein commented that the film was " directed with obvious love " by Glatzer and Westmoreland and commended González for his " hypnotic performance " as Tomas . Gianni Truzzi , who reviewed the film for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , wrote of its " charm , sensitivity and intelligence " as well as the " great authenticity " of Rios 's portrayal of Magdalena . 
 Conversely , Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly , who gave the film a C grade , found the plot " contrived " and melodramatic , and summarized it as " suds being sold as ethno @-@ sensitive reality " . The Christian Science Monitor 's Peter Rainer felt that the Quinceañera " is best approached with lowered expectations " , and that despite being " heartfelt and well @-@ observed " it failed to adequately explore its contrasting themes of race , sexuality and religion . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = Royal baccarat scandal = 
 The royal baccarat scandal , also known as the Tranby Croft affair , was a British gambling scandal of the late 19th century involving the Prince of Wales — the future King Edward VII . The scandal started during a house party in September 1890 , when Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming , a decorated lieutenant colonel in the Scots Guards , was accused of cheating at baccarat . 
 Edward had been invited to stay at Tranby Croft , Yorkshire , the home of Arthur Wilson and his family . Among Edward 's party were his advisers , Lord Coventry and Lieutenant @-@ General Owen Williams ; Gordon @-@ Cumming , a friend of the prince , was also invited . On the first night the guests played baccarat , and Stanley Wilson thought he saw Gordon @-@ Cumming illegally adding to his stake . Stanley informed other members of the Wilson family , and they agreed to watch him on the following evening . Gordon @-@ Cumming was again seen to be acting in a suspicious manner . The family members asked the advice of the royal courtiers who , with the agreement of the prince , confronted Gordon @-@ Cumming and pressured him into signing a document that declared he would never play cards again , in exchange for the silence of the guests . 
 The secret was not kept for long , and Gordon @-@ Cumming demanded a retraction from the Wilson family , whom he considered to blame for divulging the news . They refused , and he filed a writ for slander in February 1891 . Despite the efforts of the prince 's courtiers to have the matter dealt with by a military court , the case was heard in June 1891 . The atmosphere at trial was described as being like a theatre , and Edward was called as a witness , the first time the heir to the throne had been compelled to appear in court since 1411 . Gordon @-@ Cumming 's senior counsel , the Solicitor General Sir Edward Clarke , did not persuade any of the defendants to change their stories , but he highlighted several inaccuracies and serious discrepancies in their evidence . Despite a strong and well @-@ regarded closing speech by Clarke on Gordon @-@ Cumming 's behalf , the judge 's summing up was described as biased by some , and the jury found against the lieutenant colonel . 
 Gordon @-@ Cumming was dismissed from the army the following day , and was ostracised from society for the rest of his life . A leader in The Times stated that " He has committed a mortal offence . Society can know him no more . " Public opinion was on his side , and the prince was at his most unpopular for several years afterwards . The affair has been of subsequent interest to writers ; two books have examined the matter , and there have been two fictionalised accounts of the events . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming = = = 
 At the time of the events at the country home Tranby Croft , Yorkshire , Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming was a 42 @-@ year @-@ old decorated lieutenant colonel in the Scots Guards , having seen service in South Africa ( 1879 ) , Egypt ( 1882 ) and Sudan ( 1884 – 85 ) . Gordon @-@ Cumming 's biographer , Jason Tomes , thought that his subject possessed " audacity and wit [ and ] gloried in the sobriquet of the most arrogant man in London " , while Sporting Life described him as " possibly the most handsome man in London , and certainly the rudest " . In addition to considerable land holdings in Scotland , Gordon @-@ Cumming owned a house in Belgravia , London ; he was a friend of the Prince of Wales , and would lend it to the prince for assignations with royal mistresses . Gordon @-@ Cumming was a womaniser , and stated that his aim was to " perforate " members of " the sex " ; his liaisons included Lillie Langtry , Sarah Bernhardt and Lady Randolph Churchill . He was unmarried at the time of the events and subsequent court case . 
 = = = Edward , Prince of Wales ; the Marlborough House set = = = 
 Edward , Prince of Wales was a 49 @-@ year @-@ old married father of five at the time he visited Tranby Croft , and had a history of association with scandals . In 1866 he had incurred the censure of his mother , Queen Victoria , when he became involved with " the fast racing set " , and his betting had " harm [ ed ] his reputation and contribute [ d ] to the widespread unpopularity of the monarchy in this period " , according to his biographer , Sidney Lee . 
 In April 1869 Sir Charles Mordaunt ( 1836 – 1897 ) learnt that his wife had had three separate affairs , and that her lovers included the heir to the throne . Although Mordaunt did not carry out his threat of citing the prince as co @-@ respondent in the subsequent divorce case , Edward was subpoenaed to appear in court as a witness . Although Edward did not want to appear — and the queen wrote to the Lord Chancellor to see if this could be avoided — the law was such that the heir to the throne could be forced to appear if necessary . The prince appeared voluntarily and was in the witness box for seven minutes , during which time he denied having had a sexual relationship with Mordaunt 's wife ; he was not cross @-@ examined . Edward 's biographer , Colin Matthew , wrote that " the hearing coincided with general criticism of the very different <unk> of both the queen and the prince . The latter was several times booed in public " . Despite the " taboo on open criticism on [ the prince 's ] actions , an undercurrent of dissatisfaction existed " with him and his actions . For Edward , although such affairs could be discussed between friends , scandal was to be avoided wherever possible . 
 In 1890 the prince gave up dancing , telling his son George that " I am getting too old and fat for these amusements " ; he replaced dancing with other pursuits , like attending the opera and playing baccarat . He enjoyed baccarat so much that when he travelled he brought a set of leather counters , valued on one side from five shillings to £ 10 and engraved with his feathers on the other ; the counters had been a present from his friend Reuben Sassoon , a member of the well @-@ known banking family . 
 Surrounding the prince was a fashionable clique known as the Marlborough House set , named after the prince 's home overlooking The Mall , London . The set was a mixture of old titled families and " plutocratic and parvenu " families with fortunes from new industry , and Edward carried out an active policy to spread the social circle of the royal family to include new industrialists such as the shipping magnate Arthur Wilson . 
 = = = Arthur Wilson and family = = = 
 Arthur Wilson was the 52 @-@ year @-@ old Hull @-@ based owner of a shipping business . He built his home at Tranby Croft , in the East Riding of Yorkshire , as a Victorian country house , and he and his family moved in during the summer of 1876 . As well as a wife , Mary , he also had a son , ( Arthur ) Stanley Wilson , and a daughter , Ethel ; her husband , Edward Lycett Green was the son of the local manufacturer and MP , Sir Edward Green . Tomes reports that Gordon @-@ Cumming may have previously propositioned Ethel Lycett Green . 
 = = = Gambling and baccarat in 1890 = = = 
 Baccarat is a game for up to 20 players , together with a banker and croupier ; several packs of cards are used , depending on the number of players . The value of the ace to nine cards are as their pip value , while tens and court cards count as zero . A player is dealt two cards and adds up the combined pips , discounting 10 's and court cards , and only using the single digit value as a score - a King and a 6 will equal 16 , but their value will be 6 ; two 8s will equal 16 , and their value will also be 6 . Two court cards will count as zero , or baccarat ) . The idea of the game is to get 9 points . A player may ask for one extra card to be added to their hand . Betting is between the player and the bank , with the closest to reach 9 on a hand receiving the stake . 
 In 1886 the High Court of Justice in London ruled in the Parks case — Jenks v. Turpin — that baccarat was a game of chance rather than skill , and was therefore illegal when gambling was involved . In reporting the case , The Times described baccarat as " a new game , partly of chance , at which £ 1 @,@ 000 may be lost in 20 minutes " . After a solicitor asked the Home Secretary , Henry Matthews , to clarify the position regarding baccarat in social clubs and private houses , the Home Office civil servant Godfrey Lushington stated that there was nothing in the court 's judgment that made baccarat illegal if not played for money . 
 The former Shadow Home Secretary and historian Roy Hattersley comments that although baccarat was illegal , " worse still in the eyes of many Englishmen , [ it was ] thought to be popular in France " . 
 = = Visit to Tranby Croft = = 
 = = = Preliminary events = = = 
 In the years running up to 1890 the Prince of Wales had taken to visiting Doncaster Racecourse for the Doncaster Cup . In previous years he had stayed at Brantingham Thorpe with his friend Sir Christopher Sykes , the Conservative Member of Parliament for Beverley . Sykes had run into financial difficulties and could not afford to host Edward , and Tranby Croft , home to Arthur Wilson and family , became the venue . After consulting with the prince , the Wilsons also invited some of Edward 's inner circle , including Sykes , Gordon @-@ Cumming and the prince 's courtiers : the equerry Tyrwhitt Wilson , Lord Coventry , Lord Edward Somerset , Captain Arthur Somerset — his cousin — and Lieutenant @-@ General Owen Williams , along with their wives . Also accompanying the party was Lieutenant Berkeley Levett , a brother officer to Gordon @-@ Cumming in the Scots Guards and a friend of the Wilson family . 
 Among those originally invited were Lord Brooke and his wife Daisy ; her step @-@ father died two days before the party was due to leave London , and she and her husband withdrew from the trip . Daisy , the prince 's mistress at the time , was known to some journalists as " babbling " Brooke because of her propensity to gossip . On 6 September Edward returned early from travelling in Europe ; he visited Harriet Street where he found Daisy Brooke " in Gordon @-@ Cumming 's arms " , which soured the relationship between the two men . 
 = = = Events of 8 – 11 September = = = 
 After dinner on 8 September , the guests at Tranby Croft listened to music from Ethel Lycett Green until about 11 pm , when the prince suggested a game of baccarat . Although the Wilsons did not have a suitably @-@ sized table , Stanley Wilson improvised , putting two card tables alongside the smoking room table — all of which were of differing sizes — and covered them with a tapestry cloth . Among the evening 's players were the prince , who acted as dealer ; Sassoon , who took the part of banker ; and Gordon @-@ Cumming . Sitting next to the last @-@ named was Stanley Wilson , who was on Levett 's left . 
 As the game began Gordon @-@ Cumming discussed the tapestry with Wilson , commenting that the different colours of the cloth made it difficult to see the counters ; Gordon @-@ Cumming put a piece of white paper in front of him on which to place his now highly @-@ visible stake . Although many of the inexperienced party were playing for small stakes , Gordon @-@ Cumming was betting between £ 5 and £ 25 for a coup ; he played the coup de trois system of betting , in which if he won a hand with a £ 5 stake , he would add his winnings to the stake , together with another £ 5 , as the stake for the next hand . Soon after play began Stanley Wilson thought he saw Gordon @-@ Cumming add two red £ 5 counters onto his stake after the hand had finished , but before the stake had been paid — a method of cheating known in casinos as la <unk> ; after he thought that this had happened a second time , Wilson turned to Levett and , according to the later court transcripts , whispered " My God , Berkeley , this is too hot ! " further explaining that " the man next to me is cheating ! " After Levett also watched for a few minutes , he agreed , saying to Wilson " this is too hot " . After half an hour the game was completed and the prince congratulated Gordon @-@ Cumming on his play ; the future king also asked Mrs Wilson for a more suitable table for the following day . Stanley Wilson instructed the butler to move a longer , three @-@ foot wide table in and cover it with green baize . Wilson then discussed the cheating with Levett . The two men were uncertain what steps to take , and agreed that Stanley would ask his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Lycett Green , for his advice . Although Lycett Green thought it impossible that Gordon @-@ Cumming would have cheated , Stanley told him that he was certain , as was Levett . 
 The following day , 9 September , the party visited the races , where the prince 's horse won the Clumber Stakes . After dinner the prince once again wanted to play baccarat and asked for a chalk line to be drawn on the baize , six inches from the edge , behind which players were to keep their counters when not placing their stake . Edward was banker and Williams acted as the croupier . When Gordon @-@ Cumming arrived at the table , there were only two vacant seats . At either of them , Gordon @-@ Cumming would be surrounded by members of the Wilson family , all of whom had been informed of Stanley and Levett 's suspicions . 
 After half an hour 's play Lycett Green once again became convinced that Gordon @-@ Cumming was cheating . He left the table and sent a note to his mother @-@ in @-@ law — still at the table — recounting his suspicions : she took no action . By the time the game was finished Mary Wilson , the two Lycett Greens and Stanley Wilson — all of whom had been watching Gordon @-@ Cumming closely — were convinced that he had been cheating , although they differed in their versions of what they saw . Others saw nothing , including people sitting closer to him , such as the prince , Lady Coventry ( sitting next to Gordon @-@ Cumming ) and Levett ( sitting opposite him ) . Over the two nights ' play Gordon @-@ Cumming won a total of £ 225 . 
 Mary Wilson 's brother died unexpectedly that night in Hull ; although she and her husband did not attend for a second day 's racing , they asked all the other guests not to interrupt the plans , and the remainder of the party attended , watching the St. Leger Stakes . During the journey to the racecourse , Lycett Green asked Edward Somerset his advice , telling the peer that several members of the party were convinced of Gordon @-@ Cumming 's guilt . Edward Somerset decided to consult his cousin , Arthur Somerset , and the two men suggested that Lycett Green inform the prince 's senior courtier , Lord Coventry . 
 When the party returned to Tranby Croft that evening Lycett Green , Stanley Wilson and both Somersets met Coventry ; Levett refused to attend . After Lycett Green had told Coventry what he had seen , the latter summoned Williams , who was a mutual friend of both the prince and Gordon @-@ Cumming . Lycett Green repeated the allegation once again . Williams later recounted that he was " shocked and overwhelmed with a sense of calamity " , and said that Edward must be informed immediately . There was some disagreement between the courtiers on whether to tell the prince ; Coventry and Wilson both thought it the right move , but Arthur Somerset felt that the matter could and should be dealt with by those present . Later he was persuaded that informing the prince was the right course of action . Lycett Green grew more pugnacious throughout the discussions , and threatened to accuse Gordon @-@ Cumming in public at the races the following day ; he also stated that " I will not be a party to letting Gordon @-@ Cumming prey on society in future " . The men decided that Gordon @-@ Cumming should sign a document admitting his guilt in exchange for their silence , and Williams and Coventry went to Edward to inform him of what had been happening . The two men told the prince that " the evidence they had heard was absolutely conclusive and they did not believe Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming had a leg to stand on " . 
 The prince believed what he had been told by his courtiers , and also assumed that cheating had taken place ; he later said that with accusations from five witnesses he believed the worst of his friend straight away . At no point had any of those concerned investigated the situation more closely , by asking others present or seeking out Gordon @-@ Cumming 's side of events , but they had believed the events as told to them by Lycett Green and Stanley Wilson . After informing the prince , the two courtiers sought out the accused man and informed him of what had been said . Coventry broke the news to him , saying that " There is a very disagreeable thing that has occurred in this house . Some of the people staying here object ... to the way you play baccarat " , and that the accusation was that he had " resorted to foul play " at the game . Gordon @-@ Cumming denied the accusation , asking " Do you believe the statements of a parcel of inexperienced boys ? " , and demanded to see the prince . 
 After dinner the guests signed the visitors book , after which the prince — accompanied by Coventry , Williams and the two Somersets — received Lycett Green and the other accusers . After hearing what they had to say , the prince dismissed all except Coventry and Williams , and called for Gordon @-@ Cumming , who told Edward that the accusation was " foul and abominable " ; the prince pointed out that " there are five accusers against you " . Gordon @-@ Cumming then withdrew while the royal party discussed what the next steps would be . He returned after half an hour to find just the two courtiers , who urged him to sign a document that they had drafted . Under pressure , and still denying the accusations , Gordon @-@ Cumming signed the document without knowing who else would sign it afterwards . 
 " In consideration of the promise made by the gentlemen whose names are subscribed to preserve my silence with reference to an accusation which has been made in regard to my conduct at baccarat on the nights of Monday and Tuesday the 8th and 9th at Tranby Croft , I will on my part solemnly undertake never to play cards again as long as I live . " 
 The courtiers took the document to Edward , who summoned the other members of the house ; he read the note to them and signed it , pointing out to everyone that the promise of secrecy was incumbent on all of them . He also added that Gordon @-@ Cumming was still protesting his innocence , despite signing a paper that " practically admitted his guilt " . The paper was then signed by the men present : the prince , Coventry , Williams , Wilson and his son , both Somersets , Lycett Green , Levett and Sassoon . Although the prince hoped that this would bring an end to the affair , Arthur Somerset pointed out that it would not remain secret . Edward asked him " not even when gentlemen have given their word not to divulge it ? " ; Somerset replied that " It is impossible , sir . Nothing in the world known to ten people was ever kept secret " . 
 On the advice of Williams , Gordon @-@ Cumming left Tranby Croft early the following morning , 11 September ; he left behind a letter to Mary Wilson apologising for his early departure , and one for Williams , again stating his innocence , but acknowledging that " it is essential to avoid an open row and the scandal arising therefrom . " 
 = = Developments : the path to the High Court = = 
 Once he was back in London Gordon @-@ Cumming received a response to the letter he had written to Williams . Signed by the prince , Coventry and Williams , the note advised him that " you must clearly understand that in the face of the overwhelming evidence against you , it is useless to attempt to deny the accusations " . Gordon @-@ Cumming wrote to Edward with a " final appeal to show how utterly it remains in your power to utterly damn , morally and physically , one who has ever been a loyal and devoted subject " : it went unanswered by prince and courtiers . 
 Instead of hunting big game abroad as he usually did over the winter months , Gordon @-@ Cumming remained in Britain , and spent time in London and at his Scottish estate . He was also seen in the presence of an American heiress , Florence Garner , and the two became engaged . On 27 December he received an anonymous message from Paris that read : " they are beginning to talk much here of ... your sad adventure ... They have talked too much in England . He sent the message to Williams and asked him to let the prince know the contents . 
 A fortnight later Gordon @-@ Cumming was informed by a lady acquaintance that the events at Tranby Croft were being discussed in London society ; he again wrote to Williams to inform him of developments and received an unsatisfactory response . Gordon @-@ Cumming then sent a telegram to the prince asking to meet and informing him that " information I have recently received to the effect that the whole story is the subject of comment at the Turf Club ... the promise of secrecy made has been broken by those concerned " . Although Edward acknowledged receipt of the message , he declined to meet . After the negative response from the prince , Gordon @-@ Cumming lost patience and decided to fight the situation . He released his fiancée from their engagement and then visited his solicitors , <unk> & Sons . <unk> had some knowledge of the law surrounding baccarat as they had previously been involved in the Jenks v. Turpin case . 
 On the advice of his solicitors Gordon @-@ Cumming obtained a written summary of events from Coventry and Williams , and informed his commanding officer , Colonel Stacey , of the situation . Stacey told Gordon @-@ Cumming that , according to Article 41 of the Queen 's Regulations , he should already have reported the matter . Gordon @-@ Cumming replied that because the prince had been involved , and because all present had been sworn to secrecy , he had been unable to fulfil the requirement of the Regulations . He then " placed his commission in Stacey 's hands pending the result of ... [ the ] action " . 
 As the matter involved the prince , Stacey consulted other officers in the regiment about what should be done , and found that opinion was divided between allowing Gordon @-@ Cumming to remain in the regiment while he defended himself , or removing him straight away . The Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Scots Guards , the prince 's younger brother , the Duke of Connaught , was also asked : according to Havers , Grayson and Shankland , the duke " insisted that Gordon @-@ Cumming must be crushed " . Stacey disagreed , and thought that the whole story needed to be brought out before such a decision was taken . He reported the situation to the Adjutant @-@ General to the Forces , General Sir Redvers Buller , and requested permission to let Gordon @-@ Cumming retire on half @-@ pay . Buller agreed to the request , but stated that if Gordon @-@ Cumming 's legal action failed , the permission would be reviewed . Stacey relayed the message to Gordon @-@ Cumming and told him that signing the note was an error : " Because you signed that document you will never put on a sword in the regiment . If you bring a successful action you will be allowed to retire : if you fail , you will be dismissed [ from ] the service " . The Duke of Connaught strongly disapproved of Buller 's decision , and he withdrew to Portsmouth , refusing to again be drawn on the affair , even after his brother requested further advice . 
 On 27 January Gordon @-@ Cumming made a final attempt to have the rumours <unk> by instructing his solicitors to write to the two Lycett Greens , Stanley Wilson , Levett and Mary Wilson , to demand retraction of the accusation or face a writ for slander . On 6 February , with no withdrawal forthcoming , Gordon @-@ Cumming issued writs against the five , claiming £ 5 @,@ 000 against each of them . 
 On receipt of the writ the Wilsons consulted their solicitor George Lewis , who had also acted for the prince on previous occasions . Lewis briefed Sir Charles Russell to act as counsel for the defence , assisted by H. H. Asquith , the future Liberal Prime Minister . <unk> & Sons approached the Solicitor General , Sir Edward Clarke , to act as counsel on Gordon @-@ Cumming 's behalf . One of Lewis 's early concerns was to ensure Edward did not appear in court . If Gordon @-@ Cumming could be found guilty by a military tribunal , then the rationale for a court case would disappear . Lewis asked Coventry and Williams to raise the matter again with Buller , who rejected their entreaties . Buller explained his decision in a letter to the queen 's secretary , Sir Henry Ponsonby , writing that " I absolutely declined to take action against ... [ Gordon @-@ Cumming ] upon street rumours . 
 After Buller received a letter from <unk> confirming that civil action was taking place , he consulted the Judge Advocate General , who informed him that no military enquiry should take place while such a case was proceeding . Lewis then tried to persuade the Guards ' Club , of which Gordon @-@ Cumming was a member , to carry out an enquiry into the events , which would have negated much of the need for a trial . A vote of the members rejected the possibility , and the civil trial remained the outcome . The prince was furious with the Guards , and wrote to Ponsonby that " The decision of the Guards Club is a terrible blow to the Scots Guards ; and I feel most deeply for the officers who have the honour of their regiment so much at heart . " 
 Journalists drew their own conclusions from the manoeuvrings by the prince and his entourage , with the radical press quick to attack the attempts to avoid the scrutiny of a civil court . The Echo wrote that " The Baccarat Scandal is to be hushed up ... It is , no doubt , a very comfortable arrangement for all parties concerned " , while even The New York Times , normally sympathetic to Edward , foresaw political problems if the trial was prejudiced by such actions . 
 It was decided the case would be heard by the Lord Chief Justice , Lord Coleridge . His court at the Royal Courts of Justice , London , was converted to accommodate the case by raising the height of the bench and witness box and installing new seating . In May it was announced that the case would start on 1 June , and that entry to the court would be by ticket only . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial opened on 1 June 1891 . Ticket holders began queuing at 9 : 30 am , and the court was full half an hour before its 11 am start time . The prince sat on a red leather chair on a raised platform between the judge and the witness box ; his appearance was the first time since 1411 that an heir to the throne had appeared involuntarily in court . The Pall Mall Gazette stated that " the court presented an appearance which , save for the dignity of its own fittings and its rows of learned @-@ looking law books , might have been taken for a theatre at a fashionable matinée " , with society ladies watching proceedings with opera glasses or <unk> . The correspondent of The Manchester Guardian described the opening of the case as being " in the presence of a carefully selected and fashionable assembly " , while Clarke later wrote that " the court had a strange appearance . Lord Coleridge had appropriated half of the public gallery , and had given tickets to his friends " . 
 Clarke opened the case for the plaintiff , telling the jury that " It is a simple question , aye or no , did Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming cheat at cards ? " After describing Gordon @-@ Cumming 's background and record , he explained the rules of baccarat , which he described as " the most unintelligent mode of losing your own money , or getting somebody else 's , I ever heard of " . Clarke also outlined Gordon @-@ Cumming 's coup de trois system of placing bets which , he explained , could have been mistaken by the inexperienced players as cheating , rather than a correct method of gambling . After his opening speech , Clarke then questioned Gordon @-@ Cumming , and his approach was to show that Gordon @-@ Cumming " was a man of honour who had been sacrificed to save the courtiers " . 
 After an adjournment for lunch Gordon @-@ Cumming returned to the witness box , where he was cross @-@ examined by Russell . During the session Russell provided a model of the table used and a photograph of the room , and questioned Gordon @-@ Cumming about the bets where cheating had been suspected . Russell also asked him about why he had signed the document agreeing not to play cards : Gordon @-@ Cumming stated that he had " lost my head ... on that occasion . If I had not lost my head I would not have signed that document " . Gordon @-@ Cumming 's cross @-@ examination ran into the second day , after which he was then re @-@ examined by Clarke ; his time in the witness box lasted until 1 pm . The Illustrated London News considered that " Gordon @-@ Cumming made an admirable witness ... leaning easily on the rail , his grey @-@ gloved left hand resting easily on the bare right , perfectly dressed , his tones equable , firm , neither over @-@ hurried nor over @-@ deliberate , cool , but not too cool " . 
 Gordon @-@ Cumming was replaced in the witness box by the prince . Examined by Clarke , he stated that he had not seen any cheating , and was ignorant of the accusations until he was told by Coventry and Williams . After 20 minutes of questions from both Clarke and Russell , the prince was free to depart . As the prince was leaving the witness box , a member of the jury put two questions to Edward : whether the heir had seen " nothing of the alleged malpractices of the plaintiff ? " , and " what was your Royal Highness 's opinion at the time as to the charges made against Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming ? " To the first question the prince replied that he had not , although he explained that " it is not usual for a banker to see anything in dealing cards " ; to the second , he stated that " the charges appeared to be so unanimous that it was the proper course — no other course was open to me — than to believe them " . In comparison with Gordon @-@ Cumming 's performance in the witness box , Edward did not make a strong impression ; the reporter for The New York Times noticed " that the heir apparent was decidedly fidgety , that he kept changing his position , and that he did not seem able to keep his hands still ... Except to those near him , only two or three of his answers were fairly audible throughout the courtroom " . The Daily News agreed , and stated that the impression gained from the prince 's performance was unfavourable . 
 The court adjourned for lunch after Edward 's examination , and after the break Clarke called his last witness , Williams . Under Clarke 's questioning Williams confirmed that he had seen no actions by Gordon @-@ Cumming that he considered as unfair . After Clarke finished questioning Williams , Asquith cross @-@ examined the soldier for the remainder of the session ; after a brief re @-@ examination by Clarke , the day — and the case for the plaintiff — came to an end . The third day began with the opening speech for the defendants , after which Stanley Wilson took the stand for the remainder of the day , and on into the fourth day . Examined by Asquith , Stanley recounted seeing Gordon @-@ Cumming illicitly add counters to his stake twice on the first night and at least twice on the second night , although he could not remember the full details . When cross @-@ examined by Clarke he was not brow @-@ beaten by the lawyer 's questions , although Clarke made him appear " brash , conceited and callow " . Stanley was replaced in the witness box by Levett ; The Morning Advertiser considered that Levett " felt somewhat uncomfortable " appearing against Gordon @-@ Cumming , and reported that he had " described his position as an ' awkward ' one " . Despite his discomfort , Levett confirmed that on the first evening he had seen Gordon @-@ Cumming add counters after the hand had finished but before the stake had been paid . He was unsure of other details of the evening 's play , and had not witnessed anything on the second night . 
 Edward Lycett Green , described by Havers , Grayson and Shankland as " the emotional force behind the accusations " , was next in the witness box . Although Lycett Green had not played on the first night , Clarke considered him a potentially dangerous witness who was capable of giving vital evidence . Lycett Green stated that he had seen Gordon @-@ Cumming twice push counters over the chalk line when he should not have done so ; he had considered accusing Gordon @-@ Cumming at the time , but decided against it because he " did not like to make a scene before ladies " . At points in the examination by Asquith , Lycett Green contradicted the course of events outlined by Stanley Wilson — which Levett had also done — and on one point regarding a question the prince put to Levett ; his answer was " highly suspect " . Havers , Grayson and Shankland later wrote that " it is remarkable that he , the prime mover in the affair , seemed unable to say anything without qualifying it with some such remark as , ' I don 't exactly remember ' ... The hedging by the principal accuser certainly weakens the defendants ' case " . They also thought that " [ h ] is refusal to remember anything was obviously humbug , a deliberate policy " . 
 Lycett Green was followed into the witness box by his wife , and her testimony ran into the following day . Under questioning she confirmed that she had seldom played baccarat before ; although she had seen nothing untoward on the first night , she accepted her husband 's second @-@ hand version of events as the truth , but did not agree that as a result she had been watching Gordon @-@ Cumming . Although she " gave the most important part of her evidence with clarity and conviction " , and had impressed the public and press , according to Havers , Grayson and Shankland , she provided a different series of events to those outlined by other witnesses , although she stated that she thought she had seen Gordon @-@ Cumming illicitly add to his stake . 
 After Mrs Lycett Green had finished her testimony on the fifth day , her place was taken by Mrs Wilson . On examination by Russell , Mrs Wilson stated that she thought she saw Gordon @-@ Cumming cheat twice by adding additional counters to his stake . When Clarke cross @-@ examined her , he asked if anyone had placed a stake of £ 15 . Mrs Wilson stated that only her husband had placed such an amount , but Wilson had not played on either night as he disliked both the game and high @-@ stakes gambling . Havers , Grayson and Shankland consider it " rather shocking really , considering that she had sworn to tell the truth , ... to find her coming out with this ... lie spoken , apparently , with the complete self @-@ assurance that the other members of her family had shown " . 
 The final witness called for the defence was Coventry . He was one of the non @-@ playing members of the party who had witnessed no cheating , understood little about gambling and , as a non @-@ soldier , knew nothing of Article 41 of the Queen 's Regulations . When cross @-@ examined by Clarke , Coventry confirmed that as far as he was aware , the witnesses had all decided to watch Gordon @-@ Cumming 's play on the second night , despite their claims to the contrary . 
 As the defence closed , the Daily Chronicle considered " the obvious doubts which tainted the accusations of the defendants ... they and the Prince 's <unk> all contradicted each other on material points " . Russell 's summing up for the defence took the remainder of the day and the court adjourned until the following Monday , when he continued . He referred to a possible thirteen acts of cheating that the defendants were alleged to have seen , and that " we have five persons who believe he cheated , swearing unmistakably they saw him cheat , and telling you how they saw him cheat " . 
 Once Russell had completed his speech for the defendants , Clarke gave his reply , which the Daily Chronicle considered to be " a very brilliant , powerful , wily and courageous effort " . Clarke pointed to the many inaccuracies in both the written statement prepared by Coventry and Williams , and in the memories of all concerned . He went on to outline that there had been celebrations at the races — the prince 's horse had won on the first day , and the St Leger had been run on the second — combined with the full hospitality of the Wilsons to consider : according to the court reporter for The Times , Clarke " alluded to the profuse <unk> of Tranby Croft , not with any idea of suggesting drunkenness , but as indicating that the guests might not be in a state for accurate observation " . He also drew the jury 's attention to the gaps in the defendants ' memories , where they were so precise about some of their observations , but could not remember other , key , details . Clarke lampooned some of the involved parties , referring to Lycett Green as " a Master of Hounds who hunts four days a week " , while Stanley Wilson was a spoiled wastrel from a rich family who lacked initiative and drive . Above all , Clarke indicated , the defendants — with the exception of Stanley Wilson — saw what they had been told to expect : " the eye saw what it expected or sought to see ... there was only one witness who saw Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming cheat without expecting it — young Mr. [ Stanley ] Wilson . The others were all told there had been cheating , and expected to see it " . At the end of his reply , Clarke 's speech was greeted by applause amongst those in the galleries . The British lawyer Heber Hart later wrote that Clarke 's speech was " probably the most conspicuous example of the moral courage and independence of the Bar that has occurred in modern times " , while Clarke considered it to be " one of the best speeches I ever made . " 
 The following day , 9 June , Coleridge began his four @-@ hour summing up . His summary was a response to Clarke 's , and he went through on a point @-@ by @-@ point basis to discredit the solicitor general 's speech , although in places his description " was directly contrary to the evidence " . Tomes relates that " many opined that the judge 's summing @-@ up had been unacceptably biased " ; Havers , Grayson and Shankland call Coleridge 's speech " biased " , while The National Observer considered it " a melancholy and flagrant violation of the best traditions of the English bench . " Some sections of the press , however , were more sympathetic ; The Pall Mall Gazette thought the summing up to be justified , while The Daily Telegraph thought Coleridge 's summary to have been " nobly comprehensive and eloquent ... he fulfilled his duty perfectly , displaying nothing but impartial desire for the truth " . 
 The jury deliberated for only 13 minutes before finding in favour of the defendants ; their decision was greeted by prolonged hissing from some members of the galleries . According to the historian Christopher Hibbert " the demonstrations in court were an accurate reflection of the feelings of the people outside " . The historian Philip Magnus @-@ Allcroft later wrote that " a storm of obloquy broke over the head of the Prince of Wales . It would be difficult to exaggerate the momentary unpopularity of the Prince " , and he was booed at Ascot that month . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Gordon @-@ Cumming was dismissed from the army on 10 June 1891 , the day after the case closed , and he resigned his membership of his four London clubs : the Carlton , Guards ' , Marlborough and Turf . Although he offered to break his engagement for a second time , he married his American heiress fiancée the same day ; she had stood by him throughout the scandal and the couple went on to have five children together . He retired to his Scottish estate and his property in Dawlish , Devon . He never re @-@ entered society and the prince " declined to meet anyone who henceforth acknowledged the Scottish baronet " . The leader in The Times stated that " He is ... condemned by the verdict of the jury to social extinction . His brilliant record is wiped out and he must , so to speak , begin life again . Such is the inexorable social rule ... He has committed a mortal offence . Society can know him no more . " None of Gordon @-@ Cumming 's close friends spoke to him again , although some relented after Edward 's death in 1910 ; Gordon @-@ Cumming remained bitter about the events until his death in 1930 . Clarke retained his faith in his client and , in his 1918 memoirs , wrote that " I believe the verdict was wrong , and that Sir William Gordon @-@ Cumming was innocent " . 
 Following the trial the prince changed his behaviour to some extent , and although he continued to gamble , he did so in a more discreet manner ; he stopped playing baccarat altogether , taking up whist instead . While he was unpopular at the end of the case , Ridley considers that the matter " probably did little serious damage to ... [ the prince 's ] standing " ; Havers , Grayson and Shankland agree , and write that by 1896 , when the prince 's horse Persimmon won the Epsom Derby , the prince " had never been more popular " . Matthew observes that it was only when one of the prince 's own circle of confidantes brought him to court that the newspapers would " seriously <unk> [ y ] him ... the British in the 1890s had no general wish to see their future monarch fail " . 
 The scandal and court case have been the subject of factual and fictional publications . Most biographies of Edward VII contain some details of the scandal , but the first book to cover it in detail did not appear until 1932 . This was Teignmouth Shore 's The Baccarat Case , published in the Notable British Trials series and incorporating a full transcript of the case . In 1977 Havers , Grayson and Shankland wrote The Royal Baccarat Scandal , which was subsequently dramatised in a play of the same name by Royce Ryton ; the play was first produced at the Chichester Festival Theatre . Ryton 's work was also broadcast in December 1991 as a two @-@ hour drama on BBC Radio 4 . In 2000 George MacDonald Fraser placed his fictional antihero , Harry Flashman , into the scandal in the short story " The <unk> of Baccarat " , one of the three stories in Flashman and the Tiger . 
 = WrestleMania XI = 
 WrestleMania XI was the eleventh annual WrestleMania pay @-@ per @-@ view event held by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) at the Hartford Civic Center in Hartford , Connecticut on April 2 , 1995 . 
 The main event was a match between NFL linebacker Lawrence Taylor , who faced Bam Bam Bigelow as the result of an argument that took place between the two at the 1995 Royal Rumble . Taylor won the match , which led to Bigelow being kicked out of Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation . Shawn Michaels faced WWF World Heavyweight Champion Diesel in a title match but was unable to win the championship . Jeff Jarrett retained his WWF Intercontinental Championship against Razor Ramon . Owen Hart and his mystery partner , Yokozuna , challenged The Smoking Gunns for the WWF Tag Team Championship and won the title belts . 
