 The match between Taylor and Bigelow brought the WWF mainstream press coverage . The reactions to the match were mixed ; some people thought that Taylor performed surprisingly well for a non @-@ wrestler . Others thought that the WWF pushing a football player to defeat a wrestler made professional wrestling look bad . Reviews of the event as a whole have also been mixed , and the event has been called both the worst WrestleMania of all time and the event that saved the WWF . 
 = = Production = = 
 Special Olympian Kathy Huey sang a rendition of " America the Beautiful " during the event , replacing the advertised Fishbone band . Prior to Lawrence Taylor 's match against Bam Bam Bigelow , Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa sang <unk> Man . Several other celebrities also had roles at WrestleMania . Nicholas Turturro , one of the stars of NYPD Blue , conducted interviews and served as a guest ring announcer . Jonathan Taylor Thomas of Home Improvement was a guest timekeeper for the match between Diesel and Shawn Michaels . 
 On September 30 , 1995 , a one @-@ hour special including the Diesel vs. Shawn Michaels match and the Lawrence Taylor vs. Bam Bam Bigelow match was broadcast on the FOX Network . At the WrestleMania weekend , the WWF also held its Fan Fest , a promotional event during which wrestlers interacted with fans and signed autographs . 
 The WWF released the event on VHS in North America in 1995 . The VHS version was then re @-@ released on March 2 , 1999 . The event was also released on DVD in North America as part of the WrestleMania Complete Anthology boxed set on November 1 , 2005 . In the United Kingdom , the event was released on VHS on July 10 , 1995 . Packaged together with WrestleMania XII , it was then released on DVD in the United Kingdom as part of the WWE Tagged Classics line on August 7 , 2006 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The most heavily promoted feud going into the event was between Bam Bam Bigelow and Lawrence Taylor . At Royal Rumble 1995 , Bigelow teamed with Tatanka in the final round of a tournament for the WWF Tag Team Championship . Bigelow was pinned at the end of the match , which led to the crowd heckling him . He responded by pushing NFL player Lawrence Taylor , who was sitting at ringside . Bigelow refused to apologize and instead challenged Taylor to a wrestling match . Taylor agreed and trained with WWF World Heavyweight Champion Diesel to prepare for the match . The storyline between Bigelow and Taylor brought the WWF much mainstream exposure , as the match was discussed by several news outlets . 
 The other main event at WrestleMania was a match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship between Diesel and Shawn Michaels . Diesel had originally entered the WWF as Michaels 's bodyguard but later began wrestling and forming a tag team with Michaels . The pair held the WWF Tag Team Championship together in 1994 . At Survivor Series 1994 , however , Michaels accidentally kicked Diesel in the face . This led to an argument during which Diesel dissolved the tag team and vacated the championship . Three days later , Diesel defeated Bob Backlund to become the new WWF Champion . At Royal Rumble 1995 , Michaels won the battle royal main event , which earned him a match against Diesel for the title belt at WrestleMania . 
 The WWF Intercontinental Championship was also defended at WrestleMania . Jeff Jarrett , the champion , had been feuding with Razor Ramon , the challenger , for several months . At Royal Rumble 1995 , Jarrett was accompanied by The Roadie , who interfered on Jarrett 's behalf and helped Jarrett win the championship . To even the sides in the rematch at WrestleMania , Ramon was accompanied by his friend , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid . 
 In a match for the WWF Tag Team Championship , The Smoking Gunns defended their title . Their opponents were Owen Hart and a mystery partner . Hart refused to tell anyone the name of his partner , which left the Gunns uncertain who they would be facing and led to much speculation about the identity of the mystery partner . 
 Bret Hart faced Bob Backlund in an " I Quit " match at WrestleMania . The feud began the previous summer , when Hart defended the WWF World Heavyweight Championship against Backlund . Backlund mistakenly thought he won the match and began celebrating , but Hart pinned him to retain the title . After the match , Backlund turned heel by attacking Hart . This led to a title match at Survivor Series 1994 , in which Backlund won the title from Hart . Although Backlund soon lost the belt , the feud continued and Backlund attacked Hart during Hart 's match at Royal Rumble 1995 . 
 Also at Royal Rumble 1995 , The Undertaker faced Irwin R. Schyster as part of The Undertaker 's feud with Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation . During the match , King Kong Bundy , another Corporation member , interfered and enabled the Corporation to steal The Undertaker 's urn , which was said to be the source of his power . 
 = = Event = = 
 In the opening match , The Allied Powers ( Davey Boy Smith and Lex Luger ) faced the Blu Brothers ( Eli and Jacob ) . Smith started out on the offensive , but Jacob gained control with a running bulldog throw . The <unk> capitalized on the fact that they are identical twins by switching places while the referee was not looking . Luger came into the match near the end and performed a running forearm smash on Eli . Jacob tried to throw Luger with a powerbomb , but Luger tagged in Smith , who performed a sunset flip to pin Jacob and win the match . 
 The second match pitted Razor Ramon , with the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid in his corner , against WWF Intercontinental Champion Jeff Jarrett , who had The Roadie in his corner . Ramon took control at the beginning of the match by using power moves against Jarrett . Jarrett tried to leave the match , but the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid forced him back into the ring . Jarrett took advantage of one of Ramon 's mistakes to gain the advantage . He applied a sleeper hold on Ramon , who used his strength advantage to escape the move . After Ramon threw Jarrett , the Kid attempted to interfere but was kicked by Jarrett . Ramon jumped off the ropes to attack Jarrett , but Jarrett avoided the move and applied a figure four leglock on Ramon . Ramon reversed the move to place the pressure on Jarrett 's legs . He then threw Jarrett to the mat with a suplex from the second rope and prepared to execute the Razor 's Edge , his finishing move . The Roadie entered the ring and attacked Ramon , prompting the referee to disqualify Jarrett ; because titles cannot change hands on a disqualification , Jarrett retained his championship . 
 In the next match , The Undertaker faced King Kong Bundy . Ted DiBiase was at ringside holding the urn that his wrestlers had stolen from The Undertaker . Larry Young , a legit American League umpire , was the special referee for the match . Young 's storyline was as an out @-@ of @-@ work sports official because of the recently ended MLB Players Association strike and a lockout of the Major League Umpires Association umpires ( which led to the eventual dissolution of the <unk> in 2000 ; prior to the new union , umpires were split by league ) . The Undertaker took control at the beginning of the match by jumping off the top rope and hitting Bundy . He then performed several clothesline attacks on Bundy . Bundy responded with a clothesline that knocked The Undertaker out of the ring . Seeing DiBiase close , The Undertaker took back his urn . After The Undertaker returned to the ring , DiBiase called Kama , another Corporation member , to the ring . Kama stole the urn , and Bundy attacked The Undertaker in order to let Kama escape backstage . Bundy picked The Undertaker up and powerslammed him to the mat . He then performed an Avalanche splash to <unk> The Undertaker against the corner of the ring . The Undertaker was unharmed , however , and performed a powerslam and a clothesline on Bundy before pinning him to win the match . 
 The Smoking Gunns defended their WWF Tag Team Championship in the next match against Owen Hart and his mystery partner , who was revealed to be Yokozuna . The Gunns worked together to control the match at the beginning , but Yokozuna gained control by performing a leg drop on Billy Gunn . Hart attempted to perform a dropkick from the top rope but accidentally hit Yokozuna . The Gunns briefly took control until Yokozuna performed a belly to belly suplex and landed on Billy . He then performed a Banzai Drop , jumping from the second rope and sitting on Billy 's chest . Hart tagged in and considered performing the Sharpshooter submission hold ; instead , he pinned Billy Gunn to win the title belts for his team . 
 The next match , an " I Quit " match , took place between Bret Hart and Bob Backlund , with Roddy Piper as the guest referee . It was explained that , in order to win the match , a wrestler must force his opponent to say " I quit " into a microphone held by Piper . Hart attempted to perform the Sharpshooter early in the match ; when Backlund blocked it , Hart executed a figure four leglock instead . Backlund escaped the hold and began trying to injure Hart 's arm with an armbar hold . Hart then tried to attack Backlund in the corner of the ring , but Backlund moved and Hart hit his shoulder against the ring post . Backlund tried to perform the crossface chickenwing , his signature submission hold . Hart blocked him and performed the same hold on Backlund instead . Backlund made an unintelligible sound into the microphone , and Piper determined that he had submitted . As a result , the win was awarded to Bret Hart . 
 In the next match , which was for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship , challenger Shawn Michaels was accompanied to the ring by Jenny McCarthy and Diesel , the champion , was escorted by Pamela Anderson . Michaels relied on his quickness in the opening stages , while Diesel used his strength advantage against Michaels . Diesel threw Michaels out of the ring and onto the arena floor , but Michaels later performed a clothesline that knocked Diesel out of the ring . Michaels capitalized on his advantage by performing several aerial moves , including a flying crossbody , flying bulldog throw , and a diving elbow drop . He was unable to pin Diesel , however , so he performed a sleeper hold to wear Diesel down . They brawled outside the ring , after which Michaels performed a superkick , his finishing move , but Sid , Michaels 's bodyguard , had the referee distracted and unable to count the pinfall . Diesel recovered and controlled the remainder of the match with power moves before throwing Michaels to the mat with a Jackknife powerbomb and getting the pinfall victory . 
 The final bout of the event was the main event match between Bam Bam Bigelow and Lawrence Taylor . Bigelow was accompanied by the members of DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation : King Kong Bundy , Tatanka , Irwin R. Schyster , Kama , and Nikolai Volkoff . To prevent the Corporation members from interfering , Taylor brought several football players : Ken Norton Jr . , Chris Spielman , Rickey Jackson , Carl Banks , Reggie White , and Steve McMichael . Taylor gained the advantage early and performed a clothesline that knocked Bigelow out of the ring . Once he returned to the ring , Bigelow took control of the match by kicking Taylor repeatedly and performing a Boston crab submission hold to hurt Taylor 's back . Taylor got out of the hold and threw Bigelow with a suplex . Bigelow recovered and performed several headbutts on Taylor before executing a moonsault flip to knock Taylor down to the mat . Taylor began to take control of the match again , but Bigelow kicked him in the back of the head and then performed a headbutt from the top rope . Bigelow was unable to pin Taylor , however . Taylor climbed to the second rope , jumped off , and used his forearm to hit Bigelow . He then covered Bigelow to win the match . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The event was attended by 15 @,@ 000 fans , who paid a total of $ 750 @,@ 000 in admission fees . This was down from the previous year 's attendance of 18 @,@ 065 , but the decline could be attributed to the smaller size of the venue for WrestleMania XI . The attendance figure was also lower than the following year 's figure of 18 @,@ 852 fans at WrestleMania XII . The pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate for WrestleMania XI was 1 @.@ 3 , which was lower than the 1 @.@ 68 buyrate for WrestleMania X but higher than the 1 @.@ 2 buyrate for WrestleMania XII . 
 Writing for 411mania , columnist Dustin James rated the event as the seventeenth best of the first twenty @-@ three WrestleManias . He stated that the event did not have any truly amazing matches but that Lawrence Taylor put on a solid performance . John Powell of SLAM ! Wrestling rated the event as the worst WrestleMania of all time . The specific concerns he mentioned in his review are Diesel 's championship reign and WWF allowing a football player to defeat a wrestler in what he describes as a " sham of a match " . In contrast , Pro Wrestling Illustrated columnist Dave Rosenbaum stated that WrestleMania " saved " the WWF in its feud with rival World Championship Wrestling . He argued that Taylor " looked like a pro " and contributed to an " incredible " match . He also observed that the tag team matches helped rejuvenate an area of wrestling that had been suffering in the WWF and that the match between Michaels and Diesel was a candidate for match of the year . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Shortly after WrestleMania , Diesel offered Shawn Michaels a rematch . Michaels blamed Sid for the loss and informed him that he would not be needed during the match . Sid got angry and attacked Michaels until Diesel saved him . Diesel and Michaels became allies once again , and they teamed up to win the WWF Tag Team Championship later that year . Diesel feuded with Sid and defeated him at the In Your House 1 and In Your House 2 pay @-@ per @-@ view events . The animosity lingered between Michaels and Sid , but they did not face each other to settle the feud until the September 11 , 1995 episode of Monday Night Raw . 
 Bam Bam Bigelow was embarrassed after losing to Lawrence Taylor . To redeem himself , he challenged Diesel to a match for the WWF Championship . During the match , Tatanka turned on Bigelow and caused him to get pinned . Bigelow was kicked out of the Million Dollar Corporation and attacked by DiBiase 's wrestlers . Diesel saved Bigelow from the attack , which led to a friendship being formed between the two . Bigelow defeated Tatanka in a dark match at In Your House 2 . At King of the Ring 1995 , Sid , DiBiase 's latest addition to the Corporation , teamed with Tatanka in a loss to the team of Diesel and Bigelow . 
 Razor Ramon and the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid were scheduled to face Jeff Jarrett and The Roadie at In Your House 1 the month after WrestleMania . The Kid sustained a legit injury , however , and was unable to compete . As a result , Ramon wrestled a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match against Jarrett and The Roadie instead . Ramon won the bout , but the feud continued . At In Your House 2 , The Roadie faced the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and defeated him . Ramon and Jarrett wrestled several times , and Ramon regained the Intercontinental Championship on May 19 , 1995 . He held the belt for three days before dropping it back to Jarrett . 
 After WrestleMania , Kama melted down The Undertaker 's urn and made it into a necklace . The Undertaker defeated Kama in dark matches at both In Your House 1 and In Your House 2 . He then won a casket match against Kama at SummerSlam 1995 to end the feud . 
 The Smoking Gunns were given a rematch for the WWF Tag Team Championship at In Your House 1 . Hart pinned Bart Gunn to retain the championship for his team . Hart and Yokozuna then moved on to face other competition , and the Gunns did not become serious contenders for the title again until late in 1995 , when they defeated Hart and Yokozuna to regain the championship . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Campus of University of the Philippines Los Baños = 
 The main campus of University of the Philippines at Los Baños ( UPLB ) is located in the towns of Los Baños and Bay in the province of Laguna , 64 km ( 40 mi ) southeast of Manila . The complex covers 5 @,@ 445 ha ( 13 @,@ 450 acres ) of land encompassing the entire Makiling Forest Reserve ( MFR ) and surrounding areas . Its land grants in the provinces of Laguna , Negros Occidental , and Quezon have a combined area of 9 @,@ 760 ha ( 24 @,@ 100 acres ) . 
 The campus contains over 300 buildings . Equipment and facilities are estimated to be worth ₱ 10 @.@ 6 billion ( US $ 245 million ) according to UPLB 's financial statement for 2009 . The university manages eight student dormitories inside the campus , which housed 2 @,@ 170 of the 11 @,@ 980 students enrolled in 2008 . 
 As of 2007 , UPLB 's 12 libraries , collectively referred to as the University Library , hold a total of 346 @,@ 061 volumes . The University Library is a periodic recipient of publications from the United Nations agencies ( namely the <unk> , UN @-@ <unk> , and UNU ) and the World Bank . It is a contributor to the International Information System for Agricultural Services and Technology , to which it contributed almost 30 @,@ 000 titles between 1975 and 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 The campus was established in 1909 on 72 @.@ 63 ha ( 179 @.@ 5 acres ) of abandoned farmland at the foot of Mount Makiling , purchased by the University of the Philippines ( UP ) Board of Regents to serve as the campus of the newly created UP College of Agriculture ( UPCA ) . Students helped clear the land , and the first classes were held in tents . Practical instruction was done at plantations on campus , such as those for corn , sugar cane and tobacco . Act <unk> of the Philippine Legislature in February 1918 authorized the appropriation of 379 ha ( 940 acres ) for the creation of an agricultural experiment station . At the same time , funding of ₱ 125 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 890 ) was used by the college to acquire 261 @.@ 76 ha ( 646 @.@ 8 acres ) for experimental farms and pasture . 
 Most of the early structures were demolished during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines ( 1941 – 1945 ) , but some still exist , including the Palma Bridge and Baker Memorial Hall ( both built during Dean Bienvenido M. Gonzalez 's term from 1927 to 1938 ) . All the student residences , 23 College of Agriculture buildings , 13 student dormitories and bungalows , and 22 faculty and employee houses were destroyed during the Second World War . The School of Forestry was also devastated . Only the agricultural engineering building was left undamaged . 
 Grants from USAID and Mutual Security Agency in the 1950s accelerated the development of the campus . The Graduate School building , the UPCA Library ( now College of Arts and Sciences building ) , and the Women 's Dormitory ( now the Math Building ) were built as a result . Meanwhile , grants from the United States Economic Cooperation Agency ( worth US $ 239 @,@ 552 ) , the International Cooperation Administration ( ICA ) ( worth US $ 175 @,@ 000 ) , and ICA @-@ National Economic Council allowed the construction of the Forest Products Laboratory ( claimed by Centennial Panorama : Pictorial History of UPLB to be the " largest and best equipped in the eastern hemisphere " at the time it was constructed ) in 1954 , the Agricultural Credit and Cooperatives Institute in 1957 , and further construction of school and dormitory buildings in the School of Forestry campus in the 1960s . 
 Aside from international assistance , five @-@ year development programs during the terms of Dean Domingo Lantican ( 1958 – 1971 ) of the School of Forestry , and Dean Dioscoro Umali ( 1959 – 1970 ) of the College of Agriculture were also instrumental in developing the campus . During the implementation of these programs , the administration buildings of the College of Agriculture and the College of Development Communication as well as staff houses and roads were built . 
 Since 2008 efforts have been put into renovation and beautification of existing structures to repair damage from Typhoon Xangsane in 2006 and to promote the campus as a " walking museum " and ecotourism center . Construction of an 11 @,@ 000 @-@ seater convention center and cable cars connecting the lower and upper campuses have been proposed as part of the ecotourism plan . Beautification projects include paving of pathways and construction of lampposts . Some students criticized the program , arguing that the funds would have been better allocated for the renovation of classrooms , laboratories , and other academic facilities . 
 A memorandum issued by Chancellor Luis Rey I. Velasco in 2010 instructed UPLB to conserve energy to reduce operating costs . The plan calls for reduced use of electric appliances ( such as air conditioners , electric stoves and ovens ) , car pooling , and recycling . 
 = = Areas = = 
 = = = Upper campus = = = 
 The College of Forestry and Natural Resources , College of Public Affairs , ASEAN Center for Biodiversity , National Arts Center , Philippine High School for the Arts , the site of the National Jamboree of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines , and the Center for Philippine Raptors are in the upper campus . It includes the entire 4 @,@ 347 @-@ hectare ( 10 @,@ 740 @-@ acre ) Makiling Forest Reserve . It is also the site of the Bureau of Plant Industry @-@ Makiling Botanic Gardens , one of the oldest parts of the campus . The gardens are located where the tents used as classrooms were set up during the first four months of the university 's history . 
 The MFR serves as an outdoor laboratory to students , primarily of the College of Forestry and Natural Resources . ₱ 5 million ( US $ 156 @,@ 000 ) was designated for its conservation and development in 2011 . The MFR was created in 1910 under the Bureau of Forestry . Jurisdiction over MFR was transferred to UP in 1960 . The National Power Corporation acquired complete jurisdiction of the MFR in 1987 as part of the Philippines ' energy development program under President Corazon Aquino . The MFR was returned to UPLB three years later under the terms of Republic Act 6967 . 
 In 2008 Representative Del De Guzman of the 2nd district of Makati filed HB 1143 , which , if passed into law , would have transferred 57 @.@ 77 ha ( 142 @.@ 8 acres ) of the MFR to the jurisdiction of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines . The bill was strongly opposed by UPLB , citing possible mismanagement and deforestation of the site if placed under the BSP , among other reasons . The bill has been pending in the House Committee on Natural Resources since August 2007 . 
 = = = Lower campus = = = 
 The 1 @,@ 098 @-@ hectare ( 2 @,@ 710 @-@ acre ) lower campus , located at the foot of Mt . Makiling , is the location of most UPLB units and affiliated entities , including the International Rice Research Institute , World Agroforestry Centre , and the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture ( SEARCA ) . 
 The <unk> River , a tributary of Laguna de Bay , runs through the campus . Several bridges , such as the Palma Bridge ( named after UP President Rafael V. Palma ) , cross the river . A 1996 UPLB study found high concentrations of nitrates and phosphates in the river , believed to be from decaying garbage and domestic waste . There have been recent efforts to rehabilitate the river , such as planting <unk> and Hibiscus on its banks . 
 = = = Land grants = = = 
 UPLB has three major land grants provided by the government of the Philippines : the Laguna @-@ Quezon Land Grant , the La Carlota Land Grant , and the Laguna Land Grant . 
 The 5 @,@ 719 @-@ hectare ( 14 @,@ 130 @-@ acre ) Laguna @-@ Quezon Land Grant , acquired in February 1930 , is located in the towns of Real , Quezon , and <unk> , Laguna . It covers some portions of the Sierra Madre mountain range , and hosts the university ’ s <unk> and lemongrass plantations . The 705 @-@ hectare ( 1 @,@ 740 @-@ acre ) La Carlota Land Grant is situated in Negros Occidental , a province in the Western Visayas region . Acquired in May 1964 , it houses the <unk> @-@ DOST La Granja Agricultural Research Center , which serves as a research center for various upland crops . The 3 @,@ 336 @-@ hectare ( 8 @,@ 240 @-@ acre ) Laguna Land Grant , located in <unk> , Laguna , is mostly undeveloped . 
 Numerous parties have expressed interest in developing the land grants . Proposed projects include construction of dams and tree farms for <unk> <unk> , pineapples and rubber . UPLB has not entertained the potential investors due to the " lack of a solid development plan . " 
 = = Buildings and landmarks = = 
 Many of the prominent buildings in the campus were designed by Leandro Locsin , a National Artist for Architecture who is known for his extensive use of concrete and simplistic designs . 
 The Dioscoro L. Umali Hall , an auditorium named after Dean Dioscoro L. Umali , was built during Umali 's US $ 6 @-@ million and ₱ 23 @-@ million ( US $ 533 @,@ 000 ) Five @-@ Year Development Program implemented in 1965 . <unk> Filipino , a collaboration of the National Commission for Culture and the Arts and the United Architects of the Philippines , calls it a " clear example of his distinct architecture " , and notes its resemblance to the Nicanor Abelardo Hall at the Cultural Center of the Philippines . It houses the <unk> Makiling art gallery . 
 The Main Library , with a floor area of 6 @,@ 336 m2 ( 68 @,@ 200 sq ft ) and a seating capacity of 510 , is the largest library in UPLB . It holds 195 @,@ 282 volumes , theses , and digital sources , and 1 @,@ 215 serial titles . It was originally built as the SEARCA library in 1974 . It was eventually transferred to the university as the successor of the University of the Philippines College of Agriculture Library . It is believed to be the largest agricultural library in Asia . 
 The Rizal Centenary Carillon , built in 1996 , is named after Philippine National Hero José Rizal . It has 37 bells ranging from F three octaves below middle C up to G above middle C , making it the second largest non @-@ traditional carillon in the Asia @-@ Pacific region in terms of number of bells . It is one of only two non @-@ traditional carillons in the Philippines . 
 The Student Union Building houses the offices of the Office of Student Affairs , University Food Service , University Student Council , and UPLB Perspective ( the official student publication of UPLB ) . The Student Union , along with the three aforementioned buildings , was designed by Locsin . 
 A replica of the Oblation and the Philippine Pegasus ( also referred to as the <unk> ; a winged tamaraw ) were sculpted by National Artist Napoleon Abueva . The original Oblation is a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 11 ft ) statue by Guillermo Tolentino , Abueva 's mentor , commissioned in 1935 by UP President Rafael Palma . The sculpture is based on the second stanza of Rizal 's Mi último adiós ( Spanish for My last farewell ) . A replica of the Oblation can be found on each of the major UP campuses , and has become the campuses ' identifying landmark . 
 = = Transportation and amenities = = 
 Public utility jeepneys are a popular means of transportation around the campus . Jeepney drivers are required to post <unk> ( Tagalog for " right " ) or <unk> ( Tagalog for " left " ) , in reference to their direction . Since August 2007 a new jeepney route has been in force . The new route prohibits access to the middle campus — which contains most of the university 's main buildings — to promote walking and to lessen noise and air pollution inside the campus . As this part of the campus was the destination of many passengers , jeepney drivers estimated the change would result in a loss of ₱ 200 – 300 ( US $ 5 – 7 ) and a 90 percent loss of passengers . Due to this , the implementation was met with protests , including a transport strike . A walkout was staged by around 500 students , citing the lack of community consultation before implementation of the plan . The mayor of Los Baños refused to interfere . 
 The campus is also served by the UP Los Baños railway station operated by Philippine National Railways , although currently no trains stop at the station . 
 Numerous congregations can be found near UPLB . These include the Catholic parishes of St. Therese of the Child Jesus and San Antonio de Padua , the <unk> Church Among the Palms , and Victory Los Baños . Other amenities include banks ( including LBP , <unk> , and PNB ) and malls , such as Robinsons Town Mall Los Baños . Security is provided by the University Police Force and the Community Support Brigade in addition to the police force of the local government . Medical services are provided by the University Health Service , a 30 @-@ bed hospital with specialized facilities , such as a diabetes clinic and a neonatal intensive @-@ care unit , in addition to its emergency and operating rooms . It is identified as a " Center of Quality " by <unk> . 
 = The Warped Ones = 
 The Warped Ones ( <unk> , <unk> no <unk> , aka Season of Heat , Wild Love @-@ Makers and The Weird Lovemakers ) is a 1960 Japanese Sun Tribe film directed by Koreyoshi Kurahara and starring Tamio Kawachi , Eiji Go , Yuko <unk> and Noriko Matsumoto . It was produced and distributed by the Nikkatsu Company . The story concerns the young hoodlum Akira , his friends , their transgressions and specifically their revenge on the couple that got him sent to jail , a reporter and his fiancée . When the fiancée finds herself pregnant by Akira she enlists his help with her finance who has become distant since the attack . 
 Often compared by critics to Breathless ( 1960 ) and Rebel Without a Cause ( 1955 ) , it is a stylistic departure from studio norms , driven by its jazz score and employing filmic techniques described as being as energetic and frantic as its characters . It achieved success in Japan and was followed by Black Sun ( 1964 ) , featuring many of the same cast , crew and characters , with the addition of acclaimed drummer Max Roach to the soundtrack . Audubon Films released The Warped Ones in the United States in 1963 where it was marketed as a sexploitation film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Criminal and jazz aficionado Akira ( Tamio Kawachi ) and his prostitute girlfriend Yuki ( Yuko <unk> ) are arrested when they are spotted fleecing foreigners in a jazz club by a reporter named Kashiwagi ( Hiroyuki Nagato ) . In jail , Akira meets Masaru ( Eiji Go ) and on their release they and Yuki resume criminal activities . They spot Kashiwagi and his artist fiancée , Fumiko ( Noriko Matsumoto ) , hit him with a stolen car and kidnap her . They take her to a remote beach where Akira rapes her while Masaru and Yuki fornicate in the ocean . 
 Soon after , the three rent an apartment with money earned from fencing the stolen car . Masaru and Yuki commit to starting a family , while he joins a yakuza gang , to the derision of Akira . Fumiko tracks Akira down and informs him that she is pregnant . Kashiwagi has become distant and haughty and she pleads with Akira for help . Akira arranges for Yuki to seduce Kashiwagi so that the couple might again be on equal terms . Masaru is killed by a rival yakuza . Yuki discovers that she too is pregnant but without Masaru 's support she resolves to get an abortion and resume her prostitution career . Akira and Yuki meet Kashiwagi and Fumiko by chance at an abortion clinic where Akira reveals that each woman was impregnated by the other man , to the amusement of the former couple and befuddlement of the latter . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Nikkatsu Company made three popular Sun Tribe films in 1956 , a genre based on a contemporary youth subculture whose interests revolved around beach life , jazz music and their progressive attitudes towards sex . The films met with moral public outcries and a fourth production was shut down at the behest of Eirin ( The Motion Picture Code of Ethics Committee ) . However , the genre later experienced a resurgence which included The Warped Ones . The film marked director Koreyoshi Kurahara 's first collaboration with screenwriter Nobuo Yamada . They reused a many elements of Kurahara 's earlier Sun Tribe film The Time of Youth ( 1959 ) , including abortion , a near fatality via an opened gas cock and a criminal act near water , an explosion beside a stream in the former and the rape on the beach in the latter . 
 Nikkatsu was promoting lead actor Tamio Kawachi as one of its Bad Boy Trio , along with Akira Kobayashi and Tadao <unk> . Kurahara asked him to think of his character as a " hungry lion roaring at the sun . " He turned in what writer Mark Schilling described as his most unusual , and one of his best , performances of the period . Supporting actress Noriko Matsumoto came to the film as a relative unknown . Hiroyuki Nagato had starred in The Time of Youth . Eiji Go was the younger brother of future Diamond Line star Joe Shishido . The film was completed on August 18 , 1960 . 
 = = Style = = 
 As writer Mark Schilling put it , " the soundtrack drives the action , " and composer <unk> Mayuzumi 's jazz score moves swiftly . Cinematographer Yoshi Mamiya and editor Akira Suzuki employed swish @-@ pans , freeze frames and jump cuts , alternating between carefully composed shots and seemingly recklessly hand @-@ held camera work . The titular youths of the film too move violently and speak in grunts , screams , whistles and sound effects , Akira frequently greeting women with , " Wanna get laid ? " or <unk> 's scat , " At @-@ <unk> ! " They are portrayed as amoral , impulsive narcissists and hedonists , pickpocketing and stealing cars with equal nonchalance . The antihero , Akira , described as possessing the " face @-@ rubbing mannerisms of [ Marlon ] Brando and the tortured swagger of James Dean , " varies between the sadistic and the indifferent — save when in a jazz @-@ induced fervor — and reaches extremes largely unseen in the contemporaneous cinema of the West . The film 's subject matter is sensationalistic and it contains much incident in its short run time . The overall style is matched to the characters ' verve and the story 's frantic pace . 
 While not portraying Akira sympathetically , the film does offer a socio @-@ political view on the origins and inevitability of such criminal types in society . The tenements in which the youths reside are depicted as inhospitable and sterile . Lacking education , proper role models and moral codes , critic Bryan <unk> posited , crime and base pleasures are their most open recourse . They seem aware of the injustices in their environments and rail against society at large . However , Akira is illustrated as being capable of innocent pleasure , particularly in one fleeting scene in which he and his black friend Gil ( Chico Rolands ) , whom he views as a fellow outcast , frolic in the ocean . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Warped Ones was originally released in Japan by the Nikkatsu Company on September 3 , 1960 . The film was successful in Japan , although not so much so that Tamio Kawachi was ever elevated to major star status and after his " Bad Boy " period he was mainly relegated to second lead and supporting parts . In July 1961 , Arthur Davis ' newly formed , American , foreign film distribution company Kanji Pictures announced it had acquired ten Nikkatsu films for North and South American markets and parts of Europe . The films included The Warped Ones , Shohei Imamura 's Pigs and Battleships ( 1961 ) and Kon Ichikawa 's The Burmese Harp ( 1956 ) and were to be distributed by Kanji or sold to other distribution companies . An English @-@ dubbed version of The Warped Ones was then released in the United States on December 18 , 1963 , by Radley Metzger 's sexploitation @-@ centric Audubon Films , initially as the The Weird Lovemakers , then The Warped Ones became the more common title . It was marketed as an American film , and misleadingly implied to contain sexually explicit material , in order to appeal to a wider audience . 
 The original film resurfaced some four decades later at the 2005 Udine Far East Film Festival in the No Borders , No Limits : Nikkatsu Action Cinema retrospective . Mark Schilling curated the retrospective in order to expose international audiences to 1960s Nikkatsu Action films which , aside from the films of Seijun Suzuki , remained predominately unseen outside Japan . Schilling originally titled the film Season of Heat — a literal translation of the Japanese title — but it was retitled The Warped Ones for subsequent incarnations of the retrospective , which included runs in Austin and New York . It also appeared in a 12 @-@ film retrospective of Koreyoshi Kurahara 's Nikkatsu films at the 2008 Tokyo Filmex International Film Festival in Japan . It was screened with English subtitles . 
 Critics have most often compared the film to landmark youth films Breathless ( also 1960 ) — released in France five months earlier — directed by Jean @-@ Luc Godard and Nicholas Ray 's Rebel Without a Cause ( 1955 ) , although , Bryan <unk> found it takes its youths more seriously and with less sympathy . He stated , " [ The Warped Ones takes ] a wrecking ball to what can be considered the <unk> of the [ youth film ] genre , an exhibition of the horrors of uninhibited youth taken to its carnal extremes and matched by a visual accompaniment akin to the abstract and improvised style of a Miles Davis score . " Tim Lucas of Video Watchdog magazine called the film " an important rediscovery on many fronts ... one of the great jazz films , and possibly the best illustration the cinema has ever given us of the jazz buff . It 's the only film I 've ever seen that makes jazz seem scarier than the darkest heavy metal , that makes jazz seem dangerous . " For <unk> : The Japanese Cult Film Companion , Alvin Lu commended the score as " stunning " and Kawachi 's performance as " ferocious , the very incarnation of the kind of social chaos that could be engendered by too much exposure to jazz , Coke , and hot dogs . " The Boston Globe 's Wesley Morris wrote , " [ Koreyoshi ] Kurahara takes the movie to extremes of behavior and style , merging the two until the form seems as violently unstable as the characters . He makes a wave that in Europe was called ' French ' and ' new . ' But with all due respect to Jean @-@ Luc Godard , this is breathless - and more interesting , too . " Morris further qualified that while Breathless may appeal to contemporary viewers academically , The Warped Ones retains a spontaneous , documentary feel . Schilling discerned the film , " Among [ Kurahara 's ] boldest departures from studio convention . " 
 Reviewer Peter Martin confided , " The Warped Ones baffled and mystified me , but I liked it very much . " J.R. Jones , for The Reader 's Guide to Arts & Entertainment , found the film " actually celebrates the values it 's supposed to be condemning , " but recommended it for its <unk> and action . TV Guide and Allmovie did not recommended it , both gave it one star in their respective four and five star rating systems . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of the film lead Koreyoshi Kurahara and Nobuo Yamada to write and direct a couple more original scripts , where Kurahara was primarily known for his adaptations of novels . This included the follow @-@ up Black Sun ( 1964 ) which again featured Tamio Kawachi , who reprised his role from The Warped Ones , as did several of the other actors , and a lot of jazz music . In it , Kawachi 's Akira shelters a black G.I. , Gil , played by Chico Rolands , who goes A.W.O.L. after killing a white man in a bar fight . The film explores the two men 's friendship and race relations . It was also the first reversal on <unk> @-@ themed films , post @-@ war , often American @-@ Japanese co @-@ productions focusing on friendships or romances between a Japanese and an American . <unk> films were intended as to promote goodwill between the two nations but were generally less well received in Japan , seen as unrealistic or patronizing . Film historian Tadao Sato described Black Sun as the first film of this sort where Japanese pity Americans instead of the reverse as Akira 's preconceptions of black Americans are undone . Mark Schilling characterized Kawachi as bringing an " explosive energy " to the film and Roland a " piping screech of fear and desperation . " Acclaimed American jazz musician Max Roach contributed to the score . 
 Alvin Lu found The Warped Ones to be a prime example of the Sun Tribe genre and placed it among those films whose outlook made way for the Japanese pink film . In the film Tim Lucas noted antecedents and a possible influence to " the most hellbent characters " in the films of acclaimed director Quentin Tarantino 's films and specifically to Stanley Kubrick 's iconic A Clockwork Orange ( 1971 ) . Lucas drew comparisons between The Warped Ones ' main character Akira and A Clockwork Orange 's Alex DeLarge , including their respective obsessions with hard jazz and the music of Ludwig van Beethoven , the former with a framed copy of Ornette Coleman 's album The Shape of Jazz to Come next to his bed , the latter an engraving of Beethoven . Also , scenes of the former 's verbal deconstructions by a group of art students versus the latter 's by the government . Akira 's attacks on abstract art and DeLarge 's on pop art – lined homes . Finally , the character 's regular hangouts , both painted with black walls , the former 's adorned with portraits of jazz legends , the latter 's with advertisements for " <unk> " and " <unk> " — the fictional drugs DeLarge and his gang use to invigorate themselves before their criminal acts . Lucas concluded , " Kubrick simply had to have seen it . " 
 Two American music groups took their name from The Warped Ones ' alternate sexploitation title , The Weird Lovemakers . The now defunct Tucson punk band The Weird Lovemakers assumed the name in 1994 and held it until their disbandment in 2000 . The Oakland , California – based electropop band The Lovemakers planned to use the same name on their inception in 2002 but dropped the " Weird " upon their discovery of the former band having taken the name . 
 = = Home video = = 
 In North America , an abridged , dubbed , VHS version of the film is available from Something Weird Video under the moniker The Weird Lovemakers . In 2007 , a DVD @-@ R version was also made available . A DVD for The Warped Ones will be released by the Criterion Collection on August 23 , 2011 as part of their " The Warped World of Koreyoshi Kurahara " compilation . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 On February 23 , 2007 , the Japanese label Think ! Records reissued the soundtrack on Compact Disc as a part of its Cine Jazz series , which featured 1960s Nikkatsu Action film scores . It is part of a two disc set , the first contains music from <unk> Mayuzumi 's score for Black Sun ( 1964 ) and the second from his score for The Warped Ones . The first disc features American jazz musicians Max Roach on drums , Clifford Jordan on tenor saxophone , Ronnie Mathews on piano , Eddie Kahn on bass and vocals by Abbey Lincoln . The second disc features the Nikkatsu Jazz Group 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = Apolo Ohno = 
 Apolo Anton Ohno ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; born May 22 , 1982 ) is a retired American short track speed skating competitor and an eight @-@ time medalist ( two gold , two silver , four bronze ) in the Winter Olympics . 
 Raised by his father , Ohno began training full @-@ time in 1996 . He has been the face of short track in the United States since winning his medals at the 2002 Winter Olympics . At the age of 14 , he became the youngest U.S. national champion in 1997 and was the reigning champion from 2001 – 2009 , winning the title a total of 12 times . In December 1999 , he became the youngest skater to win a World Cup event title , and became the first American to win a World Cup overall title in 2001 , which he won again in 2003 and 2005 . He won his first overall World Championship title at the 2008 championships . 
 Ohno 's accolades and accomplishments include being the United States Olympic Committee 's Male Athlete of the Month in October 2003 and March 2008 , the U.S. Speedskating 's Athlete of the Year for 2003 , and was a 2002 , 2003 and 2006 finalist for the Sullivan Award , which recognizes the best amateur athlete in the United States . Since gaining recognition through his sport , Ohno has worked as a motivational speaker , philanthropist , started a nutritional supplement business called 8 Zone , and in 2007 , competed on and won the reality TV show Dancing with the Stars . Ohno later became host of a revival of Minute to Win It on Game Show Network and served as a commentator for NBC 's coverage of the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ohno was born in Seattle , Washington , to a Japanese @-@ born father , Yuki Ohno ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Yuki ) and a European American mother , Jerrie Lee . He attended Saghalie Middle School in Federal Way . Ohno 's parents divorced when he was an infant , and he was raised in Seattle by his father . He has had little contact with his biological mother and as of 2002 had expressed no interest in knowing her or his older half @-@ brother . Ohno 's father , a hair stylist and owner of the salon Yuki 's Diffusion , often worked 12 @-@ hour shifts , and with no family in the United States , found it hard to balance career and family . His father chose to name his son Apolo after the Greek words apo , which means to " steer away from " and lo , which means " look out ; here he comes . " 
 When Ohno was very young , his father meticulously researched childcare providers to care for his son during his long work hours . As he grew older , his father became concerned his son would become a latchkey kid , so he got his son involved with competitive swimming and quad @-@ speed roller skating at age 6 . He later switched from the instruction of Benton Redford , a National Champion , to a team in Federal Way , WA called <unk> Team Extreme and became a national inline speedskating champion and record holder himself . His father used Inline Speedskating to fill his spare time . Ohno 's days were spent with morning swimming practices , followed by schooling , and finally skating practices in the afternoon . 
 When Ohno was 12 , he won the Washington state championship in the breaststroke but preferred inline speed skating over swimming . He has stated that by the time he turned 13 years of age he attended parties with older teenagers if he did not have competitions on the weekends . His father has stated that it was a struggle balancing his son 's desire for independence while helping him reach his potential as a young athlete . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 When he was 12 years old , Ohno became interested in short track speed skating after seeing the sport during the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer . His father capitalized on this interest by driving him to short track competitions throughout the northwest United States and Canada , and Ohno won several competitions in his age divisions . His father wanted to encourage Ohno to develop his skills and , although Ohno was underage , he got him admitted to the Lake Placid Olympic Training Center in 1996 to train full @-@ time for short track . At 13 years of age , Ohno was the youngest skater admitted to the center . 
 At first , Ohno 's commitment at Lake Placid was low until his teammates nicknamed him " Chunky " , which motivated him to train harder . In January , he failed to make the 1997 U.S. Junior World Team . Ohno adjusted his training and made a comeback winning the 1997 U.S. Senior Championships overall title , taking a gold medal in the 1500 m , a silver in the 300 m , and came in fourth in the 500 m races . At the age of 14 , he became the youngest person to win the title . Ohno then relocated to the Colorado Springs Olympic Training Center to begin training with the senior level skaters , despite being only 14 years old . 
 However , Ohno would struggle at the 1997 World Championships in Nagano , Japan , finishing 19th overall . After this disappointing defeat at his first appearance at a world championships , Ohno returned home to Seattle . He did not train from April to August 1997 , so he gained weight and was ill @-@ prepared for the 1998 Nagano Winter Olympics . As a result , he finished last in the Olympic trials and did not qualify for the Olympic team . Because of his losses at the World Championships and his failure to qualify for the Olympic team , Ohno recommitted himself to the sport and returned to junior @-@ level skating at Lake Placid , rather than at Colorado Springs . 
 At the 1999 World Junior Championships , Ohno won first overall , placing first in the 1000 m and 1500 m , and winning silver in the 500 m . He won his second senior U.S. national championship in 1999 . He finished fourth overall at the 1999 World Championships and earned a silver medal in the 500 m . At the 2000 U.S. Championships , Ohno was unable to defend his title and finished third overall . At the 2000 World Championships , Ohno finished ninth overall . In the 2000 – 2001 season , Ohno won his first World Cup overall title , regained his National title , and finished second overall in the World Championships , losing to Chinese skater Li Jiajun . 
 = = = 2002 Winter Olympics = = = 
 = = = = Qualification race controversy = = = = 
 In December 2001 , during the U.S. Short Track Speed Skating 2002 Olympic Trials , speed skater Shani Davis was racing for a position on the short track team . Ohno and fellow skater Rusty Smith had already earned slots on the six @-@ man team due to points earned from earlier races . In order for Davis to qualify , he had to place first in the final race — the 1000 m — by overcoming stronger skaters Ohno , Smith , and Ron Biondo . Since Ohno had been dominant in the meet to this point by winning every race he entered , a win by Davis seemed to be unlikely . 
 Though Ohno , Smith and Biondo were heavily favored to win the 1000 m , the race ended with Ohno finishing third , Smith second , and Davis at the top of the podium . Prior to crossing the finish line , Ohno started celebrating for Davis and Smith . Davis ' first @-@ place finish earned enough points to move past Tommy O 'Hare in the final point standings and to qualify for sixth place . By finishing second , Smith earned the opportunity to skate individually in the 1000 m . The victory celebration was short @-@ lived as rumors began that Ohno and Smith , both good friends of Davis , intentionally threw the race so Davis would win . 
 After returning to Colorado Springs , O 'Hare , who did not skate in the 1000 m , filed a formal complaint . The complaint was founded on Ohno 's seemingly deliberate attempt to stop Biondo from being able to pass Smith . Because of that blocking move on Biondo , Smith finished in second place and Davis finished first . For three days , Ohno , Smith , and Davis stood before an arbitration panel of the United States Olympic Committee . During the hearing , Davis was never accused of being at fault and Smith made the statement : " Any allegation that there was a fix , conspiracy or understanding between Apolo and me , or anyone else , to let Shani win the race is completely false . Shani is a great athlete , skated a great race , and deserves to be on the team . " The final verdict was that O 'Hare 's claims went unproven , all three were absolved of guilt , and the claim was dismissed . After the dismissal , Ohno stated , " I am thrilled that the arbitration process has officially vindicated me ... As I 've said since the moment of these accusations , they were untrue and I did nothing wrong " . 
 = = = = Games = = = = 
 At the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , Utah , Ohno emerged as the face of short @-@ track speed skating among American fans . He was a medalist in two events but there was controversy associated with the results . 
 After a disqualification in the 500 m race , he was leading the skaters in the 1000 m race . During a turn around the final corner , Ohno , Ahn Hyun Soo , Li Jiajun and Mathieu Turcotte all fell in a series of collisions . The last man standing was Steven Bradbury from Australia , who was trailing behind at the time , and skated through to win the gold medal , becoming the first person from the southern hemisphere to win a gold medal at a Winter Olympics . Ohno quickly got to his feet and crossed the finish line to win silver with Turcotte winning the bronze . Ohno , coincidentally was wearing skates , made by Bradbury 's own boot company , Revolutionary Boot Company . Bradbury had given them to Ohno , expecting for Ohno to win wearing them . Rather than the other way around . 
 In the 1500 m final race , with one lap remaining and currently in second place , Ohno attempted to make a pass on the leader Kim Dong @-@ Sung , who then drifted to the inside and as a result , Ohno raised his arms to signal he was blocked . Kim finished first ahead of Ohno but was <unk> for impeding , awarding the gold medal to Ohno . Fourth @-@ place finisher of the race , Fabio Carta of Italy , showed his disagreement with the disqualification decision saying it was " absurd that the Korean was disqualified " . China 's Jiajun Li , who moved from bronze to silver , remained neutral saying : " I respect the decision of the referee , I 'm not going to say any more " . Steven Bradbury , the 1000 m gold @-@ medal winner , also shared his views : " Whether Dong @-@ Sung moved across enough to be called for cross @-@ tracking , I don 't know , he obviously moved across a bit . It 's the judge 's interpretation . A lot of people will say it was right and a lot of people will say it 's wrong . I 've seen moves like that before that were not called . But I 've seen them called too " . 
 The South Korean team immediately protested the decision of the chief official of the race , but their protests were denied by the International Skating Union ( ISU ) . The Korean team then appealed to the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) and the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) . The IOC refused to see the case , stating , " This is a matter for the ISU to decide on . At this time , the IOC has received no proposal and taken no action " . The CAS sided with the officials of the race as " there is no provision in the short @-@ track rule book for overturning a judgment call by the referee " after the Korean team asked to have a video replay be used to determine whether or not there was a rule violation . 
 The disqualification upset South Korean supporters , many of whom directed their anger at Ohno and the International Olympic Committee . A large number of e @-@ mails protesting the race results crashed the Olympic Committee 's email server , and thousands of accusatory letters , many of which contained death threats , were sent to Ohno and the committee . Ohno shared his thoughts on the Koreans ' hostile reaction by saying , " I was really bothered by it . I grew up around many Asian cultures , Korean one of them . A lot of my best friends were Korean growing up . I just didn 't understand . Later on I realized that was built up by certain people and that was directed at me , negative energy from other things , not even resulting around the sport , but around politics , using me to stand on the pedestal as the anti @-@ American sentiment " . Earlier the same year , President George Bush had named North Korea as one of three members of the Axis of Evil , which had upset some South Koreans ; directing their anger at Ohno was a less direct way of voicing anger against Bush 's decision . The controversy continued at the 2002 FIFA World Cup , held jointly in South Korea and Japan several months after the Olympics . When the South Korean football ( soccer ) team scored a goal against the U.S. team , Korean players Ahn Jung @-@ <unk> and Lee Chun @-@ Soo made an exaggerated move imitating the move Ohno had made during the speed skating event to indicate the other athlete had drifted into his lane . 
 = = = After Salt Lake = = = 
 Ohno continued to perform well in the sport after the 2002 Winter Games . He declined to participate in a 2003 World Cup short @-@ track event in Korea for security reasons . Despite the absence , he successfully defended his World Cup title during the 2003 season . He continued his dominance by winning the World Cup title again in the 2004 – 2005 season . 
 At the first event of the 2005 World Cup event in China , Ohno severely sprained his ankle and withdrew from the event . At the second event in South Korea , an estimated 100 riot police stood guard at Incheon International Airport to prevent harm from happening to Ohno . Their concern stemmed from a possible lingering negative reaction from the 2002 Olympic Games disqualification controversy . 
 Ohno won two gold medals , as well as the overall title at the meet despite suffering from a severe stomach illness , and was surprised when the Korean crowd cheered his victories , saying , " I was really happy with the crowd 's reaction . It was pretty positive right from the time we landed . I was really happy it wasn 't ( hostile ) . Everything went really smooth . We were happy . " He was unable to defend his World Cup title from the previous three seasons , finishing third in the 2005 – 2006 overall standings . At the 2005 World Championships , he finished second overall , winning the 1000 m and 3000 m races . 
 = = = 2006 Winter Olympics = = = 
 In the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy , Ohno stumbled during a semifinal heat in the 1500 m . Finishing fifth , he was unable to defend his 2002 gold medal in the event . Ohno was able to win the bronze medal in the 1000 m , with Korean skaters Ahn Hyun Soo and Lee Ho @-@ <unk> finishing before him . 
 After two false starts from other skaters , Ohno won gold in the 500 m when he took the lead with an explosive start and held it until the finish . Despite criticism that he appeared to move before the start , a violation of the rules , the race start was validated by the officials . Afterward , Ohno said , " I was in the moment at the time . I thought I timed the start just perfect . The starter had been pretty quick all day , so that 's why there were so many false starts at the beginning . But that was really good for me . " 
 On the same day as his 500 m gold win , he earned a bronze medal in the men 's 5000 m relay , with an inside pass on Italian skater Nicola <unk> on the final leg to put the United States in third position . Later , during the medals ceremony for the event , the winning South Korean team and the Americans embraced , followed by a group picture featuring the medalists . 
 = = = Post @-@ Olympic hiatus and return = = = 
 Taking a year off from competitive skating when the 2006 Winter Olympics ended , Ohno returned to win his eighth national title , placing first in every event during the U.S. Championships held from February 23 – 25 , 2007 . On April 26 , 2007 , he was inducted into the Asian Hall of Fame , an award which honors achievements of Asian Americans . 
 From March 9 – 11 , 2007 , he competed at the 2007 World Championships held in Milan , Italy , winning gold in the 1500 m due to the disqualification of Song Kyung @-@ Taek , who had blocked a passing attempt made by Ohno . He won bronze in the 1000 m , 3000 m , and the 5000 m relay with teammates , Jordan Malone , Travis Jayner , and Ryan Bedford . Because of his wins , he became the overall bronze medalist , behind silver medalist Charles Hamelin and Ahn Hyun Soo , who became the first man to become a five @-@ time World Champion . 
 On December 24 , 2007 , in Kearns , Utah , Ohno won his ninth national title , finishing first in the 1000 m and the 1500 m . He also finished first in the 500 m , but was disqualified for <unk> . In the 3000 m , he finished second . At the 2008 World Championships in Gangneung , South Korea , Ohno won his first overall title , placing first place in the 500 m , second in the 1000 m , and third place in the 3000 m . He defeated South Koreans Lee Ho @-@ Suk , silver medalist and Song Kyung @-@ Taek who finished third in points . In 2009 , he won his 10th national title and qualified for the world team . Unable to defend his championship , he finished fifth in the overall rankings at the 2009 World Championships in Vienna , Austria , placing second at the 1000 m , and winning gold with the 5000 m relay team . 
 = = = 2010 Winter Olympics = = = 
 In preparation for the 2010 Winter Olympics , Ohno lost over 9 kilograms ( 20 pounds ) of weight from when he appeared at the 2002 Winter Games . He went down to a 65 @.@ 7 kg ( 145 lb ) <unk> and a 2 @.@ 5 % Body fat percentage enduring a 5 @-@ month 3 @-@ a @-@ day training program combined with a strict nutritional program . As a result , he could lift double the weight he could before the training . With respect to his training regimen , Ohno said : " Come these Games , there 's no one who 's going to be fitter than me . There 's just no way . Whether I can put it together on the ice or not and feel good , that 's a different story . But I know , from a physical training standpoint , nobody 's even close ... I 've never prepared like this in my life — for anything . I want to leave nothing on the table . " 
 = = = = Trials = = = = 
 During the U.S. Olympic Trials held September 8 – 12 , 2009 , in Marquette , Michigan , Ohno won the overall meet title and defended his national title . He won the finals during the 500 m , 1000 m , and 1500 m races . However , during the 1000 m time trial , Ohno came in second to J. R. Celski despite skating a personal best of 1 : 24 @.@ 500 to Celski 's personal best of 1 : 23 @.@ 981 . Celski , who finished second overall and was leading in points after the first two nights of the trials , was injured during a crash in the semifinals of the 1000 m race when his right skate sliced into his left leg ; he did not skate in the 1000 m finals . Ohno had a narrow victory in the 500 m , beating out the silver place finisher Jeff Simon by only <unk> of a second . Ohno , Celski , Jordan Malone , Travis Jayner , and Simon Cho were the top five finishers at the trials . Afterwards , Ohno said of the nominated team : " This is the strongest team we 've ever had . I feel really good about how we will do in the next Olympics . " 
 = = = = Games = = = = 
 In the 1500 m final , Ohno placed second after two Korean skaters , Lee Ho @-@ Suk and Sung Si @-@ Bak , made contact and crashed into the wall during the final turn of the final lap . He was in fourth place leading into the crash , and as a result , moved into second place , earning the silver . Fellow American skater J. R. Celski finished with the bronze medal . The gold medal went to South Korea 's Lee Jung @-@ Su . This win allowed Ohno , with six career medals , to tie Bonnie Blair for most medals won by a U.S. Winter Olympian . 
 Heading into the 1000 m final , Ohno had won the overall silver medal for the 1000 m during the 2009 – 10 World Cup by competing in three of the four competitions during the season . During the finals of the 1000 m , Ohno finished in third place , making a comeback from a slip with less than three laps remaining . With the bronze medal win , he became the most decorated American athlete ever at the Winter Games with seven career medals . Bonnie Blair , the former record holder , said she was happy for his accomplishment , adding : " It 's a great feat for him , U.S. speedskating , and the United States of America . We hope that more kids will see his accomplishments and want to try our great sport that has been so good to us and taught us so much about what it takes to be successful in life . " 
 In the 500 m final , Ohno finished the race in second place behind Canada 's Charles Hamelin . However , he was disqualified after impeding François @-@ Louis Tremblay of Canada around the final turn . The silver medal went to Sung Si @-@ Bak , with Tremblay taking the bronze . 
 The 5000 m relay team for the United States finished with the bronze medal . The team , consisting of J. R. Celski , Simon Cho , Travis Jayner , Jordan Malone , and Ohno , were in the fourth position for the majority of the race . With a strong push from Celski with two laps to go , Ohno as the anchor leg was able to pass the Chinese team for third place ; Canada won the gold and South Korea took silver . This bronze medal was the eighth Olympic medal of his career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In the United States , Ohno is credited with popularizing and being the face of his sport . He said it is amazing being a role model to younger skaters . Growing up , he did not have that influence within his sport , but looked up to other athletes outside his sport , such as Muhammad Ali , Joe Frazier , and Lance Armstrong . Training for short track has been the main focus of Ohno 's life , but he has been able to work on other endeavors . He studied business at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs . Believing in healthy eating habits , Ohno worked with his training coach John Schaeffer during preparations for the 2010 Winter Games to develop a nutritional supplement business called 8 Zone . The supplements consist of eight @-@ hour segments where a dose is administered . He hopes this business will be able to be a sponsor for future Olympic Games . 
 After the 2010 Winter Games , he created the Apolo Anton Ohno Foundation and partnered with the Century Council 's Ask , Listen , Learn Program to discourage underage drinking of alcohol and to promote a healthy lifestyle . Furthering his goal of promoting healthier food choices and working with the endorsement of the Washington State Potato Commission , he will be working on a cookbook with top Seattle chefs in 2010 . 
 He has an interest in pursuing a career in the entertainment world . He participated and won the fourth season of the U.S. reality show Dancing with the Stars . He returned for the 15th Season which features all @-@ star celebrities . Ohno 's interests in fashion led him to be a guest judge on the fashion reality show Project Runway in 2008 , and to an endorsement deal with Omega , the maker of luxury watches , in 2010 . Omega President Stephen Urquhart said , " We are very proud to support Apolo here in Vancouver and congratulate him on his outstanding performance . He is poised to make history of his own here and we are thrilled that he is part of the Omega family " . He also appeared on Minute to Win It as the host of the GSN revival in 2013 since he is a fan of the show . 
 Ohno has an interest in being a philanthropist . He participated in GAP 's campaign to fight the spread of HIV / AIDS in Africa by joining Product Red . Half of the proceeds went to The Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria . Besides working with The Salvation Army and the Clothes off our Back Foundations , he used his fame to help raise funds for a Ronald McDonald House in Seattle after the 2002 Winter Games . He helped raise $ 20 @,@ 000 for Nikkei Concerns , a provider of care and services for Japanese elders living in the Pacific Northwest . Later that year , Ohno joined Senator Ted Kennedy in Washington , D.C. to show the importance of math and science education by helping launch the " Math Moves U <unk> Homework Happening " program , which gave students the opportunity to do math homework online with celebrities and athletes . 
 He has also volunteered with Special Olympics and taken part in Unified Sports , which brings together athletes with intellectual disabilities and without on the same team . Ohno currently serves as a Special Olympics Global Ambassador ahead of the 2015 World Summer Games taking place in Los Angeles , California . 
 Ohno dated fellow Olympian speedskater Allison Baver . 
 = = = Sponsorships = = = 
 Using his recognition and fame from his sport , he has accumulated a list of sponsors that include McDonald 's , General Electric , The Century Council , Vicks and Coca @-@ Cola . Ohno 's father , Yuki , said about sponsorships : " He 's not like a professional athlete who has a multi @-@ million @-@ dollar contract with a team ... He has to have sponsorships to pay the bills " . Capitalizing on Ohno 's fame , Alaska Airlines were his primary sponsor for the 2010 Winter Games and designed a Boeing 737 – 800 jet with his image on the side . 
 He was critical of the leaders of the U.S. Speedskating Organization when a donation of $ 250 @,@ 000 was raised by viewers of the Comedy Central show The Colbert Report for the organization after their largest commercial sponsor , the Dutch DSB Bank , declared bankruptcy and was unable to donate its $ 300 @,@ 000 in November 2009 . In an email to Time , he wrote it was " a bit embarrassing that our leadership couldn 't secure other sponsors three months before the Olympic Games " but credited the show 's host Stephen Colbert for " his willingness to help out our nation 's greatest athletes " . In return for The Colbert Report donation , long track and short track skaters had the " Colbert Nation " logo on their uniforms for World Cup events leading up to the 2010 Winter Games . Ohno did not wear the logo because Alaska Airlines was his primary sponsor for the 2010 Games . He was also part of Oreo 's Team <unk> sketch in 2011 . 
 = = Dancing with the Stars = = 
 = = = Season 4 – with Julianne Hough = = = 
 Ohno participated on the fourth season of the reality show , Dancing with the Stars . He was paired with dancing partner Julianne Hough , and both appeared on the show for the first time on March 19 , 2007 . Together , they received the competition 's first perfect score of 30 for their samba routine on April 16 , 2007 . The dancing duo became finalists in the competition , and went on to become the champions in May 2007 . 
 = = = Season 15 – with Karina Smirnoff = = = 
 In July 2012 , it was announced Ohno would return for the all @-@ star fifteenth season for a second chance to win the mirrorball trophy ; this time he was paired with Season 13 champion professional Karina Smirnoff . They were voted off during the ninth week of the competition . 
 * Note : Paula Abdul was guest @-@ judge during Week 4 , Opponents ' Choice Week . 
 During the Swing Marathon , the judges eliminated each pair until only one pair remained , earning 10 points . Apolo was the third eliminated and earned 6 points from the judges . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 In 2012 , Ohno appeared as a guest star in the 17th episode of the 2nd season of Hawaii Five @-@ 0 , as a suspect . He also had a guest appearance on The Biggest Loser in Season 12 , Episode 9 and Season 15 , Episode 12 . 
 In 2013 , Ohno appeared as the character " Stone " in the Syfy Original Movie Tasmanian Devils , as well as the host of GSN 's Minute to Win It . 
 In 2015 , Ohno appeared as a live guest during the season finale of NBC 's live variety show Best Time Ever with Neil Patrick Harris . 
 In 2016 , Ohno appeared as a guest star on Hollywood Game Night hosted by Jane Lynch on NBC . 
 = = Apolo Ohno Invitational = = 
 In November 2014 Ohno sponsored a speedskating race in Salt Lake City , UT that featured the four top men and women skaters from the US , China , Canada and the Netherlands . It aired on NBCSN on 21 November 2014 at 10 : 00 pm EST . 
 = Bergen Air Transport = 
 Bergen Air Transport AS is an airline based at Bergen Airport , Flesland in Norway . In addition to charter aviation and an aviation workshop , it offers a scheduled service between Bergen and Notodden Airport , Tuven . The airline operates two Beechcraft <unk> King Air aircraft and one Cessna Citation CJ2 . The airline was established in 1998 , offering seaplane charter flights using Cessna 421 aircraft . The service to Notodden started in 2000 ; a Cessna 441 was acquired in 2003 , and from 2006 the company has used two Beechcraft . The company is owned by Geir <unk> and Håkon Lie @-@ Nielsen . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The airline operates two 12 @-@ seat Beechcraft King Air <unk> aircraft , and one seven @-@ seat Cessna Citation CJ2 executive jet . It has its main operational base at Bergen Airport , Flesland , but also has facilities at Notodden Airport , Tuven . The company has ten pilots ; its main services are private charter and aviation @-@ mechanical services , but the company also operates a single scheduled service , with six weekly round trips between Bergen and Notodden . In 2011 , it had a revenue of NOK 31 @.@ 0 million and a NOK 0 @.@ 25 million profit . 
 = = History = = 
 Bergen Air Transport was founded in 1998 by Geir <unk> and Håkon Lie @-@ Nielsen , and commenced operations the following year . Initial operations consisted of charter services , using a Cessna 421B . In 2000 , the company replaced this aircraft with a Cessna <unk> , and started the scheduled route between Bergen and Notodden using the six @-@ seat aircraft . In 2000 , the company had eleven employees and NOK 2 @.@ 6 million in revenue . To begin with , it made four round trips per week , but in 2001 it chose to increase to five , after experiencing high cabin loads . It transported 1 @,@ 000 passengers in 2000 , and 1 @,@ 500 the following year . During the summer of 2002 , the company also attempted to fly from Notodden to Kristiansund Airport , Kvernberget , but was forced to give up due to lack of passengers . 
 A hangar was built at Bergen Airport in 2003 , and at the same time the airline was certified as a mechanical aviation workshop . The following year , the Cessna 421 was replaced with a Cessna 441 Conquest II . In 2006 , two Beechcraft King Air were bought , and the last Cessna sold . On 20 November 2003 , Notodden Airport was closed for all scheduled traffic by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority , due to a lack of safety requirements . Bergen Air Transport was forced to reroute all its aircraft to Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . Following an investment of NOK 500 @,@ 000 from the airline and NOK 1 @.@ 2 million from the municipality , which owns the airport , scheduled services commenced again . From 1 October 2004 , NOK 250 @,@ 000 was invested at Notodden Airport . Starting in October 2004 , the airline also introduced security control of all passengers at Notodden Airport . In 2005 , the company had a revenue of NOK 10 @.@ 3 million ; this increased to NOK 20 @.@ 1 million in 2006 , giving a profit of NOK 2 @.@ 8 million , when the airline transported 2 @,@ 841 passengers . 
 In September 2007 , the company bought a new hangar at Notodden , giving it ample space for expansion , and new arrival and departure facilities . At the same time , the airline bought its first jet , a Cessna Citation CJ2 . That year saw the airline transport <unk> passengers on 552 flights on the Bergen – Notodden route . 
 = The Tunnel ( TV series ) = 
 The Tunnel ( French : Tunnel ) is a British @-@ French crime drama television series , adapted from the 2011 Danish / Swedish crime series The Bridge ( <unk> / Bron ) . The Tunnel began broadcast on 16 October 2013 on Sky Atlantic in the UK , and on 11 November 2013 on Canal + in France . The series stars Stephen Dillane and Clémence Poésy as British and French police detectives Karl Roebuck and Elise Wassermann , respectively . The plot follows the two detectives working together to find a serial killer who left the upper @-@ half body of a French politician and the lower @-@ half of a British prostitute in the Channel Tunnel , at the midpoint between France and the UK . They later learn that the killer — who comes to be nicknamed the " Truth Terrorist " — is on a moral crusade to highlight many social problems , terrorising both countries in the process . As the series progresses , the killer 's true intention is revealed . 
 The Anglo @-@ French adaption of The Bridge was announced as a joint project between Sky and Canal + in January 2013 . Ben Richards , the head writer of The Tunnel , worked with Hans <unk> , the creator of the original series . Due to the setting , the dialogue of the series is bilingual , a first for British and French television . With a budget of £ 15 million , filming took place between February and August 2013 , and was shot on location in Kent , England and northern France . It was produced with both British and French crew members . The premieres on both Sky Atlantic and Canal + received strong ratings for the respective channels , with an initial consolidated figure of almost 900 @,@ 000 in the UK , and 1 @.@ 3 million in France . Critical reception of the series has been generally positive , with Dillane and Poésy 's acting being praised , as well as the plot 's grittiness . The comparisons with The Bridge were also viewed favourably by some reviewers , though others criticised The Tunnel for being identical . The producers admit that the first episode is a copy of the original . 
 In February 2015 , Sky announced that a second series of the show was set to air in early 2016 . Titled The Tunnel : Sabotage , it would focus on the crash of an airliner into the English channel . Stephen Dillane and Clémence Poésy would return as Karl Roebuck and Elise Wasserman . Consisting of eight episodes , it debuted on Sky Atlantic on Tuesday 12 April 2016 , although the video trailer on the series homepage indicated that it would start on 5 April 2016 - the debut was put back a week following the Brussels terrorist attacks on 22 March . The complete second series was made available on 12 April , via Sky 's On Demand service . As of June 2016 , The Tunnel 's first season airs in the United States on public television . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Stephen Dillane plays Detective Chief Inspector Karl Roebuck of <unk> Police ( a fictional counterpart to the real life Kent Police ) , an aging British detective used to getting his own way . Roebuck 's role parallels that of Martin Rohde ( played by Kim <unk> ) , the Danish detective in The Bridge . Karl and Martin share some characteristics , but also differ in certain ways ; for instance , Karl is " more educated and a more troubled man . " Dillane was drawn to the political questions raised in the storyline , as well as the series ' " novelistic telling " . 
 Clémence Poésy plays Capitaine ( later Commander ) Elise Wassermann of the <unk> , the French detective and Roebuck 's opposite . Wasserman 's role parallels that of Saga Norén ( played by Sofia Helin ) , the Swedish detective in The Bridge . Elise shares some characteristics with Saga , including driving a Porsche ( in Elise 's case , a Porsche 944 ) , picking up men from bars for casual sex , and exhibiting behaviour consistent with Asperger syndrome . The innate seriousness of the character was a trait that Poésy found " quite annoying " , but the actress came to appreciate Elise 's honesty . Both Dillane and Poésy opted not to view the Scandinavian original series , with the latter stating that it would allow her more freedom in interpreting the character . Poésy dubbed her English lines for the French broadcast . 
 The series includes several guest stars . Joseph Mawle plays a social worker named Stephen Beaumont , Tom Bateman appears as journalist Danny Hiller , and Tobi Bakare plays <unk> <unk> . Thibault de Montalembert plays Olivier Pujol , who is the head of the Calais police service , and Elise 's superior . Sigrid <unk> plays Cécile <unk> and Cédric Vieira plays Philippe <unk> ; these characters are police officers who work with Elise . Mathieu Carrière and Jeanne <unk> play banker Alain Joubert , and his wife Charlotte , respectively . Merlin actress Angel Coulby stars as Laura Roebuck , Karl 's wife , while Jack Lowden plays Adam , his son . Keeley Hawes guest starred as Suze Harcourt , a care worker and drug addict , along with Liz Smith , who plays Harriet , an elderly woman under Harcourt 's care . 
 James Frain plays Kieran Ashton , a former colleague of Karl , who faked his suicide and became the Truth Terrorist , serving as the primary antagonist . The character is motivated by the loss of his identity and family , as well as betrayal from Karl by his affair with Kieran 's wife before her death . Frain believed that Kieran is the most disturbing character he has played . Portraying the character , the actor wanted to make his actions understandable , though not justifiable . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Stephen Dillane as Detective Chief Inspector Karl Roebuck 
 Clémence Poésy as Commander Elise Wassermann 
 Thibault de Montalembert as Olivier Pujol 
 Cédric Vieira as Phillipe <unk> 
 Fanny <unk> as Julie 
 Angel Coulby as Laura Roebuck 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 The Anglo @-@ French adaption of the Danish / Swedish series The Bridge was first announced by Sky in January 2013 . The ten @-@ part series was to be a co @-@ production between British broadcaster Sky and French broadcaster Canal + . Sky Atlantic Director Elaine Pyke commissioned the show with the intention of establishing the channel as a home for British dramas following the channel 's release of the drama series Hit & Miss and Falcón . Due to the setting of the series , it would be bilingual , with dialogue being spoken in English and French . This would make The Tunnel — the producers claim — the first series in British and French television to be bilingual . 
 Being a " 50 – 50 co @-@ production " between the British and French , the crew were a mix from both countries , and neither party has " final control " . The series employed both British and French writers and directors to collaborate on the series , with former Spooks writer Ben Richards leading the writing team . Multiple versions of the script were used , which were translated for both languages . Five directors were hired for the series , three of them British and the other two French . Dominik Moll is considered the head director , with the other directors being Hettie MacDonald , Thomas Vincent , <unk> Prasad , and Philip Martin . The series ' executive producers are Sky 's Anne Mensah ; Canal + ' s Fabrice De La <unk> ; Kudos ' Jane Featherstone , Karen Wilson , Manda Levin , and Ben Richards ; Shine France 's Nora <unk> ; and <unk> 's Lars <unk> . Ruth Kenley @-@ Letts is the series producer . On the British / French collaboration of the series , Jane Featherstone — the chief executive of the production company Kudos — stated : " We have had to work very collaboratively to make sure we are appealing to both nations . I honestly don 't know if we have got that right yet . The French like things to be slightly slower , we like them pacier . " 
 In developing the storyline of the series Featherstone said that " the team took what was wonderful from [ the original ] and then forgot about it , in the nicest possible way , and made their own show . " While working for the series Richards worked with Hans <unk> , the Swedish writer who created The Bridge . Many aspects of the first episode are virtual copies of the first episode of the Scandinavian series , including : the female lead " stripping unselfconsciously to her underwear in the office " , the male lead 's relationship with his teenage son and the " sleazy journalist [ being ] held captive in his own car with a ticking bomb " , the last of which was a sequence Richards wanted to repeat in the remake . However Richards said that as the series progressed and the drama unfolded the storylines would diverge from the original . Featherstone also noted there would be plenty of changes , saying that many had " seen both [ The Bridge and The Tunnel ] , who feel that they get satisfaction because the characters go on different journeys and the actors all bring a whole new level of interest in it . " 
 = = = Filming and locations = = = 
 The budget of the series is estimated to be £ 15 million . Filming began in February 2013 and concluded in August 2013 , with location shooting largely taken place in Kent and northern France . Filming in Kent was based in Discovery Park in Sandwich and was supported by the Kent Film Office . A former Pfizer facility was used as a number of sets , including the Calais police station and Elise 's apartment . The series was filmed throughout five districts : Canterbury , Dover , <unk> , Swale and Thanet . Several prominent locales were featured , including Folkestone Harbour ; The Turner Contemporary art gallery ; Westwood Cross shopping centre ; and the towns of Dover , Folkestone and Margate . Production also made use of the Kent Film Office 's legal powers to close certain roads for uninterrupted filming . An estimated £ 2 @.@ 5 million of the budget was spent on , among other services , accommodation , locations , parking and catering , providing a boost for the Kent economy . The filming in France was supported by the Nord @-@ Pas de Calais Film Commission and benefited from the Tax Rebate International . Shooting took place over 31 days across Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , Calais and Dunkerque . 
 Some scenes of The Tunnel were also shot in the Channel Tunnel itself , which makes the series the first television drama production to do so . The producers spent " months of gentle negotiation " with Eurotunnel , the company that operates the tunnel , for permission to shoot scenes there . Eurotunnel allowed it . According to Moll , " The only thing they didn 't want was to see train passengers in danger or fires . " Moll also noted that they did not shoot in the actual midpoint of the tunnel , stating " once you are a few kilometres in , it all looks the same . " 
 Series two once again returned to Kent and France to film . The production filmed for 85 days in Kent between April and July 2015 with a further 50 days in the county for pre and post @-@ production , spending an estimated £ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 The Kent filming locations include Euro Tunnel , Folkestone Harbour , Discovery Park , Deal including the Pier , Folkestone , Dover including the Port and Dover Castle , Westwood Industrial Estate Margate , Ramsgate , The Barn in <unk> , St Martin ’ s Hospital , Knowlton Court plus many more . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 The Tunnel had a world premiere hosted at the international television market <unk> in Cannes , France on 7 October 2013 . In the United Kingdom , Sky Atlantic premiered the series at 9pm on Wednesday , 16 October 2013 , and continued weekly until 18 December . The premiere episode was seen by an average of 362 @,@ 000 overnight viewers , considered strong ratings for the channel . With consolidated ratings taken into account , the first episode went up to 803 @,@ 000 viewers on Sky Atlantic , with an extra 90 @,@ 000 viewing from its catch @-@ up channel , Sky Atlantic + 1 . However , the second episode dropped a third of its overnight audience , leaving it with 236 @,@ 000 viewers . The finale was seen by 267 @,@ 000 overnight viewers . In France , the series premiered on Canal + on 8 : <unk> at Monday , 11 November 2013 . The first episode attracted 1 @.@ 3 million viewers , marking it as one of the highest rated original series premieres for the channel . The first series was viewed by an average audience of 1 @.@ 04 million viewers per episode . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Tunnel received generally positive reviews from television critics . Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy stated that while remakes are " often underwhelming " , The Tunnel was " gripping stuff " , and believed that viewers " should find plenty to enjoy " in The Tunnel . The performances of Dillane and Poésy were also lauded . Gerard Gilbert of The Independent was positive in his assessment of the series , stating " as an avid fan of The Bridge , I am happy to report that The Tunnel works well in its own right – it 's intelligently made , well cast and ambitiously cinematic " , adding that it had " succeeded in its high @-@ risk strategy of re @-@ working a near @-@ flawless Scandi @-@ drama in our Anglo @-@ French image . " Ellen E Jones , also of The Independent , said that Dillane and Poésy 's performances " stuck closely " to the original characterisation of the leads from the Scandinavian version . Of the execution , Jones stated " should you bother watching The Tunnel even if you 've already seen the original ? The early signs are good . The makers obviously have sense enough to preserve what was effective about the original , and invention enough to distinguish their work too . " 
 Harry Venning of The Stage believed that — <unk> — the collaboration between the British and French police forces and style were " all very effectively done , creepily atmospheric and splendidly gruesome " , but also stated that the best thing about the series was " the interplay between Stephen Dillane 's easygoing , laddish , <unk> detective inspector and his po @-@ faced , glacial but – wouldn 't you know it – extremely sexy Gallic counterpart , played by Clemence Poesy . " Metro reviewer Keith Watson — having rated the series four stars out of five — stated " the idea is great . But what 's surprising about The Tunnel ( Sky Atlantic ) is that it 's less a version of , more a faithful re @-@ make . " 
 The Guardian posted a number of reviews on its website . Julia <unk> deemed the series a " perfectly cast remake of Swedish @-@ Danish crime hit " , and stated that " this confirms Dillane as one of our very finest . Such control . Poésy is beautifully chilly and Joseph Mawle ( another cracker ) leads an asylum @-@ seeker subplot . It 's also really funny . " Writing about the finale , <unk> stated of Dillane 's performance : " If this were on a terrestrial channel , he 'd be up for all the awards . " On the Karl / Elise partnership , she stated : " I wasn 't sure about them as a pairing but was immediately convinced by their uncomfortable chemistry . " Andrew Anthony — having not enjoyed The Bridge — called The Tunnel an " attractive proposition " , adding that " there 's an engaging confidence to the slow revelation of the story . All in all , this looks good . " However , Sam Wollaston was more critical of the series , stating that — while the tone was " atmospheric , intriguing , gripping " and there were strong performances from the lead cast members — The Tunnel was " exactly the same as the ( recent ) original . " Wollaston felt that the only " obvious " difference was that , in the original series , there " was a bridge , this is a tunnel . However magnificent an engineering feat the Channel tunnel is , it can 't compete as a spectacular location with the Oresund Bridge . " 
 Gerard O 'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph was also mixed on the series , saying : " there was no sense that this was doing much different from other mainstream crime thrillers . Sticking too close to the original script meant a golden opportunity was missed to dig deeper into the attitudes and history that both connect and divide the UK and France " . However , he also wrote that he would be " happy to be persuaded otherwise if the action develops . " 
 = = = Home media and other releases = = = 
 The series was first released on DVD in France on 20 December 2013 , with special features including a making of feature and interviews featuring Moll and Poésy on a four @-@ disc set . A release in the United Kingdom followed on 13 January 2014 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc by publisher Acorn Media UK , and includes three discs , with special features including a making @-@ of feature , cast and crew interviews , and a picture gallery . 
 Starting on 1 February 2014 in the UK , the first episodes of The Tunnel — along with some other original Sky series — will be released for free on the video sharing website YouTube , in an attempt to attract more Sky subscribers . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 ( 2013 ) = = = 
 = = = Series 2 : Sabotage ( 2016 ) = = = 
 = Formation and evolution of the Solar System = 
 The formation of the Solar System began 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago with the gravitational collapse of a small part of a giant molecular cloud . Most of the collapsing mass collected in the center , forming the Sun , while the rest flattened into a protoplanetary disk out of which the planets , moons , asteroids , and other small Solar System bodies formed . 
 This model , known as the nebular hypothesis , was first developed in the 18th century by Emanuel Swedenborg , Immanuel Kant , and Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace . Its subsequent development has interwoven a variety of scientific disciplines including astronomy , physics , geology , and planetary science . Since the dawn of the space age in the 1950s and the discovery of extrasolar planets in the 1990s , the model has been both challenged and refined to account for new observations . 
 The Solar System has evolved considerably since its initial formation . Many moons have formed from circling discs of gas and dust around their parent planets , while other moons are thought to have formed independently and later been captured by their planets . Still others , such as Earth 's Moon , may be the result of giant collisions . Collisions between bodies have occurred continually up to the present day and have been central to the evolution of the Solar System . The positions of the planets often shifted due to gravitational interactions . This planetary migration is now thought to have been responsible for much of the Solar System 's early evolution . 
 In roughly 5 billion years , the Sun will cool and expand outward many times its current diameter ( becoming a red giant ) , before casting off its outer layers as a planetary nebula and leaving behind a stellar remnant known as a white dwarf . In the far distant future , the gravity of passing stars will gradually reduce the Sun 's retinue of planets . Some planets will be destroyed , others ejected into interstellar space . Ultimately , over the course of tens of billions of years , it is likely that the Sun will be left with none of the original bodies in orbit around it . 
 = = History = = 
 Ideas concerning the origin and fate of the world date from the earliest known writings ; however , for almost all of that time , there was no attempt to link such theories to the existence of a " Solar System " , simply because it was not generally thought that the Solar System , in the sense we now understand it , existed . The first step toward a theory of Solar System formation and evolution was the general acceptance of heliocentrism , which placed the Sun at the centre of the system and the Earth in orbit around it . This conception had gestated for millennia ( Aristarchus of Samos had suggested it as early as 250 BC ) , but was not widely accepted until the end of the 17th century . The first recorded use of the term " Solar System " dates from 1704 . 
 The current standard theory for Solar System formation , the nebular hypothesis , has fallen into and out of favour since its formulation by Emanuel Swedenborg , Immanuel Kant , and Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace in the 18th century . The most significant criticism of the hypothesis was its apparent inability to explain the Sun 's relative lack of angular momentum when compared to the planets . However , since the early 1980s studies of young stars have shown them to be surrounded by cool discs of dust and gas , exactly as the nebular hypothesis predicts , which has led to its re @-@ acceptance . 
 Understanding of how the Sun will continue to evolve required an understanding of the source of its power . Arthur Stanley Eddington 's confirmation of Albert Einstein 's theory of relativity led to his realisation that the Sun 's energy comes from nuclear fusion reactions in its core , fusing hydrogen into helium . In 1935 , Eddington went further and suggested that other elements also might form within stars . Fred Hoyle elaborated on this premise by arguing that evolved stars called red giants created many elements heavier than hydrogen and helium in their cores . When a red giant finally casts off its outer layers , these elements would then be recycled to form other star systems . 
 = = Formation = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ solar nebula = = = 
 The nebular hypothesis maintains that the Solar System formed from the gravitational collapse of a fragment of a giant molecular cloud . The cloud itself had a size of about 20 parsec ( 65 light years ) , while the fragments were roughly 1 parsec ( three and a quarter light @-@ years ) across . The further collapse of the fragments led to the formation of dense cores 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 1 pc ( 2 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 AU ) in size . One of these collapsing fragments ( known as the pre @-@ solar nebula ) would form what became the Solar System . The composition of this region with a mass just over that of the Sun ( M ☉ ) was about the same as that of the Sun today , with hydrogen , along with helium and trace amounts of lithium produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis , forming about 98 % of its mass . The remaining 2 % of the mass consisted of heavier elements that were created by nucleosynthesis in earlier generations of stars . Late in the life of these stars , they ejected heavier elements into the interstellar medium . 
 The oldest inclusions found in meteorites , thought to trace the first solid material to form in the pre @-@ solar nebula , are <unk> @.@ 2 million years old , which is one definition of the age of the Solar System . Studies of ancient meteorites reveal traces of stable daughter nuclei of short @-@ lived isotopes , such as iron @-@ 60 , that only form in exploding , short @-@ lived stars . This indicates that one or more supernovae occurred near the Sun while it was forming . A shock wave from a supernova may have triggered the formation of the Sun by creating regions of over @-@ density within the cloud , causing these regions to collapse . Because only massive , short @-@ lived stars produce supernovae , the Sun must have formed in a large star @-@ forming region that produced massive stars , possibly similar to the Orion Nebula . Studies of the structure of the Kuiper belt and of anomalous materials within it suggest that the Sun formed within a cluster of between 1 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 stars with a diameter of between 6 @.@ 5 and 19 @.@ 5 light @-@ years and a collective mass of 3 @,@ 000 M ☉ . This cluster began to break apart between 135 million and 535 million years after formation . Several simulations of our young Sun interacting with close @-@ passing stars over the first 100 million years of its life produce anomalous orbits observed in the outer Solar System , such as detached objects . 
 Because of the conservation of angular momentum , the nebula spun faster as it collapsed . As the material within the nebula condensed , the atoms within it began to collide with increasing frequency , converting their kinetic energy into heat . The centre , where most of the mass collected , became increasingly hotter than the surrounding disc . Over about 100 @,@ 000 years , the competing forces of gravity , gas pressure , magnetic fields , and rotation caused the contracting nebula to flatten into a spinning protoplanetary disc with a diameter of ~ 200 AU and form a hot , dense protostar ( a star in which hydrogen fusion has not yet begun ) at the centre . 
 At this point in its evolution , the Sun is thought to have been a T Tauri star . Studies of T Tauri stars show that they are often accompanied by discs of pre @-@ planetary matter with masses of 0 @.@ 001 – 0 @.@ 1 M ☉ . These discs extend to several hundred AU — the Hubble Space Telescope has observed protoplanetary discs of up to 1000 AU in diameter in star @-@ forming regions such as the Orion Nebula — and are rather cool , reaching a surface temperature of only one thousand kelvin at their hottest . Within 50 million years , the temperature and pressure at the core of the Sun became so great that its hydrogen began to fuse , creating an internal source of energy that countered gravitational contraction until hydrostatic equilibrium was achieved . This marked the Sun 's entry into the prime phase of its life , known as the main sequence . Main @-@ sequence stars derive energy from the fusion of hydrogen into helium in their cores . The Sun remains a main @-@ sequence star today . 
 = = = Formation of the planets = = = 
 The various planets are thought to have formed from the solar nebula , the disc @-@ shaped cloud of gas and dust left over from the Sun 's formation . The currently accepted method by which the planets formed is accretion , in which the planets began as dust grains in orbit around the central protostar . Through direct contact , these grains formed into clumps up to 200 metres in diameter , which in turn collided to form larger bodies ( planetesimals ) of ~ 10 kilometres ( km ) in size . These gradually increased through further collisions , growing at the rate of centimetres per year over the course of the next few million years . 
 The inner Solar System , the region of the Solar System inside 4 AU , was too warm for volatile molecules like water and methane to condense , so the planetesimals that formed there could only form from compounds with high melting points , such as metals ( like iron , nickel , and aluminium ) and rocky silicates . These rocky bodies would become the terrestrial planets ( Mercury , Venus , Earth , and Mars ) . These compounds are quite rare in the Universe , comprising only 0 @.@ 6 % of the mass of the nebula , so the terrestrial planets could not grow very large . The terrestrial embryos grew to about 0 @.@ 05 Earth masses ( M ⊕ ) and ceased accumulating matter about 100 @,@ 000 years after the formation of the Sun ; subsequent collisions and mergers between these planet @-@ sized bodies allowed terrestrial planets to grow to their present sizes ( see Terrestrial planets below ) . 
 When the terrestrial planets were forming , they remained immersed in a disk of gas and dust . The gas was partially supported by pressure and so did not orbit the Sun as rapidly as the planets . The resulting drag caused a transfer of angular momentum , and as a result the planets gradually migrated to new orbits . Models show that density and temperature variations in the disk governed this rate of migration , but the net trend was for the inner planets to migrate inward as the disk dissipated , leaving the planets in their current orbits . 
 The giant planets ( Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune ) formed further out , beyond the frost line , the point between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where the material is cool enough for volatile icy compounds to remain solid . The ices that formed the Jovian planets were more abundant than the metals and silicates that formed the terrestrial planets , allowing the giant planets to grow massive enough to capture hydrogen and helium , the lightest and most abundant elements . Planetesimals beyond the frost line accumulated up to 4 M ⊕ within about 3 million years . Today , the four giant planets comprise just under 99 % of all the mass orbiting the Sun . Theorists believe it is no accident that Jupiter lies just beyond the frost line . Because the frost line accumulated large amounts of water via evaporation from infalling icy material , it created a region of lower pressure that increased the speed of orbiting dust particles and halted their motion toward the Sun . In effect , the frost line acted as a barrier that caused material to accumulate rapidly at ~ 5 AU from the Sun . This excess material coalesced into a large embryo ( or core ) on the order of 10 M ⊕ , which began to accumulate an envelope via accretion of gas from the surrounding disc at an ever increasing rate . Once the envelope mass became about equal to the solid core mass , growth proceeded very rapidly , reaching about 150 Earth masses ~ 105 years thereafter and finally topping out at 318 M ⊕ . Saturn may owe its substantially lower mass simply to having formed a few million years after Jupiter , when there was less gas available to consume . 
 T Tauri stars like the young Sun have far stronger stellar winds than more stable , older stars . Uranus and Neptune are thought to have formed after Jupiter and Saturn did , when the strong solar wind had blown away much of the disc material . As a result , the planets accumulated little hydrogen and helium — not more than 1 M ⊕ each . Uranus and Neptune are sometimes referred to as failed cores . The main problem with formation theories for these planets is the timescale of their formation . At the current locations it would have taken a hundred million years for their cores to accrete . This means that Uranus and Neptune probably formed closer to the Sun — near or even between Jupiter and Saturn — and later migrated or were ejected outward ( see Planetary migration below ) . Motion in the planetesimal era was not all inward toward the Sun ; the Stardust sample return from Comet Wild 2 has suggested that materials from the early formation of the Solar System migrated from the warmer inner Solar System to the region of the Kuiper belt . 
 After between three and ten million years , the young Sun 's solar wind would have cleared away all the gas and dust in the protoplanetary disc , blowing it into interstellar space , thus ending the growth of the planets . 
 = = Subsequent evolution = = 
 The planets were originally thought to have formed in or near their current orbits . However , this view underwent radical change during the late 20th and early 21st centuries . Currently , it is thought that the Solar System looked very different after its initial formation : several objects at least as massive as Mercury were present in the inner Solar System , the outer Solar System was much more compact than it is now , and the Kuiper belt was much closer to the Sun . 
 = = = Terrestrial planets = = = 
 At the end of the planetary formation epoch the inner Solar System was populated by 50 – 100 Moon- to Mars @-@ sized planetary embryos . Further growth was possible only because these bodies collided and merged , which took less than 100 million years . These objects would have gravitationally interacted with one another , tugging at each other 's orbits until they collided , growing larger until the four terrestrial planets we know today took shape . One such giant collision is thought to have formed the Moon ( see Moons below ) , while another removed the outer envelope of the young Mercury . 
 One unresolved issue with this model is that it cannot explain how the initial orbits of the proto @-@ terrestrial planets , which would have needed to be highly eccentric to collide , produced the remarkably stable and nearly circular orbits they have today . One hypothesis for this " eccentricity dumping " is that the terrestrials formed in a disc of gas still not expelled by the Sun . The " gravitational drag " of this residual gas would have eventually lowered the planets ' energy , smoothing out their orbits . However , such gas , if it existed , would have prevented the terrestrial planets ' orbits from becoming so eccentric in the first place . Another hypothesis is that gravitational drag occurred not between the planets and residual gas but between the planets and the remaining small bodies . As the large bodies moved through the crowd of smaller objects , the smaller objects , attracted by the larger planets ' gravity , formed a region of higher density , a " gravitational wake " , in the larger objects ' path . As they did so , the increased gravity of the wake slowed the larger objects down into more regular orbits . 
 = = = Asteroid belt = = = 
 The outer edge of the terrestrial region , between 2 and 4 AU from the Sun , is called the asteroid belt . The asteroid belt initially contained more than enough matter to form 2 – 3 Earth @-@ like planets , and , indeed , a large number of planetesimals formed there . As with the terrestrials , planetesimals in this region later coalesced and formed 20 – 30 Moon- to Mars @-@ sized planetary embryos ; however , the proximity of Jupiter meant that after this planet formed , 3 million years after the Sun , the region 's history changed dramatically . Orbital resonances with Jupiter and Saturn are particularly strong in the asteroid belt , and gravitational interactions with more massive embryos scattered many planetesimals into those resonances . Jupiter 's gravity increased the velocity of objects within these resonances , causing them to shatter upon collision with other bodies , rather than accrete . 
 As Jupiter migrated inward following its formation ( see Planetary migration below ) , resonances would have swept across the asteroid belt , dynamically exciting the region 's population and increasing their velocities relative to each other . The cumulative action of the resonances and the embryos either scattered the planetesimals away from the asteroid belt or excited their orbital inclinations and eccentricities . Some of those massive embryos too were ejected by Jupiter , while others may have migrated to the inner Solar System and played a role in the final accretion of the terrestrial planets . During this primary depletion period , the effects of the giant planets and planetary embryos left the asteroid belt with a total mass equivalent to less than 1 % that of the Earth , composed mainly of small planetesimals . This is still 10 – 20 times more than the current mass in the main belt , which is now about 1 / 2 @,@ 000 M ⊕ . A secondary depletion period that brought the asteroid belt down close to its present mass is thought to have followed when Jupiter and Saturn entered a temporary 2 : 1 orbital resonance ( see below ) . 
 The inner Solar System 's period of giant impacts probably played a role in the Earth acquiring its current water content ( ~ 6 × 1021 kg ) from the early asteroid belt . Water is too volatile to have been present at Earth 's formation and must have been subsequently delivered from outer , colder parts of the Solar System . The water was probably delivered by planetary embryos and small planetesimals thrown out of the asteroid belt by Jupiter . A population of main @-@ belt comets discovered in 2006 has been also suggested as a possible source for Earth 's water . In contrast , comets from the Kuiper belt or farther regions delivered not more than about 6 % of Earth 's water . The panspermia hypothesis holds that life itself may have been deposited on Earth in this way , although this idea is not widely accepted . 
 = = = Planetary migration = = = 
 According to the nebular hypothesis , the outer two planets are in the " wrong place " . Uranus and Neptune ( known as the " ice giants " ) exist in a region where the reduced density of the solar nebula and longer orbital times render their formation highly implausible . The two are instead thought to have formed in orbits near Jupiter and Saturn , where more material was available , and to have migrated outward to their current positions over hundreds of millions of years . 
 The migration of the outer planets is also necessary to account for the existence and properties of the Solar System 's outermost regions . Beyond Neptune , the Solar System continues into the Kuiper belt , the scattered disc , and the Oort cloud , three sparse populations of small icy bodies thought to be the points of origin for most observed comets . At their distance from the Sun , accretion was too slow to allow planets to form before the solar nebula dispersed , and thus the initial disc lacked enough mass density to consolidate into a planet . The Kuiper belt lies between 30 and 55 AU from the Sun , while the farther scattered disc extends to over 100 AU , and the distant Oort cloud begins at about 50 @,@ 000 AU . Originally , however , the Kuiper belt was much denser and closer to the Sun , with an outer edge at approximately 30 AU . Its inner edge would have been just beyond the orbits of Uranus and Neptune , which were in turn far closer to the Sun when they formed ( most likely in the range of 15 – 20 AU ) , and in opposite locations , with Uranus farther from the Sun than Neptune . 
 According to the so @-@ called Nice model , after the formation of the Solar System , the orbits of all the giant planets continued to change slowly , influenced by their interaction with the large number of remaining planetesimals . After 500 – 600 million years ( about 4 billion years ago ) Jupiter and Saturn fell into a 2 : 1 resonance : Saturn orbited the Sun once for every two Jupiter orbits . This resonance created a gravitational push against the outer planets , causing Neptune to surge past Uranus and plough into the ancient Kuiper belt . The planets scattered the majority of the small icy bodies inwards , while themselves moving outwards . These planetesimals then scattered off the next planet they encountered in a similar manner , moving the planets ' orbits outwards while they moved inwards . This process continued until the planetesimals interacted with Jupiter , whose immense gravity sent them into highly elliptical orbits or even ejected them outright from the Solar System . This caused Jupiter to move slightly inward . Those objects scattered by Jupiter into highly elliptical orbits formed the Oort cloud ; those objects scattered to a lesser degree by the migrating Neptune formed the current Kuiper belt and scattered disc . This scenario explains the Kuiper belt 's and scattered disc 's present low mass . Some of the scattered objects , including Pluto , became gravitationally tied to Neptune 's orbit , forcing them into mean @-@ motion resonances . Eventually , friction within the planetesimal disc made the orbits of Uranus and Neptune circular again . 
 In contrast to the outer planets , the inner planets are not thought to have migrated significantly over the age of the Solar System , because their orbits have remained stable following the period of giant impacts . 
 Another question is why Mars came out so small compared with Earth . A study by Southwest Research Institute , San Antonio , Texas , published June 6 , 2011 ( called the Grand Tack Hypothesis ) , proposes that Jupiter had migrated inward to 1 @.@ 5 AU . After Saturn formed , migrated inward , and established the 2 : 3 mean motion resonance with Jupiter , the study assumes that both planets migrated back to their present positions . Jupiter thus would have consumed much of the material that would have created a bigger Mars . The same simulations also reproduce the characteristics of the modern asteroid belt , with dry asteroids and water @-@ rich objects similar to comets . However , it is unclear whether conditions in the solar nebula would have allowed Jupiter and Saturn to move back to their current positions , and according to current estimates this possibility appears unlikely . Moreover , alternative explanations for the small mass of Mars exist . 
 = = = Late Heavy Bombardment and after = = = 
 Gravitational disruption from the outer planets ' migration would have sent large numbers of asteroids into the inner Solar System , severely depleting the original belt until it reached today 's extremely low mass . This event may have triggered the Late Heavy Bombardment that occurred approximately 4 billion years ago , 500 – 600 million years after the formation of the Solar System . This period of heavy bombardment lasted several hundred million years and is evident in the cratering still visible on geologically dead bodies of the inner Solar System such as the Moon and Mercury . The oldest known evidence for life on Earth dates to 3 @.@ 8 billion years ago — almost immediately after the end of the Late Heavy Bombardment . 
 Impacts are thought to be a regular ( if currently infrequent ) part of the evolution of the Solar System . That they continue to happen is evidenced by the collision of Comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 with Jupiter in 1994 , the 2009 Jupiter impact event , the Tunguska event , the Chelyabinsk meteor and the impact feature Meteor Crater in Arizona . The process of accretion , therefore , is not complete , and may still pose a threat to life on Earth . 
 Over the course of the Solar System 's evolution , comets were ejected out of the inner Solar System by the gravity of the giant planets , and sent thousands of AU outward to form the Oort cloud , a spherical outer swarm of cometary nuclei at the farthest extent of the Sun 's gravitational pull . Eventually , after about 800 million years , the gravitational disruption caused by galactic tides , passing stars and giant molecular clouds began to deplete the cloud , sending comets into the inner Solar System . The evolution of the outer Solar System also appears to have been influenced by space weathering from the solar wind , micrometeorites , and the neutral components of the interstellar medium . 
 The evolution of the asteroid belt after Late Heavy Bombardment was mainly governed by collisions . Objects with large mass have enough gravity to retain any material ejected by a violent collision . In the asteroid belt this usually is not the case . As a result , many larger objects have been broken apart , and sometimes newer objects have been forged from the remnants in less violent collisions . Moons around some asteroids currently can only be explained as consolidations of material flung away from the parent object without enough energy to entirely escape its gravity . 
 = = Moons = = 
 Moons have come to exist around most planets and many other Solar System bodies . These natural satellites originated by one of three possible mechanisms : 
 Co @-@ formation from a circum @-@ planetary disc ( only in the cases of the giant planets ) ; 
 Formation from impact debris ( given a large enough impact at a shallow angle ) ; and 
 Capture of a passing object . 
 Jupiter and Saturn have several large moons , such as Io , Europa , Ganymede and Titan , which may have originated from discs around each giant planet in much the same way that the planets formed from the disc around the Sun . This origin is indicated by the large sizes of the moons and their proximity to the planet . These attributes are impossible to achieve via capture , while the gaseous nature of the primaries also make formation from collision debris unlikely . The outer moons of the giant planets tend to be small and have eccentric orbits with arbitrary inclinations . These are the characteristics expected of captured bodies . Most such moons orbit in the direction opposite the rotation of their primary . The largest irregular moon is Neptune 's moon Triton , which is thought to be a captured Kuiper belt object . 
 Moons of solid Solar System bodies have been created by both collisions and capture . Mars 's two small moons , Deimos and Phobos , are thought to be captured asteroids . The Earth 's Moon is thought to have formed as a result of a single , large oblique collision . The impacting object probably had a mass comparable to that of Mars , and the impact probably occurred near the end of the period of giant impacts . The collision kicked into orbit some of the impactor 's mantle , which then coalesced into the Moon . The impact was probably the last in the series of mergers that formed the Earth . It has been further hypothesized that the Mars @-@ sized object may have formed at one of the stable Earth – Sun Lagrangian points ( either L4 or L5 ) and drifted from its position . The moons of trans @-@ Neptunian objects Pluto ( Charon ) and Orcus ( Vanth ) may also have formed by means of a large collision : the Pluto – Charon , Orcus – Vanth and Earth – Moon systems are unusual in the Solar System in that the satellite 's mass is at least 1 % that of the larger body . 
 = = Future = = 
 Astronomers estimate that the Solar System as we know it today will not change drastically until the Sun has fused almost all the hydrogen fuel in its core into helium , beginning its evolution from the main sequence of the Hertzsprung – Russell diagram and into its red @-@ giant phase . Even so , the Solar System will continue to evolve until then . 
 = = = Long @-@ term stability = = = 
 The Solar System is chaotic over <unk> and billion @-@ year timescales , with the orbits of the planets open to long @-@ term variations . One notable example of this chaos is the Neptune – Pluto system , which lies in a 3 : 2 orbital resonance . Although the resonance itself will remain stable , it becomes impossible to predict the position of Pluto with any degree of accuracy more than 10 – 20 million years ( the Lyapunov time ) into the future . Another example is Earth 's axial tilt , which , due to friction raised within Earth 's mantle by tidal interactions with the Moon ( see below ) , will be <unk> at some point between 1 @.@ 5 and 4 @.@ 5 billion years from now . 
 The outer planets ' orbits are chaotic over longer timescales , with a Lyapunov time in the range of 2 – 230 million years . In all cases this means that the position of a planet along its orbit ultimately becomes impossible to predict with any certainty ( so , for example , the timing of winter and summer become uncertain ) , but in some cases the orbits themselves may change dramatically . Such chaos manifests most strongly as changes in eccentricity , with some planets ' orbits becoming significantly more — or less — elliptical . 
 Ultimately , the Solar System is stable in that none of the planets are likely to collide with each other or be ejected from the system in the next few billion years . Beyond this , within five billion years or so Mars 's eccentricity may grow to around 0 @.@ 2 , such that it lies on an Earth @-@ crossing orbit , leading to a potential collision . In the same timescale , Mercury 's eccentricity may grow even further , and a close encounter with Venus could theoretically eject it from the Solar System altogether or send it on a collision course with Venus or Earth . This could happen within a billion years , according to numerical simulations in which Mercury 's orbit is perturbed . 
 = = = Moon – ring systems = = = 
 The evolution of moon systems is driven by tidal forces . A moon will raise a tidal bulge in the object it orbits ( the primary ) due to the differential gravitational force across diameter of the primary . If a moon is revolving in the same direction as the planet 's rotation and the planet is rotating faster than the orbital period of the moon , the bulge will constantly be pulled ahead of the moon . In this situation , angular momentum is transferred from the rotation of the primary to the revolution of the satellite . The moon gains energy and gradually spirals outward , while the primary rotates more slowly over time . 
 The Earth and its Moon are one example of this configuration . Today , the Moon is tidally locked to the Earth ; one of its revolutions around the Earth ( currently about 29 days ) is equal to one of its rotations about its axis , so it always shows one face to the Earth . The Moon will continue to recede from Earth , and Earth 's spin will continue to slow gradually . In about 50 billion years , if they survive the Sun 's expansion , the Earth and Moon will become tidally locked to each other ; each will be caught up in what is called a " spin – orbit resonance " in which the Moon will circle the Earth in about 47 days and both Moon and Earth will rotate around their axes in the same time , each only visible from one hemisphere of the other . Other examples are the Galilean moons of Jupiter ( as well as many of Jupiter 's smaller moons ) and most of the larger moons of Saturn . 
 A different scenario occurs when the moon is either revolving around the primary faster than the primary rotates , or is revolving in the direction opposite the planet 's rotation . In these cases , the tidal bulge lags behind the moon in its orbit . In the former case , the direction of angular momentum transfer is reversed , so the rotation of the primary speeds up while the satellite 's orbit shrinks . In the latter case , the angular momentum of the rotation and revolution have opposite signs , so transfer leads to decreases in the magnitude of each ( that cancel each other out ) . In both cases , tidal deceleration causes the moon to spiral in towards the primary until it either is torn apart by tidal stresses , potentially creating a planetary ring system , or crashes into the planet 's surface or atmosphere . Such a fate awaits the moons Phobos of Mars ( within 30 to 50 million years ) , Triton of Neptune ( in 3 @.@ 6 billion years ) , Metis and Adrastea of Jupiter , and at least 16 small satellites of Uranus and Neptune . Uranus 's Desdemona may even collide with one of its neighboring moons . 
 A third possibility is where the primary and moon are tidally locked to each other . In that case , the tidal bulge stays directly under the moon , there is no transfer of angular momentum , and the orbital period will not change . Pluto and Charon are an example of this type of configuration . 
 Prior to the 2004 arrival of the Cassini – Huygens spacecraft , the rings of Saturn were widely thought to be much younger than the Solar System and were not expected to survive beyond another 300 million years . Gravitational interactions with Saturn 's moons were expected to gradually sweep the rings ' outer edge toward the planet , with abrasion by meteorites and Saturn 's gravity eventually taking the rest , leaving Saturn unadorned . However , data from the Cassini mission led scientists to revise that early view . Observations revealed 10 km @-@ wide icy clumps of material that repeatedly break apart and reform , keeping the rings fresh . Saturn 's rings are far more massive than the rings of the other giant planets . This large mass is thought to have preserved Saturn 's rings since it first formed 4 @.@ 5 billion years ago , and is likely to preserve them for billions of years to come . 
 = = = The Sun and planetary environments = = = 
 In the long term , the greatest changes in the Solar System will come from changes in the Sun itself as it ages . As the Sun burns through its supply of hydrogen fuel , it gets hotter and burns the remaining fuel even faster . As a result , the Sun is growing brighter at a rate of ten percent every 1 @.@ 1 billion years . In one billion years ' time , as the Sun 's radiation output increases , its circumstellar habitable zone will move outwards , making the Earth 's surface too hot for liquid water to exist there naturally . At this point , all life on land will become extinct . Evaporation of water , a potent greenhouse gas , from the oceans ' surface could accelerate temperature increase , potentially ending all life on Earth even sooner . During this time , it is possible that as Mars 's surface temperature gradually rises , carbon dioxide and water currently frozen under the surface regolith will release into the atmosphere , creating a greenhouse effect that will heat the planet until it achieves conditions parallel to Earth today , providing a potential future abode for life . By 3 @.@ 5 billion years from now , Earth 's surface conditions will be similar to those of Venus today . 
 Around 5 @.@ 4 billion years from now , the core of the Sun will become hot enough to trigger hydrogen fusion in its surrounding shell . This will cause the outer layers of the star to expand greatly , and the star will enter a phase of its life in which it is called a red giant . Within 7 @.@ 5 billion years , the Sun will have expanded to a radius of 1 @.@ 2 AU — 256 times its current size . At the tip of the red giant branch , as a result of the vastly increased surface area , the Sun 's surface will be much cooler ( about 2600 K ) than now and its luminosity much higher — up to 2 @,@ 700 current solar luminosities . For part of its red giant life , the Sun will have a strong stellar wind that will carry away around 33 % of its mass . During these times , it is possible that Saturn 's moon Titan could achieve surface temperatures necessary to support life . 
 As the Sun expands , it will swallow the planets Mercury and Venus . Earth 's fate is less clear ; although the Sun will envelop Earth 's current orbit , the star 's loss of mass ( and thus weaker gravity ) will cause the planets ' orbits to move farther out . If it were only for this , Venus and Earth would probably escape incineration , but a 2008 study suggests that Earth will likely be swallowed up as a result of tidal interactions with the Sun 's weakly bound outer envelope . 
 Gradually , the hydrogen burning in the shell around the solar core will increase the mass of the core until it reaches about 45 % of the present solar mass . At this point the density and temperature will become so high that the fusion of helium into carbon will begin , leading to a helium flash ; the Sun will shrink from around 250 to 11 times its present ( main @-@ sequence ) radius . Consequently , its luminosity will decrease from around 3 @,@ 000 to 54 times its current level , and its surface temperature will increase to about <unk> K. The Sun will become a horizontal giant , burning helium in its core in a stable fashion much like it burns hydrogen today . The helium @-@ fusing stage will last only 100 million years . Eventually , it will have to again resort to the reserves of hydrogen and helium in its outer layers and will expand a second time , turning into what is known as an asymptotic giant . Here the luminosity of the Sun will increase again , reaching about 2 @,@ 090 present luminosities , and it will cool to about 3500 K. This phase lasts about 30 million years , after which , over the course of a further 100 @,@ 000 years , the Sun 's remaining outer layers will fall away , ejecting a vast stream of matter into space and forming a halo known ( misleadingly ) as a planetary nebula . The ejected material will contain the helium and carbon produced by the Sun 's nuclear reactions , continuing the enrichment of the interstellar medium with heavy elements for future generations of stars . 
 This is a relatively peaceful event , nothing akin to a supernova , which the Sun is too small to undergo as part of its evolution . Any observer present to witness this occurrence would see a massive increase in the speed of the solar wind , but not enough to destroy a planet completely . However , the star 's loss of mass could send the orbits of the surviving planets into chaos , causing some to collide , others to be ejected from the Solar System , and still others to be torn apart by tidal interactions . Afterwards , all that will remain of the Sun is a white dwarf , an extraordinarily dense object , 54 % its original mass but only the size of the Earth . Initially , this white dwarf may be 100 times as luminous as the Sun is now . It will consist entirely of degenerate carbon and oxygen , but will never reach temperatures hot enough to fuse these elements . Thus the white dwarf Sun will gradually cool , growing dimmer and dimmer . 
 As the Sun dies , its gravitational pull on the orbiting bodies such as planets , comets and asteroids will weaken due to its mass loss . All remaining planets ' orbits will expand ; if Venus , Earth , and Mars still exist , their orbits will lie roughly at 1 @.@ 4 AU ( 210 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) , 1 @.@ 9 AU ( 280 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) , and 2 @.@ 8 AU ( 420 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) . They and the other remaining planets will become dark , frigid hulks , completely devoid of any form of life . They will continue to orbit their star , their speed slowed due to their increased distance from the Sun and the Sun 's reduced gravity . Two billion years later , when the Sun has cooled to the 6000 – <unk> range , the carbon and oxygen in the Sun 's core will freeze , with over 90 % of its remaining mass assuming a crystalline structure . Eventually , after billions more years , the Sun will finally cease to shine altogether , becoming a black dwarf . 
 = = Galactic interaction = = 
 The Solar System travels alone through the Milky Way in a circular orbit approximately 30 @,@ 000 light years from the Galactic Centre . Its speed is about 220 km / s . The period required for the Solar System to complete one revolution around the Galactic Centre , the galactic year , is in the range of 220 – 250 million years . Since its formation , the Solar System has completed at least 20 such revolutions . 
 Various scientists have speculated that the Solar System 's path through the galaxy is a factor in the periodicity of mass extinctions observed in the Earth 's fossil record . One hypothesis supposes that vertical oscillations made by the Sun as it orbits the Galactic Centre cause it to regularly pass through the galactic plane . When the Sun 's orbit takes it outside the galactic disc , the influence of the galactic tide is weaker ; as it re @-@ enters the galactic disc , as it does every 20 – 25 million years , it comes under the influence of the far stronger " disc tides " , which , according to mathematical models , increase the flux of Oort cloud comets into the Solar System by a factor of 4 , leading to a massive increase in the likelihood of a devastating impact . 
 However , others argue that the Sun is currently close to the galactic plane , and yet the last great extinction event was 15 million years ago . Therefore , the Sun 's vertical position cannot alone explain such periodic extinctions , and that extinctions instead occur when the Sun passes through the galaxy 's spiral arms . Spiral arms are home not only to larger numbers of molecular clouds , whose gravity may distort the Oort cloud , but also to higher concentrations of bright blue giants , which live for relatively short periods and then explode violently as supernovae . 
 = = = Galactic collision and planetary disruption = = = 
 Although the vast majority of galaxies in the Universe are moving away from the Milky Way , the Andromeda Galaxy , the largest member of the Local Group of galaxies , is heading toward it at about 120 km / s . In 4 billion years , Andromeda and the Milky Way will collide , causing both to deform as tidal forces distort their outer arms into vast tidal tails . If this initial disruption occurs , astronomers calculate a 12 % chance that the Solar System will be pulled outward into the Milky Way 's tidal tail and a 3 % chance that it will become gravitationally bound to Andromeda and thus a part of that galaxy . After a further series of glancing blows , during which the likelihood of the Solar System 's ejection rises to 30 % , the galaxies ' supermassive black holes will merge . Eventually , in roughly 6 billion years , the Milky Way and Andromeda will complete their merger into a giant elliptical galaxy . During the merger , if there is enough gas , the increased gravity will force the gas to the centre of the forming elliptical galaxy . This may lead to a short period of intensive star formation called a starburst . In addition , the infalling gas will feed the newly formed black hole , transforming it into an active galactic nucleus . The force of these interactions will likely push the Solar System into the new galaxy 's outer halo , leaving it relatively unscathed by the radiation from these collisions . 
 It is a common misconception that this collision will disrupt the orbits of the planets in the Solar System . Although it is true that the gravity of passing stars can detach planets into interstellar space , distances between stars are so great that the likelihood of the Milky Way – Andromeda collision causing such disruption to any individual star system is negligible . Although the Solar System as a whole could be affected by these events , the Sun and planets are not expected to be disturbed . 
 However , over time , the cumulative probability of a chance encounter with a star increases , and disruption of the planets becomes all but inevitable . Assuming that the Big Crunch or Big Rip scenarios for the end of the Universe do not occur , calculations suggest that the gravity of passing stars will have completely stripped the dead Sun of its remaining planets within 1 quadrillion ( 1015 ) years . This point marks the end of the Solar System . Although the Sun and planets may survive , the Solar System , in any meaningful sense , will cease to exist . 
 = = Chronology = = 
 The time frame of the Solar System 's formation has been determined using radiometric dating . Scientists estimate that the Solar System is 4 @.@ 6 billion years old . The oldest known mineral grains on Earth are approximately 4 @.@ 4 billion years old . Rocks this old are rare , as Earth 's surface is constantly being reshaped by erosion , volcanism , and plate tectonics . To estimate the age of the Solar System , scientists use meteorites , which were formed during the early condensation of the solar nebula . Almost all meteorites ( see the Canyon Diablo meteorite ) are found to have an age of 4 @.@ 6 billion years , suggesting that the Solar System must be at least this old . 
 Studies of discs around other stars have also done much to establish a time frame for Solar System formation . Stars between one and three million years old have discs rich in gas , whereas discs around stars more than 10 million years old have little to no gas , suggesting that giant planets within them have ceased forming . 
 = = = Timeline of Solar System evolution = = = 
 Note : All dates and times in this chronology are approximate and should be taken as an order of magnitude indicator only . 
 = Hex Enduction Hour = 
 Hex Enduction Hour is the fourth studio album by the English post @-@ punk band the Fall . Released on 8 March 1982 , it builds on the low @-@ fidelity production values and caustic lyrical content of their earlier recordings . Fall frontman Mark E. Smith establishes an abrasive Northern aesthetic built in part from the 20th century literary traditions of kitchen sink and magic realism . Smith described it as an often satirical , but deliberate reaction to the contemporary music scene ; a stand against " bland bastards like Elvis Costello and Spandau Ballet ... [ and ] all that shit . " 
 Recording began during a 1981 three concert visit of Iceland , when Smith was inspired both by the <unk> of the landscape , its history and the enthusiasm of an audience unused to visiting rock groups . The Fall recorded " Hip Priest " , " Iceland " and non @-@ album single " Look , Know " at the Hljóðriti studio in Reykjavík , and the remaining tracks in a disused cinema in Hitchin , Hertfordshire on their return to England . The album was widely praised on release as fully capturing their aggressive live sound . The UK recordings and later promotion were funded by the independent record label Kamera following a bitter and protracted dispute between Smith and former label Rough Trade Records . Hex Enduction Hour was well received by critics , and sold well relative to its release on a small label , and earned The Fall their first UK Albums Chart placing at No. 71 . Today it is considered a hallmark of the post @-@ punk era . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 By 1981 the Fall had released three critically acclaimed albums , but band leader Mark E Smith felt they were undervalued and poorly supported by their label Rough Trade Records , whom he regarded as " a bunch of well meaning but inept hippies " . He felt constrained by the label 's ethos and worried that the Fall were in danger of becoming " just another Rough Trade band " . Frustrated and believing his career was nearing its end , Smith made overtures to other labels , and found kindred adventurous spirits at heavy metal specialists Kamera records . He proposed that Kamera record the band 's final album , which he wanted to last exactly one hour . They had already recorded several songs at the Hljóðriti studio in Reykjavík during their 1981 visit . Hljóðriti had lava walls , which according to Smith have a sound as if they had played in an igloo , which critics agree was a large factor in giving the songs their otherworldly ambience . 
 Smith wanted to record the remaining album tracks in a relatively open space , eventually using a disused cinema in Hitchin . He had hoped that the ambience of such a space would begin to resemble their live sound . Kamera agreed to pay costs for the post Iceland recordings , which were mostly songs that appeared in their October 1981 UK tour . Smith was impressed by their openness and signed , relieved to be free of Rough Trade . The uncertainty around a label change , and Smith 's doubts over The Fall 's longevity , seep into and contribute to the album 's edgy and unsettled sound . Music critic John Doran described " Hex " as the work of a band with a gun pressed to their heads . 
 Hex Enduction Hour takes influence from the Velvet Underground 's " Sister Ray " , Captain Beefheart and the early 1970s Krautrock band Can . Smith has said that the title was intended to invoke witchcraft , but that the word Enduction was made up , a word he just liked the sound of . His vocals are higher in the mix than on previous Fall releases and were described in 1982 by Sounds as " <unk> [ ing ] like a <unk> from a fog of guitar scratch " . The songs were deliberately produced in a raw and low @-@ fi approach by Smith , Grant Showbiz and Richard Mazda in a sound described at the time as a " well produced noise " that was acceptable by Fall standards . Critic Mark Storace claimed that he " could have done a better job on a 4 @-@ track if I was pissed out of my head " . Smith responded by saying that " nowadays people just can 't just shut up if they don 't know what they 're talking about . " Elaborating on the purposely amateurish production values , Smith remarked that " it was all recorded in deliberately bad places ... deliberately simple sort of thing . Three songs were written at rehearsal and done the next time . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album was their first to include Karl Burns and Paul Hanley in the band 's classic two @-@ drummer lineup . Smith intended the album 's lyrics " to be like reading a really good book . You have a couple of beers , sit down and immerse yourself . None of those fuckers Elvis Costello or Spandau Ballet did that " . Hex Enduction Hour was written during an unusually prolific period in his career . Many of the tracks had already been dropped from their live set by the time they visited Australia and New Zealand in the autumn of 1982 . The earlier single , " Look , Know " was recorded during the Icelandic sessions but not included on the album . This was characteristic of Smith 's " never look back " approach . 
 The opening track " The Classical " acts as a statement of intent similar to " Crap Rap 2 / Like to Blow " on their debut album Live at the Witch Trials . Whereas on that song Smith described himself as " Northern white crap that talks back " , on the opening lines of Hex Enduction Hour he complains that the fact that contemporary music lacks culture is his " brag " , observing that a " taste for bullshit reveals a lust for a home of office " and references " obligatory niggers " , before accusingly shouting " Hey there , <unk> , hey there , <unk> " . Pavement released a less offensive , sanitised cover of the track in the early 1990s , and Smith dismissed them later as mere Fall copyists . " Jawbone and the Air Rifle " depicts a nightmare <unk> tale of a poacher ( described as a " Rabbit Killer " ) bored by a decades @-@ old marriage who escapes by roaming the local countryside at night hunting prey . One night the protagonist " lets out a misplaced shot " which draws the Hex of the ' Broken Brothers <unk> Church ' . The song 's main focal point is towards the end when the lyrics detail a series of semi @-@ religious , semi @-@ pagan horrific and repeating hallucinations . 
 " Hip Priest " was recorded in Iceland in a single take , and is one of Smith 's most personal songs , apparently written in bemusement following a recent rise in the band 's popularity . The track has been compared to dub but in its Northern bleakness if " it had been invented in a drizzly motorway rather than in recording studios in Jamaica . " " Hip Priest " was re @-@ recorded in 1988 in a glam rock style as " Big New Prinz " for the album " I Am <unk> <unk> " . An excerpt of " Hip Priest " was used in 1991 in a closing scenes of Jonathan Demme 's film The Silence of the Lambs . 
 " Fortress / Deer Park " starts with a Casio VL @-@ 1 rhythm preset , same as used by Trio on their 1982 hit single " Da Da Da " . Its lyrics form a broad and jaundiced look at English culture and subcultures in the early 1980s . It mentions [ fucking ] Jimmy Savile while the lines " I took a walk down W11 ; I had to walk through 500 European punks " are a dry put @-@ down of the fashion @-@ oriented . 
 " Winter " comprises two songs broken by a fade out and fade in ; " Winter ( Hostel @-@ Maxi ) " closes side one of the record , " Winter 2 " opens side two . The tracks were described by Smith in early press releases as " concerning an insane child who is taken over by a spirit from the mind of a cooped @-@ up alcoholic " . During the intro of " Winter ( Hostel @-@ Maxi ) " , the narrator describes waiting , hungover , in the early afternoon for the pubs to open . The remainder of the song consists of descriptions of and encounters with a dry out house , a cleaning lady , a feminist wearing anti @-@ nicotine and anti @-@ nuclear badges , and a " half @-@ wit " child . After this the lyrics move towards magic realism and ad @-@ libbed inscrutability : " The mad kid had four lights : the average is two point @-@ five @-@ lights ; the mediocre is two lights " . 
 " Who Makes the Nazis " mentions the philosopher Colin Wilson before concluding that Nazis are born of " intellectual <unk> " . The track contains a number of sounds played through a dictaphone , a device that was to feature heavily in later Fall albums , most notably This Nation 's Saving Grace . 
 " Iceland " was improvised in a single take . Smith was taken by a country which he described in 2008 as still inaccessible and " totally unlike what it is now . Beer was against the law . You could only drink shit like pints of peach schnapps " . It consists of a two note piano figure and a banjo part , over which Smith played a tape recording he had made of the wind howling outside his bedroom window . According to guitarist Marc Riley , " He [ Smith ] just said he needed a tune , something <unk> , and we knocked around on the piano in the studio and came up with that . But we hadn 't heard the words until he suddenly did them . " The line " Fall down flat in the Cafe <unk> without a glance from the clientele " describes an incident that had happened to Smith that morning . He had tripped in a nearby cafe and fallen across several tables . He was surprised by the lack of response from the other customers , who seemed to have dismissed him as just another drunk . 
 The closing track , " And This Day " originally lasted about 25 minutes ; but was edited down to ten minutes to fit the album 's length , it still remains one of the longest studio songs by The Fall . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 Hex Enduction Hour 's all @-@ white cover with scribbles was described by music critic Robertson as " meticulously shoddy " . It consists of a series of <unk> scribbles laid down by Smith . The markings are mostly random rhetorical phrases and sentence fragments such as " Lie @-@ Dream 80 % of 10 % OR 6 % over no less than 1 / 4 = ? ? ? ? ? ? " , " Hail Sainsbury 's ! " , " <unk> <unk> " , " HAVE A <unk> GUESS " and " CIGS . <unk> HERE " . In an interview with Sounds that summer , Smith mentioned that he liked art work to reflect the album content and that his graphic choices reflected his attitude to music . He mentioned how he was drawn to cheap and misspelt posters , amateur layouts of local papers and printed cash and carry signs with " inverted commas where you don 't need them " . 
 The album art was seen by many within the industry as coarse and lacking accepted layout or typographical qualities . HMV would only shelve the sleeve back to front on their racking shelves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hex Enduction Hour was the first Fall album to make the UK Albums Chart , where it spent three weeks , peaking at no . 71 . By mid @-@ 1983 it had sold twenty thousand copies , reflecting a surge in the band 's popularity , and five years into their career brought them to the attention of record labels . Critics were highly enthusiastic ; according to Simon Ford , they could " have hardly been more supportive " . Reviewing the album in the NME , Richard Cook described the band as tighter and more disciplined than in earlier recordings , " their master piece to date " , while still maintaining their impact . He praised their having utilised recording studio techniques and atmospherics without resorting to <unk> . Melody Maker 's Colin Irwin said it was " incredibly exciting and utterly compelling " . A dissenter was Neil McCormick of Irish fortnightly Hot Press , who dismissed the album as second hand melodramatic punk , and wondered if the album was " meant to be minimalist or primitive then it fatally ignores the true primitivism of the strong melody and accessible lyrics found in folk music . " 
 Later , Record Collector described the album as a " taut , twitchy and ominous masterclass in DIY post @-@ punk " , and singled out Smith 's lyrics for praise . The Quietus , in 2009 , wrote of the album as " arguably ... The Fall 's mightiest hour " , while Stylus Magazine wrote that " Hex demonstrates the culmination of ' early ' Fall : a monolithic beast of ragged grooves piloted through the <unk> miasma of English society by the verbose acidity / Joycean all @-@ inclusiveness of Mark E. Smith . " Pitchfork listed Hex Enduction Hour as the 33rd best album of the 1980s . 
 According to Smith , the album 's lyrics had a negative impact on their later career . In 1984 Motown Records expressed interest in signing the band to a new UK division , with a provisional offer of a £ 46 @,@ 000 upfront advance . The label executive asked to hear something from their back catalogue . Hex was the only album Smith had to hand , and remembered thinking , " when he hears that , we 've had it . " The rejection letter stated that the label saw " no commercial potential in this band whatsoever " . Smith believes this was due to the " obligatory niggers " line from the opening track " The Classical " . 
 = = Re @-@ issues = = 
 The album went out of print when the Kamera label folded in 1983 , but a German edition on the Line imprint remained available , with copies pressed on white vinyl . Line issued a CD edition , flat transferred from a later generation tape . In 2002 , a new edition titled Hex Enduction Hour + ( adding both sides of the " Look , Know " single ) was released via Smith 's Cog Sinister imprint . 
 The album was remastered and issued in 2005 by Sanctuary Records , along with a disc of bonus live material . Smith conceded that the remastering was an improvement , but when asked if he liked the bonus live tracks he admitted that he hadn 't listened " that far " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Mark E. Smith . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Fall 
 Karl Burns – drums , backing vocals , tape operation on " Fortress / Deer Park " 
 Kay Carroll – percussion , backing vocals 
 Paul Hanley – drums , guitar on " Winter " 
 Steve Hanley – bass guitar , backing vocals , xylophone on " Hip Priest " 
 Marc Riley – electronic organ , guitar , piano , backing vocals , banjo on " Iceland " 
 Craig Scanlon – guitar , backing vocals , piano on " Iceland " 
 Mark E. Smith – vocals , tape operation on " Fortress / Deer Park " and " Iceland " , guitar , production , cover design 
 Technical personnel 
 Richard Mazda – production 
 Alan Skinner – cover design 
 Tony J. Sutcliffe – engineering 
 = New Jersey Route 21 = 
 Route 21 is a highway in northern New Jersey , running 14 @.@ 35 mi ( 23 @.@ 09 km ) from the Newark Airport Interchange with U.S. Route 1 / 9 and U.S. Route 22 in Newark , Essex County to an interchange with U.S. Route 46 in Clifton , Passaic County . The route is a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway known as McCarter Highway on its southern portion in Newark that serves as a connector between the Newark and Paterson areas , following the west bank of the Passaic River for much of its length . It also serves as the main north – south highway through the central part of Newark , connecting attractions in downtown Newark with the Newark Liberty International Airport . The portion of Route 21 through Newark is a surface arterial that runs alongside the elevated Northeast Corridor rail line through the southern part of the city and continues north through Downtown Newark while the portion north of Downtown Newark is a freeway . Route 21 intersects many major roads including Interstate 78 , Route 27 , and Interstate 280 in Newark , Route 7 in Belleville , and Route 3 in Clifton . 
 Route 21 was created in 1927 to run from Newark to Belleville . In 1948 , the route was extended north to Paterson . In the 1950s construction began on the freeway portion of Route 21 and it was completed in stages between Chester Avenue in Newark and Monroe Street in Passaic between 1958 and 1973 . Plans were made to extend the freeway north to Interstate 80 in Elmwood Park ; however , they were opposed by residents living on the east side of the Passaic River . In the 1980s , another northern extension of the Route 21 freeway was proposed to U.S. Route 46 in Clifton ; this section was built between 1997 and 2000 . The surface portion of Route 21 through Newark underwent many improvements in the 1990s and 2000s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Essex County = = = 
 Route 21 heads north from the Newark Airport Interchange with U.S. Route 1 / 9 and U.S. Route 22 in Newark near the Newark Liberty International Airport on the six @-@ lane , divided McCarter Highway . This portion of Route 21 serves to connect Newark Liberty with downtown Newark . The route interchanges with Interstate 78 and then crosses over the Northeast Corridor rail line on a viaduct , coming to an interchange with Broad Street that provides access to Route 27 . The route continues north , paralleling the elevated Northeast Corridor ( former Pennsylvania Railroad ) tracks that lead up to Newark Penn Station . At the Emmet Street intersection , Route 21 becomes a four @-@ lane , undivided road and intersects Murray Street , which provides access to the Ironbound neighborhood of Newark . This section of Route 21 through the southern part of Newark has a high accident rate due to the heavy concentration of businesses and traffic lights along this portion of road . The road widens to six lanes and the route intersects County Route 510 ( Market Street ) near Newark Penn Station and continues north into downtown Newark , splitting from the Northeast Corridor rail line . It crosses Raymond Boulevard and the route meets County Route 508 ( Center Street ) , with which it forms a concurrency . 
 Route 21 and County Route 508 head along the west bank of the Passaic River , passing by the New Jersey Performing Arts Center . County Route 508 splits from Route 21 by heading east on Bridge Street , crossing the Passaic River , and Route 21 continues north , passing by Bears & Eagles Riverfront Stadium before interchanging with Interstate 280 . The route intersects County Route 506 Spur ( Clay Street ) . Past the intersection with 3rd Avenue , Route 21 becomes a six @-@ lane freeway . After about a quarter mile , the northbound side swings under the southbound side and the freeway becomes a double @-@ decker , passes by Mt . Pleasant Cemetery , and returns to single @-@ decker configuration . It then interchanges with Chester Avenue / Riverside Avenue with a southbound exit and northbound entrance . Route 21 comes to a northbound exit and southbound entrance for Grafton Avenue and Mill Street ; this interchange actually connects with the originally McCarter Highway , a street that retains this name and acts as a service road to Route 21 for a few blocks in this area . Route 21 briefly becomes a double @-@ decker freeway again past the latter interchange , before crossing into Belleville at the Second River crossing . The freeway features a southbound exit for Mill Street and a northbound exit for Route 7 and County Route 506 ( Rutgers Street / Belleville Turnpike ) as it passes by houses on the left side of the freeway . Route 21 features an interchange with Main Street that has a southbound exit and an entrance in both directions . It enters Nutley where the freeway interchanges with County Route 646 ( Park Avenue ) , continuing north through residential areas along the Passaic River . 
 = = = Passaic County = = = 
 Route 21 crosses into Clifton , Passaic County . It passes under Route 3 and comes to an interchange that provides access to that route . Past Route 3 , the freeway comes to a northbound exit and southbound entrance for southbound County Route 624 ( River Road ) , passing through residential neighborhoods , and enters Passaic . In Passaic , Route 21 interchanges with County Route 608 ( Brook Avenue ) , County Route 614 ( Van Houten Avenue ) , and County Route 624 . The route features an interchange with County Route 624 ( River Drive ) and County Route 601 ( Main Avenue ) and meets State Street at a partial interchange with a northbound exit and southbound entrance . It provide access to the Union Avenue Bridge over the Passaic . Route 21 briefly enters Wallington , Bergen County before crossing back into Passaic , where it heads farther to the west of the Passaic River , passing through industrial and residential areas of Passaic . The freeway comes to an interchange that provides access to County Route 619 ( Market Street ) , Dayton Avenue , and Monroe Street . Route 21 continues to the north and resumes along the west bank of the Passaic River , narrowing to four lanes and crossing back into Clifton . Upon entering Clifton , the route comes to an interchange with Ackerman Avenue . The freeway heads to the northwest , passing by a park and featuring a southbound exit and northbound entrance for Lexington Avenue before ending at an interchange with U.S. Route 46 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 21 was first defined in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering to run from Route 25 ( now U.S. Route 1 / 9 ) and Route 29 ( now U.S. Route 22 ) in Newark north to Belleville . The surface portion of Route 21 in Newark , which follows the Northeast Corridor rail line , was commissioned in 1934 between Routes 25 and 29 and Market Street and the portion through downtown Newark was commissioned in 1936 between Market Street and Clay Street . In 1948 , the Route 21 designation was extended north to Paterson . 
 Plans for a freeway along the Route 21 corridor between Newark and Paterson date back to the early 1930s and became official in 1951 . In 1958 , the highway was extended northward as a freeway along the west bank of the Passaic River to an interchange with Park Avenue in Nutley . Route 21 was extended to the Passaic Park interchange in 1962 , Main Avenue in 1968 , and Monroe Street in 1973 . With the completion of the freeway , a portion of the former route was briefly known as Route 21A . 
 The Route 21 freeway was planned to extend north to Interstate 80 in Elmwood Park at the interchange with County Route 507 , crossing over the Passaic River . However , this extension was opposed by residents who lived on the east side of the Passaic River , and for a quarter @-@ century , traffic headed for Paterson had to use local streets in Passaic . In the 1980s , plans were resurrected for completing the Route 21 freeway along the west bank of the Passaic River to U.S. Route 46 in Clifton . Official plans were made in 1996 , and in late 1997 , construction began on this portion of the freeway . It opened on December 20 , 2000 at a cost of $ 136 million . 
 Sections of Route 21 through Newark were improved in the 1990s and the 2000s . The four @-@ lane viaduct over the Northeast Corridor , which was built in the 1920s , was replaced between 1997 and 2003 at a cost of $ 253 million . A major reconstruction is planned for the intersection with Interstate 280 at the William A. Stickel Memorial Bridge in Newark in 2015 @-@ 2018 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Sideshow Bob Roberts = 
 " Sideshow Bob Roberts " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 9 , 1994 . Kelsey Grammer returns as villain Sideshow Bob , who , in this episode , wins the Springfield mayoral election through electoral fraud . The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Mark Kirkland . Oakley and Weinstein drew inspiration for the episode from the Watergate scandal , and included many cultural references to political films , as well as real @-@ life events . These included the film All the President 's Men and the first televised debate between Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy during the 1960 United States presidential election . 
 The episode received favorable reception in the media , including a positive mention in I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide and Green Bay Press @-@ Gazette . A review in Press & Sun @-@ Bulletin placed the episode as the seventh best of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Springfield Prison , Sideshow Bob calls local right @-@ wing talk show host Birch Barlow and complains about being unfairly imprisoned . Barlow and Springfield 's residents pressure Mayor Quimby into releasing Bob . Bob is soon unveiled as the Republican candidate for the Springfield mayoral election . Determined to keep Bob from becoming mayor , Bart and Lisa decide to campaign for Quimby . Unfortunately , due to Bob 's charisma and Quimby 's drowsy , <unk> appearance at a televised debate , Bob wins the election by a massive margin . Among those voting for Bob are Krusty , who , though Bob framed him for armed robbery , " is aching for that upper @-@ class tax break " he has promised , and Homer , who disagrees with Bob 's " Bart @-@ killing policy " but does approve of his " Selma @-@ killing policy . " 
 The Simpsons awake to find that their house is in the way of Bob 's new " Matlock Expressway " and that it will soon be demolished , which will leave the Simpsons homeless . Principal Skinner who was excited by Bob 's elections , happily demotes Bart to kindergarten at Springfield Elementary School . Bart and Lisa begin to suspect that Bob somehow rigged the election . Lisa goes through the voting records but is unable to find any proof that the election was rigged . Lisa receives a message from a whistleblower to meet at night in an underground parking garage , who turns out to be Waylon Smithers , after Homer unintentionally exposes him from the cover of darkness due to his car lights . Bob 's policies disagree with Smithers ' " choice of lifestyle , " so he tells Bart and Lisa to find a voter named Edgar Neubauer , who will lead them to evidence of electoral fraud . 
 Eventually , Bart discovers the name Edgar Neubauer on a tombstone at the cemetery . After he explains this to Lisa , she discovers that many of those listed as voting for Bob are in fact long dead , including her former cat , Snowball I , making Lisa angry and makes her bring on her A game . At the trial that follows after Bart and Lisa reveal their story to the public , they trick Bob into confessing his crime by accusing him of being Barlow 's political puppet ( causing Bob to become annoyed ) resulting in Bob blurting out that he was indeed the mastermind , saying that he would never need help to rig an election . He then reveals that he did this because of what he perceives as the town 's stupidity at voting for Quimby , the Democrat , whereas Bob claims they really desire and need " a cold @-@ hearted Republican to cut [ their ] taxes , brutalize criminals , and rule [ them ] like a king . " The court then strips Bob of his position and sends him back to prison . The Simpsons get their house back , Quimby regains his job as mayor , Bart returns to the fourth grade , and the " Matlock Expressway " is put on hold . Bob vows revenge from his minimum security prison , though he quickly finds a new goal to be accomplished : helping the Yale alumni inmates beat the Princeton alumni at rowing . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although the episode primarily mocks the Republican Party , the writers included several jokes at the expense of the Democratic Party , liberal and conservative politics , to try to be as neutral as possible . Writers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were very interested in the Watergate scandal and based a lot of the second act on that . Mark Kirkland directed the episode . 
 The episode sees Kelsey Grammer return as Sideshow Bob for his fourth appearance . Clips from previous episodes featuring Bob were used to remind viewers who he was and what he had done . Bob 's Cape Fear musical cue from the episode " Cape Feare " is also reused . Showrunner David Mirkin found directing Grammer " a joy " . Dr. Demento also guest @-@ starred , as did Larry King for the second time , while Henry Corden voices Fred Flintstone . One of the prisoners in Bob 's campaign advert is a caricature of producer Richard Sakai . The " Les <unk> " joke was pitched by Mike Reiss . The episode does not feature a chalkboard or couch gag , cutting straight from the clouds to the TV . Some syndication edits have included a couch gag . 
 The episode contains the first use of the word " meh " in the show . The word , which was later included in the Collins English Dictionary , is credited as being popularized by the show , principally following its usage in the season twelve episode " Hungry , Hungry Homer " . In " Sideshow Bob Roberts " , the word is used by the librarian who provides Lisa with the town 's voting records , in response to her questioning their unclassified nature . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Much of the episode is based on the Watergate scandal , as well as other real @-@ life political events . The two Republicans who follow Bob around were based on H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman , two of Richard Nixon 's closest advisors during Watergate . Sideshow Bob 's campaign advert was based on the famous Willie Horton and Revolving Door political advertisements used by George H.W. Bush during the 1988 United States presidential election . Birch Barlow 's question to Mayor Quimby about whether his stance on crime would differ if it was his family being attacked is a reference to Bernard Shaw 's similar question to Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis during the 1988 presidential debates . Quimby 's appearance during the debate parodies Richard Nixon 's appearance during his first televised debate with John F. Kennedy during the 1960 presidential election . Nixon had recently recovered from a cold , and sweated considerably throughout , something that was detrimental to the impression he made in the debate . 
 Many political films are also referenced . The episode features several references to the film All the President 's Men , which chronicled Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein 's investigation of the Watergate scandal . These include the pull @-@ out of Lisa looking over the voting records , the music , and the clandestine meeting with Smithers in a parking garage . The end court scene , as well as Sideshow Bob 's speech , echo the 1992 film A Few Good Men , including Jack Nicholson 's speech with the line " You can 't handle the truth " . Bob 's sudden confession that he did rig the election was a vague reference to " every episode of Perry Mason " . Sideshow Bob gives his acceptance speech underneath a giant poster with a picture of himself on it ; this is a reference to the campaign speech scene in Citizen Kane . The title and several plot elements , including Bob entering Burns ' meeting draped in an American flag , are references to the 1992 film Bob Roberts . 
 The character Birch Barlow is a take @-@ off of American talk show host and political commentator Rush Limbaugh . Barlow mentions Colonel Oliver North , Officer Stacey Koon and advertising mascot Joe Camel as being " intelligent conservative [ s ] , railroaded by our liberal justice system " . Also , the language spoken at Republican Party headquarters is inspired by Enochian , a language associated with occult and Satanic ceremonies . 
 The Springfield Minimum Security Prison is a parody of Allenwood Minimum Security Prison . When Lisa drives , she is listening to " St. Elmo 's Fire " by John Parr , a choice David Mirkin found " very sad " . Archie Comics characters Archie Andrews , Reggie Mantle , Moose Mason and Jughead Jones are shown throwing Homer on the Simpsons ' lawn and warning him to " stay out of Riverdale ! " Some of the deceased voters are Buddy Holly , Ritchie Valens and The Big Bopper , who all died in a plane crash on February 3 , 1959 . The epitaph on The Big Bopper 's gravestone is " <unk> , Baby ! " a reference to the opening line of his song " Chantilly Lace " - " <unk> Baby ! " . Finally , the Simpsons ' home being demolished to make way for a bypass is a very slight reference to the opening of The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 David L.G. Arnold comments in the book Leaving Springfield that the episode is a satire on " society 's lazy , uninformed attitude about the electoral process , " as well as " a comment on the role in society of a cadre of elites ( the Republican party ) who see themselves as naturally suited to lead . " The episode also portrays Republicans as willing to break the law in order to achieve this ; in this case , Bob commits electoral fraud . This is most displayed in Bob 's line : " Your guilty conscience may force you to vote Democratic , but deep down inside you secretly long for a cold @-@ hearted Republican to lower taxes , brutalize criminals , and rule you like a king . That 's why I did this : to protect you from yourselves . " 
 Matthew Henry writes in the same book that the episode " well illustrates the battle of [ political ] ideologies … and its engagement with the politics of sexuality . " He refers to the scene where Smithers intimates that Bob rigged the election ; his motivation for whistleblowing is Bob 's conservative policies , which disagree with his " choice of lifestyle " , namely his homosexuality . Henry concludes the scene shows that conservative politics and homosexuality " cannot coexist " and that the scene marks the point where Smithers ' sexuality became " public and overtly political . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Sideshow Bob Roberts " finished tied for 64th place in the weekly ratings for the week of October 3 to October 9 , 1994 with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 . It was the sixth highest rated show on Fox that week . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide noted the episode was : " A stunningly outspoken political satire that drew considerable disapproval from the Republican Party when it was aired . " Eric <unk> , Brian Moritz and John Hill of the Press & Sun @-@ Bulletin named " Sideshow Bob Roberts " as the seventh best episode of the show . Thomas Rozwadowski of Green Bay Press @-@ Gazette placed the episode among his list of the ten best episodes of the show which have lessons : " Corrupt politicians always get their comeuppance . Or not . " He also highlighted Bob 's campaign advert and Kent Brockman 's line : " And the results are in . For Sideshow Bob , 100 percent . For Joe Quimby , 1 percent . And we remind you , there is a 1 percent margin of error . " 
 The episode has been used in a course at Columbia College Chicago . The course titled " The Simpsons as Satirical Authors " featured " Sideshow Bob Roberts " as one of the episodes used screened for the " What 's ( Not ) Wrong with America ? Critiquing the U.S. Government " topic . 
 = Last use of capital punishment in Spain = 
 The last use of capital punishment in Spain took place on 27 September 1975 when two members of the armed Basque nationalist and separatist group ETA political @-@ military and three members of the Revolutionary <unk> Patriotic Front ( FRAP ) were shot dead by firing squads after having been convicted and sentenced to death by military tribunals for the murder of policemen and civil guards . Spain was Western Europe 's last dictatorship at this time and had been unpopular and internationally isolated in the post @-@ war period due to its relations with Nazi Germany in the 1930s and the fact that the authoritarian Spanish leader , Francisco Franco , had come to power by overthrowing a democratically elected government . As a result , the executions resulted in substantial criticism of the Spanish government , both domestically and abroad . Reactions included street protests , attacks on Spanish embassies , international criticism of the Spanish government and diplomatic measures , such as the withdrawal of the ambassadors of fifteen European countries . 
 This was the last use of the death penalty in Spain ; following the death of Francisco Franco , two months later , no further executions took place . The 1978 Spanish Constitution largely abolished the death penalty , with the exception of limited cases in times of war , and these exceptions were abolished in 1995 . In 2012 , a Basque Government commission found that the processes used to convict two of those executed had violated their rights and awarded compensation to their families . 
 = = Background = = 
 Franco had come to power in 1939 after the Spanish Civil War , during which various factions had committed mass executions of political opponents . Numerous historians , including Helen Graham , Paul Preston , Antony Beevor , Gabriel Jackson , Hugh Thomas , and Ian Gibson believe that the summary executions of political opponents by the Francoist side , which became known as the " White Terror " , was a deliberate policy . In contrast , the executions their opponents perpetrated lacked the approval of the Spanish government which Franco was seeking to overthrow . The death penalty , which had been abolished in 1932 for civil cases , was revived by Franco in 1938 . 
 = = = Hostility to Spain in the post @-@ war period = = = 
 While Spain was neutral in World War II , Franco 's sympathies remained with the Axis powers and he considered entering the war on their side . He maintained good relations with Nazi Germany and many Francoists remained sympathetic to Nazism . This led Spain to be shunned by the international community , especially the Western European democracies and the United States , in the immediate post @-@ war period . Europe @-@ wide popular demonstrations against the Franco government occurred in 1946 . In the 1950s , a thawing of relations occurred as Cold War tensions escalated and Franco 's hostility to communism made him a reliable ally . This would result in reluctance on the part of the US government to support measures which could destabilise the Franco government . 
 Following the fall of the authoritarian government in Portugal in 1974 , the Spanish government was the sole surviving dictatorship in Western Europe , where several countries in 1975 were ruled by socialist parties which had long loathed Franco for coming to power by overthrowing a socialist democracy . Hostility to the use of capital punishment was widespread in Western Europe at this time and most Western European countries had ceased using it . 
 = = = Declining use of the death penalty in Spain = = = 
 Although up to 200 @,@ 000 people were executed during the Spanish Civil War and its immediate aftermath 48 people were executed in the period from 1948 to the time of the 1975 executions . Of those , 17 were executed by firing squad and 31 by <unk> . Historically , the garrote had been the preferred execution method in Spain , with firing squads used for political and military prisoners . 
 No executions took place from 1966 to 1972 . The Burgos trials ( es ) of September 1970 sentenced six ETA members to death , but , following international pressure and criticism , Franco commuted the death sentences . 
 = = = New legislation = = = 
 In reaction to left @-@ wing and Basque separatist violence , the government passed a new anti @-@ terrorist law on 26 August 1975 . <unk> with terrorists would now carry a penalty of up to 12 years imprisonment . The law re @-@ established military tribunals , empowered to order executions of those they found guilty of terrorism against the state . It extended the time that suspects could be held for interrogation from 3 to 5 days , with an option of up to 19 days with judicial approval . In response , the European Parliament debated a motion proposed by the Confederation of the Socialist Parties of the European Community condemning the new law as an infringement of human rights and calling for the suspension of relations between the EEC and Spain . 
 = = Trials and sentencing = = 
 The new law was rapidly enforced . The first military tribunal took place on 28 August 1975 in <unk> del Val when ETA members José Antonio Garmendia and Ángel Otaegui were sentenced to death for killing a civil guard , Gregorio Posadas , on 3 April 1974 in Azpeitia . Garmendia was accused of shooting Posadas and Otaegui of helping him to flee from police . Garmendia was shot during his interrogations and ended in a coma and , due to his physical condition , was unable to sign his confession , instead having to place his fingerprint on a confession previously written which implicated Otaegui . Though witnesses failed to identify <unk> and doctors testified that he was in no fit state to validate the confession , together with Otaegui , he was found guilty of the charges . 
 On 11 September 1975 , near Hoyo de Manzanares , the trial of five FRAP members took place , despite attempts by their lawyers to have it postponed . The lawyers also interrupted the prosecutor 's opening statement , claiming that it was wrong and omitted key details . They also believed that their clients could not receive a fair trial due to negative press reports describing them as " assassins . " 
 As a result of the trial , FRAP members <unk> Fernández , Manuel Blanco and José Humberto Baena received the death penalty for the killing of Lucio Rodríguez , an armed policeman , in Madrid on 14 July 1975 . Humberto had been an activist in the then @-@ illegal Communist Party of Spain and had been arrested and jailed following a student demonstration in 1970 . His parents claimed that he had been in Portugal at the time of the killing and that one of the main witnesses was not allowed to attend the trial . Though the prosecution had sought the death penalty for all five accused , Pablo Mayoral Ronda and Fernando <unk> Marco received sentences of 30 and 25 years respectively . Lawyers of the three sentenced to death appealed the sentences . 
 The third military tribunal , on 16 September 1975 , also held in Hoyo de Manzanares , sentenced FRAP members Manuel <unk> , María Jesús <unk> , Concepción <unk> , José Luis Sánchez @-@ Bravo and Ramón García Sanz to death , for their involvement in the killing of a civil guard , Antonio Pose , in Madrid on 16 August 1975 . The final tribunal took place in Barcelona , on 19 September , and gave the death penalty to ETA member Juan Txiki Paredes <unk> , for killing armed policeman , <unk> Díaz , in Barcelona on 6 June 1975 . 
 On 26 September , the Council of Ministers , headed by Franco , confirmed the death penalty for five of those sentenced : FRAP members José Humberto Baena , Ramón García Sanz and José Luis Sánchez Bravo and ETA members Ángel Otaegui and Juan Paredes , while commuting the death penalty in the case of the remaining six . 
 = = Reactions to sentences = = 
 The sentences provoked international criticism and protests against the Spanish government . Large demonstrations took place in Italy , Stockholm and Oslo , with the Swedish Prime Minister , Olof Palme , heading the Swedish demonstration . The Dutch foreign minister made a formal protest to the Spanish Ambassador . The Spanish Embassy in Lisbon was attacked and set on fire . The Spanish embassy in Switzerland was occupied for 2 hours by protesters . President of Mexico , Luis Echeverría , called for Spanish membership of the United Nations Security Council to be suspended , but this was vetoed by the US , who considered it an internal Spanish matter . Pope Paul VI asked the Spanish government to grant clemency to the condemned at his Sunday blessing in St. Peter 's Square , though he also condemned the crimes that the condemned were convicted of . Franco 's brother , Nicolás Franco , joined calls for clemency , appealing to Franco 's Christianity . 
 A group of French intellectuals , including the actor Yves Montand , the film director Costa @-@ Gavras and the journalist Régis Debray , attempted to organise a press conference in Madrid to read a prepared statement condemning the sentences , but were detained by police and expelled from Spain . 
 = = Executions = = 
 The executions took place on 27 September 1975 . Ángel Otaegui was the first executed , at 08 : 30 in Villalón prison . Juan Paredes was executed at 08 : 35 in Barcelona . Paredes , according to his brother , was led to his execution smiling and singing an anthem of the Basque Army . The remaining three were executed in Hoyo de Manzanares , José Humberto Baena at 09 : 20 , Ramón García Sanz at 09 : 40 and José Luis Sánchez Bravo at 10 : 00 . 
 = = Burials = = 
 The three FRAP members were buried the same morning in Hoyo de Manzanares . The executed men 's families claimed they were denied access to their graves in the village graveyard and scuffles with police took place . However , Gustavo Catalán Deus , a photographer who witnessed the burials , said that some family members had been present , together with police , members of the military and lawyers . The families had previously alleged that police had assaulted the mother of one of the condemned in Carabanchel Prison in Madrid during her final meeting with her son . The remains of Sánchez Bravo were later reinterred in Murcia , with those of Ramón García Sanz being reinterred in Madrid . Juan Paredes , who had been buried in Barcelona , was reinterred in Zarautz on 12 January 1977 . 
 = = Reactions to executions = = 
 = = = Domestic reactions = = = 
 In the Basque Country , 3 @,@ 000 people took part in a protest march in Azpeitia , while a larger demonstration in San Sebastián saw 30 @,@ 000 people in attendance . Six people were injured after being shot by police during a demonstration in <unk> . A mass in Madrid in memorial of the executed was followed by protests and arrests . 200 @,@ 000 people took part in a two @-@ day general strike in the Basque country , which began on 30 September 1975 . 
 = = = International reactions = = = 
 Demonstrations occurred at Spain 's embassy and consulates in France . The Spanish embassy in Brussels was fire @-@ bombed . A day of national demonstration was organised by the Dutch government and a protest in Utrecht was led by Prime Minister Joop den <unk> . In Britain , the governing Labour Party passed a resolution condemning the executions . Poland and Hungary withdrew their commercial representatives in Spain , and 15 European countries ( West Germany , East Germany , the United Kingdom , Belgium , the Netherlands , France , Switzerland , Portugal , Austria , Sweden , Ireland , Luxembourg and Italy ) withdrew their ambassadors to Spain in protest . In response , Spain withdrew its ambassadors from Norway , East Germany , The Vatican , West Germany and The Netherlands for consultations , with its ambassador to Portugal unconditionally withdrawn in protest at the embassy attack . Spain 's central bank also suspended trade in the Portuguese escudo . 
 Swedish prime minister Olof Palme denounced the Franco government as " devilish murderers . " In the United Nations , the Swedish government attempted to pass a declaration condemning the Spanish government , but the US government amended this to a general declaration condemning human rights violations , without specific reference to Spain . 
 = = = Reaction within Spain = = = 
 The Spanish press , controlled by the Spanish government , was supportive of the executions . La Vanguardia condemned the " vile and intolerable " crimes of the executed and argued that , while any death was regrettable , a " strong state at the service of a truly free society " was necessary against " fanatics who seek to disturb the peace . " ABC criticised foreign security forces for failing to defend Spanish property abroad against attacks from what they identified as " the extreme left " and stated that they hoped that the Spanish people 's desire for " internal peace " would be respected by Western European governments . 
 On 1 October , a demonstration in support of the government took place in Madrid , with Spanish TV claiming that more than a million people had taken part . Franco addressed the crowds and denounced " the leftist @-@ Masonic conspiracy assisting communist subversion " of Spain . This was the last demonstration that Franco attended before his death . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the executions , there was speculation that up to 27 more prisoners could face the death penalty . Ultimately , these predictions proved ill @-@ founded . Franco fell ill in late October 1975 and never recovered , dying on 20 November 1975 . His death resulted in the de facto abolition of the death penalty , as no further executions took place . Capital punishment was abolished for all civil crimes by the Spanish Constitution of 1978 , with sanctioned military executions in war time the sole exceptions . In 1995 , the Spanish parliament abolished the death penalty in all circumstances . 
 The families of those executed continued to seek the overturning of the sentences and compensation , based on the irregularity of the processes used to convict their relatives . In 2004 , they appealed to the Constitutional Court of Spain , which rejected their application on the grounds that it did not have the power to deal with cases prior to December 1978 , when the Constitution came into effect . In September 2005 , the European Court of Human Rights rejected their petition on similar grounds : that Spain had not been a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights in 1975 . In November 2012 , a Basque Government commission found that the processes used to convict Txiki and Otaegui had violated their right to a fair trial and awarded € 135 @,@ 000 in compensation to their families . Flor Baena , the sister of José Humberto Baena , continued to campaign for her brother , stating that she wanted to clear his name , not financial compensation . 
 In November 2014 , Spanish police refused an Argentinian request to Interpol , made under the terms of a 1987 treaty , to extradite 20 Francoists , among them those involved in the executions , for crimes against humanity . 
 = Fay Ripley = 
 Fay Ripley ( born 26 February 1966 ) is an English actress and recipe author . She is a graduate of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama ( 1990 ) . Her first professional role was in the chorus of a pantomime version of Around the World in 80 Days . Ripley 's early film and television appearances were limited , so she supplemented her earnings by working as a children 's entertainer and by selling menswear door @-@ to @-@ door . After her scenes as a prostitute were cut from Frankenstein ( 1994 ) , Ripley gained her first major film role playing Karen Hughes in Mute Witness ( 1995 ) . 
 In 1996 , Ripley was cast in her breakthrough role of Jenny Gifford in the ITV series Cold Feet . Initially a supporting role in the pilot episode , Ripley 's character was expanded when a series was commissioned in 1998 . She stayed with the show for three full series before leaving to take more varied roles and to spend more time with her family . She returned for a guest appearance in the fifth series . After leaving Cold Feet , Ripley played a succession of leading roles in comedies and dramas including Green @-@ Eyed Monster ( 2001 ) , I Saw You ( 2002 ) , The Stretford Wives ( 2002 ) , and Dead Gorgeous ( 2002 ) . Each role won her critical acclaim . In 2006 , she filmed a leading role in the ITV drama Bon Voyage , before taking time away from acting after the birth of her second child . Ripley returned to television in 2009 , starring as human resources manager Christine Frances in the ITV comedy drama Monday Monday , and Nicola Perrin alongside Martin Clunes in BBC One 's Reggie Perrin . 
 Since 2009 , Ripley has authored two recipe books ; Fay 's Family Food in 2009 and What 's For Dinner ? in 2012 . She is married to actor Daniel Lapaine , with whom she has two children — a daughter and a son — and is an advocate of several charities and causes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ripley was born in Wimbledon , south @-@ west London to Bev ( <unk> ) William Deacon Ripley and Tina Ripley ( née Forster ) on 26 February 1966 . Her father was a successful <unk> the son of Sydney William Leonard Ripley J.P. , D.L. , a member of Greater London Council , whose father had owned a printing company that produced movie <unk> and brother of 1960s pop singer Twinkle , and her mother an antiques dealer . They separated when Ripley was two years old and both remarried , so Ripley spent her childhood moving around Surrey between two families . She was the only child from her parents ' marriage but had several half @-@ brothers and sisters from their new relationships . In her early life , she lived in various Surrey towns , including Walton @-@ on @-@ Thames , Weybridge , Esher and Cobham . Her father wanted her to have a good education so , despite the family 's Protestant religion , sent her to various Catholic convent schools around the county . One was St Maur 's Convent School in Weybridge , which she attended with Liza Tarbuck . Ripley did not feel academically challenged there , and later declared the school mediocre . 
 At school , Ripley enjoyed drama lessons , spurred on by the positive remarks she received from her drama teacher Susan Ford . She said of Ford , " When I was 15 , one of the few people who said , ' Well done ' , was my drama teacher , and she was really brilliant . She was a powerful woman . Those women change your life . You always remember them . There was something about her . She basically made me feel very good about myself as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl . " Abandoning her childhood ambition to become a nurse , Ripley decided to go into acting . Her father wanted to send her to a finishing school in Switzerland but , in an effort to rebel from her middle class Home Counties background , Ripley instead went to a local state college in Surrey , where she took A @-@ levels in communication studies , art , and drama . During her time at the college , Ripley performed her own small shows at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe . In an effort to " bring Brecht to the masses " , she performed The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui at the 1983 festival . 
 After completing her A @-@ levels , Ripley sought entry to the Guildhall School of Music and Drama . It took her three attempts before she was accepted onto an acting course at the age of 20 . While at drama school , Ripley lived in a flat in Streatham , South London , during a time she described as " horrible and penniless " . To support herself financially , she sold menswear door @-@ to @-@ door , <unk> on Kensington High Street and Oxford Street , worked as a receptionist at a health club , and spent five years as children 's entertainer " Miss Chief the Clown " . As Miss Chief , Ripley performed magic tricks and painted faces at children 's parties . The work paid off when she was able to get a mortgage on her first flat , stating clown as her occupation . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Ripley graduated from drama school in 1990 . Her first role afterwards was playing <unk> in the chorus of Around the World in 80 Days at the Liverpool Playhouse during the 1990 – 91 pantomime season . She had ten lines in Japanese . Her next role came at the end of the year in the Manchester Royal Exchange 's production of Medea . Ripley recalled , " It was only my second job , and I took it all very seriously , in my Greek sarong and my torch of fire , having to burble in tongues . " 
 Ripley 's early television and film career was characterised by minor roles as prostitutes or mistresses ; in what was to be her film debut , she filmed two scenes as a prostitute in the film Frankenstein ( Kenneth Branagh , 1994 ) . In the first scene , her character was strangled by the creature ( played by Robert De Niro 's stand @-@ in ) . The second scene featured De Niro himself , though Ripley 's character was lying dead in a mortuary throughout . Pleased with what looked like her breakout role , Ripley bought a dress for the premiere , though she was distraught when Branagh sent her a card apologising for cutting her scenes from the finished film . The same year , she filmed the role of Karen Hughes , the sister of a mute character who believes she sees a murder , in the low @-@ budget film Mute Witness ( Anthony Waller , 1995 ) . After Mute Witness 's British television premiere in 1999 , a Daily Record critic wrote that Ripley 's dramatic scenes were not as good as her comic ones . 
 In 1995 , she appeared in an episode of Channel 4 's Alan Davies vehicle One for the Road and made her last theatre appearance as a cast member in the Bush Theatre 's Two Lips , Indifferent Red . In 1996 , she had a role in Stephen Poliakoff 's Frontiers , and played a club barmaid in Dennis Potter 's penultimate television series Karaoke . The following year she had roles in the comedy film <unk> 's Grave ( Paul Weiland , 1997 ) , an episode of The Bill — as a woman whose nanny is accused of stealing from her — and a two @-@ part episode of the Kevin Whately series The Broker 's Man as a police officer . Her role in The Broker 's Man was one of the few occasions on which Ripley played a police officer ; she has frequently declined offers of similar roles because she does not want to " summon up the misery " to play a character that performs post @-@ mortem examinations or investigates murders when she could be starring in more true to life and funny programmes . 
 = = Breakthrough roles = = 
 In 1996 , Ripley auditioned for Granada Television 's Cold Feet , a television pilot about the romances of three couples living in Manchester . She believed she was reading for the role of Rachel , the " young , pretty one " , and was surprised to discover that she was wanted for Jenny , the " northern housewife " . In the audition , she performed with an inelegant approximation of a local Manchester accent . The producers found her approach to the role refreshing from other actresses , who were seen as too " finger @-@ wagging " . Ripley won the role , and appeared opposite John Thomson and James Nesbitt in the programme . After the pilot won an award , ITV 's director of programmes commissioned a series of Cold Feet , so Ripley worked on improving her character 's accent by speaking to locals and mimicking their speech . Her supporting character from the pilot episode was given a bigger role in the series ; in the first episode ( broadcast in 1998 ) , Jenny gives birth to her first child . At that time , Ripley had never experienced childbirth , so copied birth scenes she had seen in other television series . An Independent review of the first series in November 1998 noted , " Fay Ripley has a range of quirky mannerisms that are more reminiscent of Elaine in Seinfeld than of any other Brit @-@ com woman . " The character also gained Ripley public recognition ; after being noticed by a member of staff in Marks & Spencer , she was so pleased that she invited the woman to dinner . 
 Ripley 's performance in the first series won her a nomination for Best TV Comedy Actress at the British Comedy Awards 1999 . For her performance in the third series ( 2000 ) , in which her character separates from her husband and dates another man ( played by Ben Miles ) , she was nominated for the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress . During pre @-@ production of the fourth series ( 2001 ) , Ripley announced to the producers that she would be leaving the show , partly because she did not want to spend five months living in Manchester away from her home in London and wanted to spend more time with her husband , and partly to take other roles which she would otherwise not be able to do . She asked the writer Mike Bullen to either kill off Jenny or have her lose a limb . Bullen refused and instead wrote a plot in which Jenny moves to New York . Ripley returned to the series for a guest appearance in the final episode ( 2003 ) . She had originally planned not to return to the show , but reprised the role so she could have an on @-@ screen record of the final stages of her pregnancy with her first child . 
 In 2000 , Ripley appeared in the British <unk> film The Announcement , as well as playing lead female character Grace Bingley — opposite Paul Rhys — in the Granada television pilot I Saw You , which used many of the same production staff as Cold Feet . David Belcher of The Herald called Ripley " perfectly <unk> , tousled and self @-@ sufficient " in the role , and Joe Joseph of The Times complimented her comic timing . Ripley returned to I Saw You for a three @-@ episode miniseries in 2002 . She considers I Saw You , in which she acted alongside her husband Daniel Lapaine , the television show she is most proud to have worked on . 
 = = Leading roles = = 
 Having left Cold Feet , Ripley began to take on more leading roles ; her first role was as housewife Deanna in the BBC thriller Green @-@ Eyed Monster , which was broadcast in September 2001 . She researched her character , a murderer , by visiting a coroner . Guardian critic Gareth McLean wrote of her performance , " Ripley did a good job of exorcising the ghost of Jenny Gifford [ ... ] by coolly cranking up the insane desperation and needy malevolence to an impressive degree . " In 2002 , she played domestic abuse victim Donna Massey in Danny Brocklehurst 's The Stretford Wives . Ripley was initially not eager to play another character from around Manchester so soon after leaving Cold Feet , but she changed her mind after reading the script . She did not research spousal abuse to play her character , a woman struggling to bring up her two children in a run @-@ down house while her husband is imprisoned , because she did not find it difficult to " work out what it 's like to be scared and want to protect your kids " . Also in 2002 , Ripley played Rose Bell in the ITV post @-@ war period drama Dead Gorgeous , alongside Helen McCrory . The following year , she provided the voice of Meg in the ITV adaptation of the Meg and Mog children 's books , before playing Jill in the third series of the BBC One sitcom Bedtime at the end of 2003 . 
 In 2004 , Ripley had her first of three on @-@ screen partnerships with Martin Clunes , playing Jane White in the CBBC adaptation of Fungus the Bogeyman . The following year , she played the guest role of corrupt police inspector Sam Phillips in the BBC TV series Hustle , a role that received praise from The Times and The Sun newspapers . In 2006 , Ripley played the role of child abductor Linda Holder in the two @-@ part ITV drama Bon Voyage , starring alongside Ben Miles , Rachael Blake and Daniel Ryan . She was offered the part without having to audition , and took it because she wanted the opportunity to play an antagonist . She liked the style of Canadian director John Fawcett in making the thriller , as it differed to that of other British thrillers , which she believed were poorly filmed . Ripley filmed the role in Canada during the later weeks of her second pregnancy , so her character was dressed in baggy clothes to hide her bump . Her pregnancy also caused changes to the script ; originally her character was to run through a forest , fall off a cliff and " die a gruesome death " . Reviewing , Thomas Sutcliffe of The Independent and Gareth McLean of The Guardian noted that Ripley 's pregnancy was poorly disguised . In complimenting the performance of the whole cast , Brian McIver of the Daily Record praised Ripley 's portrayal of Linda as " scary but sympathetic " . 
 Bon Voyage marked Ripley 's last television acting appearance until 2009 . During that time she appeared as a guest on panel shows and talk shows . In 2009 , she returned to television screens as Nicola Perrin alongside Martin Clunes ' eponymous character in the BBC One sitcom Reggie Perrin . She took the role because she had previously worked with Clunes and the writer Simon Nye . As the series was Ripley 's first studio sitcom , she approached the role with apprehension ; she told The Independent on Sunday , " I basically just hung off Martin 's coat @-@ tails and hoped for the best . " Ripley compared Nicola to Reggie 's house @-@ bound wife Elizabeth in the original series , noting that the modern character needed a job and independence from her husband because of changes in society . She reprised the role in the second series in 2010 , after which the series was cancelled . 2009 also saw the broadcast of Monday Monday , an ITV comedy drama series in which Ripley plays Christine Frances , an alcoholic human resources manager at a supermarket head office that moves from London to Leeds . She took the role because it was different to characters she had previously played . 
 = = Other work = = 
 During her time on Cold Feet , Ripley hosted the Channel 4 show Sofa Melt , a relationships chat show in the vein of Trisha . The show lasted for one series of 60 episodes , broadcast in 1999 . In Scotland on Sunday , critic Stewart Hennessey called Ripley 's presenting fantastic and called the show itself " utterly without any intelligent merit whatsoever . It is just unmissable because the people on it are hilariously stupid . Set the vid , show it at parties . " Ripley said of the show retrospectively , " It was the most terrifying thing I 've ever done . " In 2003 , she presented a short film advocating Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire for the BBC 's Big Read series and in 2009 , she presented an episode of the <unk> documentary series My Brilliant Britain . 
 In 2004 , she appeared on the Star in a Reasonably Priced Car segment of Top Gear , where she discussed her car history with presenter Jeremy Clarkson . On her celebrity lap of the Top Gear test track , she achieved a lap time of 1 : 53 , making her 38th on the Suzuki Liana leader board . The same year , she participated in a major advertising venture by The National Lottery , playing " Lady Luck " alongside a unicorn voiced by Graham Norton . In 2008 , she appeared alongside Martin Clunes in a series of advertisements for Tesco Direct and , since 2009 , has starred with Mark Addy in a series of adverts for Tesco 's various brands . 
 In 2007 , Ripley announced that she would be writing a cookbook about family food . She said , " I want to help people prepare good food for their kids , really practical stuff that 's easy , quick , healthy and you can whizz up in the blender for the baby . " Fay 's Family Food was published by Michael Joseph , an imprint of Penguin Books , in April 2009 and was selected by Marie @-@ Claire Digby of The Irish Times as a " summer read " . Ripley 's second book , entitled What 's For Dinner , was published in April 2012 . Since the release of her first book , she has resisted offers from television production companies to make her own cookery series . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ripley met English actor James Purefoy when the two were starring in the eponymous roles in a college production of Romeo and Juliet in 1983 . They began an 11 @-@ year relationship that ended when Ripley was 27 . Ripley said of the relationship in 2006 , " We were just kids when we met and , therefore , the relationship had more than run its course . " She was single for five years , before being introduced to Australian actor Daniel Lapaine at a party hosted by mutual friends . Neither of them thought the other was interested in dating and they drifted apart . After meeting again on separate holidays in New York , they began dating and married in October 2001 in a ceremony in Tuscany , Italy . Ripley gave birth to the couple 's first child , a daughter , in October 2002 . She gave birth to a son in October 2006 . 
 Ripley is a patron of several charities and causes . In 2007 she took part in What 's it going to take ? , a campaign by Women 's Aid to raise awareness of domestic abuse against women . She visited Tanzania with ActionAid in October 2008 to raise awareness of child sponsorship . While in the country , Ripley visited community projects set up by ActionAid in Bagamoyo and <unk> . Ripley was already sponsoring a child and had been asked by ActionAid to participate in a visit but had always declined because of conflicts with her work . Ripley also fronted a " Climate Action Now " protest with novelist Rebecca Frayn and actress Rula Lenska in 2008 , opposing government support of the then planned third runway at Heathrow Airport . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = 2009 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final = 
 The 2009 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was played on September 2 , 2009 , at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in Washington , D.C. The match determined the winner of the 2009 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup , a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation . This was the 96th edition of the oldest competition in United States soccer . The match was won by Seattle Sounders FC , who defeated D.C. United 2 – 1 . Clyde Simms scored D.C. United 's only goal . Fredy Montero and Roger Levesque scored Seattle 's two goals as the club became the second expansion team in Major League Soccer ( MLS ) history to win the tournament in their inaugural season . 
 D.C. United entered the tournament as the competition 's defending champions . They had previously won the tournament in 1996 as well . Both Sounders FC and D.C. United had to play through two qualification rounds for MLS teams before entering the official tournament . Prior to the final , there was a public dispute between the owners of the two clubs regarding the selection of D.C. United to host it at their home field , RFK Stadium . 
 As the tournament champions , Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2010 – 11 CONCACAF Champions League . The club also received a $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize , while D.C. United received $ 50 @,@ 000 as the runner @-@ up . 
 = = Road to the final = = 
 The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all United States Soccer Federation affiliated teams , from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . In 2009 , Major League Soccer , which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada , was allowed to enter eight of its U.S.-based teams in the tournament . The top six MLS teams from the previous season qualified automatically , and the remaining two spots are determined by preliminary qualification matches . The eight MLS entries begin play in the third round of the tournament . 
 In 2009 , MLS expanded into the Seattle market adding a new team to the league , Seattle Sounders FC . As an expansion team , they had to play through the qualification matches before entering the tournament . Likewise , D.C. United did not finish among the top six 2008 MLS teams , and therefore had to play through qualification rounds before entering the official tournament . 
 = = = Sounders FC = = = 
 Prior to their first qualification match against Real Salt Lake , Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid asserted that the U.S. Open Cup was important to the club and that they were playing to win . Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila , Washington . The facility is smaller than the club 's home stadium for league matches , Qwest Field , but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches . 
 On April 28 , 2009 , Sounders FC defeated Real Salt Lake 4 – 1 in their first qualification match . Sebastian Le Toux scored two goals , and Roger Levesque had three assists in front of a sold @-@ out crowd at Starfire . Sounders FC hosted their second qualification match on May 26 , 2009 , also at Starfire , this time against the Colorado Rapids . Reserve player Kevin Forrest scored the only goal in the match as Seattle defeated the Rapids 1 – 0 , securing their entry into the third round of the official cup competition as one of the eight teams representing MLS . 
 On July 1 , 2009 , Sounders FC traveled to Portland and defeated the Timbers of the USL First Division 2 – 1 in front of a sold @-@ out crowd . Roger Levesque and Nate Jaqua both scored for Seattle . The following week , in a quarterfinal match at Starfire , Sounders FC defeated visiting Kansas City 1 – 0 on a penalty kick in the 89th minute scored by Sebastien Le Toux . Three weeks later , on July 21 , Sounders FC won their semifinal match 2 – 1 over the Houston Dynamo at Starfire . Seattle took the lead for good when Stephen King scored a goal five minutes into extra time , sending Sounders FC to the cup final . 
 = = = D.C. United = = = 
 MLS clubs were first included in the U.S. Open Cup tournament in 1996 . D.C. United won the tournament that year , and repeated their success in 2008 . In 2009 , the club began its title defense in the MLS qualification rounds . This meant that they had to win six games instead of the four needed to obtain the cup in 2008 . 
 In their first qualifying match on March 28 , 2009 , they hosted FC Dallas at RFK Stadium in Washington , D.C. They defeated Dallas 2 – 0 , with Fred and Brandon <unk> scoring in the 21st and 66th minutes , respectively . D.C. United 's second qualification match was also played at RFK Stadium , on May 20 , 2009 . In a high @-@ scoring match against the New York Red Bulls , D.C. won 5 – 3 . Chris Pontius scored two of United 's five goals , qualifying D.C. for the third round of the official tournament . 
 On June 30 , 2009 , D.C. United began official cup competition against the Ocean City Barons of the USL Premier Development League . The match , hosted by United at Maryland SoccerPlex in Boyds , Maryland , ended with D.C. on top 2 – 0 . As a fourth @-@ tier club , the Barons lineup had featured amateur players while United 's included only three regular starters . The match remained scoreless for 74 minutes before D.C. took the lead on a penalty kick by late substitution Christian Gomez . One week later , on July 7 , D.C. United hosted their quarterfinal match at the SoccerPlex again and defeated the Harrisburg City Islanders of the USL Second Division 2 – 1 . On July 21 , 2009 , D.C. United hosted another lower tier team in their semifinal match at the SoccerPlex . This time they defeated the Rochester Rhinos of the USL First Division 2 – 1 . The match was tied 1 – 1 until the 82nd minute when <unk> <unk> 's goal propelled D.C. into the cup final . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue selection = = = 
 Both Seattle Sounders FC and D.C. United submitted bids to U.S. Soccer to host the final . D.C. United 's bid included a proposal to host the match at RFK Stadium , their home stadium in Washington , D.C. with a capacity of 45 @,@ 596 . Sounders FC 's bid proposed to host the match at Qwest Field , their home stadium in Seattle , with a capacity of 32 @,@ 400 for soccer matches . The procedure for selecting the winning bid was kept private . When D.C. United 's bid was chosen , Sounders FC general manager Adrian Hanauer expressed skepticism that it had been better than the Seattle bid . He further noted that if Seattle had hosted the match , it likely would have sold out . This prompted a reply from D.C. United president Kevin Payne , who argued that D.C. United had won the bidding process fairly , and said that he was offended by Hanauer 's comments . Following this public disagreement , D.C. United launched a marketing campaign to sell more match tickets , which included a new web site , <unk> , which chronicled the club 's history of titles as an original MLS franchise . The campaign also included an open letter in local newspapers stating that Sounders FC and its fans did not think D.C. deserved to host the match and declared D.C. fans as " the standard " for support in the league . Videos from local celebrities were posted on the team 's official blog urging fans to attend the final . Ticket discounts and special pricing on concessions for the match were also announced as part of the special marketing effort for the cup final . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Prior to meeting in the U.S. Open Cup final , Sounders FC and D.C. United had met only once , on June 17 at Qwest Field in Seattle . In that meeting , Sounders FC squandered a 3 – 1 second half lead by allowing D.C. United to score two goals late in the match . It ended in a 3 – 3 tie . 
 Since 1996 , when MLS teams were first included in the tournament , the home team had won nine times and lost only twice in the final match . Commenting on what his team brings to the game , Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid stated , " We bring a clean slate . We haven 't had any negative experiences in championship games , so we want to just build up a positive legacy for our team and we know we have a chance to make some history for our team . Every player knows that and that 's something we want to try and do . " D.C. United had previously won the U.S. Open Cup twice in 1996 and 2008 and this was their fourth appearance ever in the tournament final . D.C. United president Kevin Payne simply stated , " We want to win anything we enter . " 
 Sounders FC general manager Adrian Hanauer commented on his club 's desire to win the cup and a berth into the CONCACAF Champions League , " That 's one step towards our stated goal of competing in the world club championships , because the winner of the CONCACAF Champions League wins a spot in the World Club Championships . " 
 = = Match = = 
 The 2009 U.S. Open Cup Final was played on September 2 at RFK Stadium in Washington D.C. A total of 17 @,@ 329 fans attended the match , 38 % of the stadium 's available capacity . Approximately 200 Sounders FC fans sat together in the upper deck . Both the travel distance and the mid @-@ week scheduling made it difficult for Seattle fans to attend . Live television coverage was provided nationally by Fox Soccer Channel . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Both clubs had used a mix of reserve players and starting ( first choice ) players in previous tournament matches , but for the final neither team used reserve players in their starting lineups . Seattle took the field in a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 formation while D.C United was in a 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 formation . The match kicked off at 7 : 37 pm local time . 
 Five minutes into the match , D.C. United first @-@ year player Chris Pontius had the first chance of the evening as he pushed past Sounders FC defender Leonardo González to receive a diagonal pass from Clyde Simms . However , due to the difficult shooting angle , Pontius ' shot was wide of the far post . In the 10th minute , Sounders FC forward Fredy Montero had a close range shot on goal , but D.C. goalkeeper Josh Wicks parried the shot away . Seven minutes later , Christian Gomez had a goal scoring opportunity with a direct free kick from 28 yards ( 26 m ) , but his low kick curled just wide of the target . In the 18th minute , Seattle midfielder Sebastian Le Toux played a ball in to teammate Freddie Ljungberg , whose shot on goal was barely saved by Wicks , who kicked out a foot to block the shot . Just before halftime , Le Toux crossed to an unmarked Montero , whose direct header on goal was just in reach of Wicks , who again made the save to keep the score level , 0 – 0 . Seattle outshot D.C. 9 – 6 in the first half . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 As the players took the field for the second half , D.C. coach Tom <unk> decided to replace Fred , who had been a non @-@ factor in the first half , with Santino Quaranta . In the 60th minute , Gomez , Pontius and Luciano Emilio combined inside Seattle 's 18 @-@ yard box for a United opportunity , but Pontius mishit the shot , which resulted in an easy save for Seattle 's goalkeeper , Kasey Keller . Seven minutes later , another failed D.C. United opportunity resulted in a Sounders FC counterattack , where Freddie Ljungberg 's shot was saved by Wicks . The rebound rolled in front of Fredy Montero , who dove feet first and kicked the ball into the goal , giving Sounders FC a 1 – 0 lead . Following the goal , frustrated D.C. United goalkeeper Josh Wicks stomped on Montero 's leg while he was still on the ground . After consulting with the fourth official , referee Alex Prus showed Wicks a red card for his behavior , dismissing him from the match . United 's backup goalkeeper , Milos <unk> , was substituted for Christian Gomez after the incident , and D.C. played with 10 men for the remainder of the match . 
 Despite being down a man , D.C. United controlled possession of the ball as the match progressed towards full @-@ time . Just four minutes before full @-@ time , Seattle 's Sebastian Le Toux pushed D.C. defender Dejan <unk> off the ball , dribbled in towards goal , and then provided a centering pass to teammate Roger Levesque who scored , extending the Seattle lead to 2 – 0 . With time ticking away , United desperately threw every man forward and managed to narrow the scoring difference to one in the 89th minute when Simms kicked home a loose ball after a Quaranta free kick . During the five minutes of stoppage time , D.C. continued with repeated crosses and shots attempting to get an equalizer . 
 In the end , Sounders FC was able to withstand D.C. ' s late push for a 2 – 1 victory , becoming the second MLS expansion team in league history ( Chicago Fire was the first ) to win the U.S. Open Cup in their inaugural season . Players and coaches ran onto the field after the final whistle , jumped up and down together and hurried to a corner of the field to acknowledge the Sounders FC fans cheering in the upper deck . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Overall 
 = = Post match = = 
 In the post @-@ game press conference , Josh Wicks discussed his ejection , saying : " It was a mistake on my part and I 've got to learn my lesson . The fourth official made a call and the ref made the final decision . That was it . I 've got no excuses for it . <unk> , very , very disappointing . " One month after the stomping incident , U.S. Soccer announced that Wicks would be suspended from the U.S. Open Cup tournament for five matches . 
 After the victory , many Sounders FC fans gathered at King County International Airport to greet the team as they returned to Seattle . The trophy was put on display at several events around Seattle in the weeks following Sounders FC 's victory . On September 19 , the cup was presented to Sounders FC fans to carry in the March to the Match prior to a Sounders FC league game at Qwest Field against Chivas USA . 
 By winning the U.S. Open Cup tournament , Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2010 – 11 CONCACAF Champions League . Seattle also received the winner 's $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize , while D.C. United received $ 50 @,@ 000 as the tournament runner @-@ up . Kevin Forrest , whose game @-@ winning goal against Colorado allowed Sounders FC to qualify for the tournament , received a share of the prize money and a medal , despite being released by the team before the final . 
 In January 2010 , the club 's success in the U.S. Open Cup tournament was listed among the many reasons the Washington State Senate passed a resolution honoring Sounders FC . 
 On October 5 , 2010 , Seattle returned to the final and defeated the Columbus Crew 2 – 1 to repeat as U.S. Open Cup champion . This time Sounders FC hosted the final at Qwest Field , drawing an attendance of 31 @,@ 311 which broke the 81 @-@ year @-@ old record for the event . 
 = Hurricane Madeline ( 1998 ) = 
 Hurricane Madeline was the final tropical cyclone of the 1998 Pacific hurricane season . Madeline originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the coast of Africa on September 25 , 1998 . The wave traversed the Atlantic Ocean and crossed over Central America on October 5 or 6 . Gradually , the system intensified and was classified as a tropical depression on October 16 , a tropical storm later that day , and a hurricane on October 17 . The storm reached peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) about 95 miles ( 150 km ) southwest of San Blas , Nayarit , and after 18 hours it subsequently began to weaken . Although Madeline never made landfall , numerous rainbands affected the Mexican coast causing no known damage or fatalities . The remnant moisture moved north and contributed to flooding in central Texas , which killed 31 people and caused $ 750 million ( 1998 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 25 , 1998 a tropical wave emerged off the coast of Africa , producing intermittent concentrated clusters of convective activity . The wave traversed the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea before crossing Central America on October 5 or October 6 . After several days , convection increased , and Dvorak classifications initiated . Satellite imagery indicated that the system dissipated on October 11 , although an area of cloudiness persisted off the coast of Mexico . After four days , the system regenerated and under diffluent flow aloft , deep convection became more concentrated ; it is estimated that a tropical depression formed at 0000 UTC on October 16 , about 230 mi ( 370 km ) west @-@ southwest of Manzanillo , Mexico . Initially , due to disorganization , determining the forward movement of depression was difficult , although a few hours later it was estimated that the system was tracking to the north @-@ northwest . With favorable conditions aloft , the deep convection became more concentrated , and 12 hours after first developing , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Madeline about 170 miles ( 270 km ) southwest of Cabo Corrientes . 
 During the afternoon , convective cloud tops warmed slightly although the storm continued to intensify . Soon after , thunderstorm activity became limited as Madeline remained generally stationary in movement . An approaching mid @-@ level trough turned Madeline to the northeast . Banding features gradually improved in organization , and late on October 17 the storm attained hurricane status . However , satellite imagery indicated that convective activity was confined to the western portion of the storm , and at the same time an eye began to form . Early on October 18 , data from a Reconnaissance aircraft flight into the storm found a minimum central pressure of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , as the storm was drifting to the northeast at around 4 mph ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) near the western edge of a large @-@ scale east – west ridge axis . The apparent eye became cloud @-@ filled shortly thereafter , and a slight increase in temperature was discovered near the center . Despite this , upper @-@ level outflow was favorable , leading to predictions of slight intensification . 
 Shortly thereafter , Madeline attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) about 95 miles ( 150 km ) southwest of San Blas , Nayarit . The hurricane maintained peak winds for about 18 hours while curving again to the northwest . With evidence of southern wind shear , only a small area of deep thunderstorm activity existed on October 19 , and the system began to appear ill @-@ defined of satellite imagery . The hurricane quickly weakened into a tropical storm , and by later that day , the storm became void of convection due to strong wind shear . On October 19 , the storm was downgraded to a tropical depression , leaving just a swirl of low clouds midway between the southern tip of Baja California and mainland Mexico . By 0600 UTC on October 20 , the remnants of Madeline had completely dissipated . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In anticipation of Madeline , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning for the Baja California Peninsula southward from La Paz , and a hurricane warning from San Patricio , Jalisco to El Dorado , Sinaloa , including the Islas Marías . The storm was initially forecast to move ashore near Mazatlán , prompting officials to close the city 's port . President Ernesto Zedillo advised potentially affected residents to stay indoors or seek refuge in shelters . Also , the threat of the hurricane canceled a fishing expedition in the Gulf of California due to rough surf . The expedition was to provide a new aquarium in downtown Denver , Colorado with about 8 @,@ 500 fish . Mexican authorities deployed 2 @,@ 000 soldiers in remote areas of the Pacific coast state of Sinaloa to prepare for the hurricane . Several thousand residents and tourists at the resorts of Puerto Vallarta and Mazatlan were put on standby to evacuate their homes . Authorities along the coast in the state of Nayarit went house to house , advising people about the oncoming storm . In addition , ships from Salina Cruz to Acapulco were advised to stay in port . 
 Although Madeline never crossed the coast , numerous rainbands affected the Mexican coast , dropping up to 9 @.@ 8 in ( 250 mm ) . Despite this , no damage or fatalities were reported in Mexico . After the storm had dissipated , the remnant plume of moisture contributed to severe flooding in central Texas . Rainfall in Texas reached 22 inches ( 560 mm ) in some locations . Thirty @-@ one people died due to the flooding , and damage totaled to $ 750 million ( 1998 USD ) . A total of 24 of the deaths were drownings , 22 of them were caused by driving vehicles into high water on a road flooded by the torrential downpours . There were 16 different incidents when these types of deaths occurred , four of them involving in multiple deaths . Three others died due to trauma , and one died from hypothermia after the person was submerged in the water . The greatest impact was in Southern Texas , which included the urban areas of San Antonio and Austin , and all of their surrounding suburbs . The counties with the most significant rainfall , damage , and fatalities were Travis County , Bexar County , Guadalupe County , Comal County , and Caldwell County . This area included both the cities of San Antonio and Austin . In a small area in Caldwell County , there was 29 inches ( 740 mm ) of rain estimated by the United States Geological Survey . This included the area of Lockhart , Texas , which was badly flooded by the storm due to its close proximity to the San Marcos River . Most of the county picked up an estimated 20 to 30 in ( 510 to 760 mm ) of rain , including San Marcos , Texas , New Braunfels , Texas , and Kyle , Texas . In all , portions of 60 counties in Texas were flooded and hundreds of people were forced to flee their homes . 
 Due to the flooding , twenty counties were declared federal disaster areas , clearing the way for assistance such as federal loans . Then @-@ president Bill Clinton promised aid to the victims of the storm and then @-@ governor George W. Bush took a tour of the devastated region with the Federal Emergency Management Agency director . 
 = You 'll See = 
 " You 'll See " is a song by American recording artist Madonna from her ballads compilation , Something to Remember ( 1995 ) . The album was released with the intention of toning down the image of Madonna , who was being heavily criticized at the time . The singer decided to work with producer David Foster , who co @-@ wrote and produced three songs with Madonna in September 1995 . " You 'll See " was released on October 30 , 1995 , by Maverick Records as the lead single from the album . An acoustic pop ballad , " You 'll See " features instrumentation from percussion , tremolo guitar and piano , while lyrically it speaks of independence after end of a love affair . The song received positive reception from contemporary critics , with reviewers praising Madonna 's vocals . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) honored it as the Most Performed Song , in their annual ASCAP Pop Awards for 1997 . 
 " You 'll See " was commercially successful , reaching the top five in Austria , Canada , Finland , Italy and the United Kingdom . The single also managed to peak at number six on the US Billboard Hot 100 making it Madonna 's 29th top @-@ ten single on the chart . An accompanying music video was directed by Michael Haussman , where the story line served as a sequel to Madonna 's previous music video for " Take a Bow " . An alternate Spanish version , written by Argentine singer @-@ songwriter Paz Martinez , also received a music video , and was included on the Latin American edition of Something to Remember . Madonna has performed the song live on the British television program Top of the Pops and on selected US shows of her 2001 Drowned World Tour . In 2009 , Scottish singer Susan Boyle included a cover of the song on her debut studio album I Dreamed a Dream . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 After a controversy @-@ fueled period , Madonna 's personal life had started to dominate over her musical career . " She knew it was time to make a change " as said by one anonymous member of her management team who claimed that she wanted to prove there was more to her than the constant media circus surrounding her . In November 1995 , Madonna released a compilation album , Something to Remember , featuring a selection of her ballads over a decade of her career and three new songs ; described as a " love letter from Madonna to her fans and music lovers alike " the compilation was targeted to emphasize the singer 's musical abilities , and away from the theatrics . On the album 's liner notes , Madonna further explained : 
 So much controversy has swirled around my career this past decade that very little attention ever gets paid to my music . The songs are all but forgotten . While I have no regrets regarding the choices I 've made artistically , I 've learned to appreciate the idea of doing things in a simpler way . So without a lot of fanfare , without any distractions , I present to you this collection of ballads . Some are old , some are new . All of them are from my heart . 
 For the new songs , Madonna worked with David Foster , a well @-@ known producer who had worked with the likes of Barbra Streisand , Al Jarreau and Earth , Wind & Fire . Foster initially did not expect Madonna would collaborate with him , as he believed that his music would not " really [ be ] hip enough for her " . The recording session with Foster resulted in two new songs to the final track list , " You 'll See " and " One More Chance " . Foster commented : " At the end of the day , the songs we did were not particularly impressive , though one of them , ' You 'll See ' , was really neat . Madonna had written a great lyric ( ' You think that I can 't live without your love / You 'll see ' ) and I thought my music was great " . The track was produced and arranged by Madonna and Foster , who worked on the song during the third weekend of September 1995 . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Recording of the song was done in Brooklyn Studios and assisted by Ronnie Rivera . It was engineered and mixed by David Reitzas , who also produced the remix of " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " for Something to Remember . Simon Franglen provided synclavier programming for the song . Only three instruments were used for the song — acoustic guitar played by Dean Parks , electric guitar played by Michael Thompson and keyboard played by Foster . A Spanish version of the song , titled " Verás " , was recorded by Madonna at Gloria and Emilio Estefan 's studio in Miami . The song was translated into Spanish by Paz Martinez and was included as a bonus track on the Latin American editions of Something to Remember . " You 'll See " premiered on the radio forums of the official Warner Bros. Records ' website on October 18 , 1995 and was officially released as the album 's lead single on October 30 , 1995 . 
 Musically " You 'll See " is an acoustic pop ballad . It is set in the time signature of common time , having a tempo of 120 beats per minute . The song is played in the key of G Major , with a basic sequence of Em – D – Em as its chord progression during the first verse , while piano and guitar are used to play the background music . The sequence shifts to Em – C – D – G – C – F ♯ during the chorus . Madonna 's voice spans from G3 to C ♭ 5 . Throughout the chord changes progression to give Madonna 's vocals dominance in the song , and after a minute the percussion starts with a tremolo guitar added later . String synths and drums build the track further with the second verse seeing the singer harmonizing with herself . During the recording of the track , the singer used her vocal lessons for Evita ; she said " If you listen to those songs , you can hear how I was trying to absorb and utilize what I was learning for the recording [ of Evita ] . " Lyrically the song talks of independence after the end of a love affair stating that Madonna will go onto greater things . When asked if the track was about revenge , the singer replied " No , it 's about empowering yourself " . However , she also added that " there 's another side too which is — ' Don 't fuck with me , I don 't need anybody . I can do what I want ' , and ' You 'll See ' reflects that " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , the song received generally positive feedback . According to Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker , " You 'll See " is just one of the " consumer enticements that just add to the allure " . J. Randy Taraborrelli , the author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , called the song , along with " One More Chance " , as one of " the most sombre songs [ Madonna ] has ever recorded . " Billboard 's Keith Caulfield opined that the track " showcased Madonna 's newly @-@ trained vocal abilities , which would prepare audiences for her lead role in the following year 's Evita " . AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis described the song as " an empowered , somewhat melodramatic , Latin @-@ tinged ballad that helped to even further cement Madonna as a constant on adult contemporary radio , which , in turn , further distanced her from her raunchier days earlier in the decade " . Promis also praised the Spanish version " Verás " ; " [ Madonna ] sings the Spanish lyrics surprisingly well " . Billboard critic Timothy White called it a " bittersweet serenade . " In another review from the publication , Larry Flick called it a " deliciously fruitful collaboration with ... Foster " . Flick further added in his review : 
 Foster 's flair for musical melodrama inspires Madonna to turn in what is easily her most assured and full @-@ bodied vocal performance to date . Amid a swirl of strings and Spanish guitars , she spews the song 's declaration of romantic independence with a theatrical verve that perfectly matches the stagey , potentially overpowering tone of Foster 's arrangement without flying over the heads of her youthful top 40 following . A stunning effort that could easily become the ' I Will Survive ' of this generation . 
 The Huffington Post ranked the song sixth on their list of " The 13 Most Underrated Madonna Songs " ; author Pandora Boxx wrote : " This song takes a sad break @-@ up and empowers it [ ... ] This is truly a hidden gem in the vast Madonna library " . Louis Virtel , from TheBacklot.com , placed " You 'll See " at number 48 of his list " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " . He wrote ; " Madonna 's declaration of independence over beautiful Spanish guitar @-@ playing is organic and inspired " . Writing for The Huffington Post , Matthew Jacobs gave the song a more negative review ; " it could be credited as a curtsy to Madonna 's impending Evita / Ray of Light comeback . Unfortunately , it also sounds like a dull displacement from a compilation of yearning ' 80s ballads " . Nevertheless , he placed " You 'll See " at number 69 of his list " The Definitive Ranking Of Madonna Singles " . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) honored it as the Most Performed Song , in their annual ASCAP Pop Awards for 1997 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " You 'll See " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 8 the week of December 9 , 1995 . It became Madonna 's highest debuting single of her career , following " Erotica " ( number 13 in 1992 ) and " Rescue Me " ( number 15 in 1991 ) . The single reached a peak position of number six the following week , thus making Madonna the third act in history ( after Aretha Franklin and Marvin Gaye ) to have a hit peak at each position from one to ten on the chart . The track ranked at number 51 on the Billboard year end chart for 1996 . It was eventually certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on February 27 , 1996 , for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . The song also reached the top @-@ ten of the Adult Contemporary and Mainstream Top 40 charts . Billboard ranked it at number 28 on their list of " Madonna 's 40 Biggest Hits " on the Hot 100 . In Canada , the song debuted at number 97 on the RPM Top Singles chart , the week of November 6 , 1995 . After nine weeks , on January 15 , 1996 , it peaked at the second position of the chart . " You 'll See " also reached number three on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song reached a peak of number 5 on the UK Singles Chart the week of November 4 , 1995 , and was present on the top 100 for a total of 14 weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , the single has sold over 305 @,@ 000 physical units as of October 2010 , and was certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . In Australia , " You 'll See " peaked at number 9 on the ARIA Singles Chart the week of February 18 , 1996 , staying on this position for two week and a total of eleven weeks on the chart . It also ranked at number 87 on the ARIA year @-@ end charts for 1995 , and was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In Italy , it reached the fifth position of the FIMI Singles Chart . On the year @-@ end Italian charts , it was ranked at number 21 . " You 'll See " reached a peak of number 2 in Finland , and also reached a peak of number 13 on the Irish Singles Chart . Across Europe , the song reached a peak of number eight on the European Hot 100 Singles chart on January 27 , 1995 . 
 = = Promotion and cover = = 
 The music video for " You 'll See " was directed by Michael Haussman , and premiered on November 7 , 1995 . The video became Madonna 's first sequel clip , as it followed the storyline of the singer 's previous video for " Take a Bow " , the second single from Bedtime Stories . The video for the latter had portrayed the singer being mistreated by her lover , played by Spanish Torero Emilio Muñoz . In the music video for " You 'll See " , Madonna walks out leaving him behind in despair . Also present are scenes of the singer riding a train and later on a plane , with Muñoz trying to catch up with her . The last frame of the video shows Madonna smiling hopefully for a better life . The video 's wardrobe was styled by noted fashion editor and stylist Lori Goldstein , who had previously worked with Madonna on " Take a Bow " . Another music video was created for the song 's Spanish version , " Verás " , which was released only in Latin America . This one intersperses scenes from the original video with footage of Madonna recording the Spanish version of the song . The music video for " You 'll See " was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award for Best Cinematography in 1996 . The Spanish version of the video won the MTV Latino award for Best Female Video . 
 On November 2 , 1995 , Madonna performed the song on British television program Top of the Pops . Six years later , Madonna performed " You 'll See " on some US shows of her Drowned World Tour . In his review of the show at New York City 's Madison Square Garden , Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani praised the " French @-@ techno / acoustic revamping of the powerful ' You 'll See ' " . The performance was not included on the tour 's live video album release , Drowned World Tour 2001 . 
 Scottish singer Susan Boyle covered the song for her debut album , I Dreamed a Dream ( 2009 ) . Reportedly , Boyle loved the song for years , and used to sing the ballad at auditions when she was cruelly turned away . At the end of the number Boyle , sometimes " reduced to tears " , would assert " You 'll see " . Reviewing the album for the New York Daily News , Jim Farber felt that Boyle 's voice sounded " remote and idealized " on the album , until " You 'll See " , where the characteristic " anger and vengeance " in her vocals " give her a harder character to chew on " . The cover was included on the first episode of Brazilian telenovela Ti Ti Ti ( 2010 ) . When Boyle started working on the musical I Dreamed a Dream which was based on her life , she had asked Madonna 's permission to use the song onstage , but Madonna denied usage of the track . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , arranger , vocals 
 David Foster – songwriter , producer , arranger , keyboards 
 Simon Franglen – synclavier programming 
 Suzie Katayama – cello 
 Dean Parks – acoustic guitar 
 David Reitzas – engineer , mixing 
 Ronnie Rivera – assistant 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Kii @-@ class battleship = 
 The Kii @-@ class battleship was a planned class of four fast battleships to be built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the 1920s . Only two of the ships received names . They were intended to reinforce Japan 's " eight @-@ eight fleet " of eight battleships and eight battlecruisers after the United States announced a major naval construction program in 1919 . However , after the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty in 1922 , work on the ships was suspended ; one pair was cancelled in November 1923 and the other in April 1924 . 
 = = Design and background = = 
 By 1918 , the Navy had gained approval for an " eight @-@ six " fleet of eight battleships and six battlecruisers , all ships under eight years old . However , having four large battleships ( two each of the Nagato and Tosa classes ) and four Amagi @-@ class battlecruisers on order put an enormous financial strain on Japan , which was spending about a third of its national budget on the Navy . Despite this , the IJN gained approval of the " eight @-@ eight @-@ eight " plan in 1920 after American President Woodrow Wilson announced plans in 1919 to re @-@ initiate the 1916 plan for ten additional battleships and six battlecruisers . The Japanese response was to plan the construction of eight additional fast battleships in the Kii and the Number 13 classes . 
 Designed by Captain Yuzuru Hiraga , the Kii class was based largely on the preceding Amagi @-@ class battlecruisers , which were in turn based on a less @-@ armored Tosa @-@ class design . The only major difference between the Kiis and <unk> was their speed and armor — the <unk> were .25 knots ( 0 @.@ 46 km / h ; 0 @.@ 29 mph ) faster , and the Kiis had a thicker belt . Despite this lineage , the Kiis were classified as " fast battleships " by the Japanese , as they had decided to end the distinction between " battleship " and " battlecruiser . " 
 = = = Description = = = 
 The ships had a length of 234 @.@ 9 meters ( 770 ft 8 in ) between perpendiculars and 250 @.@ 1 meters ( 820 ft 6 in ) overall . They had a beam of 30 @.@ 8 meters ( 101 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 7 meters ( 31 ft 10 in ) . The normal displacement of the battleships was 42 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 41 @,@ 900 long tons ) . 
 The class was intended to be equipped with four <unk> @-@ Hombu geared steam turbines , each of which drove one propeller shaft . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 131 @,@ 200 shaft horsepower ( 97 @,@ 800 kW ) , using steam provided by 19 Kampon oil @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers , to reach a maximum speed of 29 @.@ 75 knots ( 55 @.@ 10 km / h ; 34 @.@ 24 mph ) . 
 The primary armament of the Kii class was ten 45 @-@ caliber 41 @-@ centimeter guns in five twin @-@ gun turrets , two fore and three aft of the superstructure . This gun fired a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 790 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . The secondary battery consisted of 16 single 50 @-@ caliber 14 @-@ centimeter guns was mounted in casemates in the superstructure . The manually operated guns had a maximum range of 19 @,@ 750 meters ( 21 @,@ 600 yd ) at an elevation of + 35 ° and fired at a rate up to 10 rounds per minute . The ships ' anti @-@ aircraft defenses consisted of four single 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ centimeter 10th Year Type anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted around the single funnel . Each of these guns had a maximum elevation of + 75 ° and a maximum rate of fire of 10 – 11 rounds per minute . They could fire a 20 @.@ 41 @-@ kilogram ( 45 @.@ 0 lb ) projectile with a muzzle velocity of 825 – 830 m / s ( 2 @,@ 710 – 2 @,@ 720 ft / s ) to a maximum height of 10 @,@ 000 meters ( 32 @,@ 808 ft ) . The Kii class was also fitted with eight 61 @-@ centimeter ( 24 in ) above @-@ water torpedo tubes , four on each broadside . 
 The ships would have been protected by a waterline belt of armor 293 millimeters ( 12 in ) thick , sloped 15 ° outwards at the top to increase its ability to resist penetration at short range . The belt armor was designed to be able to defeat 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells from a distance of 12 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 yd ) . The main battery turrets and barbettes would have had between 280 – 229 millimeters ( 11 – 9 in ) of armor plating , and the conning tower would have had been protected by armor 356 millimeters ( 14 in ) thick . The decks would have been 120 millimeters ( 5 in ) thick . The Kii @-@ class battleships would have had a torpedo bulkhead 75 millimeters ( 3 in ) thick , which connected at the top to a 38 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) splinter deck beneath the main deck . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Two ships were ordered on 12 October 1921 , and two more were ordered later that year . Kii was allocated to Kure Naval Arsenal , Kure , with a projected completion date of November 1923 , and Owari was allocated to the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal , Yokosuka , with completion in September . Two more unnamed ships , Numbers 11 and 12 , were assigned to Kawasaki in Kobe and Mitsubishi in Nagasaki , respectively . The ships ' keel laying was stopped on 5 February because the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty that forbade the construction of all battleships over 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) . Numbers 11 and 12 were formally canceled on 19 November 1923 ; Kii and Owari followed on 14 April 1924 . 
 = Alzheimer 's disease = 
 Alzheimer 's disease ( AD ) , also known as just Alzheimer 's , is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that usually starts slowly and gets worse over time . It is the cause of 60 % to 70 % of cases of dementia . The most common early symptom is difficulty in remembering recent events ( short @-@ term memory loss ) . As the disease advances , symptoms can include problems with language , disorientation ( including easily getting lost ) , mood swings , loss of motivation , not managing self care , and behavioural issues . As a person 's condition declines , they often withdraw from family and society . Gradually , bodily functions are lost , ultimately leading to death . Although the speed of progression can vary , the average life expectancy following diagnosis is three to nine years . 
 The cause of Alzheimer 's disease is poorly understood . About 70 % of the risk is believed to be genetic with many genes usually involved . Other risk factors include a history of head injuries , depression , or hypertension . The disease process is associated with plaques and tangles in the brain . A probable diagnosis is based on the history of the illness and cognitive testing with medical imaging and blood tests to rule out other possible causes . Initial symptoms are often mistaken for normal aging . Examination of brain tissue is needed for a definite diagnosis . Mental and physical exercise , and avoiding obesity may decrease the risk of AD . There are no medications or supplements that decrease risk . 
 No treatments stop or reverse its progression , though some may temporarily improve symptoms . Affected people increasingly rely on others for assistance , often placing a burden on the caregiver ; the pressures can include social , psychological , physical , and economic elements . Exercise programmes are beneficial with respect to activities of daily living and can potentially improve outcomes . Treatment of behavioural problems or psychosis due to dementia with antipsychotics is common but not usually recommended due to there often being little benefit and an increased risk of early death . 
 In 2015 , there were approximately 48 million people worldwide with AD . It most often begins in people over 65 years of age , although 4 % to 5 % of cases are early @-@ onset Alzheimer 's which begin before this . It affects about 6 % of people 65 years and older . In 2010 , dementia resulted in about 486 @,@ 000 deaths . It was first described by , and later named after , German psychiatrist and pathologist Alois Alzheimer in 1906 . In developed countries , AD is one of the most financially costly diseases . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The disease course is divided into four stages , with a progressive pattern of cognitive and functional impairment . 
 = = = Pre @-@ dementia = = = 
 The first symptoms are often mistakenly attributed to ageing or stress . Detailed neuropsychological testing can reveal mild cognitive difficulties up to eight years before a person fulfills the clinical criteria for diagnosis of AD . These early symptoms can affect the most complex activities of daily living . The most noticeable deficit is short term memory loss , which shows up as difficulty in remembering recently learned facts and inability to acquire new information . 
 Subtle problems with the executive functions of attentiveness , planning , flexibility , and abstract thinking , or impairments in semantic memory ( memory of meanings , and concept relationships ) can also be symptomatic of the early stages of AD . Apathy can be observed at this stage , and remains the most persistent neuropsychiatric symptom throughout the course of the disease . Depressive symptoms , irritability and reduced awareness of subtle memory difficulties are also common . The preclinical stage of the disease has also been termed mild cognitive impairment ( MCI ) . This is often found to be a transitional stage between normal ageing and dementia . MCI can present with a variety of symptoms , and when memory loss is the predominant symptom , it is termed " <unk> MCI " and is frequently seen as a prodromal stage of Alzheimer 's disease . 
 = = = Early = = = 
 In people with AD , the increasing impairment of learning and memory eventually leads to a definitive diagnosis . In a small percentage , difficulties with language , executive functions , perception ( agnosia ) , or execution of movements ( apraxia ) are more prominent than memory problems . AD does not affect all memory capacities equally . Older memories of the person 's life ( episodic memory ) , facts learned ( semantic memory ) , and implicit memory ( the memory of the body on how to do things , such as using a fork to eat ) are affected to a lesser degree than new facts or memories . 
 Language problems are mainly characterised by a shrinking vocabulary and decreased word fluency , leading to a general impoverishment of oral and written language . In this stage , the person with Alzheimer 's is usually capable of communicating basic ideas adequately . While performing fine motor tasks such as writing , drawing or dressing , certain movement coordination and planning difficulties ( apraxia ) may be present , but they are commonly unnoticed . As the disease progresses , people with AD can often continue to perform many tasks independently , but may need assistance or supervision with the most cognitively demanding activities . 
 = = = Moderate = = = 
 Progressive deterioration eventually hinders independence , with subjects being unable to perform most common activities of daily living . Speech difficulties become evident due to an inability to recall vocabulary , which leads to frequent incorrect word substitutions ( <unk> ) . Reading and writing skills are also progressively lost . Complex motor sequences become less coordinated as time passes and AD progresses , so the risk of falling increases . During this phase , memory problems worsen , and the person may fail to recognise close relatives . Long @-@ term memory , which was previously intact , becomes impaired . 
 Behavioural and neuropsychiatric changes become more prevalent . Common manifestations are wandering , irritability and labile affect , leading to crying , outbursts of unpremeditated aggression , or resistance to caregiving . <unk> can also appear . Approximately 30 % of people with AD develop illusionary misidentifications and other delusional symptoms . Subjects also lose insight of their disease process and limitations ( anosognosia ) . Urinary incontinence can develop . These symptoms create stress for relatives and carers , which can be reduced by moving the person from home care to other long @-@ term care facilities . 
 = = = Advanced = = = 
 During the final stages , the patient is completely dependent upon caregivers . Language is reduced to simple phrases or even single words , eventually leading to complete loss of speech . Despite the loss of verbal language abilities , people can often understand and return emotional signals . Although aggressiveness can still be present , extreme apathy and exhaustion are much more common symptoms . People with Alzheimer 's disease will ultimately not be able to perform even the simplest tasks independently ; muscle mass and mobility deteriorate to the point where they are bedridden and unable to feed themselves . The cause of death is usually an external factor , such as infection of pressure ulcers or pneumonia , not the disease itself . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The cause for most Alzheimer 's cases is still mostly unknown except for 1 % to 5 % of cases where genetic differences have been identified . 
 Several competing hypotheses exist trying to explain the cause of the disease : 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 The genetic heritability of Alzheimer 's disease ( and memory components thereof ) , based on reviews of twin and family studies , range from 49 % to 79 % . Around 0 @.@ 1 % of the cases are familial forms of autosomal ( not sex @-@ linked ) dominant inheritance , which have an onset before age 65 . This form of the disease is known as early onset familial Alzheimer 's disease . Most of autosomal dominant familial AD can be attributed to mutations in one of three genes : those encoding amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) and <unk> 1 and 2 . Most mutations in the APP and presenilin genes increase the production of a small protein called Aβ42 , which is the main component of senile plaques . Some of the mutations merely alter the ratio between Aβ42 and the other major forms — particularly <unk> — without increasing Aβ42 levels . This suggests that presenilin mutations can cause disease even if they lower the total amount of Aβ produced and may point to other roles of presenilin or a role for alterations in the function of APP and / or its fragments other than Aβ . There exist variants of the APP gene which are protective . 
 Most cases of Alzheimer 's disease do not exhibit autosomal @-@ dominant inheritance and are termed sporadic AD , in which environmental and genetic differences may act as risk factors . The best known genetic risk factor is the inheritance of the <unk> allele of the apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) . Between 40 and 80 % of people with AD possess at least one APOEε4 allele . The APOEε4 allele increases the risk of the disease by three times in heterozygotes and by 15 times in homozygotes . Like many human diseases , environmental effects and genetic modifiers result in incomplete penetrance . For example , certain Nigerian populations do not show the relationship between dose of APOEε4 and incidence or age @-@ of @-@ onset for Alzheimer 's disease seen in other human populations . Early attempts to screen up to 400 candidate genes for association with late @-@ onset sporadic AD ( LOAD ) resulted in a low yield . More recent genome @-@ wide association studies ( GWAS ) have found 19 areas in genes that appear to affect the risk . These genes include : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , HLA @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , CLU , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Mutations in the <unk> gene have been associated with a 3 to 5 times higher risk of developing Alzheimer 's disease . A suggested mechanism of action is that when <unk> is mutated , white blood cells in the brain are no longer able to control the amount of beta amyloid present . 
 = = = <unk> hypothesis = = = 
 The oldest , on which most currently available drug therapies are based , is the cholinergic hypothesis , which proposes that AD is caused by reduced synthesis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine . The cholinergic hypothesis has not maintained widespread support , largely because medications intended to treat acetylcholine deficiency have not been very effective . Other cholinergic effects have also been proposed , for example , initiation of large @-@ scale aggregation of amyloid , leading to generalised <unk> . 
 = = = Amyloid hypothesis = = = 
 In 1991 , the amyloid hypothesis postulated that extracellular amyloid beta ( Aβ ) deposits are the fundamental cause of the disease . Support for this postulate comes from the location of the gene for the amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) on chromosome 21 , together with the fact that people with <unk> 21 ( Down Syndrome ) who have an extra gene copy almost universally exhibit at least the earliest symptoms of AD by 40 years of age . Also , a specific isoform of apolipoprotein , <unk> , is a major genetic risk factor for AD . Whilst <unk> enhance the breakdown of beta amyloid , some isoforms are not very effective at this task ( such as <unk> ) , leading to excess amyloid buildup in the brain . Further evidence comes from the finding that transgenic mice that express a mutant form of the human APP gene develop fibrillar amyloid plaques and Alzheimer 's @-@ like brain pathology with spatial learning deficits . 
 An experimental vaccine was found to clear the amyloid plaques in early human trials , but it did not have any significant effect on dementia . Researchers have been led to suspect non @-@ plaque Aβ oligomers ( aggregates of many monomers ) as the primary pathogenic form of Aβ . These toxic oligomers , also referred to as amyloid @-@ derived <unk> ligands ( <unk> ) , bind to a surface receptor on neurons and change the structure of the synapse , thereby disrupting neuronal communication . One receptor for Aβ oligomers may be the prion protein , the same protein that has been linked to mad cow disease and the related human condition , Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease , thus potentially linking the underlying mechanism of these neurodegenerative disorders with that of Alzheimer 's disease . One study found possible evidence of human to human transmission . 
 In 2009 , this theory was updated , suggesting that a close relative of the beta @-@ amyloid protein , and not necessarily the beta @-@ amyloid itself , may be a major culprit in the disease . The theory holds that an amyloid @-@ related mechanism that prunes neuronal connections in the brain in the fast @-@ growth phase of early life may be triggered by ageing @-@ related processes in later life to cause the neuronal withering of Alzheimer 's disease . N @-@ APP , a fragment of APP from the peptide 's N @-@ terminus , is adjacent to beta @-@ amyloid and is cleaved from APP by one of the same enzymes . N @-@ APP triggers the self @-@ destruct pathway by binding to a neuronal receptor called death receptor 6 ( DR6 , also known as <unk> ) . DR6 is highly expressed in the human brain regions most affected by Alzheimer 's , so it is possible that the N @-@ APP / DR6 pathway might be hijacked in the ageing brain to cause damage . In this model , beta @-@ amyloid plays a complementary role , by depressing synaptic function . 
 = = = Tau hypothesis = = = 
 The tau hypothesis proposes that tau protein abnormalities initiate the disease cascade . In this model , hyperphosphorylated tau begins to pair with other threads of tau . Eventually , they form neurofibrillary tangles inside nerve cell bodies . When this occurs , the microtubules disintegrate , destroying the structure of the cell 's cytoskeleton which collapses the neuron 's transport system . This may result first in malfunctions in biochemical communication between neurons and later in the death of the cells . 
 = = = Other hypotheses = = = 
 A neurovascular hypothesis has been proposed which state that poor functioning of the blood brain barrier may be involved . 
 The cellular homeostasis of <unk> such as ionic copper , iron , and zinc is disrupted in AD , though it remains unclear whether this is produced by or causes the changes in proteins . These ions affect and are affected by tau , APP , and APOE , and their dysregulation may cause oxidative stress that may contribute to the pathology . Some studies have shown an increased risk of developing AD with environmental factors such as the intake of metals , particularly aluminium . The quality of some of these studies has been criticised , and the link remains controversial . The majority of researchers do not support a causal connection with aluminium . 
 Smoking is a significant AD risk factor . Systemic markers of the innate immune system are risk factors for late @-@ onset AD . 
 There is tentative evidence that exposure to air pollution may be a contributing factor to the development of Alzheimer 's disease . 
 An infection with <unk> ( a bacterium ) in gum disease may cause dementia and may be involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer 's disease . 
 <unk> is a medical hypothesis about the development and progress of Alzheimer 's disease proposed by Barry <unk> in the 1980s . The hypothesis is that just as the fetus goes through a process of <unk> beginning with <unk> and ending with <unk> , the brains of people with AD go through a reverse neurodegeneration process starting with demyelination and death of axons ( white matter ) and ending with the death of gray matter . Likewise the hypothesis is , that as infants go through states of cognitive development , people with AD go through the reverse process of progressive cognitive impairment . <unk> developed the caregiving assessment tool known as " FAST " ( Functional Assessment Staging Tool ) which he says allows those caring for AD patients to identify the stages of disease progression and that provides advice about the kind of care needed at each stage . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 = = = Neuropathology = = = 
 Alzheimer 's disease is characterised by loss of neurons and synapses in the cerebral cortex and certain subcortical regions . This loss results in gross atrophy of the affected regions , including degeneration in the temporal lobe and parietal lobe , and parts of the frontal cortex and cingulate gyrus . Degeneration is also present in brainstem nuclei like the locus coeruleus . Studies using MRI and PET have documented reductions in the size of specific brain regions in people with AD as they progressed from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer 's disease , and in comparison with similar images from healthy older adults . 
 Both amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are clearly visible by microscopy in brains of those afflicted by AD . Plaques are dense , mostly insoluble deposits of beta @-@ amyloid peptide and cellular material outside and around neurons . Tangles ( neurofibrillary tangles ) are aggregates of the microtubule @-@ associated protein tau which has become hyperphosphorylated and accumulate inside the cells themselves . Although many older individuals develop some plaques and tangles as a consequence of ageing , the brains of people with AD have a greater number of them in specific brain regions such as the temporal lobe . Lewy bodies are not rare in the brains of people with AD . 
 = = = Biochemistry = = = 
 Alzheimer 's disease has been identified as a protein misfolding disease ( <unk> ) , caused by plaque accumulation of abnormally folded amyloid beta protein , and tau protein in the brain . Plaques are made up of small peptides , 39 – 43 amino acids in length , called amyloid beta ( Aβ ) . Aβ is a fragment from the larger amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) . APP is a transmembrane protein that penetrates through the neuron 's membrane . APP is critical to neuron growth , survival , and post @-@ injury repair . In Alzheimer 's disease , gamma <unk> and beta <unk> act together in a proteolytic process which causes APP to be divided into smaller fragments . One of these fragments gives rise to fibrils of amyloid beta , which then form clumps that deposit outside neurons in dense formations known as senile plaques . 
 AD is also considered a <unk> due to abnormal aggregation of the tau protein . Every neuron has a cytoskeleton , an internal support structure partly made up of structures called microtubules . These microtubules act like tracks , guiding nutrients and molecules from the body of the cell to the ends of the axon and back . A protein called tau stabilises the microtubules when phosphorylated , and is therefore called a microtubule @-@ associated protein . In AD , tau undergoes chemical changes , becoming hyperphosphorylated ; it then begins to pair with other threads , creating neurofibrillary tangles and disintegrating the neuron 's transport system . 
 = = = Disease mechanism = = = 
 Exactly how disturbances of production and aggregation of the beta @-@ amyloid peptide give rise to the pathology of AD is not known . The amyloid hypothesis traditionally points to the accumulation of beta @-@ amyloid peptides as the central event triggering neuron degeneration . Accumulation of aggregated amyloid fibrils , which are believed to be the toxic form of the protein responsible for disrupting the cell 's calcium ion homeostasis , induces programmed cell death ( apoptosis ) . It is also known that Aβ selectively builds up in the mitochondria in the cells of Alzheimer 's @-@ affected brains , and it also inhibits certain enzyme functions and the utilisation of glucose by neurons . 
 Various inflammatory processes and cytokines may also have a role in the pathology of Alzheimer 's disease . Inflammation is a general marker of tissue damage in any disease , and may be either secondary to tissue damage in AD or a marker of an immunological response . There is increasing evidence of a strong interaction between the neurons and the immunological mechanisms in the brain . Obesity and systemic inflammation may interfere with immunological processes which promote disease progression . 
 Alterations in the distribution of different neurotrophic factors and in the expression of their receptors such as the brain @-@ derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) have been described in AD . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Alzheimer 's disease is usually diagnosed based on the person 's medical history , history from relatives , and behavioural observations . The presence of characteristic neurological and neuropsychological features and the absence of alternative conditions is supportive . Advanced medical imaging with computed tomography ( CT ) or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , and with single @-@ photon emission computed tomography ( SPECT ) or positron emission tomography ( PET ) can be used to help exclude other cerebral pathology or subtypes of dementia . Moreover , it may predict conversion from prodromal stages ( mild cognitive impairment ) to Alzheimer 's disease . 
 Assessment of intellectual functioning including memory testing can further characterise the state of the disease . Medical organisations have created diagnostic criteria to ease and standardise the diagnostic process for practising physicians . The diagnosis can be confirmed with very high accuracy post @-@ mortem when brain material is available and can be examined histologically . 
 = = = Criteria = = = 
 The National Institute of Neurological and <unk> Disorders and Stroke ( NINCDS ) and the Alzheimer 's Disease and Related Disorders Association ( ADRDA , now known as the Alzheimer 's Association ) established the most commonly used NINCDS @-@ ADRDA Alzheimer 's Criteria for diagnosis in 1984 , extensively updated in 2007 . These criteria require that the presence of cognitive impairment , and a suspected dementia syndrome , be confirmed by neuropsychological testing for a clinical diagnosis of possible or probable AD . A histopathologic confirmation including a microscopic examination of brain tissue is required for a definitive diagnosis . Good statistical reliability and validity have been shown between the diagnostic criteria and definitive <unk> confirmation . Eight cognitive domains are most commonly impaired in AD — memory , language , perceptual skills , attention , constructive abilities , orientation , problem solving and functional abilities . These domains are equivalent to the NINCDS @-@ ADRDA Alzheimer 's Criteria as listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR ) published by the American Psychiatric Association . 
 = = = Techniques = = = 
 Neuropsychological tests such as the mini – mental state examination ( MMSE ) are widely used to evaluate the cognitive impairments needed for diagnosis . More comprehensive test arrays are necessary for high reliability of results , particularly in the earliest stages of the disease . Neurological examination in early AD will usually provide normal results , except for obvious cognitive impairment , which may not differ from that resulting from other diseases processes , including other causes of dementia . 
 Further neurological examinations are crucial in the differential diagnosis of AD and other diseases . Interviews with family members are also utilised in the assessment of the disease . Caregivers can supply important information on the daily living abilities , as well as on the decrease , over time , of the person 's mental function . A caregiver 's viewpoint is particularly important , since a person with AD is commonly unaware of his own deficits . Many times , families also have difficulties in the detection of initial dementia symptoms and may not communicate accurate information to a physician . 
 Supplemental testing provides extra information on some features of the disease or is used to rule out other diagnoses . Blood tests can identify other causes for dementia than AD — causes which may , in rare cases , be reversible . It is common to perform thyroid function tests , assess B12 , rule out syphilis , rule out metabolic problems ( including tests for kidney function , electrolyte levels and for diabetes ) , assess levels of heavy metals ( e.g. lead , mercury ) and anaemia . ( It is also necessary to rule out delirium ) . 
 Psychological tests for depression are employed , since depression can either be concurrent with AD ( see Depression of Alzheimer disease ) , an early sign of cognitive impairment , or even the cause . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 At present , there is no definitive evidence to support that any particular measure is effective in preventing AD . Global studies of measures to prevent or delay the onset of AD have often produced inconsistent results . Epidemiological studies have proposed relationships between certain modifiable factors , such as diet , cardiovascular risk , pharmaceutical products , or intellectual activities among others , and a population 's likelihood of developing AD . Only further research , including clinical trials , will reveal whether these factors can help to prevent AD . 
 = = = Medication = = = 
 Although cardiovascular risk factors , such as hypercholesterolaemia , hypertension , diabetes , and smoking , are associated with a higher risk of onset and course of AD , statins , which are cholesterol lowering drugs , have not been effective in preventing or improving the course of the disease . 
 Long @-@ term usage of non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) is associated with a reduced likelihood of developing AD . Evidence also support the notion that NSAIDs can reduce inflammation related to amyloid plaques . No prevention trial has been completed . They do not appear to be useful as a treatment . Hormone replacement therapy , although previously used , may increase the risk of dementia . 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 People who engage in intellectual activities such as reading , playing board games , completing crossword puzzles , playing musical instruments , or regular social interaction show a reduced risk for Alzheimer 's disease . This is compatible with the cognitive reserve theory , which states that some life experiences result in more efficient neural functioning providing the individual a cognitive reserve that delays the onset of dementia manifestations . Education delays the onset of AD syndrome , but is not related to earlier death after diagnosis . Learning a second language even later in life seems to delay getting Alzheimer disease . Physical activity is also associated with a reduced risk of AD . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 People who eat a healthy , Japanese , or Mediterranean diet have a lower risk of AD . A Mediterranean diet may improve outcomes in those with the disease . Those who eat a diet high in saturated fats and simple carbohydrates ( mono- and disaccharide ) have a higher risk . The Mediterranean diet 's beneficial cardiovascular effect has been proposed as the mechanism of action . 
 Conclusions on dietary components have at times been difficult to ascertain as results have differed between population @-@ based studies and randomised controlled trials . There is limited evidence that light to moderate use of alcohol , particularly red wine , is associated with lower risk of AD . There is tentative evidence that caffeine may be protective . A number of foods high in flavonoids such as cocoa , red wine , and tea may decrease the risk of AD . 
 Reviews on the use of vitamins and minerals have not found enough consistent evidence to recommend them . This includes vitamin A , C , E , selenium , zinc , and folic acid with or without vitamin B12 . Additionally vitamin E is associated with health risks . Trials examining folic acid ( B9 ) and other B vitamins failed to show any significant association with cognitive decline . In those already affected with AD adding docosahexaenoic acid , an omega @-@ 3 fatty acid , to the diet has not been found to slow decline . 
 <unk> as of 2010 has not shown benefit in people even though there is tentative evidence in animals . There is inconsistent and unconvincing evidence that ginkgo has any positive effect on cognitive impairment and dementia . As of 2008 there is no concrete evidence that cannabinoids are effective in improving the symptoms of AD or dementia ; however , some research looks promising . 
 = = Management = = 
 There is no cure for Alzheimer 's disease ; available treatments offer relatively small symptomatic benefit but remain palliative in nature . Current treatments can be divided into pharmaceutical , psychosocial and caregiving . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 Five medications are currently used to treat the cognitive problems of AD : four are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors ( <unk> , <unk> , galantamine and donepezil ) and the other ( memantine ) is an NMDA receptor antagonist . The benefit from their use is small . No medication has been clearly shown to delay or halt the progression of the disease . 
 Reduction in the activity of the cholinergic neurons is a well @-@ known feature of Alzheimer 's disease . <unk> inhibitors are employed to reduce the rate at which acetylcholine ( ACh ) is broken down , thereby increasing the concentration of ACh in the brain and combating the loss of ACh caused by the death of cholinergic neurons . There is evidence for the efficacy of these medications in mild to moderate Alzheimer 's disease , and some evidence for their use in the advanced stage . Only donepezil is approved for treatment of advanced AD dementia . The use of these drugs in mild cognitive impairment has not shown any effect in a delay of the onset of AD . The most common side effects are nausea and vomiting , both of which are linked to cholinergic excess . These side effects arise in approximately 10 – 20 % of users , are mild to moderate in severity , and can be managed by slowly adjusting medication doses . Less common secondary effects include muscle cramps , decreased heart rate ( bradycardia ) , decreased appetite and weight , and increased gastric acid production . 
 <unk> is a useful excitatory neurotransmitter of the nervous system , although excessive amounts in the brain can lead to cell death through a process called excitotoxicity which consists of the overstimulation of glutamate receptors . <unk> occurs not only in Alzheimer 's disease , but also in other neurological diseases such as Parkinson 's disease and multiple sclerosis . Memantine is a noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist first used as an anti @-@ influenza agent . It acts on the glutamatergic system by blocking NMDA receptors and inhibiting their overstimulation by glutamate . Memantine has been shown to have a small benefit in the treatment of Alzheimer 's disease . Reported adverse events with memantine are infrequent and mild , including hallucinations , confusion , dizziness , headache and fatigue . The combination of memantine and donepezil has been shown to be " of statistically significant but clinically marginal effectiveness " . 
 Atypical antipsychotics are modestly useful in reducing aggression and psychosis in people with Alzheimer 's disease , but their advantages are offset by serious adverse effects , such as stroke , movement difficulties or cognitive decline . When used in the long @-@ term , they have been shown to associate with increased mortality . Stopping antipsychotic use in this group of people appears to be safe . 
 <unk> A while promising , requires further evidence before it use can be recommended . 
 = = = Psychosocial intervention = = = 
 Psychosocial interventions are used as an adjunct to pharmaceutical treatment and can be classified within <unk> , <unk> , <unk> or stimulation @-@ oriented approaches . Research on efficacy is unavailable and rarely specific to AD , focusing instead on dementia in general . 
 Behavioural interventions attempt to identify and reduce the antecedents and consequences of problem behaviours . This approach has not shown success in improving overall functioning , but can help to reduce some specific problem behaviours , such as incontinence . There is a lack of high quality data on the effectiveness of these techniques in other behaviour problems such as wandering . 
 Emotion @-@ oriented interventions include reminiscence therapy , validation therapy , supportive psychotherapy , sensory integration , also called <unk> , and simulated presence therapy . Supportive psychotherapy has received little or no formal scientific study , but some clinicians find it useful in helping mildly impaired people adjust to their illness . Reminiscence therapy ( RT ) involves the discussion of past experiences individually or in group , many times with the aid of photographs , household items , music and sound recordings , or other familiar items from the past . Although there are few quality studies on the effectiveness of RT , it may be beneficial for cognition and mood . Simulated presence therapy ( SPT ) is based on attachment theories and involves playing a recording with voices of the closest relatives of the person with Alzheimer 's disease . There is partial evidence indicating that SPT may reduce challenging behaviours . Finally , validation therapy is based on acceptance of the reality and personal truth of another 's experience , while sensory integration is based on exercises aimed to stimulate senses . There is no evidence to support the usefulness of these therapies . 
 The aim of cognition @-@ oriented treatments , which include reality orientation and cognitive retraining , is the reduction of cognitive deficits . Reality orientation consists in the presentation of information about time , place or person to ease the understanding of the person about its surroundings and his or her place in them . On the other hand , cognitive retraining tries to improve impaired capacities by <unk> of mental abilities . Both have shown some efficacy improving cognitive capacities , although in some studies these effects were transient and negative effects , such as frustration , have also been reported . 
 Stimulation @-@ oriented treatments include art , music and pet therapies , exercise , and any other kind of recreational activities . Stimulation has modest support for improving behaviour , mood , and , to a lesser extent , function . Nevertheless , as important as these effects are , the main support for the use of stimulation therapies is the change in the person 's routine . 
 = = = Caregiving = = = 
 Since Alzheimer 's has no cure and it gradually renders people incapable of tending for their own needs , caregiving essentially is the treatment and must be carefully managed over the course of the disease . 
 During the early and moderate stages , modifications to the living environment and lifestyle can increase patient safety and reduce caretaker burden . Examples of such modifications are the adherence to simplified routines , the placing of safety locks , the labelling of household items to cue the person with the disease or the use of modified daily life objects . If eating becomes problematic , food will need to be prepared in smaller pieces or even pureed . When swallowing difficulties arise , the use of feeding tubes may be required . In such cases , the medical efficacy and ethics of continuing feeding is an important consideration of the caregivers and family members . The use of physical restraints is rarely indicated in any stage of the disease , although there are situations when they are necessary to prevent harm to the person with AD or their caregivers . 
 As the disease progresses , different medical issues can appear , such as oral and dental disease , pressure ulcers , malnutrition , hygiene problems , or respiratory , skin , or eye infections . Careful management can prevent them , while professional treatment is needed when they do arise . During the final stages of the disease , treatment is centred on relieving discomfort until death , often with the help of hospice . 
 = = = Feeding tubes = = = 
 People with Alzheimer 's disease ( and other forms of dementia ) often develop problems with eating , due to difficulties in swallowing , reduced appetite or the inability to recognise food . Their carers and families often request they have some form of feeding tube . However , there is no evidence that this helps people with advanced Alzheimer 's to gain weight , regain strength or improve their quality of life . In fact , their use might carry an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia , use of physical restraints , and increased risk of pressure ulcers . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
