 When Bonaparte learned that Ganteaume was anchored in Toulon rather than off the Egyptian coast , he was furious and ordered the squadron to return to sea and complete its mission as ordered . His anger was amplified by the news that the frigate Africaine , despatched from Rochefort with the same orders to resupply Egypt , had been captured at the Action of 19 February 1801 by the British frigate HMS Phoebe in the Western Mediterranean . To emphasise his instructions , Bonaparte sent General Jean @-@ Gérard <unk> to deliver them in person . Ganteaume was ordered to sail to Alexandria immediately , and if the Egyptian port was under attack by British forces , the troops were to be landed anywhere practical between Cape <unk> and Tripoli and make their way to Alexandria overland . Ganteaume sailed on 19 March , as soon as <unk> had delivered the orders , with seven ships of the line , three frigates and three merchant ships carrying supplies . 
 Within hours of departing from Toulon , the squadron was struck by a heavy gale . One of the ships of the line lost its mainmast and turned back for Toulon , and the remainder of the force was scattered . The British blockade force sighted the disparate squadron on the following morning and although the French escaped pursuit , HMS Minerve succeeded in capturing one of the isolated merchant vessels . By 25 March , all but three of Ganteaume 's ships had been recovered and the force was limping southwards through the Tyrrhenian Sea when it ran directly into Warren 's squadron as it returned from Sicily . Ganteaume turned southeastwards to escape and Warren gave chase , the faster vessels in his squadron gaining on the French but the slower ships , particularly HMS Gibraltar and HMS <unk> , falling far behind . Concerned that this placed his squadron in danger of becoming separated during the night , Warren ordered his faster ships to slow down and gradually lost sight of the French during the evening . Ganteaume took advantage of the respite to turn northwards in the darkness , and once again returned to Toulon . 
 = = Third expedition = = 
 When news reached Bonaparte that Ganteaume had returned to Toulon for a second time , he once again issued orders for the admiral to go to sea and fulfill his original orders to resupply the Egyptian garrison . On 27 April , the French force sailed for the third time , with seven ships of the line , two frigates , a corvette and two storeships . Before sailing to Egypt Ganteaume first cruised off Elba in the Ligurian Sea , achieving regional superiority long enough that a force was able to cross to the island from Piombino , rapidly subduing all but the fortress of Porto Ferrajo , which was besieged . Ganteaume 's ships bombarded the fortress on 6 May , but an outbreak of typhus in the squadron significantly reduced its operational effectiveness . Ganteaume therefore divided his force , taking four ships with healthy crews south , while Formidable , Indomptable and Desaix , and the frigate Créole were all too undermanned to perform efficiently , and were sent back to Toulon . Having reorganised his force , Ganteaume passed through the Straits of Messina on 25 May . On 5 June off Brindisi , the squadron sighted and chased the British frigate HMS Pique under Captain James Young , which was able to effect an escape to Alexandria and warn Keith of Ganteaume 's approach . A planned rendezvous off Brindisi with three Neapolitan frigates did not occur , and by 7 June the squadron was close enough to Egypt for Ganteaume to send his corvette Héliopolis to investigate the situation at Alexandria . 
 On 9 June , Héliopolis reached the Egyptian coast and immediately came under pursuit from the British ships of the line HMS Kent and HMS Hector and a brig that had been detached from Lord Keith 's fleet the previous day . Under pressure , the captain of Héliopolis sought safety in Alexandria harbour , which was still in French hands , and became trapped there . Keith meanwhile , acting on the report of Captain Young who had arrived on 7 June , had turned the remainder of his ships to the west in search of Ganteaume . When the corvette did not return to his squadron , Ganteaume assumed that it had been captured and that a powerful enemy presence lay off the harbour . Believing that a landing in Egypt itself would be impossible , he searched for an alternative site , and determined that the soldiers aboard should be landed at Benghazi , a small town situated between Tripoli and Alexandria . On sighting the French the inhabitants formed a militia , their control of the available beaches rendering a landing impractical . Even as the French squadron dropped anchor off Benghazi , the first ships of Keith 's fleet appeared to the east . Ganteaume panicked and instructed his captains to cut their anchor cables and flee to the west . The two storeships , much slower than the rest of the squadron , were abandoned by the warships and were subsequently seized by the fast frigate HMS Vestal under Captain Valentine Collard . 
 Ganteaume 's surviving squadron gradually outran Keith 's pursuit and on 24 June was sailing off Cape Derna when a sail was sighted to the northeast . Ganteaume ordered his ships to pursue , and the strange ship was discovered to be the British ship of the line HMS Swiftsure under Captain Benjamin Hallowell , which had been despatched by Keith to warn Warren 's squadron that Ganteaume was in the Eastern Mediterranean . Although he attempted a series of increasingly desperate manoeuveres in his efforts to escape , Hallowell 's ship was in poor repair and under @-@ crewed and after a short exchange of fire , was forced to surrender . Without any warning , Warren was not able to intercept Ganteaume 's return , and the French squadron was able to reach Toulon unharmed on 22 July . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Heliopolis was the only one of Ganteaume 's ships to reach the Egyptian garrison , joining the frigate Régénérée and the corvette Lodi that had each made the passage independently and had arrived on 1 March . It was the last reinforcement for the Army of Egypt : without Ganteaume 's supplies and with the Royal Navy dominant in the Eastern Mediterranean , the French forces in Egypt were outnumbered by the British expeditionary force and defeated in a campaign during the summer of 1801 , surrendering at the Capitulation of Alexandria in August . Although he totally failed to achieve his primary objective , Ganteaume 's naval forces had significantly reinforced the battered French Mediterranean fleet : the ships that were detached at Elba in May were subsequently engaged at the Battles of Algeciras in July , at which another British ship of the line was captured but the Franco @-@ Spanish force suffered severe losses . 
 Although he was the subject of severe criticism by Bonaparte , historian William Laird Clowes , writing in 1900 , considered that Ganteaume had done well to prevent his squadron being overwhelmed by the British , particularly during the attempt to land at Benghazi when he almost suffered a repeat of the situation at the Nile in 1798 , with his ships anchored close inshore as a British fleet bore down on them . This precarious position , described by Clowes as a " mad idea " , was not one of Ganteaume 's choosing : it had been dictated by Bonaparte before he departed Toulon for the second time . Clowes considered that Ganteaume 's " caution was , after all , less dangerous to his country than the rash and infatuated naval strategy of his master " . Ganteaume did not hold another sea command , but was made commander of the Mediterranean and governor of Toulon following the Peace of Amiens in March 1802 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = Jackie Hudson = 
 Jacqueline Marie " Jackie " Hudson , O.P. , ( November 19 , 1934 – August 3 , 2011 ) was an American Dominican Sister and anti @-@ nuclear activist . She spent the first 29 years of her working career as a music teacher . After her retirement from education , she dedicated her life to anti @-@ war activism , during the course of which her actions led her to be arrested several times . In 2011 , after a decline in her health in prison , Hudson died from multiple myeloma at the age of 76 . 
 = = Early life , education , and career = = 
 Born in Saginaw , Michigan , she was the youngest of two children . Her father had studied in a seminary for a time and both her parents were very religious . Hudson was raised in the Roman Catholic faith and attended Catholic schools for her entire education . In 1952 , at the age of 18 , she decided to join the Dominican Sisters of Grand Rapids . 
 After her initial formation as a member of her religious congregation , Hudson was permitted to attend <unk> College of Music , concentrating in music and religious education . This led to a nearly three decade long career as a music teacher at a series of Roman Catholic junior high schools in Michigan , where she taught piano and band as well as vocal music . Throughout this time , she also sang in a musical group composed of other Dominican Sisters , known as the Mellow D ’ s . 
 = = Activism = = 
 After her retirement in the early 1980s , Hudson started to study the effects of nuclear bombs and radiation on the environment and people ; because of what she found , she subsequently focused her ministry on peace and protesting nuclear proliferation . In 1983 , she protested the introduction of nuclear cruise missiles to Michigan . In 1990 , she was arrested and imprisoned for 6 months for illegally accessing a bunker on Wurtsmith Air Force Base and painting " Christ lives , Disarm " on the side of it . Hudson had a strong belief that she was doing the right thing and living out her faith , and stated that " [ Jesus ] put life before the law . " In this , she was acting upon a determination by her congregation that the members were free to take social stands about which they felt deeply as individuals , without , however , representing the congregation . 
 Hudson moved to Bremerton , Washington , in 1993 where she joined a peace community involved in social justice issues . She became certified as a commercial driver and obtained a job driving a city bus in order to earn an income through which she both could support herself and meet her financial obligations to the congregation . 
 In 2000 , Hudson and two other Sisters of her congregation , Carol Gilbert , O.P. , and Ardeth Platte , O.P. , entered Peterson Air Force Base without authorization and sprinkled blood on a fighter plane . The trio was caught and arrested . They were then held in a federal prison until the charges were dropped because there was no lasting damage was done to the airplane . Gilbert claimed that the base was part of the " Star Wars " defense system and the government did not want to draw unnecessary attention to the area . In 2002 , the same group of nuns gained access to a Minuteman III missile silo in Colorado . Wearing white hazmat suits emblazoned with " Citizen Weapon Inspection Team , " they pounded on the missile , drew a cross in their own blood and prayed for peace . At their pre @-@ trial hearing , the Sisters , dressed in their religious habit , engaged in silent protest by only answering the judge with a nod . When their trial came about , the presiding judge , Robert E. Blackburn , granted an in limine motion to the prosecutor preventing the Sisters from arguing that their actions were legal under international law and the Nuremberg defense . The group was sentenced to between 31 and 40 months for obstructing national defense and damaging government property . The sister 's appeal was rejected in 2005 by the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals . 
 In 2010 , Hudson and 13 others illegally entered the grounds of Oak Ridge National Laboratory . She was incarcerated in a Georgia prison pending her sentence , but was allowed to go home in June 2011 due to a serious decline in her health . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Hudson died on August 3 , 2011 , at age 76 , at the Harrison Medical Center near her home in Poulsbo , Washington . She had suffered from pneumonia , but the cause of death was multiple myeloma . For 58 years , until her death , she was a member of the Dominican Order . In November 2011 , <unk> Rainey , an Occupy Seattle protester cited Hudson as her inspiration " to keep fighting the good fight , even in the winter years of her life . " 
 = California State Route 3 = 
 State Route 3 ( SR 3 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California . It runs from State Route 36 north along the shore of Trinity Lake , Fort Jones and Etna . The route approaches Yreka , intersecting with Interstate 5 , and turns east to Montague . The road was numbered SR 3 in 1964 , and most of it has been part of the state highway system since 1933 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 3 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System and is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System . Caltrans has subsequently designated it as a scenic highway for its entire length . 
 State Route 3 begins at the junction with State Route 36 south of the town of Peanut in Trinity County . SR @-@ 3 is also known as <unk> Road from its southern terminus to Hayfork . This stretch of road through the Shasta @-@ Trinity National Forest parallels the Hayfork River . Once SR @-@ 3 reaches the town of Hayfork , it travels along <unk> Road east and snakes through the mountains to Douglas City and the junction with State Route 299 . From there , SR 3 runs concurrently with SR 299 north to the town of Weaverville . 
 SR 3 then departs from SR 299 , providing access to the Whiskeytown @-@ Shasta @-@ Trinity National Recreation Area and Trinity Dam along Lewiston Lake . 
 SR 3 passes through the towns of Covington Mill , Trinity Center , and Wyntoon before paralleling the Trinity River and Trinity Mountains as Weaverville @-@ Scott Mountain Road and crossing the Scott Mountains and the Pacific Crest Trail at 5 @,@ 205 feet ( 1 @,@ 586 m ) into Siskiyou County . 
 In Siskiyou County , SR 3 passes through Callahan , Etna , <unk> , and Fort Jones as it turns northeast to intersect with Interstate 5 in Yreka . At this point , State Route 263 continues in the northerly direction towards State Route 96 ; SR 3 turns east to its northern terminus in the incorporated city of Montague . 
 = = History = = 
 The short piece from SR 36 north to Peanut was added to the state highway system in 1907 as part of the Peanut Road , which became Route 35 in 1917 . Route 35 was extended north from Peanut to Route 20 ( SR 299 ) near Douglas City in 1933 , and simultaneously a new Route 82 was created , running from Route 3 ( I @-@ 5 ) in the Yreka area southwest to Etna and east to Montague . The gap between Douglas City and Etna was filled in 1959 with an extension of Route 82 south to Route 20 near Weaverville ; at the same time , the portion between Weaverville and Yreka was added to the California Freeway and Expressway System , which identifies the main routes of transportation in the state of California . The State Route 3 designation was applied to the Peanut @-@ Montague roadway in the 1964 renumbering . The overlap with temporary I @-@ 5 ( along the portion where SR 3 runs concurrently with Interstate 5 today ) near Yreka was removed when the new I @-@ 5 bypass was built ; the legislative definition was updated to reflect this in 1974 , soon after the building of the bypass . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Evan Almighty = 
 Evan Almighty is a 2007 American comedy film and the stand @-@ alone sequel / spin @-@ off to Bruce Almighty ( 2003 ) . The film was directed by Tom Shadyac , written by Steve Oedekerk , based on the characters created by Steve Koren and Mark O 'Keefe from the original film , and starring Steve Carell , Morgan Freeman , Lauren Graham , John Goodman , John Michael Higgins , Jimmy Bennett and Wanda Sykes . 
 Production of the film began in January 2006 . Several visual effect companies were used to provide CGI for the numerous animals and the climactic flood scene . The main plot is a modern @-@ day retelling of Noah 's Ark . By the time the film had completed production , it had become the most expensive comedy film ever at the time ; it was later overtaken by Men in Black 3 . In October 2007 , the film was released on DVD and HD DVD . 
 The film grossed less than its budget of $ 175 million worldwide , and received generally negative reviews . Evan Almighty was also notable for allegations that the many animals used in the film were treated poorly , but Universal Pictures stressed the animals ' conditions were acceptable . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Newly elected to Congress , former local television news reporter Evan Baxter ( Steve Carell ) leaves his hometown of Buffalo , New York and moves to the fictional town of Prestige Crest , Virginia , where his congressional campaign officially declares that he will change the world . Evan prays to God ( Morgan Freeman ) to give him this opportunity . His wife , Joan ( Lauren Graham ) , also prays that she , Evan , and their three sons ( Jimmy Bennett , Graham Phillips , and Johnny Simmons ) will be closer together as a family . On the first day of his job at Congress , Evan is given a prime office space , where he is accompanied by his three congressional staffers , Rita , Marty , and Eugene ( Wanda Sykes , John Michael Higgins , and Jonah Hill ) , and invited to junior co @-@ sponsor the Public Land Act bill with his greedy boss , Chuck Long ( John Goodman ) . Soon after Evan 's election to Congress , six strange things start to happen around him : 
 The number 614 starts to appear everywhere he goes ( i.e. alarm clock , government license plate , Rita 's phone extension ) 
 Ancient tools and gopher wood are delivered to his house that he actually did not order . 
 A man claiming to be the Genesis God appears everywhere he goes . 
 Pairs of animals simply follow Evan without any apparent reason ( with birds even flying into his office through the window ) . 
 Evan grows a beard no matter how many times he shaves . 
 Eight vacant lots in Prestige Crest are purchased in his name . 
 Evan soon learns that 614 refers to the verse in the Book of Genesis , where God originally instructs Noah to build an Ark in preparation for a flood . God later repeatedly appears in various guises before finally revealing himself to Evan , and cordially insisting that he should also build an Ark as well . God explains to Evan that a flood is coming , and that the only opportunity Evan will have to change the world is by saving his community instead . God also tells Evan to inform others about the flood should they ask him later . Concerned about Evan 's behaviour , Joan initially believes that he is having a mid @-@ life crisis . Evan begins constructing the Ark with his sons , who start to admire him as he is spending more time with them . 
 Animals eventually follow Evan to Congress . When Long discovers this , he allows Evan latitude at first , but warns him that he will no longer tolerate it if it happens again in the future . Meanwhile , Evan 's staffers are outraged by his change of appearance and behavior . When Evan returns to the Ark during construction , God presents him with a robe , and later tells him that the flood will likely come at midday on September 22 . When Joan becomes suspicious of his behavior , Evan tells her the truth : God has been talking to him and is responsible for his new looks and recent actions , although Joan does not believe Evan and she is convinced that he is beginning to lose his mind . After wearing the robe for some time , Evan finds it comfortable , but soon realizes that God will not allow him to take it off and wear anything else after two failed attempts to change his clothes later . The next time Evan arrives at Congress for work , animals follow him once again and he is mysteriously changed into his robe midway during the session . Evan reluctantly explains his divine mission , but Long does not take him seriously , and Evan is suspended from Congress and removed from the Public Land Act bill . Evan deduces that God purposely had him suspended from Congress , so that he would have more time to build the Ark . In continued skepticism , Joan leaves Evan alone after believing that he is going insane . 
 Evan decides to build the Ark alone , gaining media attention and public ridicule , as hundreds of animals assemble in pairs . Meanwhile , God appears to Joan as a waiter at a diner . God listens to Joan as she expresses concern that Evan is only losing his sanity and allowing himself to become a laughing stock , though claiming that " God told him to do it " . Sympathetic toward Evan , God tells Joan that perhaps it is an only opportunity for them , and explains that he does not give things but only the opportunity by which to obtain things , citing togetherness of families as one of these things . Seeing God 's meaning , Joan returns to Evan with new @-@ found faith and continue helping him finish the Ark together in order to prepare for the flood . Meanwhile , Evan overhears from his staffers that Long has commissioned a dam and has cut corners in doing so , and that he will most likely do the same thing with his Public Land Act bill . 
 On September 22 , Evan loads hundreds of animals onto the Ark in front of hundreds of spectators and live news crews , who continue to mock him . Later , Long and the policemen arrive with a wrecking ball crew to try and destroy the Ark , since it violates numerous building codes in Prestige Crest . Minutes pass with no sign of rain , and while a heavy rainstorm does come , it passes within moments , leaving Evan himself humiliated . However , Evan connects Long 's profiteering ethics and what God had already told him , and realizes that the dam under Long Lake is preparing to burst . Evan warns to those present must board the Ark , and many have do so when the prophesied flood is triggered shortly after the dam burst . Prestige Crest is catastrophically destroyed , and the Ark later rides the flood through the streets and landmarks of Washington , D.C .. The Ark reaches its final destination in front of the Capitol , which disrupts the vote on the Public Land Act bill . Long becomes outraged that the flood did really happen . Evan informs Long that the flood was actually caused by his poor design of the dam , which prompts the other Congressmen also present to turn against Long . 
 After Congress suspends the Public Land Act bill to investigate Long 's profiteering ethics , and the animals return to their natural habitats , Evan is finally reinstated as a congressman , and celebrates this event by shaving his beard , changing back into his regular clothes , and going on a long @-@ promised hiking trip . When God reappears once again during the hike , Evan is initially disappointed in which he realizes he never needed to build the Ark since the flood had only happened because of Long 's defective dam . However , God reassures Evan that he now has a perfect life as well as everything that he had originally prayed for , and that this would not have happened otherwise . Evan is happy to realize this , and God informs him that the right way to change the world is by doing one Act of Random Kindness ( ARK ) at a time . During the film 's closing credits , God issues a new commandment to the outgoing audience : " Thou shalt do the dance " . This is later followed by a footage of the film 's cast and crew members dancing to C + C Music Factory 's hit song " Gonna Make You Sweat ( Everybody Dance Now ) " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Steve Carell as Evan Baxter 
 Morgan Freeman as God 
 Lauren Graham as Joan Baxter , Evan 's wife . 
 Johnny Simmons as Dylan Baxter 
 Jimmy Bennett as Ryan Baxter 
 Graham Phillips as Jordan Baxter 
 Wanda Sykes as Rita 
 John Michael Higgins as Marty 
 Jonah Hill as Eugene 
 John Goodman as Congressman Chuck Long , Evan 's greedy boss . 
 Molly Shannon as Eve Adams 
 Harve <unk> as Congressman Burrows 
 Jon Stewart as himself 
 Catherine Bell as Susan Ortega ( Uncredited ) 
 Dean Norris as Officer Collins 
 Maile Flanagan as Mail Carrier 
 Lisa Arch and Simon Helberg as staffers 
 David Barrera and Ed Helms as Ark reporters 
 Ruth Williamson as neighbor 
 Jim <unk> as neighbor 
 Michael Roper as Congressional Reporter 
 Emily Eby as Animal Wrangler 
 Bart the Bear 2 and Honey Bump as bears 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 The film 's screenplay was originally titled The Passion of the Ark and was written by Bobby Florsheim and Josh Stolberg . It became the subject of a seven @-@ studio bidding war in April 2004 . The script was sold to Sony Pictures in a deal worth $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 plus a percentage of the profits , a record for a spec script from previously unproduced writers . Universal Studios immediately made a deal to co @-@ produce the script with Sony and have Steve Oedekerk rewrite it into the sequel to Bruce Almighty . Steve Oedekerk had been involved with Bruce Almighty as an executive producer and co @-@ writer of the screenplay ( with Steve Koren and Mark O 'Keefe , who wrote the story ) . The studio later discarded the original The Passion of the Ark script completely , and Oedekerk fashioned a new script from scratch ( only he received final credit on the finished film as screenwriter ) . Jim Carrey was asked to reprise his role as Bruce in the sequel and , when he declined , director Tom Shadyac convinced Steve Carell to accept the leading role . Shadyac , reflecting on the first film , stated " [ Carell ] delivered some of the funniest stuff in the movie . We thought , ' Why not take that character and spin him off into a different film ? ' " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Jim Carrey declined to reprise his role from the original Bruce Almighty . Although Carrey did act in a sequel to Ace Ventura : Pet Detective , he has said that he is " not a big fan of doing the same character twice . " This marked the third time a sequel has been made to a film for which Carrey declined to reprise his role ; the first were Dumb and Dumberer and Son of the Mask . 
 = = = Budget = = = 
 The initial budget , at approximately $ 140 million , led Evan Almighty to become the most expensive comedy film ever made . Added costs such as set construction , visual effects , and problems with filming multiple animals in a controlled location brought the budget up to $ 175 million . Once marketing for the film was also included , the film 's entire budget was estimated to be around $ 200 million . The ballooning budget caused Sony to drop the project and hand it over entirely to Universal Studios . Part of the budget was Carell 's payroll , where he earned a reported $ 5 million for his leading role . The Virginia Film Office estimates the film brought $ 20 – 25 million to Virginia , with the majority of it in the Charlottesville area . 
 = = = Ark design and construction = = = 
 Construction of the ark began in January 2006 and the scenes involving the ark were shot in a Crozet , Virginia subdivision called Old Trail . The ark was designed to meet the actual measurements of the biblical ark , measuring 450 feet ( 137 m ) long , 80 feet ( 24 m ) wide , and 51 feet ( 16 m ) high . The ark 's layout was also based on pictures in several children 's books that crew members had read in their childhoods . When the characters were filmed during the day building the ark or were on location elsewhere , crew members would further construct the ark at night . A concrete base was built to support the weight of the large ark ; after filming was completed , the ark was taken down in a week , and the base in another week . 
 In disassembling the set , everything that was salvageable from the ark was donated to Habitat for Humanity . " Leave no trace " was the slogan used by the director as part of the DVD 's bonus features , " The Almighty Green Set " . 
 = = = Costumes and filming locations = = = 
 To create Evan 's beard and long hair , three designers would take three hours each day adding individual hairs using prosthetic adhesive and making Carell wear custom wigs . The wigs consisted of both human and yak hair . With his new look , Carell was sometimes nicknamed " Mountain Man " , " <unk> " , or " Unabomber . " For his costumes , designers spoke with textile experts , researched historical information on the clothing that was likely worn at the time of Noah , and used aged fibers for the clothing . 
 Scenes for the film were filmed in various locations in Virginia , including areas in and around Crozet , Waynesboro , Richmond , Charlottesville , and Staunton , though some filming did take place at Universal Studios in Hollywood , California . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 For the CGI used throughout the film , companies Rhythm & Hues ( R & H ) and Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) developed different parts of the film . R & H focused on the animation of the animals , while ILM completed the final scene of the ark rushing through Washington D.C. Lindy De Quattro , the ILM associate visual effects supervisor , revealed that " This is the first time where we had to do a whole series of shots that were happening mid @-@ day , where you were going to get a really long look at the water and what it was doing . " The company initially experienced problems creating the water effects and had to develop new tools which would choreograph the movements of the water . In addition , ILM used similar tools that were used on their prior film Poseidon . Lighting was also an issue as the characters on the ark had been filmed on a greenscreen stage , and the visual effects company had to ensure that the lighting matched that of the characters and the outside setting . Details were added to the ark for long @-@ distance shots to make the design of the ark more appealing and relate the ark 's size to scale in comparison to the amount of water . To complete the scene , ILM used thirty to sixty crew members and produced 200 shots over a yearlong period between April 2006 and May 2007 . 
 Rhythm & Hues created 300 pairs of animals for use on the ark and fifteen pairs with higher detail for closeup shots . R & H was also assisted by <unk> Hollywood , another visual effects company , who provided a large number of composites , involving hundreds of greenscreen animal elements . In scenes where there are multiple species of animals , crew members would film the animals on the greenscreen and R & H and <unk> would digitally add the animals one at a time , sometimes taking several weeks to a couple of months . Andy Arnett , the animation supervisor , declared that " The research was extensive . It took six or seven months to perfect the look and feel of the animals before we had the first shot out the door . " 
 For the scene in Congressman Long 's office , CGI was used the entire time for the fish that follow Evan around from the fish tank . Cafe FX , the visual effects company hired for the scene , ordered ten different kinds of tropical fish from a local store and studied their movements to imitate them on screen using computer animation . Jeff Goldman , the visual effects supervisor , stated " Early in the sequence , we mimicked the actual behavior of the fish in our animation , but as the scene plays out , the fish are a counterpoint to Steve Carell 's comedic timing . " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 In late May during production , the media learned that director Tom Shadyac angrily complained to producers , saying " I 'm not seeing any ads , and I don 't know why . I 'm not getting answers . People are giving me information that isn 't true ... I 'm only hearing about all the other summer movies , and nothing about mine . " Shadyac also fired his marketing consultants that he had used for prior films due to his thoughts over the mishandling of the marketing . He later apologized for his outburst with producers , and claimed that it was as a result of his nervousness before the film 's release . 
 Grace Hill Media , a marketing firm that targets religious Americans , held exclusive screenings of the film in mid @-@ June in fifty cities in the United States to reach religious moviegoers . The firm was also used for marketing Bruce Almighty , The Da Vinci Code , and The Passion of the Christ . Grace Hill provided free screenings to blogs in exchange for publicity on the blogs . The film and its subsequent home video release was marketed to Christians and their churches through a " kindness campaign " called Ark <unk> . 
 The first trailer of the film premiered on March 29 , 2007 for a marathon of The Office , which also stars Steve Carell and Ed Helms . For online advertising , an eight @-@ minute clip of a scene was released on Yahoo ! two days before the release of the film . The premiere for the film was held on June 10 , 2007 and guests included Adam Sandler , David Hasselhoff , Kate Flannery , Eddie Murphy , Kevin James , and Mindy Kaling , among others . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 Director Tom Shadyac felt the film reflected environmental themes of how humans are stewards of God 's creation . In keeping with the themes , Evan Almighty became NBC Universal 's first film to offset the production 's carbon emissions . Producer Michael Bostick revealed how the emissions were offset : 
 " We worked closely with The Conservation Fund to calculate our carbon emissions from what we used on the movie — whether from vehicles used or any of the construction equipment . Once our carbon emissions were calculated , we planted trees that will effectively zero out our climate @-@ changing footprint left behind from the movie . " 
 Shadyac accomplished this by requiring crew members to plant 2 @,@ 050 trees at the Rappahannock River Valley National Wildlife Refuge in Warsaw , Virginia and the San Joaquin River National Wildlife Refuge near Modesto , California . He also bought over 400 bikes for all the cast and crew , to get to work instead of driving . In addition , rather than simply demolishing sets , Shadyac tried to donate houses built for the production and had the Ark set recycled , by donating materials to Habitat for Humanity . During the premiere of the film for cast and crew at Universal <unk> , the attendees were encouraged to donate to a campaign to plant trees in forests around the world . The after party used recycled cups and plates to offset the use of resources . Shadyac also required that when Industrial Light & Magic developed the climactic scene , that the CGI flood did not appear to harm any of the trees in the scene . 
 The film partnered with the website Get On Board Now , which focused on the importance of conservation during production of the film . Donations were taken at the website for The Conservation Fund , which paid for the planting of 15 @,@ 000 trees . 
 = = Animal welfare = = 
 The American Humane Association oversaw the 177 species of animals that were used in the film . In scenes including both predators and prey , the animals were digitally added instead to ensure their safety . The American Humane Association gave its permission for the film to display " No animals were harmed in the making of this movie " over the closing credits . 
 Animal rights organization PETA accused the film 's producers of using animals that had previously been abused . Two chimpanzees who appear in the movie , Cody and Sable , were surrendered by their owner to settle a lawsuit that documented allegations of beatings and mistreatment . The film 's director , Tom Shadyac , said of PETA 's criticisms " They 're not wrong . There 's a certain amount of hypocrisy whenever you work with animals , even to show , which we hope we 're showing , that respect of all of God 's creation ... I don 't know . I respect their criticism . " PETA was also critical of Birds & Animals Unlimited , the primary animal supplier to the film , for alleged serious and continuing violations of the U.S. Animal Welfare Act , including failure to comply with veterinary care requirements and failure to provide shelter from heat and sunlight , which PETA details and claims it can document . A Universal Studios spokesperson declared : 
 " The live animals used in the filming of Evan Almighty were supplemented by a great number of computer @-@ generated animals , but it would have been impossible to depend on CGI exclusively as some key scenes in the film demonstrate the need for peaceful and productive co @-@ existence between man and animals . One of the most prominent , inescapable messages of the film is the responsibility that humans have to protect and care for animals . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on HD DVD and DVD on October 9 , 2007 and was the fourth @-@ most rented DVD of the week earning $ 6 @.@ 4 million . In the film 's first six weeks of release it earned $ 27 @,@ 676 @,@ 676 in domestic DVD sales . The HD @-@ DVD and DVD 's special features include deleted scenes , outtakes , cast interviews , and footage of the animals used in the film . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray on August 7 , 2012 . 
 = = = Proposed ban = = = 
 Malaysia 's Muslim Consumers Association ( <unk> ) called for a ban on the film , claiming it is offensive to Islam . Secretary @-@ General <unk> Osman claimed that the film was depicting the great flood as comedy and characterized God with the portrayal of a human , both of which are considered blasphemous in Islam . Similarly there was some public protest against Bruce Almighty being shown in theaters , but that movie was released on DVD and is now shown on television broadcasts . Evan Almighty was still released in Malaysia on August 23 , 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical release = = = 
 Evan Almighty received generally negative reviews from critics and viewers . On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 23 % , based on 192 reviews , with the critical consensus reading , " Big on special effects but short on laughs , Evan Almighty <unk> a star @-@ studded cast that includes Steve Carell and Morgan Freeman . " At the website Metacritic , which utilizes a normalized rating system , the film earned a score of 37 out of 100 , based on 33 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " . 
 In his review of the film , Richard Roeper commended Jim Carrey for declining to reprise his role in " three of the worst sequels of all time " , which included Dumb and Dumberer : When Harry Met Lloyd , Son of the Mask and Evan Almighty . He continued : " Evan Almighty is a paper @-@ thin alleged comedy with a laugh drought of biblical proportions , and a condescendingly simplistic spiritual message . " 
 Several reviewers credit Carell 's performance to significantly improving the humor of the film . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone declared the film the year 's Worst Epic on his list of the Worst Movies of 2007 . Before Evan Almighty was released , it was nominated for " Best Summer Movie You Haven 't Seen Yet " at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards . Competing against seven other nominees , it lost to Transformers . According to box office figures , the film is the second highest @-@ grossing film about " Supernatural Comedies with Religious Elements " according to Box Office Mojo , directly behind Bruce Almighty . Evan Almighty was nominated for one Razzie Award , Worst Prequel or Sequel ( lost to Daddy Day Camp ) . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Though Evan Almighty was hyped up , especially with churchgoers , and had double the budget of Bruce Almighty , it performed under expectations . On its first weekend , it opened in 5 @,@ 200 screens in 3 @,@ 604 theaters and earned $ 31 @.@ 1 million ( on its first two days the film earned $ 11 @.@ 4 million followed by $ 8 @.@ 3 million on Sunday ) . The opening was less than half of the first film 's $ 68 million weekend ( $ 85 million counting Memorial Day ) . Nikki Rocco , the president of distribution for Universal Pictures declared , " We never expected it to be much higher ... it is not unusual for family films to open at a level like this and build . This film will have legs . " The film managed to remain at the third spot at the box office in its second week , before dropping to fifth place in its third week . 
 Internationally , the film also opened in first place in Russia and Ukraine , earning $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Russia with 329 venues and $ 179 @,@ 000 in Ukraine at 64 locations . The gross in the opening weekends for the two countries was 10 % and 11 % , respectively , bigger than the opening for Bruce Almighty . Altogether , the film has earned $ 173 @,@ 391 @,@ 888 worldwide with $ 100 @,@ 462 @,@ 298 in the U.S. and $ 72 @,@ 929 @,@ 590 in the international box office . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Evan Almighty : Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture debuted in 2007 . The soundtrack debuted on June 19 , 2007 . " Revolution " was performed by Rascal Flatts in the film . Their version is not on the soundtrack , but it appears as a bonus track on their album Still Feels Good . Also not included on the soundtrack are Elton John 's 2006 hit , " Just Like Noah 's Ark " of which only a little bit is heard during the start of building the ark , and John Mayer 's " Waiting on the World to Change " , used in the main ark @-@ building montage . " Ready For a Miracle " was released as a single for the soundtrack by American country pop recording artist , LeAnn Rimes . 
 Rascal Flatts ' version of " Revolution " peaked at number 57 on the Hot Country Songs charts , and " The Power of One " by <unk> reached number 52 on the same . 
 Note : Tracks one , two and fourteen to sixteen are taken from the film while tracks three through thirteen are inspired by the film . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2008 , the soundtrack was nominated for a Dove Award for Special Event Album of the Year at the 39th GMA Dove Awards . The song " Be the Miracle " by Room for Two was also nominated for Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year while " Ready for a Miracle " by LeAnn Rimes won the Dove Award for Traditional Gospel Recorded Song of the Year . 
 = Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver = 
 Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver is an action @-@ adventure game developed by Crystal Dynamics and published by Eidos Interactive . It was released for the PlayStation and Microsoft Windows in 1999 and for the Dreamcast in 2000 . As the second game in the Legacy of Kain series , Soul Reaver is the sequel to Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain . Soul Reaver was followed by three games , one of which , Soul Reaver 2 , is a direct sequel . 
 Taking place 1500 years after the events of Blood Omen , Soul Reaver chronicles the journey of the vampire @-@ turned @-@ wraith Raziel , lieutenant to the vampire lord Kain . Raziel is killed by Kain , but is revived by The Elder God to become his " soul reaver " and to exact revenge . Raziel shares this title with Kain 's sword , the Soul Reaver , which he acquires during the game . 
 Crystal Dynamics began development of the game in 1997 , but a deteriorating relationship with Silicon Knights , who had developed Blood Omen , created legal problems . This and other delays forced material originally planned for Soul Reaver to be instead released with later games of the series . Soul Reaver was generally well received by critics and praised for its intriguing gothic story and high @-@ quality graphics . However , the game was criticized for simple and repetitive gameplay and an unsatisfying climax . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls Raziel , a disfigured and ghostly vampire . Gameplay relies largely on shifting between the material and spectral planes of existence to progress through areas . Although interaction with objects is limited in the spectral realm , this can be advantageous , because Raziel can phase through otherwise impassable gates there , and water is insubstantial , allowing him to walk on <unk> ; however , blocks , doors , and switches can be manipulated only in the physical realm . Many puzzles are based on the differences between the two realms ; for example , platforms and environment features in one realm may change form to open new paths in the other . Block puzzles are also common and require the rotation , flipping , and moving of large blocks to progress , often with a time limit and while avoiding enemies . 
 Combat in Soul Reaver is a hack and slash system , involving the use of combinations of various different attacks before a finishing move . Raziel 's enemies are grouped into humans , spectral creatures , and most commonly , vampires . Human enemies include peasants , vampire hunters and vampire worshippers . In the spectral realm , players fight minor enemies called <unk> and the souls of dead vampires who have become wraiths . Each brood of vampire enemies has unique powers reminiscent of their clan leader . Human and spectral enemies can be killed with Raziel 's claws or any weapon , but vampires must be bludgeoned into a stunned state and then destroyed by impaling them , lighting them on fire , or tossing them into a hazard such as sunlight or water . When killed , enemies leave behind souls that replenish Raziel 's health , which automatically decreases in the material realm and increases in the spectral . Possession of the Soul Reaver sword stops automatic degeneration of health in the physical realm , but Raziel loses the sword instantly if he sustains damage and can regain it only by restoring his health to full . 
 At first , Raziel can jump , glide using his torn wings , move blocks , and pick up and throw objects and enemies . Initially unarmed , he fights using his claws , but can alternatively use weapons such as rocks , torches , spears and staffs , and the Soul Reaver . Raziel can freely shift to the spectral realm , but can return to the material realm only through special portals when at full health . Raziel automatically shifts to the spectral realm if he runs out of health . As the game progresses , Raziel gains the powers of his clan brothers after defeating them and becomes able to phase through gates in the spectral realm and climb walls in the material realm . Initially vulnerable to water , he overcomes this weakness and learns to swim . He also gains the ability to constrict objects and enemies with a band of energy , although this feature was one of the few abilities not to feature in future games . Players can find an ancient relic that gives Raziel the power to fire bolts of telekinetic energy , which cause little damage by themselves but can knock enemies into hazards and push objects from a distance . Baptism in holy flame can transform the Soul Reaver into the Fire Reaver , which can set enemies aflame and adds fire to Raziel 's telekinetic bolts . Players can also find magical glyphs that allow Raziel to expend magical energy to attack groups of enemies simultaneously . These glyphs typically involve vampire weaknesses such as sunlight , fire , water , or sound , as well as additions such as telekinetic force ( available well before the normal telekinesis becomes available ) and the causing of earthquakes to temporarily stun enemies . Glyphs are acquired through finding glyph altars , specific locations in Nosgoth where the skills can be learned , and solving a puzzle before being granted the magical ability . However , Raziel begins the game with access to the ' Shift ' glyph , granting the ability to shift between the material and spectral planes , with no glyph altar necessary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Soul Reaver takes place within the fictional world of Nosgoth , where the health of the land is tied to the nine Pillars of Nosgoth , and each pillar in turn is represented by a guardian . Before the events of Soul Reaver , the guardians became corrupt , and , after Kain killed eight of them , he discovered he was the final one . Refusing to sacrifice himself to restore the Pillars , he doomed Nosgoth to eternal decay and proceeded to raise his vampire lieutenants , including Raziel , to besiege the land . By the time of Soul Reaver 's introduction , the vampires are now the land 's dominant species and apex predators , the humans have been decimated , and the vampire tribes have each claimed a region of Nosgoth and turned their attention to internal matters . Unknown to the vampires , beneath Nosgoth lurks The Elder God , an ancient and powerful entity . The Elder God controls the Wheel of Fate , a cycle of reincarnation of souls that circle the Wheel in a loop of predestination ; however , because vampires are immortal , their souls do not spin with the Wheel , causing the land to decay as the Wheel stalls . By the time that Raziel is revived centuries after the game 's opening cinematic , Nosgoth is on the brink of collapse , little more than a wasteland wracked with cataclysms and earthquakes . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist of Soul Reaver is the vampire @-@ turned @-@ wraith Raziel , whom Kain casts to death at the beginning of the game . Although Kain is the protagonist of the previous game , Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain , he is the primary antagonist and final boss of Soul Reaver . The Elder God resurrects and assists Raziel , explains the game 's controls , and describes previous events in the story . Ariel , who preceded Kain as the guardian of the Pillar of Balance , appears as a spirit and offers Raziel advice on occasion . During his quest , Raziel meets his brothers — Melchiah , Zephon , Rahab and Dumah — who serve as the game 's bosses . Each has developed different powers that Raziel partially gains by killing them and devouring their souls . A fifth brother , <unk> , was omitted due to time constraints on development . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 As the game begins , Raziel approaches Kain 's throne and extends newly grown wings . In an act of seeming jealousy , Kain tears the bones from Raziel 's wings and has him thrown into the Lake of the Dead , a large natural whirlpool ; however , Raziel is resurrected as a wraith by The Elder God to become his " soul reaver " and kill Kain , thus restoring Nosgoth . With The Elder God 's guidance , Raziel adapts to his new form and returns to Nosgoth . Infiltrating a Necropolis inhabited by the <unk> vampires , Raziel finds his brother Melchiah , who has devolved into a beast unable to sustain his own flesh . After Raziel kills Melchiah and absorbs his soul , he confronts Kain among the ruined Pillars of Nosgoth in the Sanctuary of the Clans . Kain does not appear surprised to see Raziel , apparently having even been expecting him , and implies that he has destroyed Raziel 's vampire clan , which only enrages Raziel even further . When Raziel begins to criticize him , Kain simply launches a tirade against him before noting what has become of the empire and engaging him in combat . Kain quickly overpowers Raziel and attempts to strike him down with the Soul Reaver , a powerful sword that absorbs its victims ' souls ; however , the Reaver shatters when it strikes Raziel , and Kain escapes , strangely satisfied . Raziel enters the spectral realm to find the blade 's soul @-@ devouring spectral form , which binds itself to him . After this , Raziel meets Ariel , who restores his strength , and learns of Zephon 's location from The Elder God . 
 Raziel ventures into a large cathedral once inhabited by the humans and finds the <unk> clan . After ascending into the cathedral 's spires , he finds that Zephon is now a large insect like creature whose body has merged into the cathedral spire in which he dwells . Raziel kills Zephon and uses the gained power to infiltrate an ancient crypt . There , Raziel discovers coffins for members of the Sarafan , a fanatical order of vampire hunters killed centuries before Kain 's rule . To Raziel 's horror , he finds the crypt was designated for him and his brothers ; as cruel irony , Kain revived the Sarafan to serve him as his vampire sons . Raziel ventures through a secret passage under the crypt and finds a flooded abbey inhabited by the <unk> clan , whose members have mutated into amphibians ; its leader , Rahab , has become a merman . Raziel tells Rahab what he has learned about their human pasts , but Rahab is unmoved , claiming that Kain " saved " them , and attacks . Raziel defeats Rahab and absorbs his soul , then crosses the Lake of the Dead to the abandoned fortress of his brother Dumah . The Elder God explains that the <unk> vampires were scattered following an invasion of human hunters . Raziel eventually finds Dumah shackled to his throne with his heart pierced . Raziel revives Dumah and leads him into a giant furnace , burning him alive and absorbing his soul . 
 Afterward , Raziel discovers the Oracle 's Cave , where Moebius the Time Streamer once hid the Chronoplast , a magical time machine . Raziel traverses the caves and finds Kain in the Chronoplast 's control room . Raziel is angered over what he has learned , and Kain says his actions are justified due to his being subject to destiny , before proceeding to inform Raziel that the Sarafan were far from the noble crusaders that Raziel believes them to be when the latter demands to know why he created him , which Raziel refuses to listen to . Raziel attacks Kain while the latter continues to adjust the Chronoplast 's controls . Although Raziel eventually gains an advantage , the Chronoplast activates , and Kain escapes through a time portal , beckoning Raziel to follow . Raziel complies , ignoring warnings from The Elder God . As the game ends , Raziel emerges from the <unk> and is greeted by Moebius , leading into the events of Soul Reaver 2 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Soul Reaver entered development alongside Blood Omen 2 in 1997 and focused on puzzle solving instead of Blood Omen 2 's action . During design , the development team created larger areas that could be explored more thoroughly as Raziel acquired new powers , avoiding the " shallow [ ness ] " of Blood Omen 's layout . Crystal Dynamics based Soul Reaver on Silicon Knights ' research of vampire mythology for Blood Omen . Other aspects of the game , such as the idea of a fallen vampire who devoured souls , were inspired by the epic poem " Paradise Lost " . The staff aimed to develop gameplay similar to Tomb Raider and used an upgraded version of Gex 3 's game engine to generate the three @-@ dimensional game world . Before Soul Reaver 's release , the relationship between Silicon Knights and Crystal Dynamics dissolved . Because their research was used , Silicon Knights filed an injunction to stop further promotion of the game . Other delays pushed the release date from October 1998 to August 1999 . 
 These delays forced Crystal Dynamics to cut significant game material , including additional powers for Raziel , a third battle with Kain , and an expanded Glyph system which would have given elemental powers to the Soul Reaver . In an interview , series director Amy Hennig stated that the development team split the original , much larger plans in two after realizing that they had " over @-@ designed the game " , given the constraints on time and data . This decision explains Soul Reaver 's cliffhanger ending and the appearance of originally planned material in later games . Despite the split , Hennig explained that the team left unused components — such as extra power @-@ ups and enemies — in Soul Reaver 's game engine to avoid unforeseen glitches that might have arisen from their removal . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Kurt Harland composed most of the music for Soul Reaver ; Jim Hedges handled the remaining audio . Harland remarked that , under Amy Hennig 's direction , he programmed music to change based on the current gameplay situation — for example , combat or swimming . This variation was accomplished through a custom Musical Instrument Digital Interface ( MIDI ) driver , which altered music based on signals from the game engine . Each vampire tribe had corresponding music ; one tribe of vampires was associated with a slow , thumping theme to convey a sense of working machinery . To further fit the music to the environment , the sound team consulted level designers regarding layout and appearance . Music from both Soul Reaver and Soul Reaver 2 was released on a promotional soundtrack in 2001 . 
 For the game 's voice acting , Raziel was voiced by Michael Bell , and Tony Jay , who had provided the voice of Mortanius in Blood Omen , voiced The Elder God . Anna Gunn , Simon Templeman and Richard Doyle reprised their roles from Blood Omen as Ariel , Kain and Moebius . Bell , Templeman and Jay also provided the voices of Melchiah , Dumah and Zephon , respectively , and Neil Ross voiced Rahab . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Soul Reaver was showcased at the 1998 E3 , where attendees were given free demo discs . Over time , further demo disks were released , including one bundled with Official PlayStation Magazine . Soul Reaver was released for the PC and Sony PlayStation in 1999 and for the Dreamcast version in 2000 . The PC and Dreamcast versions used a much higher frame rate than did the PlayStation version , and the Dreamcast port had further graphical enhancements . A Japanese release for the game was planned , but canceled . In 2000 , Soul Reaver was added to Sony 's " Greatest Hits " list , and more than 1 @.@ 5 million copies were sold by 2001 . Sony later re @-@ released the game for digital download on the PlayStation Network in November 2009 . 
 Eidos Interactive , the game 's publisher , spent US $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on a pre @-@ release advertising campaign , which included magazine articles , television ads , and a tie @-@ in comic book published by Top Cow Productions . Because such films like Stir of Echoes , The Sixth Sense , The Blair Witch Project and The Mummy had premiered earlier in 1999 , Soul Reaver 's release was considered " ideally timed " for a horror @-@ oriented game . The lack of load times was a key marketing point praised by several reviewers . After release , Eidos and <unk> partnered to release action figures of Raziel and Kain . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Soul Reaver 's dark and gothic atmosphere was generally well @-@ received , and several publications praised the game 's cut scenes . IGN 's reviewer called it " such an ambitious game - and one that achieves nearly everything it sets out to do - that few games come close to it " , and praised the soundtrack for blending with the atmosphere unobtrusively . The Dreamcast port was cited as " perhaps one of the best looking console games ever made " . Next Generation Magazine echoed this , stating that , " even if you own the PlayStation version , you may want to rent this anyway " , but expressed disappointment that no new features were added to the Dreamcast port . AllGame 's reviewer called the cut scenes " seamless " , and their frequency neither too high nor too low . The game 's storyline was praised by Game Informer as being " grim and interesting " . Soul Reaver 's voice acting was also highly praised ; GameSpot ranked this aspect of the game in its list of top ten " Best Voice Acting in Games " . GameSpot also considered the atmosphere as rich as that of Blood Omen , yet less dramatically overstated , and considered the graphics " among the best that have ever been on the PlayStation . " GamePro praised the aspect of shifting between realms , particularly the visual effects involved . 
 IGN stated that acquiring and learning the powers of Raziel 's brothers constituted part of the fun , and that Raziel 's moves were well animated and articulated . Finding minimal difficulty in using camera controls , GameSpot likened them to those of Banjo @-@ Kazooie and stated that players would want to adjust the camera deliberately to watch Raziel 's movements . RPGamer called the gameplay smooth and seamless , and , although the reviewer was initially worried that the interface would resemble that of the Tomb Raider series , stated that these concerns disappeared after playing . Presenting differences between the two , AllGame echoed RPGamer 's sentiment and stated that the game 's puzzles would challenge " all but the most experienced gamers " , while Game Informer considered the puzzles " difficult @-@ to @-@ the @-@ point @-@ of @-@ insanity " . Computer Gaming World enjoyed the devouring of souls , a gameplay element that caused Alexander Smith of the Star Tribune to compare Soul Reaver to the television series Outlander . 
 Website reviewers deemed Soul Reaver 's gameplay too non @-@ linear and its objectives too unclear . GameSpot criticized the warp system for using confusing symbols that did little or nothing to indicate the warp 's destination , and weighed the fun of impaling vampires with the Soul Reaver against the lack of challenge presented by bosses and most enemies . Next Generation Magazine considered the game challenging due to " difficult puzzles and lack of a map " , requiring the player to backtrack . RPGamer 's reviewer said that the music was " more suited to putting babies asleep " and that enemies sounded like barnyard animals . The Tampa Tribune also criticized the camera controls , though noted that the " auto @-@ facing " feature made the difficulties negligible . PC Zone criticized the PC port of the game for " chunky " graphics and bad camera controls , stating " it feels too much like a PlayStation release ported hurriedly on to the PC " . Computer Gaming World similarly felt that the limitations of the PlayStation carried over in the PC port , rendering the latter 's visuals " mind @-@ numbingly boring " . The publication praised the Lucifer @-@ based story for engaging players , but was disappointed that " it peters out in an unsatisfying climax " . Game Informer stated , " Even after years in development , Soul Reaver doesn 't feel finished . It feels rushed . " 1UP ranked Soul Reaver second on its " Top 5 Games That Ended Halfway Through " , stating " it 's pretty clear that the plot would have been a lot different if the money hadn 't inconveniently run out . " GamesRadar placed Soul Reaver at # 4 on a 2007 list of the top seven video game apocalypses , regarding the post @-@ apocalyptic Nosgoth as " one of the most fascinating wastelands we 've ever explored " . 
 = Long John Peter = 
 " Long John Peter " is the 12th and the final episode of the sixth season of the animated series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 4 , 2008 . Written by Wellesley Wild and directed by Dominic Polcino , " Long John Peter " served as the final episode of the season , which was cut short due to creator Seth MacFarlane 's participation in the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . In the episode , Chris falls in love with a lovely vet intern Anna and turns to Peter for some advice . 
 " Long John Peter " was watched by 7 @.@ 68 million viewers in its original broadcast , according to the Nielsen ratings . Actress Amanda Bynes guest starred as Anna , and Bryan Cranston and Mae Whitman made minor appearances in the episode . " Long John Peter " received generally positive reviews from critics , and was praised for its action sequence featuring Peter and a British man having a pirate fight on their cars . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Griffin family are waiting for the examination results of Brian at the veterinary office of Dr. Jewish , as Brian had apparently had stomach pains prior to the events in the episode ( Brian had eaten one of Stewie 's used diapers — which he claimed that he had mistaken for Indian cuisine ) . Chris spots a young intern named Anna and develops a crush on her . While there , Peter finds a parrot and decides to keep it , leaving a dog wearing a top hat and a mustache in its place . Peter begins taking the parrot everywhere he goes , showing it off to his friends , Quagmire , Cleveland , and Joe , who , in turn , begin making suggestions as to how Peter could change his appearance to appear more " pirate @-@ like " because of the resemblance between Peter and a pirate , who are known for keeping parrots as pets . Peter takes the advice given to him by his friends by dressing up in pirate clothing , gathering up a crew of other " pirates " , and going by the name " Long John Peter " . Peter begins taking the pirate act to the extreme , even robbing a British man 's car filled with sugarcane , tobacco , and spices . In the " battle " for the spices , Peter 's parrot is severely injured and eventually dies . 
 Meanwhile , at the vet where Dr. Jewish breaks the bad news about Peter 's dead parrot , Chris and Anna hook up and begin dating . The relationship goes smoothly until Peter berates Chris for treating her too well . Peter tells him that women like bad boys , so Chris calls Anna a " bitch " on their next date , thinking that will improve the relationship . Instead , she breaks up with him . After hearing what happened , Lois , furious at Peter , orders him to try to comfort Chris , but Peter fails to cheer up Chris when Peter gives him a bullfrog which died when Peter poked holes on its back . When Lois tells Chris that the only person he should turn to in this situation is himself , Chris beats Brian with a chair as an excuse to return to the vet , sees Anna there , and apologizes to her . Anna forgives Chris and they renew their relationship , while Brian collapses to the floor in pain . Brian asks for help but Stewie comes in and kicks Brian in his stomach , before leaving him there . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Long John Peter " was written by Wellesley Wild and directed by Dominic Polcino . According to consulting producer Tom Devanney , Wild came up with the pirate story when he had been out of work for four weeks . Creator Seth MacFarlane pitched the structure of the Chris and Peter story , which is , according to executive producer David A. Goodman , the same story as in MacFarlane 's pilot The Life of Larry . Actress Amanda Bynes guest starred as Chris 's love interest Anna , and Goodman praised her performance . 
 In addition to Bynes and the regular cast , actor Bryan Cranston and actress Mae Whitman guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actor John G. Brennan , writer Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , actress Jennifer Tilly , and writer John Viener made minor appearances . Actors Patrick Warburton and Adam West guest starred in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Long John Peter " contained several pop culture references . When Chris sees Anna for the first time , he starts singing the song " Crazy for You " , which was originally performed by Madonna in the film Vision Quest ( 1985 ) . When Peter is fighting a British man , the title music from The Sea Hawk ( 1940 ) , composed by Erich Wolfgang Korngold , is used . The episode imagines what it would be like if Michael J. Fox , who has Parkinson 's disease , would star as Zorro . In a trailer for a film , the tune from Coldplay 's " Clocks " is played . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast on May 4 , 2008 , " Long John Peter " was watched by 7 @.@ 68 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings . The episode finished second in its timeslot , after ABC 's Desperate Housewives . " Long John Peter " acquired a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 10 share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and a 4 @.@ 7 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 34 demographic . The episode dropped in 9 % from the previous episode , " The Former Life of Brian " , which received a 4 @.@ 3 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic and a viewership of 8 @.@ 42 million . 
 Since airing , " Long John Peter " has received generally positive reviews from television sources and critics . Ahsan Haque of IGN wrote that " Long John Peter " was " thoroughly entertaining from start to finish , and is a great way to end this short season on a high note . " He praised the action sequence , calling it " truly inspired " and " extremely well scripted " , and graded the episode 8 @.@ 9 out of 10 . Brad Trechak of TV Squad stated that " the pirate segment of the episode wasn 't very good and seemed out of place " , though he also praised the action scene . He enjoyed the plot line about Chris and Anna , and called the episode " a high note " . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club wrote that " the pirate gag was fine enough , in that it resulted in an amusing land @-@ battle sequence " and " Chris ' storyline resulted in some of the best Family Guy laughs I 've had in a while " . She graded the episode A- . 
 = Tropical Storm Fran ( 1984 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Fran was one of the deadliest tropical cyclones in the history of Cape Verde . The sixth named storm and eleventh tropical cyclone of the 1984 Atlantic hurricane season , Fran developed from a tropical wave near Cape Verde on September 15 . It began as a tropical depression and gradually strengthened while tracking westward , remaining south of the Cape Verde archipelago . Late on September 16 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Fran , shortly before brushing Cape Verde , and then moving further out to sea . The storm approached hurricane status on September 17 and September 18 , though it eventually weakened . Beginning on September 19 , Fran encountered strong wind shear , which contributed to further weakening . By September 20 , Fran dissipated well east of the Lesser Antilles . 
 While passing southeast of Cape Verde , the storm produced torrential rainfall . At least 1 @,@ 094 houses were severely damaged due to flooding , which left at least 2 @,@ 100 people homeless . Significant damage also occurred to roads in the country , which was still in need of repairs as late as January 1985 . The hydraulic infrastructure was destroyed on six islands , requiring $ 1 million ( 1984 USD ) in repairs . In addition , agriculture was extensively damaged , resulting in $ 1 @.@ 84 million ( 1984 USD ) in losses to crops . The storm caused no impact outside of Cape Verde . Overall , the storm caused about $ 2 @.@ 84 million ( 1984 USD ) in damage and between 29 and 32 fatalities . Several organizations and countries donated to disaster relief funds , which cash amounts alone reaching slightly more than $ 501 @,@ 000 ( 1984 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A well @-@ defined tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 14 . The system rapidly organized , and at 1200 UTC on September 15 , it developed into a tropical depression while located to the southeast of the Cape Verde . Early on September 8 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Fran , based on intensity estimates via the Dvorak technique . By then , the storm had begun a track to the northwest ; Fran then passed near the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . Late on September 17 , Fran attained peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) . It maintained this intensity for about 24 hours , during which Fran turned to the west and later to the west @-@ southwest . The storm encountered strong wind shear on September 19 ; this caused it to weaken and the deep convection to detach from the center of the storm . At 0600 UTC on September 20 , Fran was downgraded to a tropical depression . Twelve hours later , the storm dissipated while located about 1 @,@ 250 miles ( 2 @,@ 010 km ) east @-@ northeast of Antigua . By the following day , the remnants of Fran became unidentifiable . 
 = = Impacts = = 
 Light winds were reported in Cape Verde ; some weather stations recorded winds of 35 miles per hour ( 56 km / h ) . As a result , wind damage was minimal . While passing southeast of Cape Verde , Fran dropped torrential rainfall on the islands , which caused significant flooding . The storm caused severe damage to at least 1 @,@ 094 houses , which left at least 2 @,@ 100 people homeless . On Santo Antão , São Nicolau , and Santiago , agriculture also suffered losses , totaling to $ 1 @.@ 84 million ( 1984 USD ) . Fran also caused significant damage to roads , which still required repairs as late as January 1985 . The hydraulic infrastructure on Santo Antão , Santiago , São Nicolau , São Vicente , Fogo , and Maio was destroyed and cost about $ 1 million ( 1984 USD ) to repair . At least 29 people were killed , though some sources claim there were as many as 32 fatalities . Fran is thus the second deadliest tropical cyclone in the history of Cape Verde , behind only Hurricane Debbie in 1961 , which caused 60 fatalities after a plane crashed due to weather associated with the storm . Overall , the storm caused at least $ 2 @.@ 84 million ( 1984 USD ) in damage . Elsewhere , the storm caused no damage or fatalities . 
 On October 10 , 1984 , the Government of Cape Verde appealed for international assistance . Emergency relief aid requested included : two @-@ month supply of food for 1 @,@ 124 families , 1 @,@ 064 mattresses , 532 kerosene stoves , 2 @,@ 128 sets of dinner ware , 2 @,@ 128 mugs , 1 @,@ 064 cooking pots and pans , 532 water buckets , 2 @,@ 128 sheets , 1 @,@ 064 blankets , 2 @,@ 660 articles of clothing , and building materials for repair of the 1 @,@ 094 houses . In January 1985 , the government of Cape Verde announced that they had made significant progress with relief assistance . However , repairs to roads , infrastructure , and crops were still required . Five organizations contributed cash , including the National Solidarity Movement , the Cape Verde Red Cross , Chinese Red Cross , Oxfam <unk> , and Oxfam of the United Kingdom ; donations collectively totaled to $ 172 @,@ 221 ( 1984 USD ) . France , Finland , the Soviet Union , and the United States supplied 4000 tons of cereals , $ 79 @,@ 000 ( 1984 USD ) to the Red Cross , $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1984 USD ) for home repairs , 32 packages of medicines , and 17 packages of blankets . 
 = Chris Pappas ( Neighbours ) = 
 Christos " Chris " Pappas is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by James Mason . Mason was told the character was gay when he successfully auditioned for the role in 2009 . He began filming his first scenes in October of that year and he made his first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 25 February 2010 . Executive producer Susan Bower said the character 's storyline was created because of requests from young viewers in the Neighbours website 's online forums . The storyline has also been based on the real life experiences of the show 's writers . Chris was the first prominent , ongoing male homosexual character in the show 's twenty @-@ five @-@ year history . He was the second ongoing homosexual character overall , following Lana Crawford 's ( Bridget Neval ) introduction in 2004 . Chris departed on 27 March 2015 , but made a cameo appearance on 6 November . 
 Chris was a high school student who befriended the soap 's other teens . He became the captain of the school 's basketball team and he began dating Summer Hoyland ( Jordy Lucas ) . However , Chris developed a crush on Andrew Robinson ( Jordan Smith ) and subsequently revealed that he was gay . Chris initially struggled with his sexuality and the reactions of his friends , family and team mates . Upon finding employment at the local garage , Chris was faced with Warren Burrell ( Tony Rickards ) , a homophobic customer . In August 2011 , a love interest for Chris was introduced in the form of Aidan Foster ( Bobby Morley ) and they formed Neighbours ' first gay couple . After a break @-@ up and reunion , Chris and Aidan split for good in January 2013 . Chris became the focus of a coward punch storyline in 2014 and agreed to have a baby with his friend Lucy Robinson ( Melissa Bell ) . 
 Bower expected Chris 's coming out storyline to receive criticism and some media commentators called it " an obvious ratings grab " . Mason and the show 's script producer defended the storyline , saying that it was not a ploy to boost ratings and that it explored how Chris 's coming out affected the people around him . Television critics and LGBT websites have given the character and his storyline development a positive reception . In 2012 , Mason earned a nomination for Most Popular New Male Talent at the Logie Awards . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 Neighbours ' executive producer Susan Bower said the creation of the character and his storyline was a result of requests from young viewers in the Neighbours website forums . Bower said that although the show had featured lesbian romances before , love scenes between men are still taboo in Australian dramas . She added that Chris 's coming out storyline was also based on the real life experiences of the shows writers . 
 Mason 's agent got him an audition with Neighbours and he originally read for the role of Andrew Robinson . The part was given to Jordan Smith , but an offer to play the role of Chris arrived three days later . Mason told Matt <unk> of <unk> that he was okay with knowing Chris would be gay . The character is Mason 's first major television role . He began filming his first scenes in October 2009 , before making his on @-@ screen debut in February 2010 . Bower later revealed that two @-@ thirds of the boys who auditioned for the role of Chris backed out when they discovered the character was gay , which she said was " disappointing , but not surprising . " Mason said that he was " really excited to get an opportunity like this " and added the writers had helped him out as the script was coming straight from their experiences . Bower praised Mason , saying that he " does a wonderful job . " 
 In October 2010 , the ATV News Network reported that the Neighbours writers and producers were unsure how to keep Chris connected to Ramsay Street . ATV said that the writer were " stumped " as to what to do with the character and his story . At the time , Mason was still filming for the show , but ATV reported that it was not known if he would be given a new contract . However , in January 2011 , a Network Ten spokesperson told SX News that Mason 's role would be expanded from April and he and Chris will get more screen time . Chris will be seen taking on " issues that every gay teenager does . " On becoming a regular cast member , Mason told Channel 5 , " I love it . The more time I spend on Neighbours , the more I feel part of the show . And I 'm learning all the time . The thing about this industry is it 's very hard to find stable work , so to have stability , I 'm extremely grateful . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Coming out = = = 
 Chris is Neighbours ' second ongoing homosexual character , following the introduction of Lana Crawford in 2004 . Neighbours has featured a few short @-@ term or minor male gay characters before for plot points or small story arcs , but Chris is the first male gay character to be given a prominent role . The first minor male gay characters to appear were Andrew MacKenzie ( John Morris ) and Alf Taylor ( Frank Bren ) in 1994 . The following year a gay schoolteacher , Andrew Watson ( Chris <unk> ) , became the victim of a dismissal campaign by his pupils . Hairdresser Gino Esposito ( Shane McNamara ) was often hinted at being gay . 
 Mason has said that there have been a few hints about Chris 's sexuality along the way and in August 2010 , Chris finally revealed that he is gay to his girlfriend , Summer . TV Week described Chris as being " deeply conflicted " over his decision to tell her about his sexuality . Mason said " It 's hard for Chris because he has a girlfriend who he 's been with for some time . To try and tell someone in this situation would be really difficult " . Summer initially takes the news well and plays it down , but when fellow student Natasha Williams ( Valentina Novakovic ) discovers that one of her classmates is gay , she goes out of her way to find out who it is and expose them . Mason said that she does not realise that " what she sees as a game is someone else 's life " . 
 Mason has said he was nervous about filming Chris 's coming out . Describing the scene , he said " I did have to stand up in front a group of people and tell them [ as my character ] , I was gay . That was a little intimidating " . The actor felt that the storyline had been handled in a realistic manner and said that it shows that coming out is a difficult thing to do . Mason also spoke to a friend about his coming out experience to gain information about how long it took him to come out and how people reacted . The storyline follows Chris 's struggle with his sexuality and depicts the reactions of his friends and family . It also deals with the issue of homophobia in sport . The Australian gay and lesbian newspaper , SX News said " Chris is the captain of the school basketball team , but once word he 's gay gets out to the other teams it turns nasty for him " . 
 Previous same @-@ sex storylines in the show had led to criticism from conservative groups . Bower has said that she expects this storyline to come under fire , saying " I do believe homophobia is still alive and well , and I have no doubt that we will get complaints about it " . Australian LGBT website <unk> said the story had attracted attention from some media commentators , who called it " an obvious ratings grab and an attempt to out @-@ gay rival soap , Home and Away " . However , script producer , Emma Steele defended the storyline and said that it is not a " ploy to grab ratings " . Steele said that she is " particularly proud " of the way Chris 's storyline had been handled and she added " It was something we wanted to do for a while because it 's a story that affects so many people and in so many different ways . It wasn 't just Chris 's story . I think it 's interesting to see how [ his sexuality ] affected his friends and his relationships with them too " . 
 Mason said he hoped that his storyline would " draw in viewers in a responsible way " and the feedback would stay positive . Mason added that he would like to see Chris happy in the future and hopes the viewers will warm to him . He added " I know it 's quite a sensitive topic , but I think the difference between his and the last encounters they 've had is that we 're looking more in @-@ depth into more than just a " gay kiss " . We go more into the relationships , how it affects people around " . Steele backed this up , saying " We wanted gay to be part of Chris 's character , not Chris to be the gay character . He 's not your typical gay stereotype that some TV shows like to play up . He 's on the basketball team , he 's had a girlfriend for a time , and I think the show does a good job of portraying the way his character is discovering who he really is " . 
 = = = Relationship with Aidan Foster = = = 
 In October 2010 , Mason stated that a romantic interest for Chris could be introduced in the future . He said that it was not confirmed , but there was a chance that Chris would find someone . Mason admitted that he would find it " awkward " if he had to perform a male kissing scene . The following year , Mason revealed that the writers had plans for a romance for Chris on their radar and a few weeks later it was announced that Bobby Morley had joined the cast as Aidan Foster , a love interest for Chris . Aidan and Chris formed the serial 's first gay couple . Bower called the storyline " a natural progression " for Chris , noting that he needed to meet someone at some stage . Bower told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that Chris 's romance will be handled in a sensitive way and will be treated within the character . She explained " Chris is a naturally shy person – he is not a person who either flaunts his sexuality or his heart . So it will be done according to that character . And it may not be a full @-@ on relationship . The character that Bob is playing is older and further down the track with his relationship testing , so it will be a relationship story rather than a gay male romance . " Mason said that Chris and Aidan 's relationship would have a slow build up . 
 Chris meets Aidan when he is brought into the hospital following a " vicious beating " . Aidan provides a source of kindness and support for Chris . He later takes his car to the local garage to be serviced and flirts with Chris , who is initially unaware of what is going on . Lucas Fitzgerald ( Scott Major ) attempts to help Chris by asking Aidan if he is gay or straight , which leads to embarrassment for them all . The appearance of Chris ' father , George ( <unk> Amor ) , makes the situation worse and when Aidan asks Chris out for a drink , he turns him down . Mason told an Inside Soap writer " George is only just starting to accept that his son is gay , so when Aidan invites Chris for a drink , Chris turns him down out of fear of what his dad will think . " Chris becomes intrigued by Aidan , but he also unsure what to do as he has never had a boyfriend before and it is all new to him . Natasha urges Chris to " face his fears " and she decides to play matchmaker at a barbecue they are all attending . Chris bonds with Aidan , but he thinks he missed his chance when Aidan goes on a date with someone else . Mason revealed that this leads to some new tension between the characters . 
 Aidan and Chris later arrange a date , which turns into " a complete disaster " . Chris is initially anxious and on edge , until he realises Aidan is having fun and he relaxes . However , Natasha then calls Chris to help with a problem and he has to leave Aidan , who assumes Chris has set the whole thing up to get out of the date . Aidan and Chris go out on another date , which marks the beginning of their relationship and Neighbours ' first ever gay couple . On 9 April 2012 , Aidan and Chris shared their first on @-@ screen kiss . The couple , who had not shown any sign of physical affection until that point , shared " a rather passionate embrace " during a house party . Morley told TV Week 's Andrew Mercado that Chris and Aidan share the intimate moment as any other couple would do . Morley thought the kiss was just as awkward as any other kiss he had previously performed , but he and Mason spent a lot of time and effort into getting it right for their characters . Chris and Aidan 's kiss marked the serial 's first male gay kiss in its twenty @-@ seven @-@ year history . Bower had previously promised that it would not be " sensationalist or token " and the low @-@ key scene earned praise from viewers on social networking sites . 
 Morley took a break from Neighbours in mid @-@ 2012 , which led the writers to improvise an on @-@ screen break up for Aidan and Chris . The break up occurs after Aidan learns Chris has not told his parents that they are in a relationship . Mason said that Chris is fine with his friends knowing about his relationship , but it is different story when it comes to his parents . His father has not always made things easy for him in the past , so he does not give him and his mother a chance to get to know Aidan . When Chris ' parents throw him a birthday party at Lassiter 's Lake , he decides not to invite Aidan . However , Aidan learns about the party from Andrew and he feels " hurt and humiliated " by Chris ' actions . Aidan makes it clear to Chris that their relationship is over and Mason added " That 's when the gravity of the situation hits Chris , and he 's left in shock . He thinks , ' How did it come to this ? ' . Things really seemed to be falling into place with Aidan . " Chris then learns that his parents would have accepted the relationship and he realises that he has lost Aidan due to an assumption . 
 Chris and Aidan later got back together , but after a few weeks , Chris broke up with Aidan for good . Chris ended the relationship because Aidan was not being honest about things . Chris learned that Aidan had been keeping Andrew 's epilepsy and his own suspension from the hospital a secret . When Aidan then got into a fight and hid it , Chris became " exasperated enough " to end things . Mason said Chris was still in love with Aidan , so it was tough on them both . Aidan later made a " desperate suggestion " that they move in together , but Chris realised that it would be a bad idea . Mason quipped " Chris is a pretty happy @-@ go @-@ lucky guy , so I don 't think he 'll be wallowing in self @-@ pity for long . " Mason added that he would miss Morley , as he had enjoyed working with him during the storyline . 
 = = = Warren Burrell = = = 
 In September 2011 , Chris meets Warren Burrell ( Tony Rickards ) , a homophobic customer at the garage . Warren makes his prejudice against gay people clear to Chris . Mason said Chris was unsure how to respond to the situation , as he has never met an adult who speaks about gay people in the way Warren does . Chris tells his boss , Lucas Fitzgerald , about Warren , but he is disappointed when Lucas does not do anything about it . Of Chris 's situation , Mason explained " It was very confronting for him . And because the guy wasn 't pointing his remarks directly at Chris , Lucas didn 't understand why Chris was so offended . At first , he didn 't have an appreciation of how deep those comments hurt Chris . " The storyline divided the opinions of viewers with some understanding why Lucas would not want to confront Warren , while others were on Chris 's side . Mason said he was pleased that viewers were discussing the storyline and he admitted he appreciated both sides . The actor said " Lucas wasn 't there when the customer was saying these things , so he didn 't understand Chris 's point of view . However , as the story went along , we saw Lucas change and his respect for Chris grew . " Mason added the storyline was about showing understanding for where a person is coming from and being willing to change your ideas . 
 Two months later , Warren returns to the garage and Lucas shows his support for Chris and defends him . Chris meets and befriends Warren 's son , Blake ( Oliver Edwin ) . When Warren learns Blake is friends with Chris , he decides to put a stop to the situation . Warren threatens to kill Chris unless he stops spending time with Blake . Mason told TV Week that he thinks it is a shame Chris and Blake cannot continue their friendship because of Warren and his views . It soon becomes clear someone is spying on Chris , but whether it is Warren or someone else is not clear . Mason added something big would happen and it may not end well for Chris . 
 = = = Scotty Boland = = = 
 In February 2013 , Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy reported that Chris would be shocked when he realises that Scotty Boland ( Rhys Uhlich ) " may have a romantic interest in him . " During a charity camp @-@ out , which has been organised by Scotty 's girlfriend , Georgia ( Saskia Hampele ) , Scotty visits Chris ' tent and says something that makes Chris believe he is making a move on him . Mason commented that the storyline has " a serious side " because everyone believes Scotty is straight , especially his girlfriend . However , he added that there would be some funny moments in the lead up to the big revelation . Not long after the camp @-@ out incident , Scotty lets his attraction to Chris get the better of him and he tries to kiss Chris . Uhlich explained " There 's no mistaking this as Scotty hitting on Chris . He 's really put it out there now , but Chris doesn 't go for it . So he kicks Scotty out of the house , but even then Scotty doesn 't realise what the kiss means . " A shocked Chris then confides in his housemate , Kyle Canning ( Chris Milligan ) , about the kiss and they decide that they need to tell Georgia about it . However , they soon learn that Scotty has proposed to Georgia and decide to remain silent to stop her from having her heart broken . 
 = = = Coward punch = = = 
 In September 2014 , Chris was the focus of a coward punch storyline . During Kyle and Georgia 's joint bucks and hen night , Chris was forced to eject a drunk Josh Willis ( Harley Bonner ) from The Waterhole when he caused a scene . Shortly after , Josh returned and hit Chris with a coward punch , causing him to fall and hit his head on a rock . Kyle and Georgia found Chris unconscious and he was rushed to hospital in a critical condition . Mason was pleased to be given the storyline , explaining that it was a topical issue in Australia at the time . He said " The whole moral of the story is that one little mistake can have really dire consequences . I like to think that we can use this story to really educate people and get the word out there that this is something really serious that we 're battling against at the moment . " Mason thought that Chris might be able to forgive Josh in the future , but it would be " a long process " , and he would have to deal with the fact that his life had changed forever due to the attack first . Mason added that Chris would have difficulties accepting that someone like Josh attacked him . 
 Chris faced further trouble when he suffered a sudden seizure . Mason explained that many things had changed for Chris since the attack and the seizure compounded his fear that he will be struggling for the rest of his life . Chris was also worried that he had developed epilepsy like Andrew did , but doctors informed him that the seizure was a temporary symptom of his brain injury . Chris was kept in hospital overnight , which meant his romantic plans with his partner Nate Kinski ( <unk> Wyatt ) were put on hold . However , Nate turned up at the hospital and Mason said , " The two of them just cuddle , and for the first time Chris realises this is a serious relationship . " Nate then told Chris he loved him for the first time . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 After five years in the role , Mason decided to leave Neighbours and Chris departed on 27 March 2015 . Chris 's exit storyline saw him decide to be a full @-@ time father to his child with Lucy Robinson ( Melissa Bell ) , and move to New York . When Nate told Chris that he did not want to move to New York , they decided to end their relationship . Wyatt commented " It 's been a long time coming . Chris has decided that he wants to go to New York and Nate is staying in Erinsborough . " Chris departed Erinsborough with Lucy . On 6 November 2015 , Chris and Lucy made a cameo appearance to announce the birth of their daughter . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 After being scammed by Andrew Robinson and Harry Ramsay into buying a manual on how to win a girlfriend , Chris befriends them and Summer Hoyland . Chris joins the basketball team and is later elected captain . He also begins dating Summer , which makes Harry jealous . Andrew gets Chris fired from his job as a lifeguard at the local swimming pool when he throws a party that gets out of control . To make things up to Chris , Andrew helps him get a job at the local gym . Summer becomes annoyed when Chris forgives Andrew so easily and then allows himself to be influenced by him into skipping school . Chris also ends up in a fight with Kyle Canning when he defends Andrew . Michael Williams ( Sandy Winton ) becomes concerned about Chris 's behaviour and Chris later tells him he is confused about Andrew , leading Michael to realise Chris is gay . When Michael 's daughter , Natasha , spreads a rumour that a Year 11 student is gay , several people believe it is Summer . The rumours start to affect Chris and he comes out to his class . When Andrew realises Chris has feelings for him and is annoyed . 
 Chris is suspended from school when he gets into a fight with a rival basketball captain . When his parents find out about the fight and that he is gay , they throw Chris out and he stays with Summer . She later breaks down and reveals that she is struggling with his sexuality . Chris reassures her that it is not her fault he is gay and their friendship becomes stronger . Chris befriends Natasha and helps her and Summer to make up when they fall out . After receiving lower grades than expected , Chris reconsiders attending university . He gets a job at Fitzgerald Motors , upsetting his father , George , who wants him to go to university . To keep George happy , Chris begins attending TAFE . A customer , Warren Burrell , makes derogatory comments about gay people and makes Chris feel uncomfortable . Warren 's son , Blake , befriends Chris and apologises for his father . Warren witnesses them playing pool and warns Chris to stay away from Blake . Chris is later attacked while working and Lucas takes him to the hospital , but Chris leaves before getting his x @-@ rays . He later collapses and Rhys Lawson has to perform emergency surgery to get Chris breathing again . 
 Nurse Aidan Foster is assigned to look after Chris . Chris later turns down Aidan 's offer of a drink ; but Natasha encourages him to spend time with Aidan . Chris becomes jealous when Aidan goes on a date with another guy and eventually manages to ask Aidan out . Chris and Aidan begin dating . Aidan encourages Chris to tell his parents about them , but Chris admits that he is struggling to and worries how his father will react . Chris chooses not to invite Aidan to his birthday party , which is hosted by his family , and Aidan breaks up with him . Chris tells his parents about his relationship and they assure him that they would have accepted it . During a car journey to the city , Chris and his friends find Sophie Ramsay ( Kaiya Jones ) hiding in the boot of his car . Andrew pressures Chris into allowing Sophie to sit on Summer 's lap . An argument between Andrew and Natasha breaks out and when Andrew bumps Chris ' arm , he loses control of the car and crashes . Chris blames himself for the accident and Andrew 's father , Paul ( Stefan Dennis ) , tries to sue him . The police fine Chris and he loses his license for six months . Chris and Aidan get back together and Chris moves into 26 Ramsay Street . 
 Chris becomes frustrated with Aidan when he does not confide in him about his feelings or accept help from him . When Aidan goes back on his promise to be more open and honest , Chris breaks up with him . Chris suffers a flashback to the crash and damages a Lassiter 's car . Ralphie Mahone ( Daniel Bowden ) fixes the car and in return , he asks Chris to rework some vehicles for him . Chris comes clean to Lucas , who calls the police . Ralphie threatens Chris , but Mason Turner ( Taylor Glockner ) intervenes and gets rid of Ralphie . Georgia Brooks 's boyfriend , Scotty , makes sexual advances towards Chris . When Georgia finds out , she starts avoiding Chris , but they later make up . Chris befriends Amber Turner ( Jenna Rosenow ) when he sees she is being bullied . Amber develops a crush on Chris and he is forced to tell her that nothing will ever happen between them . Chris begins dating competitive swimmer Hudson Walsh ( Remy <unk> ) . Chris breaks up with Hudson when he learns that he is taking performance @-@ enhancing drugs . Chris and Hudson later get back together . Hudson confesses to running down Amber 's ex @-@ boyfriend Robbo Slade ( Aaron <unk> ) . He apologises to Chris and then refuses to see him again . 
 When he has trouble sleeping , Chris gets a prescription for sleeping pills . Kyle and his grandmother , Sheila ( Colette Mann ) , later find Chris collapsed in the garden and Karl tells Chris to stop taking the sleeping pills . Chris ignores his advice and starts sleepwalking . Chris also has a series of one @-@ night stands and gets two warnings at work from his new boss , Danni Ferguson ( Laura McIntosh ) . Chris is arrested when he punches Josh Willis , who spoke to a journalist about Chris and Hudson 's relationship . Kate Ramsay ( Ashleigh Brewer ) drives Chris to the prison , so he can see Hudson and sort things out . Hudson tells Chris that he cut off contact as he needed time to prepare himself for prison . Chris asks Hudson to give their relationship another go and he agrees . Chris keeps Hudson 's incarceration a secret from his parents , so he is angered when Sonya Rebecchi ( Eve Morey ) inadvertently reveals his secret to his mother , Patricia ( Katerina <unk> ) . When Patricia is later arrested for theft , Chris learns that she is a gambling addict and Sonya knew . 
 Chris 's knee is badly injured when Danni 's ex @-@ boyfriend Stephen Montague ( Damian Hill ) attacks him . He undergoes surgery and the flirts with nurse Will <unk> ( Christian Heath ) when he suffers a reaction to the analgesic . Chris becomes frustrated when Hudson is not there for him , and questions how he can be in a relationship and feel so alone . He decides to ask Will out for a drink , but later cancels . Chris collapses due to complications from his surgery and is readmitted to hospital . He apologises to Will for cancelling on him and then tells him about Hudson . During Chris 's next visit to Hudson , he appears distracted and when Hudson asks him if he is seeing someone else , Chris hesitates and Hudson breaks up with him . Chris tells Hudson about Will and how lonely he is . Hudson does not want Chris to date him out of guilt , and they say goodbye . Chris spends some time with Will and they begin dating , but the relationship ends when Will 's dog , Napoleon , bites Kyle 's dog Bossy , and Will refuses to accept responsibility or apologise . 
 Chris befriends Lucy Robinson ( Melissa Bell ) and she asks him to father her child , to which Chris replies that he needs time to decide . Chris meets Nate Kinski and they arrange to go a picnic for their first date . Chris is shocked when Nate attacks a drunk guy for harassing Paige Smith ( Olympia Valance ) , but Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) convinces him to give Nate a second chance . When Chris asks Nate to open up about his time in the army and Afghanistan , Nate gets physical with him . Nate promises that it will not happen again and asks Chris not to push him about opening up until he is ready . During Georgia and Kyle 's joint hen and bucks night , Chris is punched by an unseen assailant and he hits his head . Kyle and Georgia find him and he is rushed to hospital , and placed in an induced coma . Josh later confesses to punching Chris . When Chris wakes up , he struggles to remember words and his right side is weakened . Chris is allowed leave from the hospital to attend Georgia and Kyle 's wedding . After he is discharged from hospital , Nate becomes Chris 's carer . Chris decides to return to work at the garage but is unable to do the work and is sent home . Chris later suffers a seizure and is admitted to hospital . He is forced to quit his job as he can no longer handle the workload due to his injuries . Josh 's mother , Terese ( Rebekah Elmaloglou ) , offers Chris a job as a trainee manager at Lassiter 's Hotel , which Nate persuades him to accept . 
 Lucy returns and Chris rejects her offer of being father to her child when Nate confesses he does not want children ; however , Chris changes his mind when Nate supports him . Nate later helps Chris and Lucy see that they need to think the idea through more thoroughly , and they draw up a contract detailing how their child will be raised . When they learn that they are both carriers of spinal muscular atrophy , Chris tells Lucy that she should find another donor . But when Chris sees how down Lucy is , he changes his mind and they go ahead with the insemination . A couple of weeks later , Lucy calls Chris to tell him that she is pregnant . Chris plans to visit New York for the scan , but Nate confesses he is banned from the States for overstaying his visa there previously . Toadfish Rebecchi ( Ryan Moloney ) agrees to help lift the ban , but Nate misses a meeting and Chris accuses him of not taking it seriously . Lucy returns for a visit and Chris decides he wants to split his time between Erinsborough and New York when the baby comes , although Nate is against this idea . Nate realises that they want different things , and they break @-@ up . Chris then decides to move to New York with Lucy and leaves after a farewell party at The Waterhole . A few months later , Amber contacts Chris and Lucy via video call after learning that they have had a daughter . Chris and Lucy introduce her to Anne , and Chris asks Amber to say hello to Nate for him . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For his portrayal of Chris , Mason was nominated for the Most Popular New Male Talent accolade at the 2012 Logie Awards . In 2014 , Mason won the Soap Extra Award for Most Topical Storyline for Chris ' coward punch storyline with Josh Willis . The character 's inclusion in Neighbours and his storyline has received a positive reaction from the public , television critics and LGBT websites . Chris 's coming out episode , which was broadcast on 10 August 2010 , was seen by 679 @,@ 000 viewers in Australia . David Knox of Citysearch Melbourne said that the inclusion of Chris in the show is " a positive step with its juvenile audience " . Knox added that following the " gay kiss scandal " on Home and Away , " the test for Neighbours will be not just the coming out , but whether he remains in the show after this storyline subsides " . Of Chris , SX News said " One could simply dismiss the gay character as simply just another plot line , but there 's no denying its significance , especially with a show as enduring and mainstream as Neighbours . If anything , it 's a small reflection of the changing attitudes in society " . They also praised Neighbours for focusing on Chris 's coming out and the issue of homophobia , instead of letting Chris " explode out of the closet and leave Ramsay Street glittering in sequins " . 
 The ATV News Network said the Chris 's coming out should be praised for the way it has been handled . They added that the decision to play it out at a school would have viewers in a similar situation identifying with the storyline . Alan McKee , a university film and television professor , said that usually subscription television channels take risks in portraying storylines like Chris 's . He added " Commercial TV is not about risk taking , it is about entertainment for the broadest possible audience . But attitudes have changed and commercial networks like to reflect that " . Holy Soap said Chris 's most memorable moment was " Announcing to his entire class that he was gay . " Anthony D. Langford from website , AfterElton said he found it " humorous " that Neighbours emphasizes what a gentleman Chris is compared to Andrew . He said " It 's like they 're almost saying if you 're a nice guy who 's not all over your girlfriend you must be gay . But on television that 's usually the case " . Langford hoped that Chris would not vanish and that he would not be relegated to monitoring the relationship between Andrew and Summer and not having a romance of his own . 
 Langford later said that Neighbours is doing a " fairly decent job " with Chris 's coming out story . He wished that viewers got to see more of Chris 's thoughts and feelings and less of how his situation affected the people around him . Langford added " I do like that Chris isn 't a perfect kid . Many shows tend to make gay teens near saints . Instead , he 's a fairly average kid who makes mistakes and messes up , like starting a fight at a basketball game . In July 2011 , Langford revealed that he had seen some comments from people thinking that Lucas and Chris should be paired up . He opined that there is not a hint of romance between the two and wondered why people assumed that if a gay character shares a scene with another guy , they must get together . Langford revealed that he liked Chris and Lucas 's mentor and mentee relationship as it is . The writer also commented on the introduction of Chris 's father and said that he was " delighted " that Chris was finally getting his own drama , that was " pretty realistic . " He added " It 's nice to see the father / son dynamic play out . I have the feeling that a lot of Chris 's dad 's issues stem from the fact that his son is gay and I hope the show will delve into those <unk> issues . " 
 Sarah Ellis writing for Inside Soap said " I 'd love to see Chris with a boyfriend – he 's the nicest guy in Erinsborough ! " In 2011 , Mason revealed that he has had a positive reaction to his character from viewers and he has been receiving mail from people who have had similar experiences , who appreciate what Neighbours is doing . He added " What 's interesting is that a lot of feedback has been about the fact the character 's coming out wasn 't a " warm and fuzzy " experience , that there were rough spots . They appreciated the authenticity of the story , and I think that comes from the character and storylines being based on other people 's real life experiences . " Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun branded Chris Erinsborough 's token gay . He added " Good on Neighbours for not having their gay character flouncing around in a midriff top listening to Britney Spears . " Inside Soap 's staff said that they could not wait to see how Chris would get on with Aidan . They added that it was " high time he had a boyfriend " . Of the Chris and Scotty storyline , Melinda Houston from The Sun @-@ Herald wrote " Good on Neighbours for not just having an ongoing gay character but using him to explore some interesting issues . 
 = She Ain 't You = 
 " She Ain 't You " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown . The mid @-@ tempo R & B , pop @-@ flavored ballad was written by Brown , Jean Baptiste , Ryan Buendia , Kevin McCall and Jason Boyd , and was produced by Free School . It was sent to urban contemporary radio in the United States on March 28 , 2011 , as the fourth US single from Brown 's fourth studio album , F.A.M.E. ( 2011 ) . Musically , " She Ain 't You " samples the remixed version of SWV 's " Right Here " ( 1993 ) , which in turn samples Michael Jackson 's " Human Nature " ( 1983 ) . The song 's lyrics are about Brown falling in and out of love . " She Ain 't You " received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . 
 " She Ain 't You " reached number five on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , number 17 on the US Pop Songs chart , and number 27 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Although it was only officially released in the US , the song also charted in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , Slovakia and the United Kingdom . The accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley and features Brown paying tribute to Michael Jackson . Brown performed " She Ain 't You " at the 2011 BET Awards , on Today , and during his F.A.M.E. Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " She Ain 't You " was written by Brown , Jean Baptiste , Ryan Buendia , Kevin McCall and Jason Boyd , and was produced by Free School . It was recorded at Stadium Red Studios in New York City — and Brian Springer mixed the song at The Record Plant — a studio in Los Angeles , California . Springer was assisted by Iain Findlay and Mark <unk> . Amber Streeter of R & B girl group RichGirl performed background vocals on the song . The song was sent to urban contemporary radio in the United States on March 28 , 2011 . It also impacted rhythmic contemporary radio on April 19 , 2011 , and contemporary hit radio on May 31 , 2011 . A remix of " She Ain 't You " featuring SWV premiered online on June 10 , 2011 . 
 " She Ain 't You " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B , pop @-@ flavored ballad , featuring electronic and calm beats . The song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 92 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D major with Brown 's vocal range spanning from the note of B3 to the note of B5 . It also makes use of the drums . " She Ain 't You " contains a portion of a remixed version of SWV 's " Right Here " ( 1993 ) , which in turn samples Michael Jackson 's " Human Nature " ( 1982 ) . According to Najah Goldstein of WNOW @-@ FM , it is " reminiscent of a 90 's R & B love song . " According to Scott Shetler of AOL Music , on the song , " Brown sings that he 's found a new girl , but he 's not happy because he still prefers his ex . " Hannah Ash of The Harber Herald noted that the line : " With you I had a bad romance " , could be a reference to Lady Gaga 's 2009 single " Bad Romance " . Ash also noted that the song contains " slow and pouty vocals . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe wrote that the song " is totally shameless and completely effective " as it " derives much of its charm from a hefty sample of Michael Jackson 's ' Human Nature ' " . Joanne Dorken of MTV UK wrote that the sample gives " the tune an instant eighties feel " . Najah Goldstein of radio station WNOW @-@ FM wrote that the song is " shows a much softer side of Chris Brown " , and further added that it 's " definitely a song for the ladies ... maybe even for pop star Rihanna . " Margaret Wappler of Los Angeles Times wrote that " the sentiment of the song is refreshingly complex . " Hannah Ash of The Harber Herald wrote that on F.A.M.E. , " She Ain 't You " and " Up to You " are " the perfect sweet and cute love songs " . While reviewing the album , Sean Fennessey of The Washington Post wrote that " a more appropriate application appears on ' She Ain ’ t You ' , which interpolates Michael Jackson 's ' Human Nature ' . Jackson has long been the emotional , physical and musical forebear to Brown . But on ' She Ain ’ t You ' he begs the comparison , and it isn ’ t pretty . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that Brown " has a really charmless way with a lyric , as on ' She Ain ’ t You ' — " When I 'm with her it 's only ' bout the sex / With you I had a bad romance / And if I could just trade her in I would " — and a voice nowhere near strong enough to make up for it . " The song was nominated for Song of the Year at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards , and Top R & B Song at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the issue dated April 2 , 2011 , " She Ain 't You " debuted at number 75 on the US Hot R & B / Hip Hop Songs chart . The song peaked at number five in the issue dated June 18 , 2011 , and spent twenty @-@ two weeks on the chart . In the issue dated April 30 , 2011 , " She Ain 't You " debuted at number 90 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and peaked at number 27 in the issue dated August 6 , 2011 . Even though the song was only officially released in the US , it still managed to chart in other countries . On the Australian Singles Chart , " She Ain 't You " debuted at number 34 on June 13 , 2011 , and peaked at number 27 . The song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of 35 @,@ 000 copies . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , " She Ain 't You " debuted at number 37 , peaked at number 27 , and spent a total of seven weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 90 on the UK Singles Chart dated October 15 , 2011 , and peaked at number 53 on November 12 , 2011 . It also charted on the UK R & B Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 17 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " She Ain 't You " was directed by Colin Tilley , and premiered on May 2 , 2011 . Throughout the video , Brown pays tribute to Michael Jackson , and as stated by Lewis Corner of Digital Spy , " Brown has also choreographed a selection of iconic Jackson @-@ inspired moves for the song 's dance routine . " The video opens with the following dedication , " Dedicated to my biggest inspiration of all time ... I Love You . R.I.P. Michael Jackson . 08 / 29 / 58 – 06 / 25 / 09 . " Brown then appears in a 1980s @-@ styled white suit and a black fedora , performing choreography with male and female dancers against a wall of neon lights . Brown 's outfit was noted for its similarities to the one Jackson wore in his music video for " Smooth Criminal " ( 1988 ) . In between these scenes , Brown can also be seen wearing a black suit while dancing in front of a backdrop of dark clouds . Amber Streeter and Brown appear separately during the song 's chorus where they are surrounded by gold butterflies . More scenes of Brown performing choreography are shown during the second verse . He also appears outdoors splashing in a pool of water . The video ends showing Brown flying through the air . 
 A writer for Rap @-@ Up wrote that the video showcased what Brown does best – " dance " . Anthony Osei of Complex magazine wrote , " If anyone can do a great Michael Jackson tribute , it 's Chris Brown . " A writer of DesiHits wrote that the video brought the " same magic " from his tribute to Jackson at the 2010 BET Awards , and added that it included " great lighting and even better choreography . " Robbie Daw of Idolator found the video " mildly enjoyable " . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly called Brown 's dancing " tremendous " and wrote , " You 'd be hard pressed trying to find a singer out there with enough dancing abilities to even attempt a proper Jackson tribute . Brown is one of the few — if not the only . " At the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards , the video was nominated for Best Dance Performance . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On June 26 , 2011 , Brown performed " She Ain 't You " along with " Look at Me Now " and " Paper , Scissors , Rock " at the 2011 BET Awards . The performance started off with Brown performing " She Ain 't You " in a gray suit with voluminous pant legs and a cape fashioned out of a jacket . He then switched his outfit to a black jumpsuit and performed " Look at Me Now " , as a group of dancers in similarly street black hoodies joined him on stage . Busta Rhymes later appeared from a brightly lit cube flanked by dancers in eerie , transparent masks illuminated by blinking lights . Brown ended the performance with " Paper , Scissors , Rock " . On July 15 , 2011 , Brown performed " She Ain 't You " in front of an audience of 18 @,@ 000 people at the Rockefeller Plaza in New York City as part of Today concert series . For the performance , Brown wore a white shirt and a black and gold vest with black pants . " She Ain 't You " was added to the set list of Brown 's F.A.M.E. Tour in North America . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for F.A.M.E .. 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release dates = = 
 = Jada Pinkett Smith = 
 Jada Koren Pinkett – Smith ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; born Jada Koren Pinkett ; September 18 , 1971 ) is an American actress , dancer , singer @-@ songwriter , and businesswoman . She began her career in 1990 , when she made a guest appearance in the short @-@ lived sitcom True Colors . She starred in A Different World , produced by Bill Cosby , and she featured opposite Eddie Murphy in The Nutty Professor ( 1996 ) . She starred in dramatic films such as Menace II Society ( 1993 ) and Set It Off ( 1996 ) . She has appeared in more than 20 films in a variety of genres , including Scream 2 , Ali , The Matrix Reloaded , The Matrix Revolutions , Madagascar , Madagascar : Escape 2 Africa , and Madagascar 3 : Europe 's Most Wanted . 
 Pinkett Smith launched her music career in 2002 , when she helped create the metal band Wicked Wisdom , for which she is a singer and songwriter . Smith also created a production company , in addition to authoring a book , published in 2004 . 
 In 1997 , she married actor Will Smith . They have two children , Jaden and Willow . The couple founded the Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation , a charity organization which focuses on inner @-@ city youth and family support and has worked with non @-@ profit organizations like <unk> and the Lupus Foundation of America . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Born in Baltimore , Maryland , Jada Koren Pinkett was named after her mother 's favorite soap @-@ opera actress , Jada Rowland . Pinkett Smith is of African American , West Indian ( from Jamaica and Barbados ) , Creole , and Portuguese @-@ Jewish ancestry . Her parents are Adrienne Banfield @-@ Jones , the head nurse of an inner @-@ city clinic in Baltimore , and <unk> Pinkett , Jr . , who ran a construction company . Banfield @-@ Jones became pregnant in high school ; the couple married but divorced after several months . Banfield @-@ Jones raised Pinkett with the help of her own mother , Marion Martin Banfield , a social worker . Banfield noticed her granddaughter 's passion for the performing arts and enrolled her in piano , tap dance , and ballet lessons . She has a younger brother , actor / writer <unk> Pinkett . 
 Pinkett Smith has remained close to her mother and said , " A mother and daughter 's relationship is usually the most honest , and we are so close . " She also added : " [ My mother ] understood what I wanted and never stood in my way . " She participated as the maid of honor in Banfield @-@ Jones ' 1998 wedding to telecommunications executive Paul Jones . Pinkett Smith has shown great admiration for her grandmother , saying , " My grandmother was a doer who wanted to create a better community and add beauty to the world . " 
 Pinkett Smith attended the Baltimore School for the Arts , where she met and became lifelong friends with classmate Tupac Shakur . She majored in dance and theatre and graduated in 1989 . She continued her education at the North Carolina School of the Arts , and became fully invested in pursuing her acting career . She ultimately moved to Los Angeles , California , where she quickly found success in show business . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 She began her acting career in 1990 , when she starred in an episode of True Colors . She then appeared in a television pilot for a supernatural drama titled Moe 's World that was never aired . She received guest roles in television shows such as <unk> Howser , M.D. ( 1991 ) and 21 Jump Street ( 1991 ) . She earned a role on comedian Bill Cosby 's NBC television sitcom A Different World in 1991 , as college freshman Lena James . 
 In 1994 , Pinkett Smith acted with <unk> Ivory Wayans in the action and comedy film A Low Down Dirty Shame . She described her character , Peaches , as " raw " with " major attitude " , and her acting garnered positive reviews . The New York Times noted , " Ms. Pinkett , whose performance is as sassy and sizzling as a Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa recording , walks away with the movie . " 
 = = = 1996 – 2000 = = = 
 Following a role in Demon Knight ( 1995 ) , Pinkett Smith co @-@ starred with actor and comedian Eddie Murphy in the 1996 remake of The Nutty Professor . The film opened in 2 @,@ 000 theaters and earned $ 25 million in its first weekend . 
 Next , Pinkett Smith had a role in Set It Off ( 1996 ) , a crime drama about four women who rob banks to escape from poverty . With Queen Latifah , Vivica A. Fox , and Kimberly Elise , her acting in the film was noted in the San Francisco Chronicle where they named her as " the one to watch " . 
 In 1997 , Pinkett Smith had a cameo role in Scream 2 as Maureen Evans , a college student who is brutally murdered in front of hundreds of cinemagoers . The film made over $ 100 million at the US box office . In 2000 , Pinkett Smith was cast in Spike Lee 's film <unk> ( 2000 ) , as Sloan Hopkins , a personal assistant to the main character portrayed by Damon Wayans . Although the film met with mediocre reviews , it won the Freedom of Expression Award by the National Board of Review . 
 = = = 2001 – present = = = 
 Perhaps her best @-@ known role to date is the part of human rebel Niobe in the films The Matrix Reloaded ( 2003 ) and The Matrix Revolutions ( 2003 ) , and video game Enter The Matrix ( 2003 ) sequels to 1999 's The Matrix . The character was eventually written , specifically , with Pinkett Smith in mind . Directly after she filmed her scenes for Ali , Pinkett Smith flew to Australia to work on the Matrix sequels . The sequels earned over $ 91 million and $ 48 million during opening weekends , respectively . 
 In 2008 , Pinkett Smith portrayed Alex Fisher , a lesbian author , in The Women . Pinkett Smith 's directorial debut was The Human Contract ; she also wrote and acted in the movie . Starring Paz Vega and Idris Elba , it debuted at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2008 . In January 2009 , she started working on the TNT medical drama Hawthorne , in which she was executive producer and a starring cast member . In September 2011 , the show was cancelled by TNT , after three seasons . In spring 2012 , Pinkett Smith launched a web series entitled Red Table Talks , with the first episode featuring her daughter and her mother , in order to encourage dialogue within families . Beginning in 2014 , she starred in the first season of the Fox 's crime drama Gotham as the notorious gangster Fish Mooney . In 2016 she reprised her role as Mooney in many episodes of <unk> second season . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 Under the stage name Jada Koren , Pinkett Smith formed the metal band Wicked Wisdom in 2002 . The band consists of Pinkett Smith performing lead vocals , Pocket Honore ( guitar , vocals ) , Cameron " <unk> " Graves ( guitar , keyboard , vocals ) , and Rio ( bass , vocals ) . The band is managed by James Lassiter and Miguel Melendez of Overbrook Entertainment , a company co @-@ founded by Pinkett Smith 's husband Will Smith . 
 The band 's self @-@ titled debut album was released on February 21 , 2006 , by Pinkett Smith 's production company 100 % <unk> and Suburban Noize Records . Will Smith served as the project 's executive producer . The album made it to Billboard 's Top Heatseekers chart , and peaked at number 44 during the week of March 11 , 2006 . AllMusic reviewer Alex Henderson said of the album , " [ Pinkett Smith ] shows herself to be an expressive , commanding singer " and that " [ Wicked Wisdom ] shows considerable promise " . The band promoted the album in 2006 , touring with heavy metal band Sevendust . 
 = = = Onyx Hotel Tour = = = 
 Wicked Wisdom landed a slot on Britney Spears ' Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004 , one of the year 's highest @-@ profile tours . The band opened for Spears for eight dates in April and May 2004 , during the European leg of the tour . 
 = = = Ozzfest 2005 = = = 
 In 2005 , Sharon Osbourne went to see Wicked Wisdom perform at a small nightclub in Los Angeles . She said , " I was blown away . When you see and hear Jada with her band it 's apparent that she has nothing but love and respect for this genre of music " . In May 2005 organizers announced Wicked Wisdom would perform on the second stage of 2005 's Ozzfest . Fans of the festival were outraged , claiming the band did not have the credibility to perform at the music festival . Aware of the questions about the band 's addition to Ozzfest , Pinkett Smith said , " I 'm not here asking for any favors . You 've got to show and prove . And not every audience is going to go for it . " Wicked Wisdom 's guitarist Pocket Honore said while early dates of the tour were rocky , " once word got out that we weren 't a joke , people started coming out and by the sixth or seventh gig we were on fire " . Pinkett Smith agreed , saying , " After seven dates within the Ozzfest tour , the whole attitude of it started to turn around once the word of mouth started getting out . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jada met Will Smith in 1994 on the set of Smith 's television show The Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air , when she auditioned for the role of his character 's girlfriend , Lisa Wilkes . She was considered too short and the role went to actress Nia Long . Jada and Will became friends , and began dating in 1995 . On December 31 , 1997 , about 100 guests attended their wedding at The Cloisters , near her hometown of Baltimore , Maryland . Regarding her marriage , Jada said that they are " private people " and told one interviewer , " I will throw my career away before I let it break up our marriage . I made it clear to Will . I 'd throw it away completely " . 
 Jada and Will have two children , Jaden ( b . 1998 ) , and Willow ( b . 2000 ) . She is also the stepmother of Trey Smith , Will 's son from a previous marriage . 
 Will commented in 2008 on their parenting styles : " We 're not strict but we definitely believe it 's a very important component for rearing children . It creates safety for them . They understand that they need guidance . " Jaden and Willow are attending public school once again . The family resides in a 27 @,@ 000 square foot ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) home , on 100 acres ( 40 ha ) , in Malibu . 
 = = Business ventures = = 
 After opening her music company 100 % <unk> Productions , Pinkett Smith created her own fashion label , Maja , in 1994 . The clothing line features women 's T @-@ shirts and dresses embellished with the slogan " Sister Power " , sold primarily through small catalogs . 
 In 2003 , Pinkett Smith and Smith helped to create the television series All of Us , which originally aired on UPN . Pinkett Smith published her first children 's book , Girls Hold Up This World , in 2004 . " I wrote the book for Willow and for her friends and for all the little girls in the world who need affirmation about being female in this pretty much masculine world . I really tried to capture different sides of femininity . I want girls in the world to feel powerful , to know they have the power to change the world in any way they wish . " 
 In 2005 , Pinkett Smith became one of many celebrities to invest a combined total of $ 10 million in Carol 's Daughter , a line of beauty products created by Lisa Price . She became a spokesperson for the beauty line , and said , " To be a part of another African American woman 's dream was just priceless to me . " 
 She also is a shareholder the Philadelphia 76ers with her husband Will Smith and other partners . 
 = = Charity work and politics = = 
 Together with Smith , Pinkett Smith has created the Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation in Baltimore , Maryland , a charity which focuses on youth in urban inner cities and family support . Her aunt , Karen Banfield Evans , is the foundation 's executive director . The charity was awarded the David Angell Humanitarian Award by The American Screenwriters Association ( ASA ) in 2006 . The Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation has provided grants to non @-@ profit organizations such as <unk> , and Pinkett Smith has made personal donations to organizations such as Capital K @-@ 9s . 
 In December 2006 , she donated $ 1 million to the Baltimore School for the Arts in memory of her friend Tupac . 
 When Pinkett Smith 's aunt , Karen Banfield Evans , was diagnosed with lupus , the Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation , in association with the Lupus Foundation of America and Maybelline , held the first annual " Butterflies Over Hollywood " event on September 29 , 2007 , at the El Rey Theatre in Los Angeles . The event raised funds for LFA public and professional educational programs . The Will and Jada Smith Family Foundation was presented with an award in 2007 at the 4th Annual Lupus Foundation of America Awards . 
 In 2012 , on behalf of PETA , Pinkett Smith wrote a letter to Baltimore 's mayor , asking that the visiting Ringling Brothers Circus " comply with Baltimore ’ s absolute prohibition of the use of devices such as <unk> " and not harm the elephants . In 2013 , she appeared in a video clip for Gucci 's " Chime for Change " campaign that aims to raise funds and awareness of women 's issues globally . 
 In 1997 , Pinkett Smith was the emcee of the Million Woman March in Philadelphia . 
 = = = Scientology = = = 
 After meeting Tom Cruise during the filming of Collateral in 2004 , Pinkett Smith and Smith donated $ 20 @,@ 000 to the Hollywood Education and Literacy Program ( HELP ) , Scientology 's basis for homeschooling . The couple came under fire in 2008 when they decided to fund New Village Leadership Academy , a private elementary school located in Calabasas , California ( now defunct ) . The school employed teachers dedicated to Scientology and featured controversial methodologies like Study Technology , created by Church of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard . The couple have denied claims that they are themselves Scientologists . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = CMLL World Tag Team Championship = 
 The CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( CMLL Campeonato Mundial de Parejas in Spanish ) is a professional wrestling championship promoted by Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ; Spanish for " World Wrestling Council " ) in Mexico and is for two @-@ man tag teams only . The championship was created in 1993 to replace the Mexican National Tag Team Championship and is still promoted by CMLL to this day . It is the top championship promoted by CMLL , with the CMLL Arena Coliseo Tag Team Championship and the Occidente Tag Team Championship considered lower ranked , regional tag team championships . As it is a professional wrestling championship , it is not won or lost competitively but instead by the decision of the bookers of a wrestling promotion . The title is awarded after the chosen team " wins " a match to maintain the illusion that professional wrestling is a competitive sport . 
 The current tag team champions are Negro Casas and Shocker , having defeated the team known as Los Ingobernables ( " The Unruly " ; La Máscara and Rush ) on June 13 , 2014 . This is the sixth reign for Casas and the third for Shocker , they are the 37th overall champions and , the 28th championship team . Los Guerreros de la Atlantida ( Dragón Rojo Jr. and Último Guerrero ) hold the record for longest reign as a team , at 640 days . Último Guerrero and Rey Bucanero hold the record for the longest combined reigns of any team : 1 @,@ 185 days divided over three reigns . Individually , Último Guerrero has held the championship six times for a total of 1 @,@ 923 days , the longest of any individual . The team of Último Guerrero and Dr. Wagner Jr. held the championship for seven days , the shortest reign of any championship team . Casas and Último Guerrero have the most title reigns with six each , while the combinations of Casas and El Hijo del Santo , Último Guerrero and Rey Bucanero and Averno and Mephisto are the only teams to have won the championship three times . 
 The championship has been declared vacant on a number of occasions , either because of an injury to one of the champions or because a wrestler stopped working for CMLL for a period of time . The championship has been held up once , based on the inconclusive outcome of a match , being vacant for a week until the two teams had a rematch . CMLL has also held a couple of tournaments designed to give the winners of the tournament a match against the champions , declaring them the official number one contender for the champions . 
 = = History = = 
 Starting in 1957 the Mexican Lucha libre , or professional wrestling , promotion Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre ( " Mexican Wrestling Enterprise " ; EMLL ) began promoting the Mexican National Tag Team Championship as the top championship of their tag team division . In 1991 EMLL was rebranded Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( " World Wrestling Council " ; CMLL ) after the promotion left the National Wrestling Alliance in the late 1980s . In 1992 then @-@ CMLL executive Antonio Peña left CMLL along with a number of the promotion 's wrestlers to form Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) . Among the wrestlers that left CMLL were then @-@ reigning Mexican National Tag Team Champions Misterioso and Volador . The Mexican National Tag Team Championship was not owned by CMLL but rather by the Mexico City Boxing and Wrestling Commission and the commission allowed AAA to take control of the championship . In early 1993 CMLL decided to create their own tag team championship to replace the Mexican National Tag Team Championship and introduced the CMLL World Tag Team Championship . The team of Canek and Dr. Wagner Jr. faced off against Vampiro Canadiense and Pierroth Jr. in the finals of a 16 @-@ team tournament to determine the first champions , with Canek and Wagner Jr. winning the match to become the first tag team champions . The duo would hold the title until El Canek left CMLL in November 1994 . CMLL held a 32 @-@ team tournament from November 11 to December 16 , 1994 . In the finals " Los Cowboys " ( Silver King and El Texano ) defeated El Satánico and Emilio Charles Jr. to become the second ever CMLL World Tag Team Champions . Six months later Los Cowboys would lose the title to their longtime rivals los Headhunters . 
 In September 1996 the champions , the team of Atlantis and Lizmark , were stripped of the championship after an inconclusive match against los Headhunters . In the subsequent eight @-@ team tournament brothers Silver King and Dr. Wagner Jr. captured the title with a victory over Dos Caras and Último Dragón . The title would be vacated once again only six months later as Silver King left CMLL to work for World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . Dr. Wagner Jr. teamed up with Emilio Charles Jr. and the two former champions won an eight @-@ team tournament in August 1997 . The title would be vacated once again in 1998 when one half of the tag team champions , Mr. Niebla , was injured . Bestia Salvaje and Emilio Charles Jr. became champions by winning an 8 @-@ team tournament and began working a storyline with the team of Negro Casas and El Hijo del Santo , whom they traded the title back and forth with over the next year . In early 1999 El Hijo del Santo left CMLL forcing them to vacate the title once again . Los Guerreros del Infierno ( " The Warriors from the Inferno " ; Último Guerrero and Rey Bucanero ) defeated Mr. Niebla and Villano IV in a tournament final bringing some stability to the title as they have not been vacated since then . Guerrero and Bucanero has held the title three times since then and Guerrero has teamed with Dr. Wagner Jr. and Atlantis to win the title twice more for Los Guerreros del Infierno . CMLL held a number one contenders tournament in both 2008 and in 2013 , using the tournament to build the credibility of the tournament winners . Both the 2008 winners , Averno and Mephisto , and the 2013 winners , Rush and La Máscara would go on to win the championship . 
 In 2000 CMLL revived the CMLL Arena Coliseo Tag Team Championship after it had been dormant since the 1980s . The title became a secondary tag team championship for CMLL , primarily for younger , lower ranked wrestlers . The Guadalajara branch of CMLL has intermittently promoted the Occidente ( western ) tag team championship , a local championship that is not defended outside the Mexican state of Jalisco . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 The current tag team champions are Negro Casas and Shocker , having defeated the team of La Máscara and Rush on June 13 , 2014 . This is the sixth reign for Casas and the third for Shocker , together they are the 37th overall champions and the 28th duo to hold the championship . On January 22 , 2016 it was announced that Shocker had undergone knee surgery due to a severe injury that had kept him out of the ring since mid @-@ December , 2015 @.@ it was announced he was expected not to be able to compete for around four months . No announcements were been made in regards to the status of tag team championship . 
 Negro Casas and Último Guerrero share the record for individual reigns with six , and three teams are tied for most title reigns as a team with Guerrero and Rey Bucanero , Averno and Mephisto and Negro Casas and Hijo del Santo , who all have three reigns . Los Guerreros de la Atlantida ( Dragón Rojo Jr. and Último Guerrero ) held the title for 640 days , which is the longest reign of any team while Último Guerrero 's six reign combine to 1 @,@ 923 days . Último Guerrero and Dr. Wagner Jr. held the title for seven days and are thus the team with the shortest reign to date . CMLL has been forced to declare the championship vacant on eight different occasions since its creation in 1993 , which meant that there were no champions for a period of time . The title has been declared vacant twice because one of the champions ( El Canek and Silver King respectively ) left CMLL , and four times due to a major injury to one of the champions . On one occasion CMLL held up the championship , vacating the championship until a rematch between the teams of Místico / Héctor Garza and Averno / Mephisto , a match that Místico and Héctor Garza won to become two @-@ times champions . On February 5 , 1999 El Hijo del Santo and Negro Casas defeated Bestia Salvaje and Scorpio Jr. by disqualification , which in CMLL meant that they also won the championship . Casas and Hijo del Santo refused to win the championship in that matter , vacating the championship until the two teams could have a rematch . Casas and Hijo del Santo won the rematch without controversy to win the championship once more . 
 As the CMLL World Tag Team Championship is a professional wrestling championship , it is not actually won or lost competitively but instead championship changes are decided by the officials and the bookers of CMLL . The title is awarded after the chosen team " wins " a match to maintain the illusion that professional wrestling is a competitive sport . Championship matches usually take place under best two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ three falls rules . On occasion single fall title matches have taken place , especially when promoting CMLL title matches in Japan , conforming to the traditions of the local promotion . An example of this was when Bushi won the CMLL World Welterweight Championship in a one @-@ fall match on a New Japan Pro Wrestling show in 2015 . 
 = = Tournaments = = 
 = = = 1993 = = = 
 The CMLL World Tag Team Championship was the last of the CMLL branded championships to be created in the years immediately following the name change to Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre . Until early 1993 the Mexican National Tag Team Championship had served as the main tag team title , but the title moved to AAA when the champions left CMLL to jump to AAA leaving CMLL without a tag team championship . CMLL co @-@ promoted the tournament with the Universal Wrestling Association ( UWA ) with the tournament spread out between CMLL and UWA shows , the tournament started on February 26 , 1993 featuring wrestlers from both promotions . The three falls final match was spread out over three shows , with one fall of the match on each of the shows . The finals took place on March 19 on a CMLL show , followed by a second fall on March 21 at a UWA show and the finals on March 26 on CMLL 's Super Viernes show . The tournament was won by Dr. Wagner Jr. a CMLL regular , and El Canek who had been synonymous with the UWA for over a decade at that point in time . 
 Tournament bracket 
 = = = 1994 = = = 
 In the summer of 1994 El Canek was planning on leaving CMLL , which meant that CMLL had to make plans for the tag team championship that Canek held at the time alongside Dr. Wagner Jr . The decision was made to hold a 16 @-@ team tournament to determine the next champions . The tournament started on July 22 , 1994 and ran until August 5 . As it turned out El Canek stayed in CMLL longer than expected and was still working for them by the time El Texano and Silver King won the tournament . CMLL named the winning team the " number one contenders " , but before they got a chance to wrestle against Canek and Dr. Wagner Jr . , Canek left CMLL . Without a championship team to defend against El Texano and Silver King CMLL organized a second 16 @-@ team tournament to determine who would wrestle the previous tournament winners for the vacant championship . The second tournament , which ran from November 18 until December 2 featured several wrestlers that also competed in the first tournament , most with different partners . The second tournament was won by El Satánico and Emilio Charles Jr . , who ended up losing to El Texano and Silver King on December 16 , 1994 . With their victory El Texano and Silver King became the second CMLL Tag Team Champions . 
 Number 1 Contenders tournament 
 Number 2 Contenders tournament 
 = = = February 1997 = = = 
 On October 25 , 1996 Los Headhunters defeated then reigning CMLL World Tag Team Champions Atlantis and Lizmark to win the titles . After the match was over Los Headhunters continued to attack both of their opponents , which led to the referee disqualifying the team , negating the championship change . Los Headhunters took the championship belts with them , ignoring that they were not actually the champions . The storyline was that the team declared themselves the tag team champions , but CMLL did not have the same opinion , declaring the titles vacant instead . CMLL followed up the decision to vacate the championship by holding an eight @-@ team tournament that spanned their February 21 and February 28 , 1997 Super Viernes shows . In the end , the brother team of Dr. Wagner Jr. and Silver King defeated Dos Caras and Último Dragón to become the seventh overall champions . 
 Tournament bracket 
 = = = August 1997 = = = 
 The team of Silver King and Dr. Wagner Jr. had held the championship since winning a tournament on February 2 , 1997 , but in August , 1997 Silver King left CMLL to work for Promo Azteca and the U.S. based World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . CMLL held a two @-@ night , eight @-@ team tournament to fill the void left by Silver King leaving . The finals took place on August 29 , where Dr. Wagner Jr. and his new partner Emilio Charles Jr. defeated los Headhunters to become the eight overall champions . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 1998 = = = 
 In the fall of 1998 Mr. Niebla suffered an injury while holding the CMLL World Tag Team Championship with Shocker . Due to the injury Mr. Niebla was unable to compete so CMLL declared the championship vacant and put together an eight @-@ team tournament to crown new champions . The tournament started on October 30 and lasted until to November 13 where the team of Bestia Salvaje and Scorpio Jr. defeated El Satánico and Dr. Wagner Jr. to become the tenth over all tag team champions . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 2000 = = = 
 On June 16 , 2000 the CMLL World Tag Team Championship was announced as vacant . The official explanation was that co @-@ champion Negro Casas voluntarily gave up the championship to " give other teams a chance " , but in reality his partner , El Hijo del Santo , had stopped working for CMLL . CMLL organized a 16 @-@ team tournament from June 23 through August 4 , 2000 , with the finals being at CMLL 's Entre Torre Infernal pay @-@ per @-@ view . The finals of the tournament was set to be Los Infernales ( " The Infernal Ones " ; Rey Bucanero and Último Guerrero ) against the team of Emilio Charles Jr. and Mr. Niebla but Emilio Charles Jr. had suffered an injury before the show began . As a result , Los Infernales were declared the new champions . The team was then ordered to defend the championship against Mr. Niebla and his new partner Villano IV so there was still a championship match on the show . Los Infernales retained the championship . They later successfully defended against Mr. Niebla and Emilio Charles Jr. on August 18 , 2000 . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = Number one contenders tournament 2008 = = = 
 In January 2008 CMLL put together a 16 @-@ team tournament to determine which team would get a title match against then @-@ champions Atlantis and Último Guerrero . The tournament took place over three weeks , with two qualifying blocks and then the final match in the third week . The finals saw former CMLL World Tag Team Champions Los Hijos del Averno ( " The Sons of Hell " ; Averno and Mephisto ) defeating the team of Dos Caras Jr. and La Sombra . On February 1 , 2008 Averno and Mephisto defeated Atlantis and Último Guerrero to become the 25th overall champions . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = Number one contenders tournament 2013 = = = 
 In September , 2013 CMLL arranged a 16 @-@ team tournament to determine which duo would be next in line to get a match for the CMLL World Tag Team Championship . In the end , the team of La Máscara and Rush defeated the team of Atlantis and La Sombra . The duo would be awarded the championship on September 18 , 2013 when champions Rey Bucanero and Tama Tonga were unable to defend the title due to Bucanero being injured . Months later La Máscara , Rush and La Sombra formed Los Ingobernables during La Máscara and Rush 's tag team title reign . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = Nils Vogt ( journalist ) = 
 Nils Vogt ( 27 October 1859 – 27 June 1927 ) was a Norwegian journalist and newspaper editor . Born into a family of politicians and civil servants , he became the first chairman of the Norwegian Press Association and the Conservative Press Association . Vogt worked at the conservative newspaper Morgenbladet for 45 years , acting as editor @-@ in @-@ chief from 1894 to 1913 . He wrote numerous articles during his lifetime , advocating independence from Sweden and the Riksmål standard of written Norwegian . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Nils Vogt was born in Bergen as the son of politician Niels Petersen Vogt ( 1817 – 94 ) and his wife Karen Magdalena ( " Kaja " ) Ancher Arntzen ( 1819 – 70 ) . Amongst Nils Vogt 's forbears were many politicians and government officials . His brother was Paul Benjamin Vogt ( 1863 – 1947 ) and his second cousins were Johan Vogt ( 1858 – 1932 ) , Nils Collett Vogt ( 1864 – 1937 ) and Ragnar Vogt ( 1870 – 1943 ) . Growing up in Kristiansand and Christiania ( today Oslo ) , he finished his secondary education in 1876 . He graduated with a cand.jur. degree in 1881 after having studied law at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania . 
 = = Journalistic and political career = = 
 After a stint in Statistics Norway , Vogt began devoting his life working for the newspaper Morgenbladet . His decision to make a career within journalism was met with disdain amongst his friends and family . He worked in the beginning as sub @-@ editor for the editor @-@ in @-@ chief Christian <unk> , whom he succeeded in 1894 . Vogt 's biographer Rune <unk> writes in Norsk biografisk leksikon that Vogt " unfolded his wide journalistic commitment for politics " in the newspaper . Having a profound interest in the plays of Henrik Ibsen , Vogt also wrote theatre reviews for the newspaper . From 1905 to 1915 , Vogt was a correspondent to The Times . He subsequently was correspondent to Stockholms Dagblad and other newspapers in Northern Europe . 
 When it came to politics , Vogt was a conservative with many liberal opinions . He disagreed with Francis Hagerup , who supported the Union between Sweden and Norway . In his political articles , he championed the Riksmål written standard and the policies of Michelsen 's Cabinet . 
 Having founded the Conservative Press Association in 1892 , Vogt was its first chairman , serving from 1892 to 1898 and from 1906 to 1909 . He was also elected the first chairman of the Norwegian Press Association ( NP ) , notwithstanding his controversial position in the press of Kristiania . In 1910 , he penned an article for the periodical Samtiden entitled " <unk> og <unk> " ( " The Press and The Capital " ) , in which he made the distinction between newspaper editors who were solely motivated by profit and those who regarded the job as an ideal life mission . The article was reprinted in his 1913 book Under <unk> <unk> og <unk> <unk> . 
 In 1910 , controversy arose in the NP when lawyer Olaf Madsen – who had cooperated with Ola Thommessen for more than 20 years at the newspaper Verdens Gang and was responsible for its financial priorities – wanted to have more dividend for his investments in the newspaper . Editor Ola Thommessen considered this to be an inappropriate intervention in the editorial part of the newspaper , and took his staff with him and started a new newspaper named Tidens Tegn . Vogt supported Thommessen in his decision , and came at odds with the chairman of Morgenbladet 's board , lawyer and politician Edmund <unk> . Both left Morgenbladet in the summer of 1913 as a result of the <unk> , although Vogt continued as theatre and literature critic in the paper until his 1927 death . As editor , Vogt was succeeded by C. J. Hambro . 
 = = Marriage , honours and death = = 
 On 6 November 1884 , Vogt married Helena Andrea <unk> ( 1861 – 1906 ) . Acting as Norwegian president in the Nordic press partnership , he attended the press meetings in Kristiania in 1899 and in Copenhagen in 1902 . He was also delegated to the international press congresses in Stockholm ( 1897 ) , Rome ( 1899 ) and Berlin ( 1909 ) . He was decorated as a Knight , First Class of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav in 1907 . He was also a knight of the Danish Order of the Dannebrog and the French Legion of Honour . Vogt died in Aker ( now Oslo ) on 27 June 1927 . 
 = 1997 – 98 Manchester United F.C. season = 
 The 1997 – 98 season was Manchester United 's sixth season in the Premier League , and their 23rd consecutive season in the top division of English football . The campaign ended in disastrous fashion , having been pipped to the Premier League title by Arsenal , who managed a ten @-@ match winning streak in the last two months of the season as well as being eliminated by league strugglers Barnsley and French outfit AS Monaco in the FA Cup and UEFA Champions League , respectively . To make matters worse , United entered March still in contention for a League and European double after opening up a 12 @-@ point gap , regardless of the fact that nearest challengers Arsenal had three games in hand . Thus , the season ended with only the Charity Shield in the cabinet . 
 Following the loss of captain and star striker , Eric Cantona at the end of the previous season , Ferguson acquired the services of England international Teddy Sheringham as a direct replacement on a three @-@ year deal from Tottenham Hotspur for £ 3 @.@ 5 million . Cantona 's departure meant that Roy Keane was promoted as captain and a reshuffle of squad numbers occurred ; David Beckham was awarded the coveted number 7 shirt and Sheringham was given Beckham 's former squad number 10 . Henning Berg was the only other new face to arrive at Old Trafford from Blackburn Rovers for a £ 5 million fee at the start of the season . 
 = = Pre @-@ season and friendlies = = 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = FA Charity Shield = = 
 Manchester United faced FA Cup winners Chelsea in the season 's annual curtain raiser , the FA Charity Shield . The Premiership champions won the match 4 – 2 on penalties after both teams produced a 1 – 1 draw after 90 minutes . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = FA Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Manchester United started their campaign to win an unprecedented third straight title at White Hart Lane — Teddy Sheringham 's former stomping ground . An hour into his debut presented him with a chance to score from a dubious penalty , but he hit the post and blasted the rebound wide . What seemed like a pulsating draw turned out to be business as usual for the champions , who scored twice in the last ten minutes from a Nicky Butt strike and an own goal by hapless defender Ramon Vega . David Beckham came off the bench to grab the winner against Southampton to ensure United remained in the driving seat and despite a lacklustre goalless draw to Leicester at Filbert Street , they managed a third straight clean sheet . Beckham kept up his ever @-@ improving goal @-@ scoring record while Sheringham poached his first goal for the club as Ferguson 's all @-@ conquering United dismantled Everton at Goodison Park . At home to Coventry , Andy Cole marked his return from minor surgery with a goal inside 73 seconds that left goalkeeper , Steve <unk> completely bamboozled . Keane and Poborský added to the rout , which Ferguson and Coventry boss Gordon Strachan mutually agreed was a " flattering scoreline " . The champions set the benchmark in August with five straight clean sheets and eight goals leaving them joint top with Blackburn Rovers . In such commanding form , pundits alike reckoned that it was a matter of time before they would resume their domestic supremacy . 
 West Ham took some heart in their performance at Old Trafford by scoring the opening goal , thus breaking United 's clean sheet record . The champions responded in typical fashion , scoring twice in both halves of the match to win a third on the trot and give Ferguson the perfect boost ahead of their midweek Champions League tie . Although victorious away to Košice , United couldn 't break the deadlock in their next league match to Bolton , squandering numerous chances to remain at the top of the table , most notably from Andy Cole . The main talking point at the Reebok Stadium came in the 35th minute , when a brawl between Nathan Blake and Gary Pallister resulted in both players being controversially sent off . After the game , a furious Ferguson personally sent a video of the incident to The Football Association in the hope of the decision being rescinded . Referee Paul Durkin publicly admitted before the video arrived that , in hindsight , he had made the wrong decision . Mark Hughes returned to Old Trafford and scored what looked to be the winner for Chelsea , before super @-@ sub Ole Gunnar Solskjær popped in to earn a dramatic equaliser with four minutes to go . A first @-@ half header from Leeds defender David Wetherall was enough to condemn United to their first defeat of the season and first in almost three months of football . Worse was to come for the champions , as captain Roy Keane was ruled out for the rest of the season with knee ligament damage , although Ferguson revealed after the Leeds match that they hoped that he would be fit enough to play some part in their next Champions League game , at home to Juventus on the coming Wednesday . Schmeichel was placed as captain in his absence . 
 Crystal Palace met Manchester United in the first week of October , looking to capitalise on their defeat to Leeds . Ferguson had anticipated that their midweek triumph at home to Italian giants Juventus would act as the " spark " to their league form . A 2 – 0 win – their first in four attempts – put them a point behind league leaders Arsenal . The first ever sell @-@ out game at Derby 's new £ 20 million Pride Park stadium saw the home side take a commanding 2 – 0 lead through Paulo Wanchope and Francesco Baiano . A third defeat in five games was on the cards for Alex Ferguson 's side after Teddy Sheringham missed his second penalty of the season , but he quickly made amends , connecting his head with Gary Neville 's inch @-@ perfect cross . Cole , who was dropped from the first team for the Champions League tie at home to Feyenoord , came on with fifteen minutes of normal time remaining and grabbed a vital equaliser , drilling a low shot past the wretched Derby defence . Old Trafford welcomed Barnsley for the first time in over 60 years and a rampant United display helped them leapfrog Arsenal to the top of the Premiership for the first time since early September . Andy Cole bagged a first half hat @-@ trick and Scholes , Ryan Giggs ( 2 ) and Poborský followed up with goals in a breathtaking performance that gave the <unk> their ninth league defeat of the season . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 Fergie 's fledglings began November in the same fashion they ended the previous month – with a rout . Sheringham , Cole and Solskjær all scored twice each at home to Sheffield Wednesday , in a game that they could have scored so many more . David Pleat managed to get sympathy from Ferguson who admitted " every shot United had in the first half went in " but not from the board , cumulating in his sacking the following Monday . The talk of a one @-@ horse race for the Premiership was put on hold after defeat to Arsenal at Highbury . The psychological impact of United opening up a seven @-@ point lead had they won would have been too much ground to make up for the challengers . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger admitted before the game that defeat would make it " difficult for them " to catch up on United 's ground but not " impossible " . The Gunners put themselves in front with Nicolas Anelka 's first goal for the club and Patrick Vieira 's swooping shot which left Schmeichel rattled . Sheringham 's admirable brace just before half time left the match finely poised but former United trainee David Platt headed into the far corner with seven minutes left . <unk> Wimbledon courtesy of a Beckham brace and goals from Cole , Scholes and Butt was the perfect response after their second defeat of the season and United bettered it at home to Blackburn Rovers , the only team with an unbeaten away record . A 4 – 0 win ensured distance between themselves and the challengers , popping the question as to which team was capable of stopping them . The Red Devils managed to score 30 goals in the last nine fixtures prior to this game and qualification to the quarter finals of the Champions League meant that they could prolong their rich domestic goal @-@ scoring form . Ferguson understandably quashed any sort of hype , but admitted that they were in an " ideal position " , in comparison to the same point in the last season . 
 An early morning kick @-@ off away to fierce rivals Liverpool ended in a routine victory for United . Losing to Juventus in the last match of the Champions League before hiatus had seemed to have no effect on United 's domestic dominance . They comprehensively defeated Aston Villa thanks to a solitary Giggs goal and followed it up with a heroic Schmeichel performance to deny Newcastle United at St James ' Park . British Prime Minister Tony Blair , a lifelong fan of the Geordies , was among the crowd and was in awe over Ferguson 's team , believing that the manager had assembled " one of the greatest sides of the century " . Two out of two became three as Everton found no answer to deny the league leaders , who extended their lead at the top of the table to six points on Boxing Day . The win marked the end of Karel Poborský 's spell , coming on for David Beckham in the second half ahead of a switch to Graeme Souness ' Benfica . However , what was to come at the end of December exemplified the vulnerability of the defence during the second half of the season . In losing to mid @-@ table Coventry City two days after the Everton win , United blew the chance to open up a nine @-@ point lead at the top of the table , which would virtually slam the door shut on the challengers . They again found themselves a goal down , this time courtesy of Noel Whelan , Solskjær and Sheringham responded to restore the advantage back on the champions but a Dion Dublin penalty and mazy run from youngster Darren Huckerby in the last minute ensured an implausible victory , given the fact that Coventry were 2 – 1 down with five minutes to go . Prior to the game , Ferguson highlighted the fact that the league " wasn 't won in December " , but following the defeat blasted his side 's display as " silly " and " on the verge of complacency " . 
 As 1997 turned to 1998 , an inspirational performance from Giggs helped a modest United side labour for a hard @-@ earned three points and still maintain their desire for a fifth title in six seasons . A trip to the Dell to play Southampton – where United were undone last season repeated itself , this time by a solitary Kevin Davies goal in the third minute . The Saints pulled off a valiant performance , most notably from goalkeeper Paul Jones , who denied Solskjær from scoring right at the death of the second half . Things went from bad to worse in January as Tony Cottee popped in to stun Old Trafford and score the winner for Leicester in what proved a wretched season for the striker . This was the Foxes first win in the league since November and United 's first home defeat of the season and fifth altogether . 
 7 February marked the visit of Bolton Wanderers to Old Trafford on the 40th anniversary of the Munich air disaster , which killed seven United players , eight sports journalists and several club officials . Having gone a goal down to Bob Taylor 's scrappy shot that bamboozled Gary Neville and Schmeichel , Andy Cole struck in a late equaliser with five minutes to go . In injury time , Gary Neville connected with a floating corner provided by Beckham , only for it to ricochet off the crossbar . Although they gained a point , United increased their lead due to their contenders ' inability to close the gap . They typically left it late to snatch the three points in their next match – away to Aston Villa – but followed it up against Derby County with a somewhat polished 2 – 0 victory . The only drawback that came out of the match was a hamstring injury suffered by Giggs that ruled him out of the FA Cup replay away to Barnsley and remained serious doubt for first leg of the Champions League quarter @-@ final at Monaco . Giggs joined Scholes and Keane on the injury list , who both had knee injuries . Another early morning kick @-@ off had meant United had the chance to open up an 11 @-@ point lead at the top of the table if they could beat Chelsea at Stamford Bridge . They did via a rare goal from Phil Neville , which also ended the Blues ' title challenge . Although Arsenal had three games in hand , a third successive title was within United 's grasp . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Ferguson 's target of achieving an unassailable lead in the Premiership was coming into fruition . United managed to gain 22 points out of a possible 33 over the winter , in spite of the absence of first team regulars . Such a massive gap between themselves and the chasing pack with ten games remaining was enough for Manchester bookmaker Fred Done to pay out on punters who backed the champions in retaining their crown . Within several hours , £ 17 @,@ 000 had been snapped up , irrespective if a late challenger had emerged . Drawing away to AS Monaco gave them a slender but crucial outcome but a shock defeat at the hands of Sheffield Wednesday prevented them from opening up a 14 @-@ point advantage . The league leaders ' dismal run continued ; Paul Scholes scored his first goal in over four months to salvage a point at Upton Park . On the same night , Arsenal sealed a 1 – 0 win against Wimbledon to close the gap on United and set up a frantic contest between the top two on the Saturday . A late surge from the Gunners also reopened betting for the Premiership title race , much to the delight of Arsène Wenger . Leading up to the potential championship decider , Ferguson was adamant that a win would just about seal this title . After numerous attempts to break the deadlock in the match , Arsenal finally managed to score with 15 minutes left ; Marc Overmars latched onto an Anelka header coming from a long ball and used his agility to flick it beyond the goalkeeper to give Arsenal the all important lead and win . Peter Schmeichel , who was in agony in the closing stages was ruled out for the Monaco encounter on Wednesday with a hamstring injury . When asked which team was in the best position going into the finishing straight of the season , Wenger admitted to the press that United had a " small advantage " over the rest . Ferguson , however was bullish with his side 's downturn and warned that it would be " inevitable " for Arsenal to lose points . 
 Elimination to Monaco through the away goals ruling ended United 's run in the European Cup but they showed their championship credentials , scoring twice late on at home to Wimbledon and extending their lead via thumping Blackburn . However , it left Arsenal six points behind with three games in hand . Liverpool frustrated the leaders on Good Friday , holding out for a draw after teenage sensation Michael Owen had been sent off by the referee for a double bookable offence in the 40th minute . Another draw , this time to Newcastle meant that Arsenal moved to the top of the table for the first time since October , having thrashed Blackburn 4 – 1 and Wimbledon 5 – 0 respectively . United moved to within a point on Monday night after relegating Crystal Palace but Ferguson confessed only " a total collapse " would prevent the title heading towards North London . 
 By the time United kicked off their final home game of the season , Arsenal had recorded a tenth straight league victory at home to Everton and ensured their status as champions for the first time in seven years . Frenchman Arsène Wenger also became the first foreign manager to get his hands on the coveted trophy since its inception , in only his first full campaign . He completed a double three weeks later by winning the FA Cup , regarded by many fans and pundits alike as unthinkable given the circumstances four months ago . 
 The Red Devils signed off their disappointing campaign on a high at home to Leeds and a comfortable victory away to the already relegated Barnsley . Alex Ferguson vowed to regain the trophy next season and promised a whole host of new signings , starting with Dutch defender , Jaap Stam . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red 
 = opponents win . 
 Pld = 
 Matches played ; W 
 = Matches won ; D = 
 Matches drawn ; L 
 = Matches lost ; GF = 
 Goals for ; GA 
 = Goals against ; GD = 
 Goal difference ; Pts = Points 
 Points allocation : Three points awarded for a win ; one for a drawn match ; none for a loss . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 The draw for the third round of the FA Cup saw Manchester United take on cup holders Chelsea at Stamford Bridge in a repeat of the 1994 final . The outcome was the same : United dominated from the outset and Chelsea found themselves 3 – 0 down before the end of the first half . Cole and Sheringham added to the rout , before Graeme Le Saux and Gianluca Vialli added three between them for Chelsea to keep the score a competitive one . Many journalists and fans regarded the win as United 's best of the season . Another five goals were dished out against Division Two outfit Walsall , and in the fifth round they were placed alongside Premiership strugglers , Barnsley , whom they had ripped apart in October . An error by Schmeichel allowed Barnsley to take the lead but Sheringham equalised four minutes later . A replay was needed , much to the discomfort of Ferguson , and in a thrilling cup tie , United were knocked out , putting the ultimate treble dream – comprising the UEFA Champions League , the Premier League and the FA Cup – on hold for another season . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = League Cup = = 
 The League Cup was clearly not one of Ferguson 's main priorities of the season , as he used it to blood the younger and less @-@ known players . After being swept aside in the third round by Ipswich Town – a team at the bottom of the First Division – Ferguson came under intense scrutiny for fielding a reshuffled squad . However , the manager felt that it was , at the time , an unwanted domestic distraction . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 European dominance was at the forefront of United 's agenda during the 1997 – 98 season . Having failed to take their chances in a semi @-@ final against eventual champions Borussia Dortmund in 1996 – 97 , Ferguson was resolute to go one step further and emulate Matt Busby 's success of 1968 , quashing any talk that his team was not good enough . 
 Early autumn marked the return of the Champions League and Manchester United were paired up with Italian champions , Juventus , Dutch giants Feyenoord and <unk> Košice in Group B. Ferguson 's men started their quest away to Košice ; it didn 't take them long to stamp their authority – Denis Irwin tapped in an intercepted cross , Henning Berg scored his first goal with a thumping header and Andy Cole completed the rout three minutes from time with a composed finish . The first night of October brought Juventus to Old Trafford in what was to be perhaps one of the best European matches ever staged at Old Trafford . After going a goal down inside 24 seconds to Alessandro Del Piero 's cool finish , Teddy Sheringham replied with a looping header before Scholes put United into the lead , dribbling round Angelo Peruzzi to place the ball in the back of the net . They weren 't finished yet – Giggs fired into the top left hand corner to give them an historic win . Juventus were given a late consolidation from a Zinedine Zidane free @-@ kick but this couldn 't dampen United 's joy . After the game , an ecstatic Ferguson felt United were in a " great position " and emphasised his belief that his squad was capable of winning the tournament . 
 Feyenoord were the next to feel the wrath of United in a back @-@ to @-@ back fixture . A penalty from Irwin in the home tie helped ensure the Mancunians would increase their tally to nine points , and a hat @-@ trick from Andy Cole in Rotterdam helped maintain their 100 % record in the group stage . However , the game was marred by a high tackle on defender Denis Irwin by Feyenoord midfielder Paul <unk> ( leaving the Irish international six weeks out at a crucial stage of the season and causing something of a media frenzy back in Britain ) and constant clashes between both sets of fans . Nevertheless , United were placed as favourites for the competition , largely due to their impressive start , and a routine 3 – 0 win at home to Košice all but ensured qualification to the knockout stage . Filippo Inzaghi 's late header ended United 's unbeaten streak in Europe in their last match away to Juventus , but United qualified as group winners nonetheless . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 Points allocation : Three points awarded for a win ; one for a drawn match ; none for a loss . 
 = = = Knockout phase = = = 
 United were drawn against French champions AS Monaco in the quarter @-@ finals , and drew 0 – 0 and 1 – 1 in the first and second legs respectively . AS Monaco went through on away goals , as the second leg was played at Old Trafford . 
 Colours : Green 
 = Manchester United win ; Yellow = 
 draw ; Red = opponents win . 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 Note : In the following table figures , in brackets are substitution appearances . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 United 's first departure of the 1997 – 98 season was Gareth Macklin , who signed for Newcastle United on a free transfer on 1 July . Five days later , Gary Bickerton , Jamie Byers , Christopher Calderone , and Jonathan Phillips were all released . On 22 July , Jon Macken signed for Preston North End for a fee of £ 250 @,@ 000 , while six days later , Pat McGibbon signed for Wigan Athletic for the same fee . Simon Davies joined Luton Town on 1 August , while a week later , Michael Appleton joined Macken at Preston North End , with Appleton 's fee being double Macken 's . Stephen Newman joined Middlesbrough on 26 September . 
 Arriving during the summer were Norwegian duo Erik Nevland and Henning Berg , who signed from Viking and Blackburn Rovers respectively . Both players would eventually rejoin their old clubs , with Nevland rejoining Viking in 1999 , and Berg going back to Blackburn in 2000 . 
 Leaving in the winter were Czech midfielder Karel Poborský , English forward Neil <unk> , and English defender John O 'Kane . Andy Duncan joined Cambridge United on 1 April , while on 12 June , Grant Brebner joined Reading . Robert Trees departed to Bristol Rovers on 14 June , while on 30 June , Stuart Brightwell , David Brown , Brian McClair , Ross Millard , Gavin Naylor , and Kevin Pilkington left . 
 On 24 March , Jonathan Greening joined from York City for a fee of £ 750 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = In = = = 
 = = = Out = = = 
 = = = Loan out = = = 
 = Girdap = 
 Girdap or <unk> ( Bulgarian : <unk> ) was the first privately owned Bulgarian bank . Established in Ruse in 1881 , until its closure in 1925 it was one of the two large Bulgarian banks which relied on capital that was both private and local , along with the Bulgarian Commercial Bank . Prior to the Balkan Wars and World War I , Girdap was among the six largest banks in Bulgaria , and during the wars its financial group was the most influential in the country . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Girdap 's constituent assembly was held on 1 December 1881 , less than four years after the Liberation of Bulgaria from Ottoman rule and the establishment of the Principality of Bulgaria . At the time , the northeastern Bulgarian city of Ruse was a major economic hub . Ruse prospered due to its role as a major port on the Danube , its rapid industrial development and its well @-@ established ties with Central Europe along that river . Banking , however , was a new concept , as most people employed the services of money lenders and entrusted their savings to people they knew personally . The founders of Girdap sought to " liberate the population of money lenders " , in the words of later bank director Boncho Boev . Due to an overall lack of capital in the country , interest rates of loans given by Girdap were nonetheless high : 15 – 18 % as compared to the over 20 – 30 % interest rate of money lenders . The bank officially commenced operations on 1 January 1882 . It took its name from the Girdap neighbourhood of Ruse where the constituent assembly was held . 
 The capital of Girdap at the time of its foundation amounted to 1 @,@ 380 Bulgarian gold leva , though by the end of 1882 it had increased fivefold to 6 @,@ 900 gold leva . In 1886 , the capital of Girdap amounted to 70 @,@ 300 leva ; in that year , the bank hired a clerk for the first time . In the year of the company 's 10th anniversary , 1891 , it disposed of 300 @,@ 000 leva , and in 1894 its capital had increased to 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 leva . Founded as a depositor 's company , it was transformed into a joint @-@ stock credit company in 1894 . In 1898 , Girdap 's capital was 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 leva and a new company statute was approved , which extended the board of managers to 12 members . These included Ruse 's wealthiest and most eminent people , most notably the chairman Stefan <unk> . In the autumn of 1902 , Girdap opened its first branch offices outside Ruse : in the port of Varna on the Black Sea coast , in the Dobrujan city of <unk> and in Istanbul ( Constantinople ) , the capital of the Ottoman Empire and largest city of the Balkans . In Istanbul , the bank was known under a French name , Société de Crédit <unk> , though the branch only existed for 18 months and was closed down due to political pressure . An office in Silistra was opened on 1 August 1910 . 
 Ever since its establishment Girdap served political interests , and it was later tied to the Popular Liberal Party of Stefan Stambolov . On the other hand , the Bulgarian Commercial Bank ( Balgarska <unk> banka ) , which was also founded in Ruse in 1885 , was close to the Popular Party . The two banks competed for lending municipal loans and regularly used their political ties in their competition . These relations were often damaging to the Bulgarian treasury , as politicians who were also bank shareholders or somehow related to Girdap awarded contracts based on their personal interest rather than that of the state . As the Bulgarian economy consolidated in the first decade of the 20th century and the emerging industry required increasing funds , local banks grew in importance . In 1911 Girdap had a capital of 2 million leva and by 1912 it was the third @-@ largest private bank in the Kingdom of Bulgaria after the Bulgarian Commercial Bank and the Deutsche Bank @-@ related Credit Bank ( <unk> banka ) . However , Bulgaria 's privately owned banking sector remained comparatively small . 
 = = = Heyday and bankruptcy = = = 
 Girdap 's heyday was during the Balkan Wars and World War I ( 1912 – 1918 ) , when it became the leading financial group in the kingdom and remained close to the government . It controlled some 83 @.@ 97 million leva of invested capital , which put it ahead of the General Credit Society , the Balkan Bank and the Bulgarian Commercial Bank financial group . During the wars , Bulgarian banks established filial companies or invested in new enterprises . Girdap was no exception to that trend . 
 One of Girdap 's notable enterprises was the international transport company <unk> which had a capital of 100 @,@ 000 leva . Of the company 's 500 shares , 200 were owned by Girdap and another 170 were owned by three of the bank 's managers or employees . <unk> after World War I , <unk> was active as a carrier from Bulgaria to Edirne , Alexandroupoli , Thessaloniki and Niš and along the Danube . During the wars , Girdap was involved in tobacco trade and had warehouses in modern <unk> , Blagoevgrad and Xanthi . This led to the establishment of another Girdap venture , the Bulgarian Macedonian Bank ( Balgarska <unk> banka ) , on 21 May 1916 . The Bulgarian Macedonian Bank was mostly active as a commercial bank , which is indicated by its capital of 46 @.@ 95 million leva as opposed to only 13 @.@ 31 million leva of deposits . Other banks more or less related to Girdap included the Sofia Bank ( <unk> banka , established in 1906 ) , the Bulgarian Forest Commercial Bank ( Balgarska <unk> @-@ <unk> banka , established in 1917 ) , and the Bulgarian Surety Bank ( Balgarska <unk> banka , established in 1912 ) . The Pleven @-@ based Lev cement factory was founded in 1917 with Girdap board of managers member Ivan Kovachev as chief shareholder . Ninety percent of the capital of the <unk> mine in the Iskar Gorge was controlled by Girdap or its head figures Ivan Kovachev and Boncho Boev . Despite Girdap 's active involvement in assistance to national industry , it failed to make a significant contribution and gradually minimized its participation due to insufficient profits . 
 After World War I , Girdap was deprived of its government protections , as it had no links to the new agrarian government of Aleksandar <unk> . In 1919 Boncho <unk> was imprisoned in <unk> for eight months before he was acquitted , Ivan Kovachev was put on trial , and the bank 's funds were sealed . In 1922 , the Bulgarian National Bank closed Girdap 's account , causing 38 million leva of deposits in Girdap to be withdrawn by 1923 and its debtors ( including members of Girdap 's management ) to protest their bills . While at the time the Bulgarian National Bank , Girdap 's most important creditor , was opposed to Girdap 's declaration of bankruptcy , it reversed its stance two years later . Girdap was declared bankrupt on 3 February 1925 and its managers Boncho Boev , Ivan Kovachev and Nikola Kovachev were arrested . 
 = = Headquarters in Ruse = = 
 Girdap 's central office in Ruse was located in a historic edifice at 2 <unk> Street that takes up 260 square metres ( 2 @,@ 800 sq ft ) . It was finished in 1896 and designed either by <unk> <unk> and Udo <unk> ( architect of what is known as Ruse 's Old High School of Music ) or by Samuil <unk> , at the time still an architecture student . Together with the opposing building owned by wine merchant Petar Petrov and built in 1897 under Viennese architect Georg Lang , the Girdap headquarters are part of an architectural ensemble highlighting the entrance to Ruse 's commercial street from Liberty Square , the location of the Monument of Liberty . 
 The building 's attic was damaged in a fire in 1913 . An additional storey was constructed in 1935 under the engineer Todor <unk> , turning the headquarters into a three @-@ storey edifice . The trademark clock was added in the late 19th century . In 1964 – 1967 , the building 's interior was refurbished so it could accommodate the City People 's Council . Today , it houses the administration of Ruse 's Chamber of Control . 
 = Expédition d 'Irlande = 
 The Expédition d 'Irlande ( " Expedition to Ireland " ) was an unsuccessful attempt by the First French Republic during the French Revolutionary Wars to assist the outlawed Society of United Irishmen , a popular rebel Irish republican group , in their planned rebellion against British rule . The French intended to land a large expeditionary force in Ireland during the winter of 1796 – 1797 which would join with the United Irishmen and drive the British out of Ireland . The French anticipated that this would be a major blow to British morale , prestige and military effectiveness , and was also intended to possibly be the first stage of an eventual invasion of Britain itself . To this end , the French Directory gathered a force of approximately 15 @,@ 000 soldiers at Brest under General Lazare Hoche during late 1796 , in readiness for a major landing at Bantry Bay in December . 
 The operation was launched during one of the stormiest winters of the 18th century , with the French fleet unprepared for such severe conditions . Patrolling British frigates observed the departure of the fleet and notified the British Channel Fleet , most of which was sheltering at Spithead for the winter . The French fleet was subject to confused orders as it left port and was scattered across the approaches to Brest : one ship was wrecked with heavy loss of life and the others widely dispersed . Separated , most of the French fleet managed to reach Bantry Bay late in December , but its commanders were driven miles off course and without them the fleet was unsure of what action to take , with amphibious landings impossible due to the weather conditions , which were the worst recorded since 1708 . Within a week the fleet had broken up , small squadrons and individual ships making their way back to Brest through storms , fog and British patrols . 
 The British were largely unable to interfere with the French fleet before , during or after the invasion . A few ships operating from Cork captured isolated French warships and transports , but the only significant British response came from Captain Sir Edward Pellew , who was able to drive the French ship of the line Droits de l 'Homme ashore in the Action of 13 January 1797 with the loss of over 1 @,@ 000 lives . In total , the French lost 12 ships captured or wrecked and thousands of soldiers and sailors drowned , without a single man reaching Ireland except as prisoners of war . Both navies were criticised by their governments for their behaviour during the campaign , but the French were encouraged to launch a second attempt in 1798 , successfully landing 2 @,@ 000 men in August but failing to influence the Irish Rebellion and again losing significant numbers of men and ships . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the French Revolution in 1789 , the cause of republicanism was taken up in many countries , including the Kingdom of Ireland , at that time ruled by the Kingdom of Great Britain . Opposition to British rule had existed in Ireland for centuries , but the French example , combined with the imposition of the Penal Laws which discriminated against the Catholic majority and a large Presbyterian minority , prompted the creation of the Society of United Irishmen , a broad non @-@ sectarian coalition of groups seeking to create an Irish Republic . Initially a non @-@ violent political movement , the United Irishmen were forced to operate as a secret society after membership was made illegal in 1793 at the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars . Deciding that their only hope of creating the Irish Republic lay in armed revolt , the United Irishmen began secretly organising and arming their forces . In search of external aid , two of their leaders , Lord Edward FitzGerald and Arthur O 'Connor travelled to Basle to meet with French General Lazare Hoche . Their efforts were supported by Protestant Dublin lawyer Theobald Wolfe Tone , who travelled to Paris to appeal to the French Directory in person . During this period , the British government repealed some of the Penal Laws , in an attempt to quell unrest . 
 The First French Republic had long planned an invasion of the British Isles , but their ambitions had been repeatedly thwarted by other factors , including other fronts of the Revolutionary Wars , the War in the Vendée and the parlous state of the French Navy . This latter problem was a major cause for concern : the Navy had suffered heavily from the removal of its officer corps during the Revolution and then endured a series of military setbacks , culminating in the tactical defeat at the Glorious First of June in 1794 and the disastrous Croisière du Grand Hiver in 1795 . After securing peace on several fronts in 1795 , the new French Directory decided that Britain was one of their most dangerous remaining opponents , and they determined to defeat it through invasion . 
 The applications from Tone intrigued the Directory , which understood that by attacking Ireland they would be striking at the least defensible part of the British Isles . Support for the British government was weakest there and the United Irishmen optimistically claimed to be able to raise an irregular army of as many as 250 @,@ 000 waiting to join the French once they had landed , with the additional attraction that a successful establishment of an Irish Republic would prove an ideological coup for the French Republic . Finally and most significantly , a large expeditionary force in Ireland could provide an ideal springboard for an invasion of Britain , especially in combination with a plan then under development to land 2 @,@ 000 uniformed criminals in Cornwall , who would distract the British Army during the invasion of Ireland and could potentially provide a beachhead for future operations . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 With the end of the War in the Vendée and peace with Spain , substantial French forces were made available for the operation , to be led by General Hoche and scheduled for the end of October 1796 . Hoche was a successful military commander , who had defeated the Vendée Royalists and been subsequently engaged in planning the Cornish invasion . A body of veteran soldiers and the entire French Atlantic Fleet were placed at his disposal , based in the major Atlantic seaport of Brest . The number of soldiers earmarked for the invasion is uncertain : the French Directory suggested 25 @,@ 000 men would be required , the Irish delegates insisting that 15 @,@ 000 would be sufficient . Estimates of the number of soldiers eventually embarked range between 13 @,@ 500 and 20 @,@ 000 . [ Note A ] 
 By August the plan was already behind schedule : severe shortages of stores and wages slowed work at the Brest shipyards , while the troops set aside for the invasion of Cornwall proved unreliable , deserting in large numbers . A practice voyage of the Cornish invasion fleet ended in total failure , as the small ships intended for the operation proved unable to operate in open water . The plan was dropped and the reliable soldiers from the unit were merged into the Ireland expeditionary force and the rest returned to prison . Reinforcements from the Mediterranean Fleet were also delayed : seven ships under Contre @-@ amiral Joseph de <unk> had to shelter from the British blockade squadron in Rochefort , only arriving in Brest on 8 December , while a second fleet under Contre @-@ amiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve did not arrive until after the expeditionary force had departed . 
 Throughout late 1796 , progress on the expedition faltered . Hoche publicly blamed the naval command and specifically Vice @-@ amiral Villaret de Joyeuse for the delay , whom he accused of being more interested in the planning of a proposed invasion of India . In October , Villaret was replaced by Vice @-@ amiral Morard de Galles and the India plans were cancelled , while Hoche was placed in direct command of discipline within the fleet . By the second week of December the fleet was ready , consisting of 17 ships of the line , 13 frigates and 14 other vessels , including several large transports created made by removing the cannon from old frigates to maximise cargo space . Each ship of the line carried 600 soldiers , the frigates 250 and the transports approximately 400 . Included were cavalry units , field artillery and substantial military stores with which to arm the thousands of anticipated Irish volunteers . Hoche was still dissatisfied , announcing to the Directory on 8 December that he would rather lead his men in any other operation than the planned attack on Ireland . He was supported by Morard de Galles , who admitted that his men were so inexperienced at sea that encounters with the enemy should be avoided wherever possible . 
 = = Departure = = 
 Despite the misgivings of the expedition 's commanders , the fleet left Brest as scheduled on 15 December 1796 , one day ahead of a message from the Directory calling off the entire operation . De Galles knew that the British would be watching Brest harbour : their frigates were a constant presence as part of the Inshore Squadron of the blockade . In an effort to disguise his force 's intentions , he first anchored in Camaret Bay and issued orders for his ships to pass through the Raz de Sein . The Raz was a dangerous narrow channel littered with rocks and sandbanks and subject to heavy surf during bad weather , but would also obscure the size , strength and direction of the French fleet from the British squadron offshore , which French scouts claimed consisted of 30 ships . 
 Despite the French reports , the principal British blockade squadron was absent from the approaches to Brest during the night of 15 December . Most of the fleet had retired to one of the British Channel Ports to avoid the winter storms , while the remaining squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral John Colpoys had been forced to retreat 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ) into the Atlantic to avoid the risk of being driven onto the rocky French Biscay shoreline during a storm . The only British ships within sight of Brest were a frigate squadron , consisting of HMS Indefatigable , HMS Amazon , HMS Phoebe , HMS Révolutionnaire and the lugger HMS Duke of York , under the command of Captain Sir Edward Pellew in Indefatigable . Pellew had noted French preparations on 11 December and immediately sent Phoebe to warn Colpoys and Amazon to Falmouth , to alert the Admiralty . He remained off Brest with the rest of the squadron , and sighted the main French fleet at 15 : 30 on 15 December , bringing his frigates inshore towards Camaret Bay to establish its size and purpose . At 15 : 30 on 16 December , the French sailed from the Bay , Pellew observing closely and despatching <unk> to assist in the search for Colpoys . 
 Morard de Galles had spent most of 16 December preparing for passage through the Raz de Sein , situating temporary <unk> in the channel to warn of hazards and giving instructions on the use of signal rockets during the passage . The fleet was so delayed in this work that darkness began to fall before preparations were complete and he abandoned the plan at approximately 16 : 00 and signalled for the fleet to leave via the main channel from the port , leading the way in his flagship , the frigate Fraternité . It was so dark by the time the signal was made that most ships failed to see it , Fraternité and the corvette Atalante attempting to notify them by rocket signal . These signals were confusing and many ships failed to understand , sailing for the Raz de Sein rather than the main channel . Pellew added to the problem by weaving ahead of the fleet shining blue lights and firing rockets , further confusing the French captains as to their location . 
 When dawn broke on 17 December , most of the French fleet was scattered across the approaches to Brest . The largest intact group was that under Vice @-@ amiral François Joseph Bouvet , which had come through the Raz de Sein with nine ships of the line , six frigates and one transport . The other ships , including Fraternité , which also carried General Hoche , were alone or in small groups , the captains forced open their secret orders to discover their destination , in the absence of instructions from any commanding officers . One ship had been lost : , the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line Séduisant had driven onto the Grand <unk> rock during the night and sank with the loss of 680 lives . She too had fired numerous rockets and signal guns in an effort to attract attention , succeeding only in compounding the confusion in the fleet . Pellew , unable now to affect the large French force , sailed for Falmouth to telegraph his report to the Admiralty and replenish his supplies . 
 = = Voyage to Ireland = = 
 By 19 December , Bouvet had gathered 33 ships together and set a course for Mizen Head in southern Ireland , the designated rendezvous point where he was instructed by his sealed orders to wait five days for further instructions from France . One of the ships still missing was the Fraternité . Despite the disappearance of its commanders the French fleet continued to Bantry Bay , sailing through both high winds and thick fog , which delayed its arrival until 21 December . While Bouvet sailed for Ireland , Fraternité crossed the Western Approaches in search of the fleet , accompanied by Nestor , Romaine and Cocarde . <unk> passing Bouvet 's fleet in the fog , de Galles separated from his small squadron near the rendezvous on 21 December , only to discover a British frigate immediately ahead . Retreating from the threat , Fraternité was chased far into the Atlantic before she could escape the unidentified pursuer . On the return journey de Galle found the winds against him , and it took eight days to regain Mizen Head . 
 Phoebe did not find Colpoys until 19 December , deep in the Bay of Biscay . The following day he sighted the delayed French squadron under Villeneuve and gave chase , but Villeneuve was able to outrun Colpoys ' pursuit in a gale , reaching Lorient ahead of the British , whose ships were badly damaged by the storm . Unable to continue operations , Colpoys was forced to retreat to Spithead for repairs . The response from the Channel Fleet under Lord Bridport was similarly ineffective . News of the French departure from Brest did not arrive in Plymouth , the most westerly of the British fleet ports , until 20 December . Many of Bridport 's ships , based at Spithead , were not ready for sea and it was several days before enough vessels were manned and equipped for service . The order to leave port was issued on 25 December , but the fleet was almost immediately thrown into chaos when the large second @-@ rate HMS Prince swung out of control and collided with the 80 @-@ gun HMS Sans Pareil . At almost the same time , another second @-@ rate , HMS Formidable , was driven into the 100 @-@ gun first @-@ rate HMS Ville de Paris by strong winds while the 98 @-@ gun HMS Atlas grounded . All five ships were required to enter dock for extensive repairs , denying Bridport his strongest vessels and delaying his departure further . When he eventually reached St Helens , the departure point from the Solent , the wind was blowing from the west and his remaining eight ships were rendered immobile until 3 January . 
 In the absence of Morard de Galles and Hoche , Bouvet and his army counterpart , General Emmanuel de Grouchy , gave orders on 21 December for the fleet to anchor in preparation for landings the following day . Local maritime pilots , believing the fleet to be British , rowed out to the ships and were seized , providing the French with guides to the best landing sites . During the night of 21 December , the weather suddenly and significantly worsened , Atlantic gales bringing blizzards that hid the shoreline and forced the fleet to anchor or risk being wrecked . For four days they remained in the Bay , the inexperienced French sailors , lacking any winter clothing , unable to operate their ships in the coldest winter recorded since 1708 . On 24 December the wind slackened and a council of war was convened among the expedition 's senior officers . Together they resolved to force a landing despite the weather , identifying a nearby creek as the safest point and giving orders for the operation to go ahead at first light on 25 December . During the night the weather deteriorated once more , and by morning the waves were so violent that they were breaking over the bows of many ships . Anchors dragged and a number of vessels were blown right out of the Bay and into the Atlantic , unable to return against the wind . In the storm , the largest ship of the line , the Indomptable , collided with the frigate Résolue and both suffered severe damage . 
 = = = Collapse of the expedition = = = 
 For four more days Bouvet 's ships were battered by the high winds , none able to approach the shore without severe risk of being destroyed on the rocky coast . Losing their anchors as the cables snapped , many ships were forced to run before the wind and scatter into the Western Approaches . Others were destroyed : an American ship named Ellis , passing close to <unk> on 29 December , encountered a vessel wallowing in the waves , dismasted and with the deck strewn with bodies . The American captain , Harvey , reported that he approached the ship but was unable to assist her due to the storm and as he watched , the ship was driven ashore and destroyed . This was the 44 @-@ gun frigate <unk> , of which only seven men survived from her complement of 550 crew and passengers . Harvey also recounted coming across the Révolution and frigate Scévola . Captain Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley was in the process of removing the crew and passengers from Scévola before she foundered , the heavy weather having reduced the 40 @-@ gun razee frigate to a sinking condition . Ellis was not the only ship to discover Révolution ; the long @-@ delayed Fraternité encountered the ships and observed the destruction of the Scévola , which was burnt once she had been abandoned . 
 Bouvet had been driven offshore in his flagship Immortalité during the storm , and when the wind fell during 29 December he decided to abandon the operation . Signalling to the ships within view , he ordered his remaining squadron to sail southeast towards Brest . Some ships failed to receive the message and continued to the second rendezvous off the River Shannon , but they were few and scattered and in the continuing storms no landing was possible . With provisions running low , these ships also turned and sailed for Brest , as the weather worsened once more . As their expeditionary force sailed home , Morard de Galles and Hoche arrived in Bantry Bay on 30 December , discovering that the fleet had gone . With their own provisions almost exhausted , Fraternité and Révolution were forced to return to France as well . The British response to the attempted invasion continued to be inadequate , Colpoys arriving at Spithead on 31 December with only six of his ships still in formation . Only a handful of ships based at Cork under Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Kingsmill , principally HMS Polyphemus under Captain George Lumsdaine and a frigate squadron , interfered with the French fleet : Polyphemus seized the transport Justine on 30 December and HMS Jason captured the transport Suffren shortly afterwards , although she was later recaptured by the French frigate Tartu . 
 = = Retreat = = 
 The first French ships to return to Brest arrived on 1 January , including Bouvet 's flagship Immortalité accompanied by Indomptable , Redoutable , Patriote , Mucius , Fougueux and some smaller ships . They had avoided any contact with British warships and had been able to make good speed in a period of relatively calm weather . During the following days , the French ships that had gathered off the Shannon limped home , all badly damaged due to the increasingly rough seas and high winds . Several ships did not return to France at all , including the frigate Surveillante , which was scuttled in Bantry Bay on 2 January ; many of those aboard , including General Julien <unk> and 600 cavalrymen , were rescued by boats from the remaining French fleet while others scrambled ashore to become prisoners of war . On 5 January , Polyphemus outran and captured the frigate Tartu , of 44 guns and 625 men ( including troops ) , after four hours of intermittent combat . The Royal Navy later took her into service as HMS Uranie . Polyphemus also captured another transport , but the weather being bad and night falling , she did not take possession . Captain Lumsdaine of Polyphemus reported that the transport was leaky and making distress signals , but that he was unable to assist . He thought it highly likely that she had sunk . This may have been the transport Fille @-@ Unique , which sank in the Bay of Biscay on 6 January , although the fate of the 300 soldiers aboard is unknown . 
 On 7 January , the British frigates HMS Unicorn under Captain Sir Thomas Williams , HMS Doris under Captain Charles Jones and HMS Druid under Captain Richard King , captured the transport Ville de Lorient , Druid escorting the prize back to Cork . The following day Unicorn and Doris encountered some of the force that had attempted to land at the Shannon . Outnumbered , the frigates retreated westwards and encountered the battered Révolution and Fraternité , which withdrew before them . This prevented Morard de Galles and Hoche from belatedly joining their squadron and took them away from the route back to France . When Unicorn and Doris reappeared the following morning , they were operating as scouts for Bridport 's fleet , which had finally left port at the start of the new year and had encountered the frigates during the night . Escaping pursuit in a fog , Révolution and Fraternité sailed directly for France and arrived at Rochefort on 13 January . 
 The majority of the remaining French ships had reached Brest on 11 January , including Constitution , Trajan , Pluton , Wattignies and Pégase , the latter towing the dismasted Résolue . On 13 January most of the remainder returned , including Nestor , Tourville , Éole and <unk> with their attendant frigates , while the frigate Bravoure arrived at Lorient alone . Losses had continued as the French neared Brest , the disarmed Suffren recaptured by HMS Daedalus off Ushant and burnt on 8 January , while Atalante was outrun and captured by HMS Phoebe on 10 January . On 12 January , the storeship <unk> was captured by the brig HMS Spitfire . 
 = = = Droits de l 'Homme = = = 
 By 13 January , all of the French fleet had been accounted for except the small brig Mutine , which was blown all the way to Santa Cruz and was captured there in July , and the 74 @-@ gun Droits de l 'Homme . Droits de l 'Homme had been among the ships under Bouvet in Bantry Bay and then with those that carried on to the Shannon , but as the fleet broke up she became separated . With provisions running low and landings still impossible , Captain Jean @-@ Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse determined to return to France independently . Progress was slow as Droits de l 'Homme was overloaded with 1 @,@ 300 men , including 800 soldiers under General Jean Humbert . She was further delayed when she encountered and captured a small British privateer named Cumberland . As a result , La Crosse had only reached Ushant by 13 January , where he encountered the same fog that had enabled Révolution and Fraternité to reach safety . 
 At 13 : 00 , two ships emerged from the gloom to the east and Lacrosse turned away rather than risk his passengers in a pointless engagement . The ships persisted and were soon revealed to be the frigates Indefatigable under Captain Sir Edward Pellew , and Amazon under Captain Robert Carthew Reynolds , which had taken on supplies at Falmouth and then returned to their station off Brest . As Droits de l 'Homme steered southwest , the winds increased once more and the sea became choppy , preventing Lacrosse from opening the gunports on his lower deck without severe risk of flooding and snapping his topmasts , which reduced his ship 's stability . Realising his opponent 's difficulties , Pellew closed with the larger ship and began a heavy fire . At 18 : 45 , Amazon came within range and the frigates combined to repeatedly rake the French ship . The combat continued throughout the night , punctuated by short breaks in which the more mobile British ships repaired their battle damage out of range of Lacrosse 's guns . 
 At 04 : 20 on 14 January , lookouts on all three ships sighted waves breaking immediately eastwards . Desperate to escape the heavy surf , Indefatigable turned north and Amazon turned south , while the battered Droits de l 'Homme was unable to make any <unk> and drove straight onto a sandbar near the town of Plozévet , the force of the waves rolling her onto her side . Amazon too was wrecked , although in a more sheltered position which enabled the frigate to remain upright . The only surviving ship was Indefatigable , which was able to round the Penmarck rocks and reach open water . While Reynolds fashioned rafts to bring his men safely to shore , the French officers on Droits de l 'Homme were unable to launch their boats , their exposed position in the heavy surf destroying every attempt to reach shore and drowning hundreds of men . Losses on board the wreck mounted as the storm continued , breaking open the stern of the ship and flooding the interior . On the morning of 15 January a group of prisoners from Cumberland reached the shore in a small boat , but subsequent attempts failed and it was not until 17 January that the sea calmed enough for the small naval vessel Arrogante to approach the wreck and remove the remaining 290 survivors . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French attempt to invade Ireland had ended in total failure . With the exception of a handful of prisoners of war , not one French soldier had successfully landed in Ireland , despite some ships remaining off the coast for almost two weeks . Twelve ships had been lost and over two thousand soldiers and sailors drowned . The invasion was abandoned , Hoche and his remaining men were returned to the army for service in Germany , and the general died nine months later from natural causes . The French Navy , although criticised for failing to land the expeditionary force , was also praised for successfully reaching Ireland and returning without encountering the main body of the British fleet . This achievement encouraged further invasion attempts , including a landing at Fishguard in Wales in February 1797 and a second invasion of Ireland in mid @-@ 1798 . 
 In Britain , the Royal Navy 's response to the French campaign was heavily criticised : both fleets assigned to intercept the invasion fleet had failed , the only losses inflicted on the French coming from the small Cork squadron or Pellew 's independent frigates . Colpoys was replaced in command of the blockade of Brest by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Roger Curtis , and extensive deployments to the Bay of Biscay were made in February and March to prevent any further French operations . In addition , reinforcements were also sent to the fleet off Cadiz under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Jervis , who had won the Battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February . These extended deployments were unpopular with the regular seamen and in April the Spithead Mutiny broke out , paralysing the Channel Fleet . The French , still recovering from their losses in the winter campaign , were unable to respond . 
 In Ireland , the failure of the French expeditionary force was the source of great frustration : Wolfe Tone , who was aboard Indomptable throughout the voyage , reported that he felt that he could have touched either side of the bay with both hands . <unk> the uprising , Tone continued to rally support in Europe , raising a fleet in the Netherlands for an attempted invasion that ended in destruction at the Battle of Camperdown . In May 1798 , a British crackdown arrested the leaders of the United Irishmen in Ireland and provoked the Irish Rebellion . By the time the French had managed to gather a small force and reach Ireland in August , the rebellion was almost over and the inadequate French army , led by Jean Humbert , surrendered in September at the Battle of Ballinamuck . A subsequent invasion attempt the following month also ended in failure , when the invasion squadron was intercepted and defeated at the Battle of Tory Island . Wolfe Tone was captured at the action off Tory Island and committed suicide in prison . His death , combined with military defeat and reprisals against the Irish rebels , ended both the Society of United Irishmen and French invasion plans . 
 = Maryland Route 743 = 
 Maryland Route 743 ( MD 743 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 1 @.@ 00 mile ( 1 @.@ 61 km ) from MD 36 in Frostburg east to U.S. Route 40 Alternate ( US 40 Alternate ) in Eckhart Mines . MD 743 is the original alignment of US 40 through Eckhart Mines . The state highway was designated when US 40 bypassed Eckhart Mines around 1950 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 743 begins at an intersection with MD 36 ( New Georges Creek Road ) in Frostburg just south of MD 36 's southern intersection with US 40 Alternate . The state highway heads east into the unincorporated village of Eckhart Mines as a winding two @-@ lane road . After intersecting MD 638 ( Parkersburg Road ) at an acute angle , MD 743 reaches its eastern terminus at US 40 Alternate ( National Pike ) . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 743 is the original alignment of US 40 and , before that , the National Road through Eckhart Mines . The highway was one of the original state roads scheduled for improvement by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . The state road was paved through the village in 1911 . MD 743 was designated through Eckhart Mines shortly after the US 40 ( now US 40 Alternate ) bypass of the village was completed in 1950 . MD 743 originally extended west to US 40 , meeting the highway on a tangent in front of Beall High School at the city limit of Frostburg . The western end of the state highway was truncated when MD 36 was moved to its present alignment between Midland and Frostburg in 1972 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Allegany County . 
 = Night Terrors ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Night Terrors " is the ninth episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , and was first broadcast on BBC One and BBC America on 3 September 2011 . It was written by Mark Gatiss and directed by Richard Clark . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) decide to make a " house call " to an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy named George ( Jamie Oram ) who is terrified of almost everything , and especially dreads the cupboard in his bedroom . While the Doctor discusses this with George 's father Alex ( Daniel Mays ) , Amy and Rory become trapped in a doll house with terrifying life @-@ size peg dolls . 
 " Night Terrors " was inspired by Gatiss 's fear of dolls , and the ones in the episode were designed to be scary and crude @-@ looking . The episode was moved from the first half of the series to the second , which necessitated changes to make it fit into the series ' story arc . It was the first to be filmed , with production taking place in September 2010 at a council estate in Redcliffe , Bristol and at Dyrham Park , where the doll 's house interior scenes were filmed . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 07 million viewers in the UK and received generally positive to mixed reviews from critics , though some were critical of how it fitted into the overarching story as it came after a heavy story @-@ arc episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor decides to make a " house call " after his psychic paper receives a message from George , a frightened 8 @-@ year @-@ old child , asking his help in getting rid of the monsters in his bedroom . On arrival at a council estate on present @-@ day Earth , the Doctor , Amy , and Rory split up to try to locate the child . The Doctor , taking the guise of a social services worker , finds the right flat , and meets George 's father , Alex , while his mother Claire is working a night shift . Through Alex 's photo album , the Doctor learns that George has been frightened all his life , fearing many of the sounds and people around the flat and is helped to cope by various habits , including metaphorically placing his fears in his wardrobe . 
 Meanwhile , Amy and Rory , while taking the lift down , suddenly find themselves in what appears to be an eighteenth @-@ century house , but shortly discover most of the furnishings are wooden props . Other residents of the estate appear in the house , but are caught by life @-@ sized peg dolls that laugh and sing like children , and transform the residents into more dolls . Amy and Rory witness one transformation and try to flee , but Amy is caught and becomes a doll herself , joining the others in chasing Rory . 
 The Doctor , suspecting that the wardrobe contains the evil George fears , opens it to find its contents are simply clothes and toys , including a doll house . The Doctor suddenly recalls from Alex 's photo album that Claire did not appear pregnant in the weeks leading up to George 's supposed birth , causing Alex to remember the fact that Claire was unable to have children . The Doctor asserts that George is a <unk> child , an empathic alien who took on the form of Alex and Claire 's desired child through a perception filter , and has the ability to literally lock away his fears in the wardrobe . George begins to panic from this revelation and the Doctor and Alex are pulled into the wardrobe , joining Rory in the dollhouse . As the dolls descend on the three , the Doctor calls out to George to face his fears ; George is able to open the wardrobe and appears in the dollhouse , but the dolls turn to advance on him . The Doctor realises that George is still frightened that Alex and Claire plan to send him away , having mistakenly interpreted a conversation they had earlier that night ; Alex rushes through the dolls to embrace George as his son . They all soon find themselves back at the estate , restored to normal . Claire returns the next morning to find George no longer scared while Alex and the Doctor make him breakfast . After being thanked , the Doctor rejoins his companions to set off for their next adventure . 
 At the end , a nursery rhyme foreshadowing the Doctor 's death is heard , and a screen in the TARDIS displays details of the Doctor 's death : the date and time he is to die , and the location of his death . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The Doctor refers to " Snow White and the Seven Keys to Doomsday " , " The Three Little Sontarans " and " The Emperor Dalek 's New Clothes " as being among his childhood nursery stories , referencing the 1974 stage play Seven Keys to Doomsday and the Sontarans and the Emperor Dalek , two of the series ' recurring monsters . He also repeats his predilection for tea and Jammie Dodgers from another Gatiss @-@ written episode , " Victory of the Daleks " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Episode writer Mark Gatiss told Radio Times that he had always been scared of dolls , and was surprised that Doctor Who had never used them before . He was especially interested in peg dolls , which he said were " the stuff of proper nightmares " . Gatiss had previously worked with guest actor Daniel Mays in the BBC serial Funland and purposely inserted the line " Maybe later " into the script as it had been " a bit of a catchphrase " for the two on Funland . However , Mays did not notice the reference . The episode was originally given the title of " What Are Little Boys Made Of ? " 
 To achieve a greater variety of stories in the first half of series 6 " Night Terrors " was moved to the second block of episodes , having been filmed as episode four and showing up in promos for the first half of the season . This necessitated minor changes to the episode , including the removal of a recurring sequence featuring the appearance of Madame Kovarian . The original last scene was dropped , and a new one was written so it would make sense at that point in the series . This scene consisted of nursery rhyme ; lead writer Steven Moffat wanted to foreshadow the Doctor 's death and asked Gatiss to write a nursery rhyme , which he described as " rather wonderful " . Variations of the rhyme are heard in " Closing Time " and the series finale " The Wedding of River Song " . 
 The episode was the first to be filmed , in September 2010 . It was mainly filmed on a council estate in Bath , Somerset , while the scenes in the dollhouse were filmed in Dyrham Park . The Bristol estate was chosen because of its " crisp architecture " . The country house of Dyrham Park was chosen because of its staircase and checked flooring . The antiques were stripped out of the building and replaced with " child @-@ like " furniture that was placed to look as though it had been played with . Several designs of the dolls were made , trying to achieve the desired balance of a normal doll and a scarier , more " crude " -looking one . The actors portraying the dolls were choreographed to move with stiff legs but swing their arms . In the scene in which Alex and the Doctor are in the kitchen they open and close the fridge as they are talking ; this was not in the script , but improvised by Smith and Mays on set . Mays was invited to guest @-@ star in the episode , and was drawn to the story because of the family element ; he has a young son like George . The scene in which Purcell sinks into the carpet was filmed with actor Andrew Tiernan on a hydraulic platform that lowered him into green @-@ coloured liquid . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Night Terrors " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 3 September 2011 . The episode achieved an overnight figure of 5 @.@ 5 million viewers , making it the fourth most @-@ watched programme for the day . Final consolidated figures showed it picked up 1 @.@ 6 million timeshifted viewers , bringing the total up to 7 @.@ 07 million viewers . It received an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reception to the episode has been generally positive to mixed . Dan Martin of the Guardian commented that the episode was an improvement on Gatiss 's previous three episodes – " The Unquiet Dead " , " The Idiot 's Lantern " and " Victory of the Daleks " . He complimented it overall as " a classy , creepy episode of retro Doctor Who " in comparison to " Let 's Kill Hitler " , though he saw its plot as over @-@ similar to " The Empty Child " and other episodes written by Steven Moffat . Martin later rated it the tenth best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph praised the dolls for " stealing the show " , as well as the concept of the doll 's house . 
 IGN 's Matt Risley rated the episode 8 out of 10 , praising Gatiss 's script which " moved the drama and horror straight into the miniaturised heart of a rickety creepy dolls house , with a set of villains that — while never as memorable or scary as their look may suggest — used sound design to its most effective " . He said that the main story " soared " , though the sidelined Amy and Rory left " little impact " in relation to the Doctor , George , and Alex . Russell Lewin of SFX gave " Night Terrors " three and a half out of five stars , saying that it had " many great things going for it but perhaps hasn 't quite got that little extra something that would have turned it into a classic " and that nothing seemed especially unexpected . However , he praised the shots of the doll house and apartment buildings , the sound , dolls , the acting of Matt Smith and Daniel Mays , and the idea of George being alien who created the reality . 
 Blair Marnell of Crave Online noted that " Night Terrors " was reminiscent of the second series episode " Fear Her " , but said that this episode " fared a little bit better because it didn 't rely on Jamie Oram 's George to be anything more than a scared little boy " . She also praised Matt Smith 's performance and Arthur Darvill 's Rory , who was " quickly becoming one of the funniest companions of the new Doctor Who " , though she commented that Amy 's transformation into a doll was " kind of glossed over within the story itself " and " there was never any doubt that it would be reversed " . Overall , the episode was given a 7 out of 10 rating . Sam McPherson , writing for Zap2it , called " Night Terrors " the " worst episode of series 6 so far " that was an " incoherent mess of an episode that was utterly unenjoyable " and gave it an overall grade of a C + . He criticised the idea to follow up a story arc @-@ heavy episode with a standalone one , as he felt it " served as a speed bump for the forward momentum started in " A Good Man Goes to War " and continued through " Let 's Kill Hitler " . He thought that its " biggest flaw " was that George was sidelined in favour of Alex , which missed an opportunity to make it a story " about little boys overcoming fear and fighting off the monsters in their closets " . However , he did praise dialogue delivered by Smith and Darvill . 
 Because the episode was originally planned to be in the first half of the series , many of the reviewers mentioned that it was strange that Amy and Rory did not comment upon what had happened previously , such as what had happened to their child . McPherson noted the " tacked @-@ on " nursery rhyme foreshadowing the Doctor 's death was included , though he thought it was " unintelligible " and did not count . 
 = Liberty Head nickel = 
 The Liberty Head nickel , sometimes referred to as the V nickel because of its reverse ( or tails ) design , is an American five @-@ cent piece . It was struck for circulation from 1883 until 1912 , with at least five pieces being surreptitiously struck dated 1913 . The obverse features a left @-@ facing image of the goddess of Liberty . 
 The original copper – nickel five @-@ cent piece , the Shield nickel , had longstanding production problems , and in the early 1880s , the United States Mint was looking to replace it . Mint Chief Engraver Charles Barber was instructed to prepare designs for proposed one- , three- , and five @-@ cent pieces , which were to bear similar designs . Only the new five @-@ cent piece was approved , and went into production in 1883 . For almost thirty years large quantities of coin of this design were produced to meet commercial demand , especially as coin @-@ operated machines became increasingly popular . 
 Beginning in 1911 , the Mint began work to replace the Liberty head design , and a new design , which became known as the Buffalo nickel , went into production in February 1913 . Although no 1913 Liberty head nickels were officially struck , five are known to exist . While it is uncertain how these pieces originated , they have come to be among the most expensive coins in the world , with one selling in 2010 for $ 3 @,@ 737 @,@ 500 . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Industrialist Joseph Wharton , who had interests in nickel mining and production , had been influential in the decision to use the metal in coinage in the mid @-@ 1860s , leading to the introduction of the Shield nickel in 1866 . The Shield nickel presented difficulties through its life : the intricate design made the coins not strike well . Modification to the design failed to solve the technical problems , and the mint had considered replacing the design as early as 1867 . Nevertheless , the Shield nickel remained in production . With production of copper – nickel five @-@ cent pieces lagging in the late 1870s , and with production of copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent pieces nearly moribund , Wharton sought to increase his sales of nickel to the United States Mint . Although copper @-@ nickel coins were struck only in small numbers , the bronze cent represented a major portion of the Mint 's production , and Wharton began to lobby for the piece to be struck in copper @-@ nickel . 
 In 1881 , this lobbying led Mint Superintendent Archibald Loudon Snowden to order Mint Chief Engraver Charles Barber to produce uniform designs for a new cent , three @-@ cent nickel , and five @-@ cent piece . Snowden informed Barber that the proposed designs were to feature on the obverse ( or heads side ) a classic head of Liberty with the legend " Liberty " and the date . The reverse ( or tails side ) was to feature a wreath of wheat , cotton , and corn around a Roman numeral designating the denomination of the coin ; thus the five @-@ cent piece was to have the Roman numeral " V " . The proposal for the cent would decrease its size to 16 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 63 in ) and its weight to 1 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 053 oz ) , and the modifications to the three @-@ cent piece would increase its size to 19 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) and its weight to 3 grams ( 0 @.@ 11 oz ) . The nickel would retain its weight of 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 18 oz ) , but its diameter would be increased to 22 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) . 
 Barber duly produced the required designs . Fairly large numbers of pattern coins were struck . Barber 's design for the nickel showed a portrait similar to that eventually adopted for the obverse , with " United States of America " and the date . The reverse featured the required wreath surrounding the " V " , and no other lettering . A modified pattern design later that year added the words " In God We Trust " to the reverse . Snowden decided that the proposed cents and three @-@ cent pieces would be too small for effective use , but Barber continued work on the nickel , with the size adjusted to 21 @.@ 21 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 835 in ) . Barber reworked the design in 1882 , adding " E Pluribus Unum " to the reverse . One variant that was struck as a pattern , but was not adopted , was a coin with five equally spaced notches in the rim of the coin . This " Blind Man 's nickel " was struck at the request of Congressman and former Union General William S. Rosecrans , who stated that many of his wartime colleagues had been blinded by combat or disease . 
 Late that year , Barber 's 1882 design was endorsed by Mint authorities , and 25 specimens were sent to Washington for routine approval by Treasury Secretary Charles J. Folger . To Snowden 's surprise , Folger rejected the design . The secretary , on review of the coinage statutes , had realized that the laws required " United States of America " to appear on the reverse , not the obverse . Folger had then consulted with President Chester Arthur , who confirmed Folger 's opinion . Snowden suggested that an exception should be made , but Folger refused , and Barber modified his design accordingly . The revised design was approved , and the coin was ready for striking in early 1883 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Striking of the new coins began on January 30 , 1883 , and the Mint placed the first pieces in circulation on February 1 . Snowden , concerned about reports of speculation in 1883 Shield nickels , received permission on February 6 to continue striking Shield nickels for several months alongside the new pieces . 
 It had not been thought necessary to inscribe the word " cents " on the nickel ; the silver and copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent pieces had circulated for years with only a Roman numeral to indicate the denomination . Enterprising fraudsters soon realized that the new nickel was close in diameter to that of the five @-@ dollar gold piece , and if the new coin was gold @-@ plated , it might be passed for five dollars . They soon did so , and had success in passing the coin . Some coins were given a reeded edge by the fraudsters , to make them appear more like the gold coins . A widespread tale is that one of the perpetrators of this fraud was a man named Josh Tatum , who would go into a store , select an item costing five cents or less , and offer the gold @-@ plated piece in payment — and many clerks gave him $ 4 @.@ 95 in change . According to the tale , the law had no recourse against Tatum , as he had tendered the value of his purchase and had merely accepted the change as a gift . By some accounts , Tatum could not have misrepresented the value of the coin as he was a deaf @-@ mute . 
 The plating of the nickels caused consternation at the Mint , and brought production of Liberty Head nickels to a sudden stop . Barber was told to modify his design , which he did , moving other design elements to accommodate the word " cents " at the bottom of the reverse design . The revised nickel was issued on June 26 , 1883 , the date on which production of the Shield nickel was finally stopped . The public responded by hoarding the " <unk> " nickels , egged on by reports that the Treasury Department intended to recall those nickels , and that they would become rare . 
 = = Production = = 
 After heavy mintages of the nickel in 1883 and 1884 , production was much lower in 1885 and 1886 . This was due to an economic downturn which lowered demand for the coins . The 1886 production was also depressed by the Treasury 's decision to reissue large numbers of worn minor coins . It was not until September 1886 that the Mint resumed full production of the coin . By 1887 , however , the Mint was overwhelmed by orders , melting down large quantities of older copper @-@ nickel coins to meet the demand . Despite these efforts , the Mint was forced to return many orders unfilled . Demand remained strong until 1894 , when the Mint temporarily suspended production as it had accumulated a surplus during the Panic of 1893 . 
 The Coinage Act of 1890 retired a number of obsolete denominations , including the three @-@ cent piece . Another Act of Congress , also enacted on September 26 , 1890 required that coinage designs not be changed until they had been in use 25 years , unless Congress authorized the change . However , the second act indicated that nothing in the law was to prevent the redesign of the current five @-@ cent piece and silver dollar " as soon as practicable after the passage of this act " . In 1896 , pattern nickels were struck for the first time since 1885 , when experimental , holed coins had been tested . The 1896 pieces , which featured a simple shield with arrows crossed behind it , were struck in response to a resolution of the House of Representatives asking the Secretary of the Treasury to report to it on the advantages and disadvantages of using various alloys in coinage . Pattern nickels would not be struck again until 1909 . 
 The turn of the century saw unprecedented demand for nickels , due to a booming economy and the use of nickels in coin @-@ operated machines . In 1900 , Mint Director George E. Roberts called on Congress to grant the Mint a larger appropriation to purchase base metals , allowing for greater production of nickels and cents . The same year , the design was modified slightly , lengthening some of the leaves on the reverse . This change occurred with the introduction of a new hub , from which coining dies were made . Demand for the coins remained heavy ; in March 1911 , Mehl 's Numismatic Monthly reported that the Mint was working twenty @-@ four hours a day to produce cents and nickels , and even so was failing to satisfy demand . 
 Mint directors , in their annual reports , had long called for the authority to strike cents and nickels at all mints ; by law they could then only be struck at Philadelphia . On April 24 , 1906 , this restriction was removed , although the first base metal coins , cents in both cases , were not struck at San Francisco until 1908 and Denver until 1911 . In 1912 , nickels were coined for the first time at each of the two branch mints . The 1912 @-@ S ( for San Francisco ) nickel was not struck until Christmas Eve , and was only struck for four business days . A 1912 @-@ S nickel , one of the first forty coined , was used by former San Francisco Mayor James D. Phelan to pay the first fare on the city 's first streetcar on December 28 , 1912 . Excluding the 1913 nickel , the 1912 @-@ S , with only 238 @,@ 000 struck , is by far the rarest in the series . 
 = = Replacement = = 
 In 1909 , consideration was given to the replacement of the Liberty Head nickel by a new design . In an attempt to modernize the coinage , the cent and the gold pieces had been redesigned . Prominent artists from outside the Mint had been contracted to provide the designs of the new coins , much to Barber 's disgruntlement . Mint Director Frank A. Leach was an admirer of Barber 's work , and had him prepare designs to be struck as patterns . Barber , at Leach 's request , prepared a design showing Washington 's head , and newspapers reported that new coins might be issued by the end of 1909 . In July 1909 , however , Leach resigned , putting an end to the matter for the time being . 
 On May 4 , 1911 , Eames MacVeagh , son of Treasury Secretary Franklin MacVeagh wrote to his father : 
 A little matter that seems to have been overlooked by all of you is the opportunity to beautify the design of the nickel or five cent piece during your administration , and it seems to me that it would be a permanent souvenir of a most attractive sort . As possibly you are aware , it is the only coin the design of which you can change during your administration , as I believe there is a law to the effect that the designs must not be changed oftener than every twenty @-@ five years . I should think also it might be the coin of which the greatest numbers are in circulation . 
 Soon afterwards , Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Abram Andrew announced that the Mint would be soliciting new designs . Well @-@ known sculptor James Earle Fraser approached Treasury officials , who were impressed by his proposals . Mint Director Roberts initially asked Fraser for a design featuring a bust of Lincoln , which he produced , mainly to please Roberts , but Fraser also developed a design featuring a Native American on the obverse , with an American bison on the reverse . This design was given preliminary approval by MacVeagh on January 13 , 1912 , and would come to be known as the Buffalo nickel . In late June , Fraser completed the model of the final design . The specifications of the new nickel were provided to the Hobbs Manufacturing Company , a maker of vending machines , which , following a meeting with Fraser in early November , opined that the new coins would likely jam its machines . At the company 's request , Fraser prepared a revised version , but Secretary MacVeagh rejected it on the grounds that the changes compromised the design , which he greatly admired . 
 On December 13 , 1912 , Roberts warned the Mint staff to take no action in preparation for the 1913 five @-@ cent coinage until the new designs were ready . He ended production of the Liberty Head nickel at the Philadelphia Mint the same day . A minor change was made to the Buffalo design in an attempt to satisfy the Hobbs Company , which promptly provided a lengthy list of changes it wanted made to the coin . On February 15 , 1913 , with less than three weeks until he would have to leave office on the advent of the Wilson administration , McVeagh wrote to Roberts , noting that no other vending or slot machine maker had complained about the new design . The Secretary concluded that everything possible had been done to satisfy the Hobbs Company , and ordered the new nickel put into production . 
 = = 1913 = = 
 The first information that a 1913 Liberty head nickel might have been struck came in December 1919 , when coin dealer Samuel W. Brown placed advertisements in numismatic publications , offering to buy any such nickels . In August 1920 , Brown displayed one such coin at the annual American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) convention . Brown related that a master die had been prepared for the 1913 Liberty head nickels , and a few pieces had been run off to test the die . As it turned out , Brown possessed five coins , which he eventually sold . After spending fifteen years in the hands of the eccentric Col. E.H.R. Green , the famous Fort Worth , Texas , area collector , the coins were finally dispersed in 1943 . Since then , the coins have had several owners each . Today , two are on public display — at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington and the ANA 's Money Museum in Colorado Springs , while three are owned privately . The highest price recorded for a 1913 Liberty Head nickel was in January 2010 , when one sold for $ 3 @,@ 737 @,@ 500 in an auction . The most recent sale of a 1913 Liberty Head nickel was in April 2013 for more than $ 3 @.@ 1 million . 
 It is uncertain how the 1913 nickels came to be made . The Mint 's records show no production of 1913 Liberty head nickels , and none were authorized to be made . Dies were prepared in advance and sent to California for a 1913 @-@ S Liberty Head nickel coinage , but upon Roberts 's instruction to stop coinage , they were ordered returned to Philadelphia . They were received by December 23 , and were almost certainly destroyed routinely by early January . Brown had been an employee at the Philadelphia Mint ( although this was not known until 1963 ) and many theories focus suspicion on him . 
 = = Mintage figures = = 
 = Series 8 , Episode 8 ( Spooks ) = 
 The series eight finale of the British espionage television series Spooks was originally broadcast on BBC One on 23 December 2009 , and is the 72nd episode in the overall series . The episode was written by Ben Richards and directed by Alrick Riley . The episode continues the " Nightingale " story @-@ arc , a shadow organisation bent on changing the geopolitical map . In the finale , Nightingale attempt to provoke a nuclear war between India and Pakistan , and Section D have a week to prevent it . 
 The episode was based on actual reports of conflict between the two nations . Hermione Norris made her final appearance as Ros Myers ; the producers intended to leave her fate open in order for the audience to debate whether or not she survived the hotel explosion at the end of the episode . It was viewed by under six million viewers after its original broadcast , and received overwhelmingly positive reviews , particularly due to the reveal of Nightingale 's plot and the cliffhanger , questioning whether or not Ros survived the hotel explosion . 
 = = Background = = 
 The finale continues the story @-@ arc involving a multinational shadow organisation bent on changing the geopolitical map . Referred to as " Nightingale " , actor Richard Armitage has said that " India , Pakistan and China feature heavily . But everyone , including Russia , America and Britain have a finger in the pie . " In the sixth episode it is revealed that CIA liaison and Lucas North 's ( Armitage ) lover Sarah Caufield ( Genevieve O 'Reilly ) is part of the organisation , and flees when Lucas confronts her . In the previous episode , Section D discover that Nightingale is manipulating Hindus and Muslims to attack each other in an attempt to further tarnish relations between India and Pakistan ; Section D is able to prevent the attacks in the UK , but it is later revealed that Nightingale succeeded in setting up similar attacks throughout the rest of Europe and the United States . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An Indian submarine is forced into port at Karachi by the Pakistan Navy . Knowing it is a Nightingale plot – Pakistani General Azim Ali is a member – Section D learn they have a week to stop a nuclear war between India and Pakistan . News of this shocks the team , particularly Tariq Masood ( <unk> Latif ) , who has family in Lahore . Ruth Evershed ( Nicola Walker ) discovers the name of a prominent Nightingale operative , Hans Lindemann . While Lucas North and Ros Myers work to bug Lindemann 's office , Sarah Caufield returns , having been ordered by CIA Head of European Operations Russell Price ( Mark Aiken ) , also a Nightingale member , to kill Lucas . Instead , Sarah warns him to leave the country before escaping . 
 Ruth meets a Chinese contact , Heng ( Roger Yuan ) , who tells her that both countries will fail the negotiations and that war is inevitable . He is shot dead by an assassin in front of her . Tariq finds Sarah staying at a hotel under an assumed name . Lucas and Ros apprehend her after Lucas distracts her and Ros shoots her in the leg . At a hospital , Sarah reveals to Lucas that Nightingale wants India and Pakistan to go to war in order to " contain " the future , where Nightingale believes the Taliban will take over Pakistan and gain control of nuclear weapons , though the war will kill several million innocent lives in the process . As Lucas leaves the room momentarily to call Ros , an assassin kills Sarah ; Lucas captures him and learns that Price arranged the hit . 
 To prevent negotiations from succeeding , Price rigs the Summit hotel with explosives . To prevent Pakistani President Mudasser ( Nicholas Khan ) and Home Secretary Andrew Lawrence ( Tobias Menzies ) from escaping , he paralyses both of them . Learning Price is in the hotel , Lucas and Ros arrive and capture him . Since disarming the bomb is impossible , Ros threatens to leave Price behind when the bomb explodes unless he divulges the room both politicians are held . Although Price eventually discloses the room number , Ros leaves him in the room where the bomb is anyway . Lucas is able to carry Mudasser safely out of the hotel , where he recovers and orders the release of the Indian submarine , preventing the war . However , Ros is still in the hotel , struggling to pull Lawrence to safety . As Lucas runs back to aid her , the hotel explodes , killing Lawrence , Price and Ros . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and pre @-@ production = = = 
 Before the episode aired there was speculation that Hermione Norris will leave the series following the " explosive finale explosive cliffhanger . " When questioned whether she will leave the series , Norris would not comment . In June 2010 , co @-@ star Richard Armitage confirmed that Norris has left the series , meaning the series eight finale was her final episode as Ros . The producers left the episode end with a cliffhanger to have the audience debate whether or not Ros and Lawrence survived the hotel explosion . Casting an actor as Russell Price was initially a problem for the producers , but they decided to cast Mark Aiken for the role following his work in American television . An actual news reporter was cast to record a news story . The reporter runs the dialogue with the producers at 4 : 30 in the morning , and then record the story before 6am , the time reporters start their work on actual news stories . 
 The episode was written by Ben Richards . The general plot of India and Pakistan on the verge of nuclear war is based on actual reports of conflict between the two nations . The beginning was not originally in the script ; Richards wanted to feature a submarine crisis , but the producers were not sure what the crisis would be . They eventually decided to have an Indian submarine " taken hostage " by the Pakistanis . They wanted to add a personal stake towards Tariq , by revealing that members of his family live in Pakistan . The intent was to include and develop a potential relationship between Ros and Lawrence to the point where they bond during their final scenes before the hotel explosion . They also wanted to touch up on the Harry / Ruth relationship , which was not in the original script ; so Ben Richards added the scenes as additional dialogue . 
 Despite the seriousness of the episode , Richards included some wit and humour . For instance , the scene where Lucas bugs Lindemann 's office and " small talks " Ros ; the producers wanted the scene to be different from similar scenes from movies involving secret agents planting bugs in offices and homes . The producers also wanted to have Ruth return her confidence in her work , back to how she was before her departure . The finale also includes Lucas being confused over Sarah . The writing team wanted him to despise her as a villain , but at the same time , still maintain feelings for her . Following her death , they did not want Lucas to be calm and calculating when confronting the assassin , but instead make him " lose it " and then have him broken afterward . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 A scene in the pre @-@ title sequence was filmed during the same block as episodes three and four , which were directed by Sam Miller . The rest of the finale was filmed several weeks later . The inside of a surveillance van used in a few scenes were shot at a set right next to the Grid set ; using a set would be more manageable for the filming crew . A military school in Belgravia was used to film two separate locations ; the Home Office and Lindemann 's office . Other scenes at the Home Office were filmed in a separate building in Roehampton . 
 The hospital Sarah was held was filmed at a new private hospital in Hammersmith that was closed down at the time . A Radisson Edwardian Hotel in the London Docklands served as the filming location for the Summit Hotel ; the management of the hotel were cooperative and allowed the filming crew access to several rooms and facilities . The scene where Ruth meets Heng was filmed at Dollis Hill ; it was the last scene of the episode to be shot , and was completed in one afternoon . In the fight scene between Ros and Sarah at Lindemann 's office , Hermione Norris played herself , and a stunt double stood in for Genevieve O 'Reilly , because her character was getting " thrown about a lot " . The fight scene between Lucas and Sarah 's assassin were performed by Armitage and stunt coordinator Crispin Layfield respectively . 
 The scene where the Pakistanis take control of the Indian submarine were archival footage taken from the BBC Motion Gallery . Split screen sequences were placed towards the end more than the rest of the episode to show the audience there is a bomb at the hotel with several police officers outside the building and Lucas and Ros looking around the hotel for Lawrence and Mudasser . The sequence where the hotel exploded was made through the medium of visual effects , produced by Darkside Animation . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode originally aired on BBC One at 9pm on 23 December 2009 , and later repeated on BBC Three at 12 : <unk> on 24 December . After its original broadcast , the series finale drew 5 @.@ 5 million viewers , earning the series a 23 % audience share during its time slot . It won the time slot against BBC Two 's Grumpy Guide to Christmas , ITV1 's Bridget Jones : The Edge of Reason , and Channel 4 's The Family . According to the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode received final viewing figures of 5 @.@ 91 million , placing Spooks the 25th most seen programme on BBC One , and the 36th most seen programme overall during the week it aired . 
 Reviews of the episode were very positive . In a preview for the episode , Vicky Power of The Daily Telegraph said that " as usual there 's a large body count and fist @-@ fights , but these are tempered by scenes of high emotion " , and if the episode were Ros ' last , " it is a fitting send @-@ off " . David Chater of The Times was positive towards the episode , stating " just in case you think you 're having an exhausting time in the run @-@ up to Christmas , spare a thought for Lucas North [ who found out ] his lover is a liar , a murderer and a traitor " , and also noted that " the great thing about Spooks is that they will always stop and explain how serious things are " . 
 The Guardian published two separate reviews for the episode . Sam Wollaston started by saying " they never listen " , noting the " prisoner either disappears or is killed " and that Section D " need to rethink the whole prisoner thing , or hire less rubbish guards " ; however , Wollaston also noted that since it was Sarah who was killed , " mo one 's really going to miss snaky Sarah much " . Plot @-@ wise , Wollaston liked the phrase " getting pretty Finding Nemo about it " , and said that Ros " better had " survived the cliffhanger , claiming " Spooks without Ros would be like Christmas without presents " . Vicky Frost called the episode a " cracking finale " , stating that after " weeks of build @-@ up , it feels almost a relief to have the Nightingale plot finally revealed " . In regards to the cliffhanger , Frost commented that Spooks has " passed its peak but not sunk so low as to be embarrassing , it still goes out on something of a high , and it 's remembered as a decent example of its type " . She was also receptive of Norris ' portrayal as Ros in her likely final appearance , but felt the Harry and Ruth relationship was " <unk> " . 
 = Westhay Moor = 
 Westhay Moor ( sometimes , historically , referred to as West Hay Moor ) is a 513 @.@ 7 @-@ hectare ( 1 @,@ 269 @-@ acre ) biological Site of Special Scientific Interest 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) north @-@ east of Westhay village and 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from Wedmore in Somerset , England , notified in 1971 . Westhay Moor is also notified as part of the Somerset Levels and Moors Special Protection Area under the EU Birds Directive and as a Ramsar Site , and a National Nature Reserve . 
 The low @-@ lying swampy area of Westhay Moor has had peat laid down over older rocks for the last 10 @,@ 000 years . The Neolithic people lived on the areas of slightly higher ground but exploited the reed beds for materials and built wooden trackways to cross the raised bog . Peat extraction on the Somerset Levels has occurred since the area was first drained by the Romans . Measures to improve the drainage were carried out in the Middle Ages largely by Glastonbury Abbey . In the 17th and 18th centuries further drainage work was undertaken including digging a series of rhynes , or ditches and larger drainage canals . Peat extraction peaked in the 1960s but has since declined . 
 The geology of the moor and prolonged peat extraction has provided a unique environment which provides a habitat for a range of flora and fauna . Much of the nature reserve managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust is based around abandoned peatworkings which have now become flooded . It is particularly noted for the millions of starlings which congregate at the site . 
 = = Location = = 
 Although underlain by much older Triassic age formations that protrude to form what would once have been islands — such as Athelney , Brent Knoll , Burrow Mump and Glastonbury Tor , which is composed of Blue Lias , the lowland landscape was formed only during the last 10 @,@ 000 years , following the end of the last ice age . As the sea level changed following the Pliocene era , vegetation was laid down which was later converted into peat . The peak of the peat formation took place in swamp conditions around 6 @,@ 000 years ago , although in some areas it continued into medieval times . 
 Westhay Moor forms part of the Somerset Levels and Moors which is important for its grazing and ditch system , and is crossed by the River Brue and Galton 's Canal . Over much of the moor , the water table is high throughout the year with extensive winter flooding occurring regularly . The level of the water tables can be artificially lowered during active working of the peat excavations , but for much of the year these are often filled with water . 
 = = History = = 
 Westhay Moor originally lay at the centre of the most northerly of the two lowland raised bogs that formed in the lower Brue Valley . They reached their greatest extent at the end of the Iron Age . The Neolithic people exploited the reedswamps for their natural resources and started to construct wooden trackways such as the Sweet and Post Tracks . The Sweet Track , named after the peat digger who discovered it in 1970 and dating from the 3800s BCE , is the world 's oldest timber trackway , once thought to be the world 's oldest engineered roadway . The track was built between what was in the early 4th millennium BCE an island at Westhay and a ridge of high ground at Shapwick , close to the River Brue . The remains of similar tracks have been uncovered nearby , connecting settlements on the peat bog including the Honeygore , Abbotts Way , Bells , Bakers , Westhay and Nidons trackways . The archaeology , history and geology of the Somerset Levels was displayed at the Peat Moors Centre until its closure in 2009 . The centre also included reconstructions of some of the archaeological discoveries , including a number of Iron Age round houses from Glastonbury Lake Village , and the Sweet Track . 
 The eastern part of the Moor was covered by Meare Pool which was formed by water ponding @-@ up behind the raised peat bogs between the Wedmore and the Polden Hills , and coring has shown that it is filled with at least 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) of detritus mud , mainly dating from the Subatlantic climatic period ( 1st millennium BC ) . In prehistoric times there were two Meare Lake Villages situated within the lake , occupied at different times between 300 BCE and 100 CE , similar to the nearby Glastonbury Lake Village . 
 Early drainage work was carried out in the later years of the 12th century , with the responsibility for maintaining all the watercourses between Glastonbury and the sea being placed on named individuals among whom were Ralph de Sancta Barbara of Brentmarsh . Drainage of the surrounding area by monks of Glastonbury Abbey had reduced the size of the lake to 500 acres ( 200 ha ) at the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Meare Pool had disappeared from maps by 1749 . The Meare Pool originally collected the waters of the rivers Brue and Sheppey , and discharged in a northerly direction into the Lower River Axe . In the later years of the 12th century the Abbey diverted the Brue to flow westwards , perhaps largely through natural channels , from Meare Pool to join the river Parrett . 
 In the early 17th century plans were made to drain and enclose much of Sedgemoor . Further reclamation was carried out in stages between about 1620 and 1740 , with the " new Cutts " ( or Decoy Rhyne ) being built about 1660 . The rivers Sheppey and Hartlake were canalised into the River James Wear and Division Rhyne sometime in the late 1730s . In 1795 , John Billingsley advocated enclosure and the digging of rhynes ( a local name for drainage channels , pronounced " reens " in the east and rhyne to the west ) between plots , and wrote in his Agriculture of the County of Somerset that 18 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 400 acres ) had been enclosed in the last 20 years in Wedmore and Meare , 1 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 350 acres ) at Nyland , 3 @.@ 64 square kilometres ( 900 acres ) at Blackford , 8 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 000 acres ) at Mark , 0 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 100 acres ) in Shapwick , and 7 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 700 acres ) at Westhay . 
 In the 1810s Samuel Galton , Jr. showed that bogs could be drained and dressed with clay and other soil , and built Galton 's Canal . The character of the soil was also changed by the spreading of clay and silt from the digging of King 's Sedgemoor Drain . Galton 's Canal was a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) canal with one lock , connecting the River Brue to the North Drain . It was operational by 1822 , and ceased to be used after the 1850s . The land is drained by a series of rhynes , or ditches with water levels ( and hence the level of the water table ) being controlled by a system of sluice gates and pumps . The water resource management operations are managed by the Somerset internal drainage board . 
 In the early 18th century several duck decoys were built on the moor . These consisted of a pool of water leading from which are from one to eight curving , tapering ditches . Over each ditch is a series of hoops , initially made from wood , later from iron , which diminish in size as the ditch tapers . The hoops are covered in netting . The combination of ditch and net @-@ covered hoops is known as a pipe . 
 = = = Peat extraction = = = 
 Large areas of peat were laid down on the Somerset Levels , particularly in the River Brue Valley , during the Quaternary period after the ice sheets melted . Peat extraction on the Somerset Levels has occurred since the area was first drained by the Romans . The raised bogs were extensively dug for peat for use as fuel up until the end of World War II after which the primary market was for horticulture . Large parts of Westhay Moor have now been dug back to the underlying clay exposing estuarine deposits dating from about 6000 BP before isolation from the sea and peat formation began . The introduction of plastic packaging in the 1950s allowed the peat to be packed without rotting , which led to the industrialisation of peat extraction during the 1960s as a major market in horticultural peat was developed . However , the resultant reduction in water levels that resulted put local ecosystems at risk ; peat wastage in pasture fields was occurring at rates of 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 9 metres ( 1 – 3 ft ) over 100 years . 
 In 1970 the Somerset Wildlife Trust bought the first part of the last 12 hectares ( 30 acres ) of acid raised bog vegetation left on the Somerset Moors undamaged by peat digging or agriculture . Since then <unk> have bought or been given 100 hectares of former peatworkings . These were sculpted and restored to wetland as the experimental area for the Avalon Marshes . This was the term given in the late 1980s to describe the wetland restored from peat workings in the Brue Valley . The wetland on the clay is dominated by Phragmites reed , <unk> and open water . The wetland restoration has been a great success and was declared a National Nature Reserve in 1995 . Peat working is now beginning to draw to a close on Westhay Moor and the majority of the remaining peatworkings are now being restored to wetland as they are completed . In 2014 two land owners unsuccessfully appealed against changes in planning permission which removed their rights to dig peat from Westhay Moor . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Westhay Moor supports a nationally outstanding community of terrestrial and aquatic invertebrates . At least 28 nationally notable invertebrate species also occur on the moor . The meadows , ditches , abandoned peat workings and hedgerows provide suitable breeding habitats for a diverse and nationally important breeding bird community . 
 It is part of the Brue Valley Living Landscape conservation project . The project commenced in January 2009 and aims to restore , recreate and reconnect habitats ; joining together protected areas into a network to enable plant and animal movement . It aims to ensure that wildlife is enhanced and capable of sustaining itself in the face of climate change while guaranteeing farmers and other landowners can continue to use their land profitably . It is one of an increasing number of landscape scale conservation projects in the UK . 
 Part of the moor has been designated as a nature reserve , covering 106 hectares ( 261 acres ) , which is managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . In addition to open water and reedbeds , it contains a fragment of acid mire , the largest to have survived in the south west of England . The reserve provides habitat for many varieties of birds , which includes millions of starlings between November and January , along with osprey and bittern . Otters and Banded demoiselle are among other species which have made their home on the moor . A large bird hide , reached via a raised boardwalk , has been erected . Westhay Moor is also notified as part of the Somerset Levels and Moors Special Protection Area under the EU Birds Directive and as a Ramsar Site , and a National Nature Reserve . 
 = Eat a Peach = 
 Eat a Peach is the third studio album by American rock band the Allman Brothers Band . Produced by Tom Dowd , the album was released on February 12 , 1972 , in the United States by Capricorn Records . Following their artistic and commercial breakthrough with the release of the live album At Fillmore East ( 1971 ) , the Allman Brothers Band got to work on their third studio album . Many in the band were struggling , however , with heroin addictions , and checked into rehab to confront these problems . Shortly after leaving rehab , group leader and founder Duane Allman was killed in a motorcycle accident in the band 's home of Macon , Georgia thus making it the final album to feature the guitarist . 
 Eat a Peach was a mix of studio recordings — both with and without Duane Allman — and recordings from the band 's famed 1971 Fillmore East performances . The album contains the extended , half @-@ hour @-@ long " Mountain Jam , " as well as vocalist Gregg Allman 's performance of his brother 's favorite song , " Melissa , " plus Dickey Betts ' " Blue Sky " , which became a radio staple . Album artwork was created by W. David Powell and J. F. Holmes at Wonder Graphics , and depicts the band 's name on a peach truck , in addition to a large gatefold mural of mushrooms and fairies . The album 's title came from a quote by Duane Allman : " You can 't help the revolution , because there 's just evolution ... Every time I 'm in Georgia , I eat a peach for peace ... the two @-@ legged Georgia variety . " 
 Issued as a double album in February 1972 , Eat a Peach was an immediate success and peaked at number four on Billboard 's Top 200 Pop Albums chart . The album was later certified platinum and remains a top seller in the band 's discography . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Allman Brothers Band had struggled to achieve commercial success in their two and a half years on the touring circuit ; their first two studio albums , The Allman Brothers Band ( 1969 ) and Idlewild South ( 1970 ) , had debuted to only modest sales . Despite this , they had achieved significant acclaim due to their live performances , which included extended jam renditions of songs . The band 's third release was a live album , titled At Fillmore East , and represented their artistic and commercial breakthrough : it immediately received solid sales upon its July 1971 release and went gold some months later . In about a " three @-@ or @-@ four @-@ week period , " the band quite literally went from " rags to riches , " and were able to pay their debts to manager Phil Walden and record label Capricorn Records . 
 Although suddenly very wealthy and successful , much of the band and its entourage now struggled with heroin addiction . Four individuals — group leader Duane Allman , bassist Berry Oakley , and roadies Robert Payne and Joseph " Red Dog " Campbell — checked into the Linwood @-@ Bryant Hospital for rehabilitation in October 1971 . Their addictions had begun to affect their performances and matters seemed to only be getting worse , according to many involved . The clinic was deemed a " joke " and a " <unk> " by Payne and Red Dog , and was later described as more of a psychiatric ward , as true rehabilitation clinics were several years away . All involved ( including Duane ) struggled to keep off the substance in the ensuing days . Despite this , Duane fueled the band 's passion to get better and end their addictions : " Duane was so happy and full of positive energy . He was always like that unless he was just totally wasted . He was the leader , the great soul , and he kept saying , ' We are on a mission and it 's time for this thing to happen , ' " said Linda Oakley . " He was moving forward , and that energized everyone else . Everyone fed off of that . " 
 On October 29 , 1971 , Duane Allman , aged 24 , was killed in a motorcycle accident a day after returning to the band 's home of Macon , Georgia . Allman was riding at a high speed in his motorcycle at the intersection of Hillcrest Avenue and Bartlett Street as a flatbed truck carrying a lumber crane approached . The flatbed truck stopped suddenly in the intersection , forcing Allman to swerve his Harley @-@ Davidson <unk> motorcycle sharply to the left to avoid a collision . As he was doing so , he struck either the back of the truck or the ball on the lumber crane and was immediately thrown from the motorcycle . The motorcycle bounced into the air , landed on Allman and skidded another 90 feet with Allman pinned underneath , crushing several internal organs . Though he was alive when he arrived at the hospital , despite immediate emergency surgery , he died several hours later from massive internal injuries . The loss devastated all who knew Allman , just as At Fillmore East climbed into the top 15 of the national album charts . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Several weeks before the gold certification and their rehabilitation , the band headed to Miami 's Criteria Studios with producer Tom Dowd to work on their third studio album . The band first began recording the album one month prior , when they laid down the initial tracks for " Blue Sky " . The band saved money on studio time by writing and debuting songs on the road . The band worked on three songs : " Blue Sky " , an instrumental titled " The Road to Calico " ( which would eventually develop into " Stand Back " , with added vocals ) and " Little Martha " , the only song solely credited to Duane Allman . The band laid down these three songs and went back on the road for a short run of shows , and at this point several checked into rehab . After Duane 's death , the band held a meeting on their future ; it was clear all wanted to continue , and after a short period , the band returned to the road . Drummer Butch Trucks later said , " We all had this thing in us and Duane put it there . He was the teacher and he gave something to us — his disciples — that we had to play out " . 
 Following these tragic events , lead guitarist Dickey Betts gradually took over the role as group leader . The band returned to Miami in December to complete work on the album . Twiggs Lyndon , a friend of the band , joined them ; he had just completed a stay in a psychiatric hospital stemming from his 1970 arrest for the murder of a concert promoter . Lyndon became the band 's production manager . The band recorded four more tracks with Dowd , including " Melissa , " " Les Brers in A Minor , " and " Ain 't Wastin ' Time No More . " Allman 's death provided the band with motivation ; " We were all putting more into it , trying so hard to make it as good as it would have been with Duane . We knew our driving force , our soul , the guy that set us all on fire , wasn 't there and we had to do something for him , " said Trucks . The heroin addictions had taken their toll on the band members ; Gregg Allman later said , " We were taking vitamins , we had doctors coming over and sticking us in the ass with B12 shots every day . Little by little by little , we crawled back up to the point where we were standing erect " . 
 The other material on Eat a Peach comes from live recordings . Dowd later said , " When we recorded At Fillmore East , we ended up with almost a whole other album 's worth of good material , and we used [ two ] tracks on Eat a Peach . Again , there was no overdubbing " . Dowd started the mixing process for Eat a Peach but had run overtime and was called to commitments with Crosby , Stills and Nash ; longtime Allman friend and colleague Johnny Sandlin took over for the remaining mixes . Sandlin later said of the mixing process , " As I mixed songs like " Blue Sky , " I knew , of course , that I was listening to the last things that Duane ever played and there was just such a mix of beauty and sadness , knowing there 's not going to be any more from him " . He was particularly proud of his mixing work on the album , but was angry because he did not receive credit , only a " special thanks . " 
 Completing the recording of Eat a Peach raised each members ' spirits ; Allman said , " The music brought life back to us all , and it was simultaneously realized by every one of us . We found strength , vitality , newness , reason , and belonging as we worked on finishing Eat a Peach " . " Those last three songs ... just kinda floated right on out of us ... The music was still good , it was still rich , and it still had that energy — it was still the Allman Brothers Band . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Much of the music on Eat a Peach that was recorded after Duane 's death directly dealt with the tragedy . " Ain 't Wastin ' Time No More " was written by Gregg Allman for his brother , Duane , immediately following his death . The song was composed on an 110 @-@ year @-@ old Steinway piano in Studio D of Criteria . " Ain 't Wastin ' " was composed when Duane was still alive , but the lyrics deal with his passing , as well as veterans coming home from the Vietnam War . The song relates to the theme that " death is an inescapable inevitability — that every day is precious . " " Les Brers in A Minor " is an instrumental penned by Dickey Betts , and its title is " bad French " for " less brothers . " When writing the song , all in the band felt something was familiar about the song ; it turned out to be a solo of Betts 's from live renditions of " Whipping Post . " It resurfaced many years later on a bootleg recording . " Les Brers " began recording in the newly constructed Studio C of the recording complex at Criteria , but the band disliked the sound captured in the room and moved to Studio A. As a result , the recording contains a slight pitch variation due to the difficulty of matching the original speed of the instruments when the intro was spliced onto the master tape . 
 Gregg Allman recorded " Melissa " primarily as a tribute to his brother , who adored the song ; the song was written in 1967 while staying in a hotel in Pensacola , Florida and was one of the first he saved after dozens of writing attempts . Allman had previously not shown it to other members of the band ( " I thought it was too soft for the Allman Brothers , " he said ) , and was saving it for a possible solo album he assumed he would one day record . " One Way Out " was recorded on June 27 , 1971 at the band 's final concert at the Fillmore East , which was shut down after that date , and " Trouble No More " and " Mountain Jam " were culled from the band 's March performances . " Mountain Jam " was always intended for inclusion on the band 's next album ; the band teased its appearance by including the opening seconds on the fade @-@ out of the final song on At Fillmore East . The band considered it a signature song of the group , but they deemed the performance that was recorded relatively mediocre . 
 = = Artwork and title = = 
 The album 's artwork was created by W. David Powell at Wonder Graphics . He had seen old postcards at a drugstore in Athens , Georgia , one depicting a peach on a truck and a watermelon on a rail car . Believing them perfect for an Allman Brothers album , he purchased them and " bought cans of pink and baby @-@ blue <unk> spray paint and created a matted area to make the cards on a twelve @-@ by @-@ twenty @-@ four LP cover . " He envisioned the album having " an early @-@ morning @-@ sky feel . " He hand @-@ lettered the band name and photographed it with a small Kodak camera , developing the photos at the drugstore . He then cut and pasted the letters on the side of the truck , underneath the peach . 
 The album includes an elaborate gatefold mural featuring a fantasy landscape of mushrooms ( referencing the psychedelic drug ) and fairies , drawn by Powell and J. F. Holmes . " It told a story of happy , mystical brotherhood that was receding ever further into fantasy as the band grappled with the tragedy of Duane 's death , " according to biographer Alan Paul . There was very little planning involved in the piece , which was created when the duo were in Vero Beach , Florida . When one would be drawing or painting the image , another would be swimming in the ocean . " We swapped off this way with virtually no conversation about the drawing , just fluid trade @-@ offs , " said Powell . The art was created on a large illustration board , " on a one @-@ to @-@ one scale — it was the size of the actual spread , " according to Powell . Holmes ' work is featured largely on the left , with Powell 's on the right . Both were " profoundly influenced " by Early Netherlandish painter Hieronymous Bosch on the piece . 
 At the time the artwork was finalized , Duane Allman was still alive and the title had not been finalized . As a result , the album lacks a title on the cover , which was an unusual approach for bands at the time . Powell later said , " When we showed it to someone at the label , he said , ' They are so hot right now , we could sell it in a brown paper bag ' " . Atlantic initially intended to title the album The Kind We Grow in Dixie , but the band refused . The title was the label of the postcard series Powell had seen in Athens . Trucks suggested they name the album Eat a Peach for Peace , after a quote from Duane Allman . When the writer Ellen Mandel asked Allman what he was doing to help the revolution , he replied : 
 I 'm hitting a lick for peace — and every time I 'm in Georgia , I eat a peach for peace . But you can 't help the revolution , because there 's just evolution . I understand the need for a lot of changes in the country , but I believe that as soon as everybody can just see a little bit better , and get a little hipper to what 's going on , they 're going to change it . Everybody will — not just the young people . Everybody is going to say , ' Man , this stinks . I cannot tolerate the smell of this thing anymore . Let 's eliminate it and get straight with ourselves . ' I believe if everybody does it for themselves , it 'll take care of itself . 
 According to some sources , the peach being " eaten " was " the two @-@ legged Georgia variety " . Drummer Butch Trucks also considered Allman 's comment a sly reference to the poem " The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock " by T. S. Eliot , one of Allman 's favorite poets . An untrue story persisted for many years after the album 's release that it was named after the truck Allman crashed into , purported to be a peach truck . The album art was later selected by Rolling Stone magazine in 1991 as one of the 100 greatest album covers of all time . 
 = = Release = = 
 Before the release of Eat a Peach , industry talk suggested the demise of the group after the death of Duane Allman . The record 's promotional campaign was coordinated by Dick Wooley , the former head of promotion for Atlantic Records . He had recently quit his position there and was contacted by Walden to help Capricorn in its efforts . ( Capricorn Records had recently separated from Atlantic Records as well ; Eat a Peach would be among the first Capricorn albums released under a new distribution deal with Warner Bros. Records . ) " They needed help because the buzz in the record business and on the street was that the ABB was finished as a band and would never survive without Duane , " said Wooley . After being played some songs from Eat a Peach by Sandlin , Wooley was " blown away " and accepted the offer at half his usual salary . He arranged to have the band 's New Year 's Eve performance at New Orleans ' Warehouse live simulcast on radio . " I took a gamble and cobbled together a network of radio stations in the Southeast via Ma Bell phone lines , " said Wooley . The stunt helped launch Eat a Peach , which was issued by Capricorn in February 1972 and became an instant success . The album shipped enough copies to be certified by the RIAA as gold and peaked at number four on Billboard 's Top 200 Pop Albums chart . " We 'd been through hell , but somehow we were rolling bigger than ever , " said Gregg Allman . 
 Rolling Stone 's Tony Glover wrote that , even without their leader , " the Allman Brothers are still the best goddamned band in the land ... I hope the band keeps playing forever — how many groups can you think of who really make you believe they 're playing for the joy of it ? " Robert Christgau gave the album a B but criticized " Mountain Jam " ' s length : " I know the pace of living is slow down there , but this verges on the comatose . And all the tape in the world isn 't going to bring Duane back . " In a retrospective review , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the record a solid five stars , calling the record a showcase of " the Allmans at their peak . " David Quantick of BBC Music also considered it their " creative peak , " praising the album 's " well @-@ played , surprisingly lean bluesy rock . " The album is mentioned as the band 's top studio recording in the 2008 book 1 @,@ 000 Recordings To Hear Before You Die ( 2008 ) , with author Tom Moon praising the record 's " sedate , beautifully contemplative studio material . " 
 " Melissa " was the album 's most successful single , peaking at number 65 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Ain 't Wastin ' Time No More " and " One Way Out " were also singles , charting at numbers 77 and 86 , respectively . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Biographer Alan Paul notes that the band ’ s members " all profoundly felt the absence of their guiding light " during the touring cycle for Eat a Peach . Dickey Betts had to convince the band members to tour , since all other members were reluctant . Despite rumors , the band did not replace Duane Allman , and simply toured as a five @-@ piece . The Allman Brothers Band played 90 shows in 1972 in support of the record . " We were playing for him and that was the way to be closest to him , " said Trucks . Allman and Oakley took turns introducing songs , which was traditionally Duane ’ s role . Betts learned Duane 's slide guitar parts , but put his own spin on it . Oakley had a downward spiral following Duane 's death and was significantly inebriated for many shows on the tour . " He wasn ’ t playing like he used to — instead , he 'd hit maybe every fifth note , " recalled Allman . Occasionally , the band would have bassist Joe Dan Petty , later of <unk> , cover for Oakley for the show . After nearly a year of severe depression , Oakley was killed in a motorcycle accident not dissimilar from his friend 's in November 1972 . 
 The band were headliners for the first time on the Eat a Peach tour , and many label mates on Capricorn opened for the band , including Wet Willie , Cowboy , and Dr. John . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs arranged by the Allman Brothers Band , except where noted . 
 Side one 
 " Ain 't Wastin ' Time No More " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 40 
 " Les Brers in A Minor " ( Dickey Betts ) – 9 : 03 
 " Melissa " ( Gregg Allman , Steve Alaimo ) – 3 : 54 
 Side two 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Donovan Leitch , Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) – 19 : 37 * 
 Side three 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) – 4 : 58 
 " Trouble No More " ( Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 43 
 " Stand Back " ( Gregg Allman , Berry Oakley ) – 3 : 24 
 " Blue Sky " ( Dickey Betts ) – 5 : 09 
 " Little Martha " ( Duane Allman ) – 2 : 07 
 Side four 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Continued ) – 15 : 06 * 
 Later compact disc editions of the album include the entirety of " Mountain Jam " ( which , in all , runs 33 : 38 ) as track four . 
 = = = 2006 Deluxe Edition = = = 
 = = = = Disc 1 = = = = 
 " Ain 't Wastin ' Time No More " ( Gregg Allman ) - 3 : 40 
 " Les Brers In A Minor " ( Dickey Betts ) - 9 : 05 
 " Melissa " ( Gregg Allman ) - 3 : 56 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Live ) ( Donovan Leitch , Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) - 33 : 41 
 " One Way Out " ( Live ) ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) - 4 : 58 
 " Trouble No More " ( Live ) ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) - 3 : 44 
 " Stand Back " ( Gregg Allman , Berry Oakley ) - 3 : 26 
 " Blue Sky " ( Dickey Betts ) - 5 : 10 
 " Little Martha " ( Duane Allman ) - 2 : 10 
 = = = = Live Songs = = = = 
 Tracks 4 and 6 recorded March 12 & 13 , 1971 at the Fillmore East in New York , NY 
 Track 5 recorded June 27 , 1971 at the Fillmore East in New York , NY 
 = = = = Disc 2 = = = = 
 Recorded live from the final Fillmore East show in New York , NY on June 27 , 1971 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) - 4 : 25 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) - 3 : 46 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) - 3 : 38 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) - 5 : 08 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) - 12 : 50 
 " Midnight Rider " ( Gregg Allman , Robert Payne ) - 3 : 08 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) - 5 : 51 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) - 20 : 06 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) - 17 : 24 
