 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " has been covered by multiple artists since its release in 1979 . 
 In 1980 : A reggae version was released by Derrick <unk> & Trinity as a 12 " single . 
 In 1985 : the song was included in the second album of Dominican Juan Luis Guerra & 440 , <unk> y <unk> . This version is a merengue based on disco and rock sounds and was titled " Dame " ( Give me ) . 
 In 1999 : The song was covered by BB Band in 1999 on their album entitled , The Detroit Sound . 
 Chris Tucker and Adrienne Bailon recorded a new version of the song for the 2001 film Rush Hour 2 , which stars also Tucker . 
 In 2005 : Westlife performed the song live on their The Number Ones Tour . 
 In 2005 : The song was also covered by James Chance on his 2005 album , which included a recorded and live version . 
 In 2005 : " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " was covered by Melissa Forbes on her 2005 album entitled , No More Mondays . 
 In 2007 : American pop @-@ rock band Shivaree covered " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " on their 2007 album of cover versions , entitled , Tainted Love : Mating Calls and Fight Songs . 
 The song was covered by Rod Hanna , on his album of covers entitled Rod Hanna Live : <unk> 70 's Superhits - Rod Hanna . 
 In 2009 : Following Jackson 's death in June 2009 , the band U2 began their world tour , entitled U2 360 ° Tour , with renditions of two of Jackson 's songs , " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " and " Man In The Mirror " ( from Jackson 's 1987 album Bad ) on June 30 , 2009 . 
 Also in 2009 , Egyptian singer Tamer Hosny heavily sampled " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " in his song , " <unk> Fein ( Don 't Stop ) , which is featured on his album , " <unk> Hayati " . 
 Cookin Soul did a remix cover of the track , entitled , " Don ’ t Stop ‘ til You Get Enough feat . Jay @-@ Z " . The remixed version was performed during Cookin Souls <unk> show , and the track was made available as a digital download track . Amos Barshad and Nick Catucci , of NYMag.com , commented that the remix version was a " surprisingly great meeting of music and lyrics , connecting MJ and rap without overstating the shared DNA " . 
 Former rival Prince covered it on his 2011 " Welcome 2 America " tour . 
 Usher performed the song and a few other mix of songs as a tribute to Jackson on his OMG Tour . 
 Maroon 5 incorporated the song in its set list on the U.S. Overexposed Tour following the band 's opening song " Payphone " and is prior to the next song , " Makes Me Wonder . " 
 Anthony Strong 's jazzy version appears on the album On a Clear Day ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 James Montgomery of MTV noted that " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " , along with Off the Wall 's other three singles , " showcased ( or , more specifically , unleashed ) Jackson 's talents as a [ sic ] entertainer , a vocalist , a writer and , most importantly , as a leading man . " After Jackson 's death , AOL 's Radio Blog released a list , entitled " 10 Best Michael Jackson Songs " , which placed " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " at number ten on the list . 
 William Ruhlmann , author of The All @-@ Music Guide to Rock , praised " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " as an " irresistible dance track " . John Lewis , author of 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , noted that the " jittery , frenetic opening track " is the centerpiece of Off the Wall . He concluded that " Jackson 's falsetto hollers and frisky yelps serve as an obbligato to the lead line , punctuating Ben Wright 's thrilling string arrangement and Jerry Hey 's tight horn charts " . Jason Elias , a writer for Allmusic , noted that " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " presents a " new Michael Jackson " that was " sexual , [ an ] adult , and aggressive . Elias commented that " Like the best of Jones ' late- ' 70s , early- ' 80s work , this [ song ] wasn 't quite disco , couldn 't be hardcore funk - it was an amalgam of styles with the all @-@ important pop accessibility . " 
 Jackson 's biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli described Jackson 's unveiling of a " sexy , playful falsetto " that " no one had ever heard from him before " . Nelson George stated that the argument for Jackson 's greatness began with the arrangements of " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . He noted that the percussion and backing vocals were " artfully choreographed " to " create drama and ecstasy on the dance floor " . He concluded , " It 's one thing to make a dance record — it is another to instill that track with an epic , celebratory quality as Michael does here " . James Montgomery of MTV noted that Off The Wall contained a " masterful mixture of fiery disco tracks " , specifying " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " and " Workin ' Day and Night " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Nottingham Panthers = 
 The Nottingham Panthers are a British professional ice hockey club based in Nottingham , England . They are members of the Elite Ice Hockey League . The team is officially known as the GMB Nottingham Panthers due to a sponsorship agreement with the GMB union . 
 The Nottingham Panthers have won four league titles ( two English National League titles , one British National League title and one Elite Ice Hockey League title ) , five Championships , six Autumn Cups and eight Challenge Cups during their history . They are the only team to have played in every season where a British league championship has been contested and are the only founding member of the Premier Division in 1983 to have continually participated in the top flight league . The Panthers have 16 members enshrined in the British Ice Hockey Hall of Fame and have had 34 players represent Great Britain at the World Championships and in Olympic qualifying . 
 The club was founded in 1946 after earlier attempts to establish a team were postponed due to World War II . During their first eight seasons the Panthers played in the English National League . They joined the newly formed British National League in 1954 , which they competed in until its disbandment in 1960 . With no league to play in the club also ceased operations . In 1980 , players and officials from the Sheffield Lancers relocated to Nottingham and reformed the Panthers . Both the original and modern Nottingham Panthers played their home games at the Ice Stadium until 2000 when the team moved into the National Ice Centre . 
 The Nottingham Panthers have one of the largest fanbases in British ice hockey , averaging over 5 @,@ 000 spectators per game during the 2014 – 15 season . Their supporters have shared a number of rivalries with other teams during their history . Currently the Panthers have a fierce rivalry with the Sheffield Steelers . The two sides have played over 200 games , including eleven major finals , since 1992 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1946 – 60 : Original era = = = 
 An initial attempt to bring a professional ice hockey team to Nottingham was made in 1939 following the completion of the Ice Stadium in Nottingham City Centre . A team was assembled and brought to the United Kingdom from Canada to compete in the 1939 – 40 English National League season but were promptly sent home having not played a single game due to the outbreak of World War II . Seven years later , after the war had ended , a second effort to bring ice hockey to the city was begun . With a team of Canadians largely from Winnipeg , Manitoba , the Nottingham Panthers played their first competitive game on 22 November 1946 with a 3 – 2 home victory over the Wembley Monarchs . 
 The Panthers struggled during their early years and only once during their first four seasons did they finish in the upper half of the league table . The club 's first coach , Alex Archer , left Nottingham after two seasons and was replaced by Archie Stinchcombe who would coach the team until 1955 . Despite a lack of success in their formative years the team had a number of players who would become local heroes including forwards Les Strongman and Chick Zamick . Zamick became one of the most prolific scorers in the league and won the Nottingham Sportsman of the Year award on two occasions , defeating sportsmen such as the Notts County and England international footballer Tommy Lawton . 
 The club 's first major title came in the 1950 – 51 season . After finishing fourth in the Autumn Cup the Panthers won 18 of their 30 league games and clinched the league championship . The team also ended the campaign having scored the most goals and conceded the least . The following season Nottingham lost Chick Zamick to injury and fell to the bottom of the rankings . Success returned in 1953 – 54 when , after a last place finish in the Autumn Cup , the Panthers secured their second English League title by one point over Streatham . 
 In the close season of 1954 the English League and the Scottish League were merged to form a British League . The Panthers finished second to the Harringay Racers in the eleven team competition . After one season all the Scottish teams , with the exception of the Paisley Pirates , withdrew from the British League and left it with only five members . The close season of 1955 also saw the departure of Stinchcombe who was replaced as coach by Zamick . The 1955 – 56 season proved to be one of the club 's most successful . Nottingham won the Autumn Cup at the beginning of the season before clinching their third league title on goal average ahead of the Wembley Lions . They also travelled to Sweden where they won the Ahearne Cup . 
 The 1955 – 56 title win proved to be the original Panthers ' last . Over the next four years Nottingham alternated between bottom and second place in the league standings . After finishing runner @-@ up in 1959 – 60 , the Panthers took part in the first British Championship final in thirty years where they faced the Brighton Tigers . Nottingham were defeated 3 – 2 in the first leg but won the second in regulation time by the same scoreline forcing overtime . The Tigers clinched the tie 6 – 5 after six minutes and 32 seconds of the extra session . During the close season of 1960 the British National League collapsed and the Nottingham Panthers were disbanded . Ice hockey would not return to Nottingham for the next two decades . 
 = = = 1980 – present : Modern era = = = 
 = = = = Ice Stadium years = = = = 
 The Nottingham Panthers were revived largely thanks to the efforts of Gary Keward . In 1980 the Ice Stadium directors , led by Charles Walker , agreed to a request by Keward to give ice hockey another chance . The Sheffield Lancers , a team Keward helped to run , were relocated to Nottingham taking the name of the team that had occupied the same building 20 years earlier . On 20 September 1980 the modern Panthers took to the ice for the first time defeating the Solihull Barons 7 – 4 at the Ice Stadium . 
 During their first three seasons the Panthers played in regional leagues , first in the English League South and then in Section B of the British Hockey League . In 1983 the British Hockey League reconstituted itself into the first truly national ice hockey league for 23 years and Nottingham became one of nine founder members of the league 's Premier Division . The Panthers were one of the best supported teams in the league with games regularly selling out but success on the ice eluded them as the team struggled against more established opponents such as the Durham Wasps and the Murrayfield Racers . It was not until the appointment of Alex Dampier as coach in 1985 that the team 's fortunes began to change . In his first season Dampier led Nottingham to the playoffs for the first time since reforming . The Panthers lost all four of their quarter final group games and failed to advance to the finals at Wembley Arena . 
 In 1986 Nottingham secured their first trophy since reforming and their first overall in thirty years when they defeated the Fife Flyers 5 – 4 in overtime to win the Norwich Union Trophy at the NEC in Birmingham in front of a crowd of 5 @,@ 600 . Layton <unk> scored the winning goal after one minute and 53 seconds of the extra session in a game that had seen both the Panthers and the Flyers lead twice . In the league Nottingham again succeeded in qualifying for the playoffs but again failed to register a point . The team repeated this in the Championships the following season bringing the number of consecutive playoff defeats to twelve . 
 In 1988 – 89 the Panthers enjoyed one of their most successful seasons . They finished third in the league and were not only able to register their first win in the playoffs but also advance to the finals at Wembley for the first time . Nottingham met Whitley Warriors in the semi final , winning the match 8 – 6 . In the final the following day the Panthers defeated the Ayr Bruins 6 – 3 , clinching their first Championship title . Another Autumn Cup followed in 1991 but Dampier left the club during the 1992 – 93 season to join the newly formed Sheffield Steelers . He was replaced by Kevin Murphy who coached the team for the remainder of the campaign . Murphy was in turn replaced by Mike Blaisdell during the close season of 1993 . 
 Blaisdell assembled a strong team for the 1994 – 95 season and led the Panthers to the Benson & Hedges Cup with a 7 – 2 victory over the Cardiff Devils in the final . Nottingham opened their league campaign with a 21 @-@ game unbeaten run but four defeats over the final two weekends of the regular season , including an 8 – 6 home defeat by nearest rivals and eventual champions Sheffield , denied the club their first league championship in 39 years . During the 1995 – 96 season the Panthers made it to both the Benson & Hedges Cup and playoff finals , but they were defeated on each occasion by the Steelers . 
 In 1996 the Panthers became a founder member of the new Ice Hockey Superleague . The new league abolished the wage cap and restrictions on the number of non @-@ British trained players a club was allowed . Many of Nottingham 's British players , who had risen through the ranks of the club 's youth development system , were dropped in favour of North American imports . Of Nottingham 's locally trained contingent only Randall Weber , Ashley Tait and Simon Hunt were retained . The Panthers began the season by qualifying for the Benson & Hedges Cup final for a third straight year following a 6 – 3 aggregate victory over arch rival Sheffield at the semi final stage . In the final they defeated the Ayr Scottish Eagles 5 – 3 , taking the lead 29 seconds into the game and never relinquishing it . The Panthers finished fourth in the league and qualified for the last four in the playoffs after finishing top of their group with five wins and one overtime loss from six games . Their semi final against the Ayr Scottish Eagles became the longest game in British ice hockey history . The scores were level at 5 – 5 after regulation time and each of the following five periods of ten @-@ minute overtime ended goalless . Only in the sixth period of overtime , with the two @-@ hour mark of the match nearing , did Jeff Hoad finally score a shorthanded winner for Nottingham ending the game after 115 minutes and 49 seconds . In the final the Panthers met Sheffield where they were defeated 3 – 1 after taking an early lead . 
 In 1997 the Panthers franchise was sold after directors revealed the club was in considerable debt . A buyer was found in London based businessman Neil Black and his sports management company . The 1998 – 99 season saw the Panthers sign one of their strongest ever line @-@ ups . After finishing third in their Benson & Hedges Cup group , the Panthers eliminated the Slough Jets and Newcastle <unk> before defeating the Manchester Storm in the semi final despite being depleted by injuries and facing a full strength Storm side . The final saw the Panthers taking on the Ayr Scottish Eagles in a repeat of the 1996 final . Here Nottingham came from behind to defeat the Eagles 2 – 1 with Finn Pekka <unk> scoring both goals . In the league the Panthers finished in third place , twelve points behind champions Manchester . Nottingham also qualified for the finals of the Challenge Cup and the playoffs but the team were defeated by the Sheffield Steelers and Cardiff Devils respectively . During the course of the season Paul Adey and Greg Hadden scored 141 points between them , four players scored more than 20 goals , six players earned more than 30 assists and seven players achieved 30 or more points . 
 The 1999 – 00 season was the club 's final year at the Ice Stadium before moving to the National Ice Centre . The budget for players was limited by the club chairman so that the Panthers would be able to break even the following season . Players were asked to take a wage cut , leading to the departure of Trevor Robins , Mike Bishop , Mark Kolesar , Eric <unk> and record goalscorer Paul Adey . This frustrated Mike Blaisdell who left the club in November to become head coach of the Sheffield Steelers . He was replaced by former coach Alex Dampier . Lacking the spending power of many of their rivals , Nottingham finished sixth in the eight team league . The club fared better in the Challenge Cup where it made the final for the second successive year but the team was defeated 2 – 1 at London Arena by Mike Blaisdell 's Steelers . On 22 March 2000 the Panthers hosted Newcastle in their final game at the Ice Stadium . Jamie Leach scored Nottingham 's last goal at their home of 54 years but the club was defeated 2 – 1 in overtime . 
 = = = = Move to the National Ice Centre = = = = 
 The Panthers moved to the new National Ice Centre in September 2000 but endured a terrible first season in their new home . They were knocked out at the semi final stage of the Benson & Hedges Cup by the Steelers and suffered a dire first half to the regular season . By Christmas the team faced the prospect of not qualifying for the playoffs for the first time since 1985 . Form improved during the second half of the season with the team winning five of their first seven home games during 2001 , including a 6 – 4 victory over the Sheffield Steelers marred by a violent bench clearing brawl . The Panthers still lay in ninth and last place going into their final game of the regular season , three points behind their opponents Newcastle Jesters . Nottingham required a regulation time win to claim the eighth and final playoff berth , something they had not done away from their home ice all season . The Jesters needed only to tie . With 10 @.@ 1 seconds to go , the game was locked at 2 – 2 , but with an extra attacker the Panthers won a faceoff next to the Newcastle goal and Robert Nordmark scored with 4 @.@ 4 seconds remaining to take them into the playoffs and eliminate the Jesters . In the playoffs a 5 – 0 win over a financially troubled Sheffield Steelers was their only victory of the post season . 
 In 2003 the Superleague collapsed after financial problems ; it was left with only five members and faced the prospect of having only three . After uncertainty over which league the Panthers would be taking part in and even uncertainty over the future of the club itself , Nottingham became a founding member of the new Elite Ice Hockey League . Changes to the rules regarding the number of non @-@ British trained players a club was allowed to sign saw the Panthers make substantial changes to their squad . After finishing second in the league , their highest finish in twelve years , Panthers qualified for the Challenge Cup final . Their opponent in the two @-@ legged final was arch rival Sheffield Steelers , a team that Nottingham had failed to beat in each of the six finals the two club 's had contested . The first leg ended in a 1 – 1 tie in Nottingham . In the second leg at Sheffield Arena the Panthers raced to an early 3 – 1 aggregate lead . However , Sheffield pulled a goal back late in the second period and equalised with ten minutes remaining , forcing overtime . After 53 seconds of the extra session Kim <unk> scored the winning goal , ending an eight @-@ year wait for the Panthers to beat the Steelers in a showpiece final and securing the club 's first silverware since 1998 . The Panthers followed up their trophy win with a strong playoff campaign , but after a 6 – 1 win over the Manchester Phoenix in the semi final , the Steelers avenged their Challenge Cup defeat with a narrow 2 – 1 win in the final . 
 The 2004 – 05 season saw the club take part in the Continental Cup . The Panthers were placed into a group with host team <unk> d <unk> , Italian side Milano Vipers and Slovenian side Olimpija Ljubljana . Nottingham tied their first game against Milan before recording 1 – 0 and 3 – 1 victories over the Slovenians and French , narrowly missing out on a place in the second round of the competition due to Milan 's better goal difference . Domestically the team struggled for much of season and only during the end of season playoffs did the Panthers replicate the form they showed in Europe where , despite being depleted by injuries , they qualified for a second successive playoff final , losing 2 – 1 in overtime to eventual Grand Slam winners Coventry Blaze . 
 Mike Blaisdell briefly returned to the club as coach for the 2005 – 06 season , before being succeeded by Mike Ellis . Ellis made numerous changes to the playing staff and led the Panthers to a fifth place league finish . In the playoffs Nottingham eliminated the Sheffield Steelers and Belfast Giants before defeating the Cardiff Devils to clinch their first playoff title in 18 years . All three ties were decided on penalty shots with goaltender Rastislav <unk> saving all seven shots he faced during the course of the competition . The following season the Panthers won a second Challenge Cup title , defeating the Sheffield Steelers 9 – 7 on aggregate in the final . This was the first time that the Panthers had won major honours in successive seasons . 
 = = = = The Corey Neilson era = = = = 
 Coach Mike Ellis departed the club following the 2007 – 08 season , to be replaced by Corey Neilson . After a third @-@ place finish in the 2008 – 09 season , the Panthers mounted a title challenge during 2009 – 10 , remaining in contention for the championship until the final stages of the season . They eventually finished third for a third successive season . The Panthers also won the Challenge Cup for the second time in three seasons , defeating the Cardiff Devils 8 – 7 on aggregate in the final . The 2010 – 11 season started strongly , but the Panthers suffered a poor mid season run which scuppered their chances of winning the regular season title and led to players being fined a proportion of their wages . The team were able to rebound from this , first securing a 4 – 3 aggregate victory over the Belfast Giants to successfully defend the Challenge Cup , then securing their third playoff championship with a 5 – 4 win over the Cardiff Devils . The Panthers repeated the double in the 2011 – 12 season first winning a third straight Challenge Cup with a 10 – 4 aggregate victory over Belfast . In the playoffs , the Panthers defeated Braehead and Hull in the playoffs before winning 2 – 0 against Cardiff in the final . The game was a tight affair , with David @-@ Alexandre Beauregard breaking the deadlock after 53 goalless minutes . 
 The 2012 off @-@ season began with the release of captain Danny Meyers and his replacement by fellow Great Britain international Jonathan Weaver . Other new additions included forwards David Ling , Patrick <unk> and Bruce Graham , while Jason Beckett and Eric Werner were brought in as new defencemen . The season began with the Panthers losing 2 of their first 4 home games . This prompted Neilson to re @-@ sign defenceman Guillaume Lepine as well as Anthony Stewart , then of the Carolina Hurricanes , on a short @-@ term deal due to the NHL lockout . Form began to improve and , following a shootout win in Cardiff on 8 December , Panthers went top of the league standings . They remained there for the rest of the season , clinching their first regular season title in 57 years on 15 March 2013 . Patrick <unk> scored the championship @-@ sealing goal late in the third period before Matt Francis added an empty @-@ netter in a 5 – 3 victory over the Belfast Giants . Five days later the Panthers defeated Sheffield 4 – 1 in the first leg of the Challenge Cup final . This proved decisive , and a 2 – 1 defeat in the second leg was not enough to deny the Panthers a fourth consecutive Challenge Cup title . Nottingham went on to face Belfast in the playoff final . The Panthers opened a 2 – 0 lead before the Giants rallied to tie the game and force overtime . On the powerplay in the extra session , captain Jordan Fox scored to give Panthers the win and complete the Grand Slam . 
 By contrast , the 2013 – 14 season was plagued by injuries , suspensions and a high turnover of players , and the Panthers fell to fourth in the final league table . They once again reached the Challenge Cup final , but were considered outsiders against a Belfast Giants team that comfortably won the league championship and finished 32 points ahead of Nottingham . The Panthers lost the first leg 5 – 2 , a result that left the Giants as strong favourites to lift the cup . However , the Panthers won the second leg 4 – 1 to level the tie and force overtime . When that finished goalless , goaltender Craig Kowalski saved all three Belfast penalty shots and Petr <unk> scored to give Panthers a 7 – 6 aggregate victory and a fifth consecutive Challenge Cup . 
 On the 2 May 2014 it was confirmed that the Panthers would be taking part in the Champions Hockey League after Belfast Giants had to turn down the offer due to ice time issues . The Group Draw , which took place in Minsk on the 21 May saw Panthers come up against Hamburg <unk> of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga , <unk> Rauma of the SM @-@ liiga and Luleå Hockey from the Swedish Hockey League . 
 = = Name origins , logos and colours = = 
 The origin of the name Panthers is uncertain . One of the most widely known theories is that the club were named for a squadron of Canadian airmen based near Nottingham during World War II . However , there is no evidence to suggest that such a squadron existed and records indicate that the name was coined before these events could have taken place . A souvenir brochure produced to mark of the opening of the Ice Stadium in April 1939 stated that the venue 's new team would be known as the Nottingham Panthers . It does not , however , explain the rationale behind the name . Three games were played by teams using the name Nottingham Panthers during the winter of 1939 – 40 before the name was revived in 1946 . 
 During the original era the Panthers did not have a logo , instead using stylised lettering on the front of their shirts . The club 's current logo was adopted in 2003 and is the fifth to be used since the Panthers were reformed . The first was used between 1980 and 1994 and was the silhouette of a Panthers ' head in a red circle . The second logo , adopted in 1994 , was similar to the first but used a more detailed Panthers ' head . The third logo , introduced in 1998 , featured a keyhole shaped like the head of a cat with a Panther reaching through it . The fourth logo was adopted following the move to the National Ice Centre and was similar to the logo of German side Augsburger Panther . The stylised lettering used during the original era was used again on special shirts made to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the club in 2006 . 
 The colours used by the original Panthers were black and white . Home shirts were black with a black and white striped lining on the shoulders . When the club reformed in 1980 , the black and white colours were also revived , with a gold lining also being added to the jerseys . In 1996 red was added to the colour scheme of the shirts . In 2001 – 02 the club 's colour scheme was changed to black and gold . Home jerseys are gold with a black lining with away jerseys being the reverse . In 2007 – 08 , the Panthers brought out a predominantly white third jersey for the Challenge Cup . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 The original home of the Panthers was the Ice Stadium . Built by Sims , Sons and Cooke Ltd , the Ice Stadium was based on the Harringay Arena design and officially opened on 10 April 1939 . The building hosted its first game two days later with the Harringay Greyhounds defeating the Harringay Racers 10 – 6 in a challenge game in front of a crowd of 5 @,@ 000 spectators . Though a team playing under the name Nottingham Panthers would play three games during the winter of 1939 – 40 , it would be 1946 before the venue would host a competitive match . During World War II the Ice Stadium served as a makeshift munitions store and morgue . The building reopened on 31 August 1946 and hosted another game between the Greyhounds and Racers before the Panthers made their competitive debut on 22 November , defeating the Wembley Monarchs 3 – 2 . The venue became the home of the team between 1946 and 1960 and again from the club 's reformation in 1980 to 2000 . 
 The Ice Stadium held a capacity of 2 @,@ 950 spectators and had an ice pad measuring 185 feet ( 56 m ) by 85 feet ( 26 m ) . After the club 's reformation a second ice pad was installed in 1983 . In October 1996 plans were announced by Nottingham City Council to replace the ageing building with a twin @-@ <unk> National Ice Centre . Work began on the 6 @,@ 500 capacity arena section of the facility in the summer of 1998 and was completed in the spring of 2000 . The Panthers played their final game at the Ice Stadium on 22 March 2000 . After the game supporters were allowed to dismantle anything easily removable from the interior of the building to take home as souvenirs . The Ice Stadium was demolished soon afterwards to allow for the completion of the new Ice Centre . 
 The new National Ice Centre was designed by Nottingham City Council officials and was built by John Laing plc . The building cost £ 40 million to construct , of which £ 22 @.@ 5 million was awarded by the National Lottery . The arena half of the facility was opened on 1 April 2000 , with the second public skating pad opening a year later . Both rinks are Olympic sized ice pads measuring 196 feet ( 60 m ) by 97 feet ( 30 m ) . The Panthers played their first game at their new home on 2 September 2000 when the team hosted the London Knights in the Benson & Hedges Cup . Barry Nieckar scored the club 's first goal in a 2 – 1 Panthers victory played to a crowd of 4 @,@ 800 . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 Randall Weber holds the record for Nottingham Panthers appearances , having played for the club 845 times between 1985 and 2002 . Centre Chick Zamick comes second , having appeared 624 times between 1947 and 1958 . 
 Canadian forward Paul Adey is the club 's all @-@ time leader in goals , assists and points . He scored 828 goals and 781 assists for a total of 1 @,@ 609 points in 609 appearance between 1988 and 1999 . Zamick is in second place having scored 774 goals and 638 assists for 1412 points . He is the only other player to have amassed more than 1 @,@ 000 points for the Panthers . Adey also holds the record for the most goals scored by a Panthers player in a single season with 120 during the 1994 – 95 season . During the same season Rick <unk> set club records for the most assists and most points in a single season with 156 and 241 respectively . 
 British forward Simon Hunt holds the club record for the most penalty minutes , serving 1 @,@ 226 minutes in 524 appearances between 1988 and 1999 . During 2000 – 01 Barry Nieckar earned 352 penalty minutes , the highest number for a player in a single season . 
 The club 's record win came on 31 October 1981 when the Panthers defeated the Southampton Vikings 31 – 2 at the Ice Stadium . A few weeks earlier , on 4 October , the Panthers had recorded their record away victory with a 23 – 1 win over the same opposition . The team 's heaviest defeat came on 20 March 1988 with a 23 – 1 away defeat at the Whitley Warriors . Nottingham 's largest home defeat was a 14 – 2 loss to the Dundee Rockets on 25 February 1984 . 
 The Nottingham Panthers have held continuous membership of British ice hockey 's highest division since the foundation of the Premier League in 1983 and are the only team to have this distinction . The club are one of the oldest in the Elite Ice Hockey League having been founded eight years after the Fife Flyers , but forty years before the Cardiff Devils . 
 On 29 December 2011 , forward David Clarke became the Elite Ice Hockey League All @-@ time leading goalscorer in all competitions . Clarke scored to move on to 230 goals and pass Adam Calder . 
 In the same game , another milestone was set as David @-@ Alexandre <unk> reached his 1 @,@ 000 career point . 
 On 9 March 2014 David Clarke registered his 600th EIHL point in his career , in the same game Corey Neilson also became Nottingham Panthers most successful coach , overtaking Mike Blaisdell . 
 = = Current roster = = 
 2015 – 16 EIHL season 
 = = Confirmed signings for the 2016 @-@ 17 season = = 
 = = Honoured members = = 
 The Panthers have retired the numbers of five players since reforming : The number 3 of defenceman Gary <unk> was retired following his death at the age of eighteen in 1992 . Randall Weber , who spent his entire seventeen @-@ year career at the Panthers , had his number 10 retired following his final game for the club in 2002 . The number 11 of forward Greg Hadden and the number 22 of the club 's all @-@ time leading goal , assist and point scorer Paul Adey were retired in 2003 . The number 77 of defenceman and head coach Corey Neilson was retired in 2013 on the same night the club were presented with their first league championship trophy since 1956 . 
 Sixteen people who have been associated with the Panthers are members of British ice hockey 's Hall of Fame . As a member of the Great Britain team that won gold at the 1936 Winter Olympics , Panthers coach Archie Stinchcombe was inducted in 1951 . The club 's first coach , Alex Archer was posthumously elected to the Hall of Fame as a member of the Olympic winning team in 1993 . Forward Chick Zamick , who played for the Panthers between 1947 and 1958 and holds the original club 's records for most goals and most appearances , was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1951 while fellow forward and team mate Les Strongman who went on to serve as the modern club 's coach , secretary and as a club director was inducted in 1987 . Coaches Alex Dampier and Mike Blaisdell were inducted in 1995 and 2004 respectively while Paul Adey was inducted in 2006 . Former players George Beach , Rick <unk> , Johnny Carlyle , Stephen Cooper , Jack Dryburgh , Art Hodgins , Chris Kelland , Jimmy Spence and Mike Urquhart are also members of the Hall of Fame . Zamick is the only person associated with the Nottingham Panthers to have membership of another Hall of Fame , having been inducted into the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame in 1995 . 
 = = Leaders = = 
 = = = Head coaches = = = 
 † Dampier was Director of Hockey between 2000 and 2002 . Coaching during this period was overseen by Peter Woods ( 2000 – 01 ) and Paul Adey ( 2001 – 02 ) , however overall responsibility for the team remained with Dampier . 
 = = = Team captains = = = 
 = Dan Povenmire = 
 Daniel Kingsley " Dan " Povenmire ( / <unk> / ; born September 18 , 1963 ) is an American television director , writer , producer , storyboard artist , and voice actor associated with several animated television series , best known as the co @-@ creator of the Disney animated series Phineas and Ferb in which he also voiced the show 's villain , Heinz Doofenshmirtz . Povenmire grew up in Mobile , Alabama , where he was a talented art student who spent summers outdoors and making movies . Povenmire attended the University of South Alabama before deciding to pursue a film career and transferring to the University of Southern California School of Cinematic Arts . 
 Povenmire has been a long @-@ time contributor to the animation business , working on several different animated television series such as Hey Arnold ! , The Simpsons , Rocko 's Modern Life and SpongeBob SquarePants . He was a longtime director on the prime time series Family Guy , where he was nominated for an Annie Award in 2005 . He left the series to create Phineas and Ferb with Jeff " Swampy " Marsh . Povenmire has been nominated for several awards for his work on the show , including a BAFTA , an Annie , and an Emmy Award . As of 2015 , he and Marsh are currently producing a new series for Disney entitled Milo Murphy 's Law . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Povenmire was born in San Diego , California on September 18 , 1963 , and grew up in the city of Mobile , Alabama . A child prodigy , he began drawing at age two ; by the time he was ten , his work was displayed in local art shows . His first efforts in animation included a series of flip books that he produced in his school text books . As a child , Povenmire considered animator Chuck Jones his hero ; in a 2009 interview , he stated that " every drawing he [ Jones ] did was beautiful to look at and had so much energy in it " . Hayao Miyazaki was also an early influence . 
 = = Education = = 
 Povenmire received his secondary education at Shaw High School in Mobile . Initially , he attended the University of South Alabama , where he created his first popular comic strip , Life is a Fish , devoted to the life of Herman the goldfish and the college students he lives with . Povenmire also supported himself as a waiter and performer at a dinner theater . In 1985 , he transferred to the University of Southern California ( USC ) , planning to pursue a career in film . 
 Soon after arriving at USC , he pitched Life is a Fish to Mark Ordesky , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Daily Trojan , the university newspaper . Ordesky first " basically brushed [ him ] off " , but , after viewing Povenmire 's portfolio , accepted the strip . Fish ran daily in the paper . Though the rapid pace left Povenmire afraid he was " running out of ideas " , he never missed a deadline and made $ 14 @,@ 000 a year through Fish merchandise , which included T @-@ shirts , books , and calendars sold at the campus craft fair . The discipline of regular production also helped teach Povenmire to " represent something in the least amount of lines " . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Povenmire left USC without finishing the degree requirements , and used the money from Fish merchandise to fund a short @-@ lived career as a street artist . His first professional animation commission came on the Tommy Chong project Far Out Man , for which Povenmire produced two minutes of animation . By age 24 , Povenmire was freelancing on several animated television series , including Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . In 1989 , he appeared in a small role as a band member in Adam Sandler 's first film , Going Overboard . 
 In the 1990s , Povenmire secured a job as a character layout animator on the hit animated series The Simpsons . His desk placed him opposite Jeffery Marsh , another up @-@ and @-@ coming animator . They shared similar tastes in humor and music , and later became colleagues on other projects . 
 Povenmire 's experience , from both previous industry work and from his own projects , earned him respect at The Simpsons . He worked on layout animation and collaborated on storyboard production for the series , recalling later that staff were handed pages of production notes and instructed to " Do the Brad Bird notes and any others that make sense . " He maintained a side interest in film , writing scripts and the screenplay for a low @-@ budget horror movie , Psycho Cop 2 . The movie 's producers offered Povenmire the opportunity to direct the film , but its terms required that he quit The Simpsons . Povenmire chose to stay with The Simpsons , which he enjoyed and considered a better fit with his future ambitions . Rif Coogan ended up directing the picture instead . 
 = = = Rocko 's Modern Life = = = 
 Work on The Simpsons involved an irregular schedule . The producers laid off the animation staff for two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ month periods , and rehired the staff later in the production cycle . During one of these layoffs , Povenmire found a temporary job on the series Rocko 's Modern Life , Nickelodeon 's first in @-@ house cartoon production . The show 's creator , television newcomer Joe Murray , hired Povenmire solely on the strength of his Life is a Fish comic strips , which proved he could both write and draw . 
 Though Povenmire started on Rocko simply to occupy his downtime from The Simpsons , he found the greater creative freedom he enjoyed on his temporary job compelling , and quit The Simpsons to work on Rocko full @-@ time . There , he reunited with Jeff Marsh , this time as a writing partner ; Marsh claimed the crew hoped Povenmire 's neatness would offset his own sloppy storyboarding . The pair developed a distinctive style characterized by characteristic musical numbers and chase scenes . Povenmire and Marsh won an Environmental Achievement Award for a 1996 Rocko episode they had written . 
 = = = Family Guy = = = 
 Povenmire later became a director on Family Guy , starting with the season two episode , " Road to Rhode Island " . Creator Seth MacFarlane granted Povenmire substantial creative freedom . Povenmire recalled that MacFarlane would tell him " We 've got two minutes to fill . Give me some visual gags . Do whatever you want . I trust you . " Povenmire praised MacFarlane 's management style for letting him " have [ ... ] fun . " Povenmire brought realism and material from his own experiences to the visual direction of Family Guy . For " One if By Clam , Two if By Sea " ( August 1 , 2001 ) , several characters demonstrate Fosse @-@ like moves in prison . To correctly depict the moves , Povenmire asked color artist Cynthia MacIntosh , who had been a professional dancer , to strike poses so he could properly illustrate the sequence . In the episode " To Love and Die in Dixie " ( November 15 , 2001 ) , Povenmire drew on his childhood in the Deep South to create and sequence a background scene in which the redneck character nonchalantly kicks a corpse into the nearby river . 
 " Brian Wallows and Peter 's Swallows " ( January 17 , 2002 ) , a Family Guy episode which Povenmire directed , won the Emmy Award for Best Song . Creator MacFarlane , the recipient of the award , noted that Povenmire deserved to have received the award for the contribution the visuals made to the episode 's win . Povenmire jokingly responded " That 's a nice sentiment and all , but did he offer to give me his ? No ! And it 's not like he doesn 't already have two of his own just sitting in his house ! " Povenmire was nominated for an Annie Award for Directing in an Animated Television Production for the episode " PTV " ( November 6 , 2005 ) but lost out to a fellow Family Guy director Peter Shin , who had directed the episode " North By North Quahog " . Povenmire and several others were also nominated for their work on " PTV " in the Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) category at the Primetime Emmy Awards . Povenmire also received the same nomination for " Road to Rhode Island . " 
 While directing for Family Guy , Povenmire was offered a job as storyboard director of the series SpongeBob SquarePants . He wrote various musical numbers for the series , including " The Campfire Song Song " in " The Camping Episode " ( April 3 , 2004 ) . 
 = = = Phineas and Ferb = = = 
 In 1993 , Povenmire and Marsh conceived the series Phineas and Ferb , based on their similar experiences of childhood summers spent outdoors . Povenmire spent 14 – 16 years pitching Phineas and Ferb to several networks . Most rejected it as unfeasible for the complexity of its plots , but Povenmire persevered , later observing " It was really the show we wanted to see : if this was on the air , I 'd watch it , and I don 't always feel that about every show I work on . " Even the Walt Disney Company initially rejected Povenmire 's pitch , but asked to keep the proposal packet : " Usually that means they throw it in the trash later , " Povenmire recalled . Eventually Disney called Povenmire back with an acceptance , on the condition that he would produce an 11 @-@ minute pilot . He called Marsh , who was living in England , to ask him if he would like to work on the pilot ; Marsh accepted immediately and moved back to the United States . 
 Instead of a conventional script , the pair pitched the pilot by recording reels of its storyboard , which Povenmire then mixed and dubbed to produce action and vocals . The network approved the show for a 26 @-@ episode season . Povenmire left Family Guy to create the series . 
 Povenmire and Marsh wanted to incorporate into Phineas and Ferb the kind of humor they had developed in their work on Rocko 's Modern Life . They included action sequences and , with Disney 's encouragement , featured musical numbers in every episode subsequent to " Flop Starz " . Povenmire described the songs as his and Marsh 's " jab at immortality " , but the pair have earned two Emmy nominations for Phineas and Ferb songs to @-@ date . A third Emmy nomination , for the episode " The Monster of Phineas @-@ n @-@ <unk> " ( 2009 ) , pitted the show against SpongeBob SquarePants , although neither nominee received the award due to a technicality . In 2010 , Povenmire was nominated amongst several other Phineas and Ferb crew members for the Daytime Emmy Award for both " Outstanding Writing in Animation " and " Outstanding Original Song – Children ’ s and Animation " for their work on the show , winning for " Outstanding Writing in Animation " . 
 The distinctive style of the animation legend Tex Avery influenced the show 's artistic look . Like Avery , <unk> employed geometric shapes to build both the characters and the background . The style developed almost accidentally , with Povenmire 's first sketch of title character , Phineas Flynn , which he produced while eating dinner with his family in a restaurant in South Pasadena , California . He doodled a triangle @-@ shaped child on the butcher paper covering the table . He was so taken with sketch he tore it out , kept it , and used it as the prototype for Phineas and as the stylistic blueprint for the entire show . 
 = = = Musical endeavors = = = 
 During his college years , Povenmire had performed with a band that played at clubs and bars across Los Angeles , California . His current band , Keep Left , releases albums through Arizona University Recordings . Their second CD , Letters from Fielding , became available for download on <unk> during 2004 . They have an official website maintained and updated by artist Larry Stone . A 2004 email exchange about the website between Stone and Povenmire resulted in a " clever and twisted " series of comic strips drawn by the two , eventually moved to the website <unk> . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Hurricane Emmy = 
 Hurricane Emmy was the longest @-@ lived hurricane of the 1976 Atlantic hurricane season . The fifth tropical cyclone and the third hurricane of the season , Emmy developed from a tropical wave on August 20 to the east of the Lesser Antilles . After changing its direction three times over several days , during which it reached a peak intensity of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) , it turned to the east and slowly weakened . Emmy passed through the Azores on September 3 , and a day later it was absorbed by approaching Hurricane Frances . 
 Emmy passed within 135 miles ( 215 km ) of the Lesser Antilles , though only minor effects were experienced . No damage was reported in the Azores , though strong winds from the hurricane caused a Venezuelan air force flight to crash near Lajes Field , killing all 68 aboard . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa between August 15 and August 16 . The wave moved westward at 15 to 20 mph ( 24 to 32 km / h ) , and developed atmospheric convection along the wave axis . It slowly organized , developing a low @-@ level circulation , and formed into a tropical depression on August 20 while located about 775 miles ( 1 @,@ 250 km ) east of Barbados . A reconnaissance aircraft flight into the system on August 21 confirmed the existence of a depression , which reported winds of only 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) with a pressure of 1 @,@ 012 mbar . The depression slowly strengthened and organized , and after turning to the west @-@ northwest , it intensified into Tropical Storm Emmy on August 22 while located 370 miles ( 600 km ) east @-@ northeast of Guadeloupe . The tropical wave from which Emmy developed from continued westward through the Caribbean Sea and ultimately developed into Tropical Storm Joanna in the eastern Pacific Ocean . 
 Tropical Storm Emmy turned more to the northwest , and passed about 135 miles ( 220 km ) northeast of Barbuda on August 23 . The rapid development of an unseasonable frontal low pressure system to the northeast of the storm turned Emmy sharply east @-@ northeastward on August 25 . Its eastward movement at such a low latitude for the time of year was unprecedented . The storm steadily intensified and Emmy attained hurricane status later on the 25th while located 270 miles ( 430 km ) north of Barbuda . After moving eastward for about 24 hours , the Westerlies retreated northward , and Emmy turned gradually to the northwest . 
 A strong ridge over the north Atlantic Ocean turned Emmy sharply eastward on August 29 . The hurricane continued to strengthen , and Emmy attained a peak intensity of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) shortly after turning to the east while located 500 miles ( 800 km ) northeast of Bermuda . The hurricane maintained its peak intensity for 42 hours while moving eastward at 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) , and slowly weakened after peaking in strength . On September 1 , Emmy turned to the east @-@ southeast , and a day later it turned to the northeast as its forward motion decreased . Emmy passed through the Azores on September 3 , and the following day it became extratropical to the north of the islands . The extratropical remnant persisted another six hours before being absorbed by approaching Hurricane Frances . 
 = = Impact and preparations = = 
 Initially , the path of Emmy was uncertain whether it would affect the Lesser Antilles . As a result , officials issued a hurricane watch for the northeastern Leeward Islands . The warning was cancelled when the storm turned more to the north , with the outer fringes of the hurricane slightly impacting Antigua . Several ships experienced rough seas and strong winds from Emmy , though none reported any damage . After Emmy turned to the west for the final time , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center considered the hurricane not a real threat to land , though they indicated it had a remote chance to affect land masses . The hurricane also posed a threat to the island of Bermuda initially , though it remained away from the island . Two days before Emmy passed through the Azores , the National Hurricane Center advised citizens there to closely monitor the progress of the storm . No damage reports exist from the Azores , though it was likely not severe . 
 On September 3 , a C @-@ 130 Hercules air force flight left Caracas , Venezuela for Spain , with a flight crew of 10 and 58 members of the Central University of Venezuela choir . That night , heavy rainfall from the hurricane forced the plane to land on the Azores island of Terceira Island , Portugal . After attempting twice to land in hurricane @-@ force winds , the plane crashed in a hill one mile from the runway of Lajes Field , killing all 68 aboard . 
 = Beach Games = 
 " Beach Games " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the third season of the US version of The Office , and the 51st of the series . In this episode , the office goes to a nearby lake for some " beach games " . It is revealed that Michael ( Steve Carell ) is being interviewed for a position at Corporate and that the winner of the beach games will become regional manager . Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) and Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) sabotage Andy ( Ed Helms ) , and Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) spends her day taking notes of the office workers ' activities . 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Celotta and Greg Daniels and directed by Harold Ramis . Filming took place at a fake beach near Hansen Dam , as it was " the bleakest lake [ they could ] find . " The crew had to deal with hot temperatures during the day and " frigid " weather at night . One of Helms ' scenes involved him being trapped on a lake in a sumo wrestling outfit , forcing him to wear a harness and be pulled by a boat manned by a crew member . For the fire walk , orange and yellow gels and lava rocks were used , and gas lines were installed to produce flames . 
 An estimated 7 @.@ 2 million viewers watched " Beach Games " on its first American broadcast on May 10 , 2007 , resulting in the episode placing fourth for the night in its timeslot . It received mainly positive reviews from television critics , and many cited the sumo suit scenes as particular highlights . Most critics praised Pam 's speech at the end of the episode , though one found it out of character . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 When Michael ( Steve Carell ) is invited to interview for a position at Dunder @-@ Mifflin corporate headquarters in New York City , he assumes he will get the job and decides to hold a Survivor @-@ like competition at Lake Scranton to determine his successor . The entire office travels to the lake by bus , except for Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) , whom Michael will not allow to attend , much to Toby 's disappointment because he anticipated getting to see Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) wearing her bikini . 
 Michael selects the " tribe " captains – Jim ( John Krasinski ) , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , Andy ( Ed Helms ) and Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) – and instructs Pam to take detailed notes on the events of the day , which include games such as egg and spoon races and hot dog eating contests . Initially unaware of the purpose of the exercise , the employees do not all take it seriously . Once the job in New York is revealed , Andy and Dwight step up their efforts , Stanley tries to be enthusiastic but gives up , and Jim decides to interview for the same position that Michael is pursuing . Karen ( Rashida Jones ) also applies for the position . 
 To support her secret lover Dwight , Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) sabotages Andy , leaving him adrift in the lake in an inflatable sumo wrestling costume . Michael 's final event is a walk across hot coals . Initially , only Pam volunteers , but Michael refuses to let her walk across because she is not being considered to replace him . However , Michael cannot even bring himself to do it . Dwight throws himself on the coals , refusing to leave until he is given the job , and he writhes in agony until he is dragged off . 
 As a last @-@ ditch effort to salvage the day , Michael assembles a " Tribal Council " stand @-@ up comedy competition . Jim declines to participate , and reveals that he has applied for the position in New York . Separated from the group , a barefoot Pam runs across the hot coals and , feeling a new sense of confidence because of the experience , interrupts the Tribal Council to berate her colleagues for treating her poorly , citing the fact that almost no one attended her art show . She rounds on Jim , and tells him that she called off her wedding because of him , that it is " fine " that he is with someone else now , but that she misses the fun that they had as best friends before he transferred . As she runs to cool her feet in the water , the cameraman turns to Jim who is now in a blank stare , shaken by the confession . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Beach Games " was written by co @-@ executive producer Jennifer Celotta and series creator Greg Daniels , and was directed by Harold Ramis , whose credits include the episodes " A Benihana Christmas " and " Safety Training " . Celotta and Daniels came up with the idea for the opening scene while researching medical symptoms at <unk> ; they began considering ideas for the episode 's cold open , and decided to write on what " we 're doing right now , " resulting in Michael researching symptoms . Michael 's later conversation with David Wallace set an important foundation for both the season and the series , as it established that several people would be competing for a corporate job and solidified the CFO as an important character . The actor who plays Wallace , guest star Andy Buckley , was then working at Merrill Lynch as a stockbroker . 
 Originally the crew sought to film at a lake that resembled Lake Scranton . However , upon arriving at one in the area they found that it was too beautiful , as they had wanted a lake that was the equivalent of the dour office : " the bleakest lake [ they could ] find . " Eventually , much of the episode was filmed at a fake beach at the reservoir of Hansen Dam , where it was " a thousand degrees during the day and minus 40 at night , " Celotta remarked in the DVD audio commentary . " We had tents pumping air conditioning that didn 't work all day long , " according to one crew member . And at night , the production crew set up heaters everywhere because the weather became " frigid " . 
 Actress Kate Flannery later said that the days of filming were extremely " hot " , and she became sick of hot dogs after eating many of them in the contest seen in the episode . Many cast members spit out the hot dogs after putting them in their mouths , an act that sometimes activated Ed Helms ' gag reflex . The cast members found the sumo suits uncomfortable , both due to the hot weather and the inability to sit down . Actress Angela Kinsey previewed before the episode broadcast that she would " forever look at John Krasinski differently , because he looked so hilarious to me " wearing his sumo suit . For the scenes of Helms floating in the lake in his sumo suit , the actor wore a harness and a fishing line that snaked out through his sleeve , the purpose being to drag him farther out on the lake . A crew member pulled him in a row boat ; the crew would film a take of the scene , and then would have to wait fifteen minutes to do it again . 
 To create a safe enough fire pit to allow the actors to walk on it , the crew used a " light box buried in the ground with orange and yellow gels on it , with lava rocks on top , " according to Ramis . Gas lines were also buried in the sand to supply a steady stream of flames . Many of the scenes and lines of dialogue were improvised , such as Andy throwing a rock at a duck and Jim guiding an unsuspecting Karen into the water . For Pam 's speech , Daniels and Celotta knew it was important , and discussed with Ramis for about 45 minutes about how best to shoot it . Many different takes were shot , and Celotta thought Fischer " was so amazing , take after take after take . " Ramis believed the past 28 episodes had contained a slow build @-@ up to this scene . Daniels wrote most of the speech , though Celotta did contribute some parts . 
 The third season DVD contains a number of deleted scenes . Notable cut scenes included Jim receiving a call informing him of the job opening , Michael annoying Pam when she 's preparing the hot dogs by telling her to grill faster , Dwight sumo wrestling with Stanley , Ryan asking to participate in the fire walk , and Andy failing to flag down a passing car . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 On the bus , the cast sing songs such as the Kenny Rogers song " The Gambler " and the Flintstones theme song . Ramis encouraged them to sing , as he had never ridden on a bus where people did not sing . Also in the episode , Michael wears Sandals gear and a beaded necklace , a reference to his Jamaican vacation in " Back from Vacation " . According to Helms and the episode 's writers , the plot references the reality television series Survivor and The Bachelor , and The Apprentice . Before their work on The Office , the camera men used in this episode shot Survivor for four years . Several media outlets noted similarities between Michael and Jeff Probst , the host of Survivor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode first aired in the U.S. on May 10 , 2007 , attracting 7 @.@ 2 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 9 / 11 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 . It ranked fourth in its timeslot behind episodes of Survivor : Fiji , Ugly Betty , and Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? . It was a special 28 @-@ minute " supersized " episode . 
 Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West considered Pam 's speech to be " a terrific payoff for those of us invested ( some might say too much ) in the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Karen love triangle . " West also praised other aspects of the episode , such as the fire walk and the sequences with Stanley ' to her , " everyone brought his or her A game ( in hilarity , if not in effort ) to the race to succeed Michael . " IGN 's Travis Fickett rated " Beach Games " 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , an indication of a " great " episode . Like West , he highlighted Stanley for praise , and also liked Helms being trapped on the lake . Fickett concluded that " while this episode 's closing scene doesn 't have the impact of Jim telling Pam he was in love with her at the end of Season 2 , it is one of those long awaited moments that we knew was coming . And Jenna Fischer , as Pam , handles it perfectly . Once again the Scranton branch is facing some big changes , and the show has us eagerly awaiting the season finale . " 
 Give Me My Remote writer Kath Skerry liked the cast 's scenes with the sumo suits , but saved most of her praise for Pam 's speech . She declared that it " was <unk> . Jenna Fischer blew me away with that speech . It ’ s what I have been hoping for since the first episode of this season . It didn ’ t end with Jim swooping in and kissing Pam but there ’ s still one episode left in the season . So that ’ s what we have to ponder over the next week . " Jay Black of AOLTV also enjoyed the episode . He wrote , " I thought that it was a bit more low key than some of the previous episodes ( hilarious sumo outfits not withstanding ) and that suited me just fine . I thought that Michael 's ridiculousness , always a difficult balancing act , was reigned @-@ in to just this side of believable where it belongs . I thought that it was filled with a great assortment of gags , both character @-@ based and farcical . " However , Black was critical of Pam 's speech because it felt both " forced " and out of character for Pam to publicly state her feelings . 
 = After This = 
 After This is a 2006 novel by award @-@ winning American author Alice McDermott . The novel follows a working @-@ class American family who reside on Long Island , New York and their four children , who are enduring their own experiences during the times of the sexual revolution . It is set during the mid @-@ 20th century , a time after the end of World War II , through to the presidency of Richard Nixon . 
 The book received many positive reviews from critics , often commenting on the writing styles of McDermott . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette commented that the storyline is " sophisticated in design , spare like an elegant entrée at a fine restaurant . " The book was highlighted among the 100 Notable Books of the Year of The New York Times . 
 = = About the author = = 
 Alice McDermott was born in Brooklyn , New York on June 27 , 1953 . In 1975 , McDermott received her B.A. from the State University of New York and her <unk> from the University of New Hampshire in 1978 . She began writing at an early stage in her life , although her first novel , A <unk> ' Daughter , was not published until 1982 . In 1987 , McDermott was a recipient of the Whiting Writers Award for her novels , several of which had been finalists for the Pulitzer Prize or winners of the National Book Award . 
 = = Content = = 
 The book is set on Long Island , New York , shortly after the ending of World War II . Mary Rose , a lonely , thirty @-@ year @-@ old woman with the responsibility of looking after her father and brother , leaves Church on an April day in the 1940s . She goes to a <unk> 's outlet and becomes acquainted with a man there ordering food . When she sees him there the next day , the pair begin dating and eventually marry . Together , they have four children . Their first three children , Jacob , Michael , and Annie live with their parents in an Irish @-@ Catholic community on Long Island . 
 Their fourth child , Claire , is delivered by a neighbor of the family in the lounge of their house as a hurricane is heading towards the Eastern Seaboard . The book follows the family through the 1960s and 1970s , as the children enter adolescence and discover themselves during the changing times of the 1960s and the Sexual Revolution . The Keane children , on entering early adulthood , begin to break away from their family and religious backgrounds . Jacob , the eldest child , serves in Vietnam and is killed in the French trenches . Michael moves away from Long Island and goes to study in a college in northern New York , but later turns to sex and drugs . Meanwhile , Annie , the bookworm of the family , leaves to study in England , but quickly changes her plans after meeting a man on a bus whom she likes . Claire , the youngest , returns from a summer vacation to her former Catholic high school , showing a changed personality and increased self @-@ confidence . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Washington Post commented that " in After This there is no excess , no look @-@ at @-@ me pyrotechnics in her prose ; with the mastery of a poet , she distills the life of the <unk> to its essence . " A review by The Chicago Tribune noted that " It is hard to know how to start piling on the praise for this gripping , poignant book . It would seem there is no technique of fiction McDermott has not mastered . Like the masters , she makes it look effortless . " Writing for the New York City @-@ circulated Wall Street Journal , Kate Flatley <unk> praised the book , praised the book , writing : " Through sharp , funny , heartbreaking and breathtaking vignettes , Ms. McDermott conveys the family 's evolution ( and America 's too ) — from John and Mary 's first meeting at a diner in postwar New York City through the children 's traditional Catholic school youth in the 1950s to the inevitable turbulence of the 1960s . " 
 USA Today wrote " McDermott 's prose is stunning yet emotionally cool , " adding : " While it fails as a cohesive novel , After This shines in its small moments , much like a story collection . " Entertainment Weekly described it as a " lovely <unk> of a novel . " The Economist reviewed the book positively , writing " After This is more than a book about an influential time in history and its effect on those living through it . In its portrayal of the emotions that hold people and families together — the loyalties and frustrations , the sorrows and joys — this quietly unusual novel is ultimately about what it is to be human . " 
 = Ten Hamadi = 
 Ten Hamadi ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) or <unk> is a village and rural commune in southern Mauritania , in the Aïoun El Atrouss department of the <unk> El Gharbi region . In 2000 , the commune had a population of 2 @,@ 264 , of which 155 lived in the village of Ten Hamadi itself , approximately 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) southwest of the main town and departmental capital of Aïoun El Atrouss . The population estimate in 2007 was 3 @,@ 686 , spread over 16 villages . 
 The northern part of the commune is hilly but relatively favorable to agriculture , while the southern part is flat and characterized by sand dunes . Situated at the southern boundary of the Sahara @-@ Sahel region of southern Mauritania , the climate is generally hot and dry . 
 Most of the population live in poverty , occupied in farming or raising livestock . Some have moved to the cities to seek a higher standard of living , returning to help during the peak periods of agricultural activity . Infrastructure is underdeveloped ; there is no electricity supply , most water comes from traditional wells , and the rudimentary school system provides only elementary education in poorly equipped establishments . 
 = = History = = 
 Settlement of the commune began with the establishment of the village of El <unk> in 1960 , followed by the main village of Ten Hamadi in 1962 . El <unk> was established in 1972 , and is one of the fastest @-@ growing settlements in the commune . Its population more than doubled between 2000 and 2007 , from 111 to an estimated 230 , making it more populous than the main village of Ten Hamadi . <unk> Ehl Ahmed Zein , established in 1980 , on the other hand , has declined in population by more than 75 percent , with a population of 1 @,@ 252 in 2000 to an estimated 284 in 2007 . In 2007 , nearby Aïoun El Atrouss was one of the stops on the 2007 Dakar Rally . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Ten Hamadi is situated at the southern boundary of the Sahara @-@ Sahel region of southern Mauritania . By air it is located approximately 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) southwest of the departmental capital of <unk> El Atrouss , and the main village of Ten Hamadi is accessed via a dirt trail leading south off National Route 3 , which connects it to this town and to the town of <unk> to the west . The commune is bordered to the north by the village and rural commune of <unk> , to the north @-@ east by the town and urban commune of <unk> El Atrouss , to the east by the village and rural commune of <unk> , to the south by the village and rural commune of Hassi <unk> <unk> Ahmed , and to the west by the village and rural commune of Hassi Abdallah . 
 The northern part of the commune is hilly but relatively favorable to agriculture , while the southern part is flat and characterized by sand dunes . Sixteen caves are found within the area . The earth is mainly composed of stony rocks , sandy loam soils , and clay loam soils in the beds of wadis in the area . The soils in the hills have pockets of alluvium and sandy loam suitable for crop development , particularly on the hillsides and at the foot of the hills . Clay loam soils are found in the bowls and beds of wadis , which although suitable for farming are susceptible to gully and water erosion during the rainy season . The aquifers of shallow wells with depths varying from 25 – 50 metres ( 82 – 164 ft ) , yielding little more than 2 cubic metres / hour ( 71 cu ft ) , vary widely in availability . Deeper aquifers offer larger quantities of water , but its quality is generally brackish . The wadis are generally dry , usually only inundated after rainfall . 
 Vegetation is typical of the Sahara @-@ Sahel region , and is mainly desert with thorny steppe land . Soil erosion is a problem , as many previously wooded areas have disappeared as the locals use wood for fuel , and inadequate farming practices have sometimes resulted in soil exhaustion . 
 Ten Hamadi has three main climatic seasons . The wet season from July to October has temperatures of the order of 30 – 40 ° C ( 85 – 105 ° F ) and irregular rainfall . The dry and cold season in November to February has temperatures that can fall below 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) during the night . During the hot and dry season from March to June temperatures reach 40 – 45 ° C ( 105 – 115 ° F ) during the day . 
 = = = Villages = = = 
 In 2007 , there were 16 villages in the commune according to the Mauritanian government , with a total estimated population of 3 @,@ 686 . 
 = = Demography and religion = = 
 In 2000 , the commune had a population of 2 @,@ 264 people , with 155 people in the village of Ten Hamadi itself . In 2007 , the commune had 3 @,@ 686 inhabitants in about 791 households . The population is generally young , and more than 53 percent are female . Most people belong to the <unk> tribe , although small numbers belong to the <unk> Nasser , <unk> and <unk> tribes . Most live in the north and east of the commune owing to greater availability of water and land that can be used for crops or grazing . More than half the population live below the poverty line . There is seasonal migration from the commune to the cities of Aïoun and Nouakchott in the dry season , then back to the commune in the winter season , when many people return to help their families with tilling and planting . Like the rest of Mauritania , Islam is the primary religion , which according to the Central Intelligence Agency has a 100 percent following in the country . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy is mostly based on agriculture and raising livestock , with some commerce and artisan activity . There are some dams and ditches to support irrigation , but they are in a poor condition . In 2007 , there were 361 farmers , most of whom relied on irrigation to some extent , nine grain banks and one grain mill . There were 311 sedentary stock owners , 115 semi @-@ migratory and 65 practicing large @-@ scale migration , mostly to Mali . An estimate of herd sizes gave 10 @,@ 340 goats , 8 @,@ 870 cattle , 1 @,@ 361 camels , 652 donkeys and a few horses and sheep . There were 63 full @-@ time retailers and 143 people practicing trade to some extent . There were 45 full @-@ time artisans and 65 part @-@ time craftspeople . Activities included masonry , transport by cart , butchering , bakery and woodworking . 
 = = Education = = 
 In 2001 , the commune had eight primary schools with 19 teachers for 595 children . There were 20 <unk> , or traditional schools , in 11 locations . Only four had a library or document repository . There were 11 writing rooms of varying quality , and one small vocational training centre . By 2007 , the commune had 11 primary schools with 689 students ( 45 percent of whom were girls ) and 28 teachers , but no secondary school . Only three schools had desks . All had latrines , but not all had drinking water or facilities for preparing meals for the children . The quality of education was mixed . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Until fairly recently , Ten Hamadi had no mains power supply , no radio communication , and no fixed telephone lines , but most areas now have mobile coverage from at least one of the three local operators : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Fewer than a third of families have a latrine . In 2001 , there was one health centre in the village of Ten Hamadi , built of cement with a corrugated roof and with six rooms . A pharmacy was operated on a cost @-@ recovery basis . By 2007 , there were two health posts in the commune , each staffed by one nurse , but there were no midwives . The health posts had no running water , electricity or latrines , and were not equipped with radio or ambulances , although the post at Ten Hamadi village did have a refrigerator and a pharmacy . 
 The commune has six wells with pumps supplying 221 connections , 15 modern wells and 61 traditional wells . The water tends to become salty towards the end of the dry season . The main village of the commune relies on two traditional wells . The " Route de l ’ Espoir " ( Road of Hope ) crosses the commune , providing good access to several villages . The commune has several permanent tracks , but some villages are difficult to access , particularly in winter . About 20 percent of the dwellings are concrete ; the others are shacks or , in a few cases , tents . 
 = Banded archerfish = 
 The banded archerfish ( Toxotes jaculatrix ) is a brackish water perciform fish of the archerfish genus Toxotes . It is silvery in colour and has a dorsal fin towards the posterior end . It has distinctive , semi @-@ triangular markings along its sides . It is best known for its ability to spit a jet of water to " shoot down " prey . Larger specimens may be able to hit prey 2 to 3 metres ( 6 ft 7 in to 9 ft 10 in ) away . The banded archerfish may reach the displaced prey within 50 milliseconds of its hitting the water . 
 The name ( binomial as well as common ) refers to Sagittarius the archer , because of the unusual method banded archerfish use to capture prey . Banded archerfish are found in Indo @-@ Pacific and Oceanian waters , generally in river mouths and mangrove estuaries . They move between fresh , salt , and brackish water over the course of their lifetime , though not to breed . Because of their markings and silvery colour , banded archerfish are sometimes kept as aquarium fish , though they are difficult to care for and not recommended for most home aquaria . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 Toxotes jaculatrix were originally described by Peter Simon Pallas in 1767 . Since then , several synonyms ( such as <unk> jaculatrix and <unk> jaculatrix ) and misspellings ( Toxotes <unk> ) have come into use . 
 Toxotes is Greek for " bowman " or " archer " , and specifically refers to Sagittarius . The species name jaculatrix is related to the English <unk> and means " thrower " or " caster " ( of a dart or arrow ) . Both the common name and binomial name refer to the banded archerfish 's habit of catching prey by shooting " arrows " of water through its mouth . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banded archerfish have four dorsal spines , 11 to 13 dorsal soft rays , three anal spines ( of which the third is longest ) and 15 to 17 anal soft rays . The first spine is always the shortest ; the rays become shorter toward the posterior end . There are about 23 scales between the first dorsal spine and the posterior nostrils . Certain areas of the body are tinged green . The back of the fish is olive @-@ green or brown . The dorsal fin is yellowish @-@ green and located towards the posterior end , and its base is shorter than that of the anal fin . The caudal fin is " dirty green " and about the same height until the point of attachment , where it becomes shallower . The anal fin is silver . 
 The body of the banded archerfish is oblong in shape and raised on the posterior side . The body is generally silver @-@ white in colour , though varying colourations , such as yellow , have been observed . Four to six broad black bars may be present on the dorsal side . The first bar is found anterior to the operculum , the bony plate covering the gills , and the second is found behind the operculum . The third bar is found below the origin of the dorsal fin , the fourth bar below the soft dorsal , and the fifth ( if any ) on the area between the anal fin and caudal fin ( caudal peduncle ) . These bars become shorter as the fish ages . The lateral line curves upwards at the area between the fourth and ninth lateral scales . Banded archerfish can reach a maximum length of 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) ; however , average length is about 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 Banded archerfish have large eyes , which , unlike many other fishes , are positioned for binocular vision . The head is slightly shorter than the body , with a distinctively pointed snout . Juveniles may be yellow @-@ green to brown on the dorsal side and silvery on the ventral side . The juveniles ' flanks are grey @-@ green . Some banded archerfish have irregular yellow patches between their bands . 
 The possibility of sexual dimorphism in banded archerfish has not been investigated . 
 = = = Comparison to other archerfish = = = 
 The banded archerfish and its relative the largescale archerfish ( Toxotes chatareus ) are sometimes grouped and sold together under the label " archerfish " . However , the banded archerfish has four dorsal spines whereas largescale archerfish has five . The banded archerfish usually has four to five wedge @-@ shaped bands , but largescale archerfish has six or seven spots and shorter bands in a regular , alternating pattern . Unlike the silvery banded archerfish , the largescale is sooty in colour . The banded archerfish may also be confused with the smallscale archerfish , Toxotes microlepis . These are more difficult to distinguish , but the most striking difference is in the last two bands . While both species have four or five wedge @-@ shaped bands , those of the banded archerfish extend to the dorsal fin , whereas those of the smallscale archerfish do not ; there are two spots on the dorsal fin separate from the main bar . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 Banded archerfish are omnivorous . In the daytime , they come to the surface to feed on floating matter . Their diet comprises plant matter and insects , which they are able to " shoot down " . Banded archerfish are also able to capture prey by jumping out of the water and seizing it from low overhanging branches . Young archerfish form small schools while learning aim , increasing the chance that at least one shot will hit the target . Their diet also comprises underwater prey , including crustaceans and small fishes . 
 = = = Shooting = = = 
 Banded archerfish have mouths adapted to spit jets of water over distance , usually to knock prey into the water . The banded archerfish shoots the jet of water by raising its tongue against the roof of its mouth , forming a tube . The opercula then close quickly , pressurizing water along the tube . Most archerfish are able to spit at a range of 150 centimetres ( 59 in ) , though some larger specimens may be capable of ranges of up to 2 to 3 metres ( 6 ft 7 in to 9 ft 10 in ) . When a prey is shot down , the banded archerfish begins to move towards the place where it will land within 100 milliseconds and can reach it within 50 ms of its hitting the water . 
 A study found that banded archerfish could be trained to hit moving targets at an accuracy rate of greater than 50 % . According to this study , the ability to hit moving targets is a complex learned behaviour , and can be learnt from other members of the school . The study concluded that fish could shoot more accurately after observing other members of the school shooting . 
 The banded archerfish is able to hit targets with a high degree of accuracy , despite refraction of light at the water @-@ air interface . It was believed that they are able to achieve this level of accuracy by positioning their bodies to shoot from directly under the intended target . However , later studies have found that banded archerfish are able to achieve great accuracy even at angles , suggesting that they are somehow able to compensate for refraction . This may also suggest that banded archerfish are capable of three @-@ dimensional tasks . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The breeding habits of the banded archerfish are not well known . Banded archerfish first begin to breed when they are about 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long . The banded archerfish reproduces by spawning . There are reports that banded archerfish go to saltwater reefs to spawn , but these have not been confirmed . Archerfish lay 20 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 eggs at a time . Banded archerfish rarely breed in captivity . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The banded archerfish inhabits the Indo @-@ Pacific and waters off northern Australia , and less frequently those on the southern coast of Australia . It can be found from India eastwards to the Philippine Islands , southwards to Australia , as well as in waters off the Solomon Islands and the Indonesian Archipelago . It has been observed as far east as the New Hebrides ( now known as Vanuatu ) . The banded archerfish occurs mainly in areas of brackish water . Mangrove estuaries are its primary habitat , though it occasionally moves upstream into freshwater rivers . It is associated with reefs and has been reported to occur near overhanging vegetation . While they may move between fresh and salt water during their life cycle , they do not do so to breed . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Banded archerfish are fairly common in the Indo @-@ Pacific and are not currently endangered . They have a minor commercial role in fisheries and may be sold fresh in markets or collected for the aquarium trade . Banded archerfish are threatened by the destruction of their mangrove swamp habitat and by pollution . 
 = = = In aquaria = = = 
 Species in the genus Toxotes , including the banded archerfish , are kept as aquarium fish . In aquaria , the banded archerfish can grow up to 25 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) long . They swim at the top level of the aquarium . Banded archerfish can be kept in small groups of three to five ; fish of the same size get along but fish that are larger may be aggressive towards those that are smaller , and even try to eat them . They may live from five to eight years in captivity , and occasionally nine or ten . Banded archerfish need warm water , usually between 25 and 30 ° C ( 77 and 86 ° F ) . The aquarium should be large with middling amounts of plant growth and plenty of space for swimming . It should be at least 20 to 30 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 to 11 @.@ 8 in ) deep . 
 Banded archerfish are generally not recommended for average home aquaria despite their attractive appearance because they are difficult to care for and require special conditions . Banded archerfish prefer to shoot and capture live food rather than be fed flake food , and are therefore difficult to feed . They need brackish water as well as a tall canopy . In the wild they are able to jump out of the water to capture prey on overhanging branches ; a tall canopy is required to prevent their jumping out of the aquarium . Banded archerfish should be kept in an aquarium with a volume of at least 45 to 55 US gallons ( 170 to 210 l ; 37 to 46 imp gal ) , though a greater volume is preferred . Because of such difficulties in caring for banded archerfish , the species has not yet been successful in captivity . 
 = Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together = 
 " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together " is the 22nd aired episode of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . The episode aired originally on the United States Disney Channel on March 8 , 2008 . The plot concerns an attempt by Phineas Flynn and Ferb Fletcher to reform the band Love Händel for their parents ' wedding anniversary . 
 The story was written by Bobby Gaylor and Martin Olson , and storyboarded by Chris Headrick and Chong Lee . It was directed by series co @-@ creator Dan Povenmire . The episode 's central characters , the members of Love Händel , are parodies of three of the production staff , Gaylor , Povenmire , and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh . Jaret Reddick , Carlos Alazraqui , and Steve Zahn guest starred as the band members themselves . 
 " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together " was well received and is considered a " fan favorite . " It has been referred to by the Phineas and Ferb co @-@ creators as one of their favorite episodes in several different interviews . The episode garnered a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for the song " I Ain 't Got Rhythm " in the category " Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics . " 
 = = Episode summary = = 
 Phineas and Ferb 's parents , Linda and Lawrence , are arguing over something Lawrence has forgotten . Linda goes out alone for the afternoon , leaving Lawrence confused ; then Candace informs him that today is his wedding anniversary . Lawrence goes to the garage to search for a gift and discovers an old album by Love Händel : he explains to the children that he and Linda shared their first kiss at the band 's farewell concert . Lawrence despairs of recapturing the moment , but Candace , Phineas , and Ferb watch a Where Are They Now ? -type special about Love Händel , and decide to reform the band . Candace tries to keep Linda away from the house while Phineas and Ferb are looking for the members of the band . 
 Meanwhile , the boys ' pet secret @-@ agent platypus , Perry , breaks into the hideout of his foe , the evil Dr. Doofenshmirtz , only to discover that he is only putting a birthday party for his 16 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Vanessa . Doofenshmirtz explains that he has been trying to give out the best birthday parties for her , but failed for some reasons , as she felt so extremely unhappy about her birthdays all her life ( this was evident of several birthday photos that Doofenshmirtz shows to Perry in his wallet ) . Seeing this , Perry agrees to set aside his rivalry and help Doofenshmirtz prepare for the party . 
 Phineas and Ferb set out to convince the members of Love Händel - lead singer Danny , bassist Bobbi Fabulous , and drummer Swampy - to reform . Danny alone agrees immediately , with a song ; the other two need convincing , through song as well . At the same time , Isabella and the Fireside Girls are starting the stage building . Lawrence , at the same time , tries to cater a small dinner and hires a singing telegram ; unfortunately , the dinner catches fire , and Lawrence 's hastily planned evening goes up in smoke . Phineas and Ferb arrive and assure Lawrence that all is well , explaining that the band has agreed to reform . Meanwhile , Candace continues keeping Linda away from the house by taking her to the mall to try on some dresses . 
 Doofenshmirtz , back at his lair , ties Perry to a giant firecracker rocket , explaining that he will end the party with fireworks and kill Perry at the same time . When Vanessa arrives , however , she hates the " girly " theme Doofenshmirtz has chosen and sits down to mope at a table , fearing that this would embarrass her in front of her arriving goth friends . At Phineas and Ferb 's house , Love Händel 's rehearsal descends into infighting ; sure that no one will want to hear them any more , the band are again on the verging of breaking up when they hear the roar of the crowd . Meanwhile , Doofenshmirtz mopes of failing another attempt of giving Vanessa a good party , so he decides to ignite Perry 's rocket to cheer himself up , but Perry frees himself and a fight ensues , during which Doofenshmirtz becomes tied to the rocket by accident instead . At the same moment the band begins to play ; Candace and Linda arrive home . Linda reunites with her husband , and eventually kiss , thanks to some motivation from Ferb , who yells to Lawrence to kiss her . 
 The explosion as Doofenshmirtz 's firecracker rocket launches leaves the lair filthy and partly destroyed ; the creepy look thrills Vanessa 's arriving goth friends , who find it to be cool . Touched by this , Vanessa happily thanks both her father for getting one birthday party right for her and Perry for helping her father out . As the rocket ascends , Doofenshmirtz is himself cursing Perry , as usual , but pauses to notice Love Handel singing below . The band finish their song just as Doofenshmirtz 's rocket explodes with a heart @-@ shaped flare . The episode ends with Love Handel singing " Music Makes Us Better " and with everyone ( including Doofenshmirtz , who has survived the explosion unscathed ) dancing . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together " was written by Bobby Gaylor and Martin Olson , with storyboards by Chris Headrick and Chong Lee . Series co @-@ creator Dan Povenmire directed the episode . Povenmire and Headrick had previously collaborated on a direct @-@ to @-@ video Looney Tunes short entitled Hare and Loathing in Las Vegas . 
 Each member of Love Händel was inspired by a member of the production team , who had previously been musicians themselves . Danny was named after and based on Povenmire , Bobbi Fabulous on Gaylor , and Swampy on co @-@ creator Jeff " Swampy " Marsh . Povenmire and Marsh each played in different bands in Los Angeles for over a decade . Gaylor was a spoken word performer who played pop and rock music ; he recorded an album titled <unk> Dreams . 
 As well as the show 's regular voice actor cast members , " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together " featured guest stars in the roles of the three band members . Jaret Reddick ( the leader of the Grammy @-@ nominated band Bowling for Soup , who also perform the show 's regular , Emmy @-@ nominated theme song ) , Carlos Alazraqui , and Steve Zahn portrayed each of the bandmates . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Newsarama reporter Steve Fritz called the episode a fan favorite . Fritz praised it for demonstrating " incredible ways to play within the walls of [ the show 's ] formula , constantly coming up with refreshingly different plot lines . " 
 The episode was also popular among the production staff : Povenmire named it as his and Marsh 's favorite , citing the quality of the songs , the " sort of touching " ending , and the " really good feel " of the story . In April 2009 , Marsh cited " Rollercoaster " as his favorite , tying " Dude , We 're Getting the Band Back Together " in second place with " The Chronicles of <unk> . " 
 One of the episode 's songs , " Ain 't Got Rhythm , " was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category " Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics " later in 2008 . The nomination credited Danny Jacob , Marsh , Povenmire , Olson , and Robert Hughes for the song . This was the series ' second Emmy nomination for songwriting . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Love Händel made a cameo appearance in the season two episode " Thaddeus and Thor . " In this episode , Doofenshmirtz sings about his childhood to the tune of the song " Snuck Your Way into My Heart " , then introduces the band to finish the song . He then gloats to Perry about having the band appear in his " back story " . Three songs featured in the episode ( " Ain 't Got Rhythm , " " Fabulous , " and " You Snuck Your Way Right Into My Heart " ) are available on the self @-@ entitled Phineas and Ferb soundtrack . " Danny 's Story " and " Music Make Us Better " are not included . " Ain 't Got Rhythm " was voted # 8 on Phineas and Ferb 's Musical Cliptastic Countdown , a viewer @-@ voted countdown of the best songs from the first season of the show . The band also was seen in " Just Passing Through " as well as and " Hip Hip Parade " , and also sung two songs for Phineas and Ferb : Summer Belongs To You ! : " Bouncin ' Around the World " and " The Ballad of <unk> " , the latter only available on the soundtrack . They also made an appearance in the " Carpe Diem " song in " Rollercoaster : The Musical ! " 
 = Squatina squatina = 
 Squatina squatina , the angelshark or monkfish , is a species of shark in the family Squatinidae ( known generally also as angel sharks ) , once widespread in the coastal waters of the northeastern Atlantic Ocean . Well @-@ adapted for camouflaging itself on the sea floor , the angelshark has a flattened form with enlarged pectoral and pelvic fins , giving it a superficial resemblance to a ray . This species can be identified by its broad and stout body , conical barbels , <unk> back ( in larger individuals ) , and grayish or brownish dorsal coloration with a pattern of numerous small light and dark markings ( that is more vivid in juveniles ) . It measures up to 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long . 
 Like other members of its family , the angelshark is a nocturnal ambush predator that buries itself in sediment and waits for passing prey , mostly benthic bony fishes , but also skates and invertebrates . An aplacental viviparous species , females bear litters of seven to 25 pups every other year . The angelshark normally poses little danger to humans , though if provoked , it is quick to bite . Since the mid @-@ 20th century , intense commercial fishing across the angelshark 's range have decimated its population via bycatch – it is now locally extinct or nearly so across most of its northern range , and the prospects of the remaining fragmented subpopulations are made more precarious by its slow rate of reproduction . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed this species as Critically Endangered . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The angelshark was originally described by the Swedish natural historian Carl Linnaeus , known as the " father of taxonomy " , in the 1758 tenth edition of Systema Naturae as Squalus squatina . He did not designate a type specimen . The word squatina is the angelshark 's name in Latin , derived from the word for skate ; it was made the genus name for all angel sharks by the French zoologist André Duméril in 1806 . Other common names used for this species include angel , angel fiddle fish , angel puffy fish , angel ray , angelfish , <unk> <unk> , fiddle fish , monk , and monkfish . <unk> and colleagues ( 2010 ) conducted a phylogenetic study based on mitochondrial DNA , and found that the sister species of the angelshark is the sawback angelshark ( S. aculeata ) . The two species formed a clade with a number of Asian angelshark species . 
 = = Description = = 
 One of the largest members of its family , female angelsharks can attain a length of 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) and males 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) ; the maximum reported weight is 80 kg ( 180 lb ) . This species shares in common with other angelsharks a flattened body and large , wing @-@ like pectoral fins whose anterior lobes are not fused to the head . The head and body are very broad and stocky , with small eyes positioned dorsally and followed by a pair of larger spiracles . A pair of unadorned barbels occurs in front of the nares , as well as a smooth or weakly fringed flap . Folds of skin with a single triangular lobe are present on the sides of the head . The teeth are small , sharp , and of similar shape in both jaws . 
 The pectoral and pelvic fins are wide with rounded tips ; the two dorsal fins are positioned on the muscular tail behind the pelvic fins . The anal fin is absent , and the caudal fin has a larger lower lobe than upper . The dermal denticles are small , narrow , and pointed , and cover the entire upper and most of the lower body surface . There are patches of small spines on the snout and over the eyes . Small individuals have a row of thorns down the middle of the back . The coloration is gray to reddish or greenish brown above , with many small black and white spots , and white below . Juveniles are more ornately patterned than adults , with pale lines and darker blotches . The dorsal fins have a darker leading margin and lighter trailing margin . Some individuals have a white spot on the back of the " neck " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Historically , the angelshark occurred in the temperate waters of the northeastern Atlantic , from southern Norway and Sweden to the Western Sahara and the Canary Islands , including around the British Isles and in the Mediterranean and Black Seas . In recent times , it has been extirpated from the North Sea and large portions of the northern Mediterranean . This benthic shark inhabits the continental shelf , preferring soft substrates such as mud or sand , and can be found from near the coast to a depth of 150 m ( 490 ft ) . It sometimes enters brackish environments . Northern angelshark subpopulations migrate northward in summer and southward in winter . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 During daytime , the angelshark usually lies motionless on the sea floor , buried under a layer of sediment with only its eyes showing . At night , it becomes more active , and may sometimes be seen swimming above the bottom . Aggregations numbering up to a hundred have been observed off Gran Canaria in the summer . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms <unk> <unk> @-@ gora , G. angeli , and <unk> <unk> , the fluke <unk> <unk> , the monogenean <unk> minor , and the isopod <unk> rosacea . 
 The angelshark is an ambush predator that feeds mainly on bottom @-@ dwelling bony fishes , especially flatfishes , though it also preys on skates and invertebrates . Prey reported taken include the hake <unk> <unk> , the bream <unk> <unk> , grunts in the genus <unk> , the flatfishes <unk> spp . , <unk> <unk> , and Solea <unk> , the squid Loligo vulgaris , the <unk> Sepia officinalis and <unk> spp . , and the crabs <unk> lanata , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> rotundatus . The stomachs of some examined specimens have also contained seagrass or birds ( in one case an entire cormorant ) . Individual sharks select sites that offer the best ambush opportunities , and if successful , may remain there for several days . 
 <unk> are aplacental viviparous , meaning the young hatch inside the mother 's uterus and are nourished by a yolk sac until birth . Females have two functional ovaries , with the right ovary containing more oocytes and the right uterus correspondingly containing more embryos ; this functional asymmetry is not present in other angel shark species . Unlike most sharks , in which vitellogenesis ( yolk formation ) occurs concurrently with pregnancy , in the angelshark , the onset of vitellogenesis is delayed until halfway through the gestation period . The mature ova measure 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) across and are not enclosed in a capsule . The reproductive cycle has been estimated at 2 years with ovulation taking place in spring , though this periodicity is ill @-@ defined . The litter size ranges from seven to 25 and is correlated with the size of the mother ; the young are gestated for 8 – 10 months . Parturition occurs from December to February in the Mediterranean and in July off England , with the newborns measuring 24 – 30 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) long . Males and females mature at lengths of 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 3 m ( 2 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 3 ft ) and 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 7 m ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 6 ft ) , respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The angelshark is generally not aggressive towards humans , though it can deliver a severe bite if disturbed . When approached underwater , the angelshark usually remains still or swims away , though one circling a diver with its mouth open is recorded . Fishery workers in particular should treat it with caution ; in the 1776 edition of British Zoology , Thomas Pennant wrote that it is " extremely fierce and dangerous to be approached . We know of an instance of a fisherman , whose leg was terribly torn by a large one of this species , which lay within his nets in shallow water , and which he went to lay hold of incautiously . " 
 Humans have used the angelshark for thousands of years . Ancient Greek authors , such as Diphilus and <unk> , described its meat as " light " and " easily digestible " , and Pliny the Elder noted in his Naturalis Historia ( 77 – 79 AD ) that its rough skin was valued by craftsmen for polishing wood and ivory . Aristotle recorded elements of its natural history , including that it bore live young , and correctly recognized that it was a shark despite its resemblance to rays and skates . The use of this species for food has continued into modern times ; it is sold fresh or dried and salted , often under the name " monkfish " ( which also refers to the <unk> of the genus Lophius ) . The angelshark may also be a source for shark liver oil and fishmeal . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Sources from the 19th and early 20th centuries indicate that the angelshark was once abundant all around the coasts of Western Europe . Yarrell ( 1836 ) , Day ( 1880 – 04 ) , and Garstang ( 1903 ) all noted that the angelshark was common around the British Isles , and Rey ( 1928 ) recorded that this species was common around the Iberian Peninsula and in the Mediterranean . However , from the latter half of the 20th century onwards , the angelshark has come under intense pressure from commercial fisheries operating across much of its range . Due to its benthic , near @-@ shore habits , individuals of all ages are susceptible to incidental capture by bottom trawls , trammel nets , and bottom longlines ; the low reproductive rate of this shark limits its capacity to withstand population depletion . 
 <unk> numbers have declined precipitously across most of its range ; it is now believed to be extinct in the North Sea and most of the northern Mediterranean , and has become extremely rare elsewhere . During the comprehensive Mediterranean International Trawl Survey program from 1995 to 1999 , only two angelsharks were captured from 9 @,@ 905 trawls . Similarly , another survey by the Italian National Project ( National Group for Demersal Resource Evaluation ) around the same period caught angelsharks in only 38 of 9 @,@ 281 trawls . Fishery data compiled by the Working Group for <unk> Fishes ( <unk> ) show that no angelsharks have been landed in the Northeast Atlantic since 1998 . Fewer than a dozen angelsharks are thought to remain in Irish waters . Healthy subpopulations of angelsharks are thought to still persist in areas off North Africa and around the Canary Islands , though a more thorough assessment is urgently needed . 
 As a result of these steep population declines and the ongoing threat from demersal fisheries , the IUCN has assessed the angelshark as Critically Endangered . It is listed on Annex III of the 1976 Barcelona Convention , which aims to limit pollution in the Mediterranean Sea . This species is protected within three marine reserves in the Balearic Islands , although it has not been reported from this area since the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2008 , the angelshark also received full legal protection from human activities in the waters off England and Wales from the coast to a distance of 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) , under the UK Wildlife and Countryside Act . The United Kingdom and Belgium have pushed , unsuccessfully , for this species to be listed on the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North @-@ East Atlantic Priority List of Threatened and Endangered Species . A captive breeding program has been initiated at Deep Sea World , North Queensferry , with the first live pups born in 2011 . 
 = Fettering of discretion in Singapore administrative law = 
 Fettering of discretion by a public authority is one of the grounds of judicial review in Singapore administrative law . It is regarded as a form of illegality . An applicant may challenge a decision by an authority on the basis that it has either rigidly adhered to a policy it has formulated , or has wrongfully delegated the exercise of its statutory powers to another body . If the High Court finds that a decision @-@ maker has fettered its discretion , it may hold the decision to be ultra vires – beyond the decision @-@ maker 's powers – and grant the applicant a suitable remedy such as a quashing order to invalidate the decision . 
 It is not wrong for a public authority to develop policies to guide its decision @-@ making . Neither will it necessarily be considered to have fettered its discretion by adhering to such policies , as long as it approaches decisions with an open mind and is willing to give genuine consideration to each case at hand . It has been noted that by endorsing its application in this manner , the High Court has given legal effect to informal rules or policies , which therefore amount to " soft law " . 
 Where a statute gives a decision @-@ maker a discretionary power , it is generally unlawful for the decision @-@ maker to delegate that power to another person or body unless the statute itself expressly provides that this may be done . Thus , it is illegal for a decision @-@ maker to abdicate its responsibility of exercising power by taking orders from other bodies . The <unk> doctrine of English administrative law ( which Singapore inherited at independence ) allows a civil servant to take a decision on behalf of a minister , even where the statute confers discretion on the minister . The Interpretation Act of Singapore provides that the exercise of a minister 's power may be done under the signature of the permanent secretary to the ministry which the minister is responsible for , or by any public officer authorized in writing by the minister . In addition , ministers are permitted to depute other persons to exercise certain powers or perform certain duties on their behalf . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 In the context of Westminster systems of government , all legal power conferred on the executive by legislation is " inevitably discretionary to a greater or lesser extent " . When exercising judicial review of such discretionary powers , the courts are concerned with whether they have been exercised in a lawful manner in accordance with Parliament 's presumed intentions in conferring such powers . 
 Over time , the courts have developed various grounds upon which discretionary powers may be reviewed , holding that Parliament must be assumed not to have intended for decision @-@ makers to exercise powers in such improper ways . The wrongful exercise of discretion may refer to " not exercising it at all or being subject to external influences in its exercise , as well as abusing conferred discretion " . 
 When a public authority fetters its discretion , it can either be said to have failed to exercise its discretionary power or to have been subject to external influences . In the Singapore High Court decision Lines International Holding ( S ) Pte . Ltd. v. Singapore Tourist Promotion Board ( 1997 ) , two distinct forms of fettering of discretion were recognized : fettering of discretion through rigid adherence to a policy , and fettering of discretion by an unlawful delegation of authority . These two forms of fettering of discretion have been said to represent two elements defining the concept of discretion in administrative law – the first form relates to freedom of choice , and second form the notion of one 's personal discretion . 
 It has been observed that in Singapore administrative law , " extensive reference is made to the landmark English cases " , and in particular English administrative law has largely influenced the adoption of the doctrine of fettering of discretion in Singapore . One exception is that although a contractual fetter on discretion has been established in English law to be a separate ground of review , this has yet to be recognized by the Singapore courts . In Birkdale District Electricity Supply Co. v. Southport Corporation ( 1926 ) , the House of Lords held that if legislation entrusts a public authority with certain powers and duties to be exercised for public purposes , it is illegal for the authority to enter into a contract that prevents itself from exercising its powers . 
 = = Fettering discretion by rigid adherence to a policy = = 
 Public authorities given discretion under statute to make certain decisions often adopt non @-@ statutory policies to guide them in their exercise of such discretionary powers . In Lines International , Justice Judith Prakash noted that were it the case that statutory bodies could not formulate policies or guidelines except through duly promulgated regulations , " then everything would come to a grinding halt while policy decisions had to be communicated to the Attorney @-@ General 's Chambers , then drafted into regulations and then the drafts approved by the organisation concerned before being sent on to Parliament and effected by gazette notification . That is not the way the executive arm of any common law country functions . " 
 The principle of not fettering one 's discretion " directs attention to the attitude of the decision @-@ maker , preventing him from rigidly excluding the possibility of any exception to that rule or policy in a deserving case " . A decision @-@ maker must not " shut his ears " to exceptional cases because of such a policy . 
 The ground of fettering discretion on this basis is distinct from the right to a fair hearing . The latter relates to a separate ground of judicial review , namely , procedural impropriety , and particularly the audi alteram partem ( " hear the other side " ) principle . 
 = = = English position = = = 
 The English courts have held that there is nothing wrong with a public authority adopting a policy to base its decisions on as long as the authority does not refuse to listen at all to anyone who has something new to say . Both the English and Singapore positions are similar in that they both regard consideration of exceptional cases as the benchmark for whether discretion has been fettered . In R. v. Port of London Authority , ex parte Kynoch , Ltd . ( 1918 ) , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales held that : 
 Where a tribunal in the honest exercise of its discretion has adopted a policy , and , without refusing to hear an applicant , intimates to him what its policy is , and that after hearing him it will in accordance with its policy decide against him , unless there is something exceptional in his case ... if the policy has been adopted for reasons which the tribunal may legitimately entertain , no objection could be taken to such a course . 
 The House of Lords agreed with ex parte Kynoch in British Oxygen Co . Ltd. v Minister of Technology ( 1970 ) . The court held that there was nothing to stop the Minister from requiring the operation of some limiting rule if that is what policy or good administration requires . It also reiterated that for discretion to be unfettered , consideration must be given to exceptional cases . " What the authority must not do is to refuse to listen at all . There can be no objection to [ the formulation of the rule ] , provided the authority is always willing to listen to anyone with something new to say . " 
 This position was further buttressed in Re Findlay ( 1984 ) , where four prisoners contended that the Home Secretary 's new policy of refusing parole in all but exceptional cases was a fetter upon his discretion . The House of Lords rejected the argument that the relevant statutory provisions required " individual consideration of individual cases in every instance , free of presumptions or policies " , and held that it would be difficult to understand how a Secretary of State could properly manage the complexities of his statutory duty without a policy . 
 = = = Singapore position = = = 
 = = = = Lines International conditions = = = = 
 In Lines International , the plaintiff , a cruise operator , challenged the adoption by the Singapore Tourist Promotion Board ( " STPB " ) and the Port of Singapore Authority ( " PSA " ) of a general policy in the form of non @-@ statutory guidelines regulating cruises @-@ to @-@ nowhere ( " CNWs " ) , which were mainly operated for gambling purposes . The guidelines had been read out to cruise operators at a meeting . One condition was that berths might not be allocated for CNWs if operators scheduled more than 30 % of their cruises as CNWs over a three @-@ month period . The plaintiff argued that the PSA 's power to control the use of its berths had to be exercised through subsidiary legislation . The High Court held that the PSA had discretion in deciding which vessels could use which berths , and went on to consider whether the PSA had fettered its discretion in enforcing the guidelines . Justice Prakash laid out a set of conditions by which the adoption of a policy by an authority exercising discretionary power would be valid . The conditions were that such a general policy will be valid if : 
 the policy is not Wednesbury unreasonable in the sense used in Associated Provincial Picture Houses v. Wednesbury Corporation ( 1947 ) , that is , it is not " a decision that is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or accepted moral standards that no sensible person who applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it or that no reasonable person could have come to such a view " ; 
 in considering what constitutes " reasonableness " , the courts are not to substitute their views of how the discretion should be exercised , and the plaintiff bears the burden of proving that the policy or guideline is illegal or ultra vires ; 
 the guidelines must be made known to the persons affected ; and 
 the authority must not fetter its " discretion in the future and is prepared to hear out individual cases or is prepared to deal with exceptional cases " . In the formulation of this condition , the judge referred to the English cases of British Oxygen ( 1970 ) and Re Findlay ( 1984 ) , and accepted that a decision @-@ maker cannot fetter its discretion by rigid adherence to a policy . 
 On the facts of Lines International , the judge held that the policy satisfied all four conditions and that the adoption of the guidelines was valid . On the fourth consideration relating to fettering of discretion , the judge found that the PSA and STPB had not rigidly enforced the guidelines as they had made it clear at the meeting attended by the plaintiff that they would consider representations from cruise operators , and , in fact , a number of such concessions were made . Hence , the guidelines had been flexibly applied and the PSA had not fettered its discretion by rigidly adhering to a policy . The Lines International conditions were approved by the Court of Appeal in JD Ltd. v. Comptroller of Income Tax ( 2005 ) . 
 Non @-@ statutory rules or policies are " often drafted in a more flexible and less formalistic and precise way than statutory rules , thus leaving more leeway in their application " . Such policies are often referred to as " soft law " . Such soft law " may be understood as a descriptive umbrella for non @-@ binding instruments containing recommendations or <unk> , programmatic statements , taking the form of informal rules like circulars , self @-@ regulating codes of conduct or government white papers . These soft law instruments co @-@ exist with ' hard ' law and may have legal impact . " It has been commented that the High Court 's formulation of the Lines International conditions has given legal effect to informal rules or policies issued by public authorities . 
 = = = = Application of the conditions = = = = 
 The Lines International conditions were applied by a different High Court judge in the case of Borissik Svetlana v. Urban Redevelopment Authority ( 2009 ) . The plaintiff argued that the Urban Redevelopment Authority ( " URA " ) had not been transparent while processing her application for permission to redevelop her house , or had not given her case genuine consideration . The Court held that the URA had considered the planning approval application , and had explained to the plaintiff the implications of her proposal and had extended several invitations to discuss the proposal but the plaintiff had declined to amend her redevelopment plans . On these facts , the Court held that the URA had thoroughly considered the plaintiff 's application and had not fettered its discretion . 
 The issue in the High Court decision Komoco Motors Pte . Ltd. v. Registrar of Vehicles ( 2007 ) and the appeal to the Court of Appeal from that decision , Registrar of Vehicles v. Komoco Motors Pte . Ltd . ( 2008 ) , was whether the Registrar of Vehicles had acted correctly in relying on the open market value ( " OMV " ) of vehicles determined by the Singapore Customs to calculate the additional registration fee ( " ARF " ) payable on such vehicles . This practice , referred to as the " administrative convention " in the case , had existed for over 40 years . In the High Court , the judge found that the Registrar had fettered her discretion in relation to the valuation of the cars because , having instituted a policy of adopting the Customs ' valuation of the OMV , she had not been prepared to hear out with an open mind Komoco 's case that the ARF was incorrect . The judge dismissed the fact that the Registrar had held meetings with her senior officers and had taken extended periods of time to make a decision , holding that these did not show she had given genuine consideration to Komoco 's case as " the passing of time [ did ] not by itself indicate how the time was used " . The judge also found that the absence of the Registrar 's comments on Komoco 's arguments , especially on some which the judge found credible , strengthened the case that genuine consideration had not been given . Lastly , the judge held the Registrar had indicated that she had dealt with Komoco 's representations with a predisposed frame of mind as her reply to Komoco was that " the policy was very clear " and that the ARF had been " computed based on the OMVs as assessed by Customs " . 
 The High Court 's decision was overruled by the Court of Appeal . The Court held that the Registrar had given genuine consideration to Komoco 's arguments . It found that the Registrar had been entitled to take , prima facie , the Customs ' OMV figures as correct unless they had been shown to be incorrect . Although the Registrar had been disposed to follow the Customs ' OMV , she had equally been concerned to find out whether there had been sufficient reasons for her not to follow the administrative convention . Komoco had neither challenged the sworn evidence given by the Registrar by applying to cross @-@ examine her , nor adduced any evidence to disprove the Registrar 's sworn statement . There was thus no merit in Komoco 's contention that the Registrar had not given genuine consideration to its representation . Furthermore , Komoco had not provided new evidence not already presented to the Customs to justify a departure from the administrative convention . Therefore , there had not been any compelling reason for the Registrar to re @-@ evaluate her decision . She had adequately justified her refusal to depart from the policy , and had not fettered her discretion . 
 The principle against a public authority fettering its discretion by rigid adherence to a policy also applies to the exercise of discretionary police powers , as indicated by obiter dicta in the High Court case of Chee Soon Juan v. Public Prosecutor ( 2011 ) . Although the case did not involve judicial review and did not specifically cite Lines International , Justice Woo <unk> Li discussed the validity of a general police policy in the context of judicial review , opining that the adoption of a policy " determining that political activities as a class posed a greater threat to public order than commercial activities ... was not in itself offensive for the purposes of administrative law provided that the police do not fetter their discretion and remain prepared to consider the facts of each case " . 
 = = Fettering discretion by wrongful delegation of responsibility or powers = = 
 Where a statute gives a decision @-@ maker a discretionary power , whether of a judicial , legislative or administrative nature , it is generally unlawful for the decision @-@ maker to delegate that power to another person or body unless the statute itself expressly provides that this may be done . In exercising his discretionary powers , a government official is expected to " apply his own mind in the matter " . 
 = = = English position = = = 
 = = = = Delegation of authority to an absolute body = = = = 
 The case of Ellis v. <unk> ( 1921 ) lays down the principle that there can be no delegation of authority to an absolute body from which no right of appeal exists . In this case , a licensing committee exercising statutory powers to license cinemas to be used for film screenings had imposed a condition in a licence that films had to be certified by the British Board of Film Censors before they could be shown . This was found to be ultra vires because the Board should not be made the final dictator . Furthermore , the fact that the Board had been given absolute power to prohibit films for reasons which might be private or influenced by trade considerations was sufficient to render the condition ultra vires . 
 = = = = Nature of function delegated = = = = 
 The nature of the function delegated by a public authority is crucial in determining whether such delegation offends the law . Where functions are considered administrative , delegation may not be wrongful . In R. v. Race Relations Board , ex parte <unk> ( 1975 ) , it was accepted that the Board could establish a committee in order to investigate and conduct preliminary inquiries , and that it was not practical for the whole body to be engaged in such a task . On the other hand , it is an established principle that no tribunal can delegate judicial or quasi @-@ judicial functions such as disciplinary powers . 
 = = = = Delegation by minister = = = = 
 In the case of ministerial discretion , it has been established in <unk> Ltd. v. Commissioner of Works ( 1943 ) that it is not unlawful for a civil servant to take a decision on behalf of the minister , even where a statute confers discretion on a minister . Parliament will expect only that the power is to be exercised by an appropriate official . However , the minister is ultimately responsible for decisions taken on his or her behalf . While there has been discussion in case law about whether a minister should be required to personally exercise discretion in decisions that affect a person 's liberty , the courts have usually been reluctant to hold so . Such a requirement , however , has been made by way of statutes which require the minister to act personally . 
 Although ministers are entitled to obtain views from other departments or ministries when making decisions , they must consider objections and not disable themselves from exercising their discretion . In H. Lavender and Son Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government ( 1969 ) , the Housing Minister 's decision was quashed because he had , by his stated policy , delegated to the Minister of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food the effective decision on any appeal where the latter had an objection . 
 = = = Singapore position = = = 
 = = = = Abdication of responsibility and delegation of powers to another agency = = = = 
 The English common law position that a public body cannot fetter its discretion by abdicating its responsibility and powers to another was discussed and adopted in Lines International . The general rules that Justice Prakash enunciated in the case are that , first , a public body has the duty to exercise discretion by itself ; it cannot abdicate this responsibility by taking orders from other bodies unless it is under a legal duty to do so . Therefore , a condition in its policy that appeared to be a direction by the PSA to itself to take orders from either the Gambling Suppression Branch ( " GSB " ) of the Singapore Police Force or STPB to deny berths to cruise vessels was a fetter on PSA 's exercise of discretion and was held to be invalid . However , the invalid condition alone did not mean that the PSA had in fact fettered its discretion . The High Court stated that while the PSA had agreed to take orders from the GSB and STPB on the basis of the invalid condition , whether it had in fact done so was another matter . On the evidence , the Court went on to find that the PSA had in fact made its own decision in the matter . 
 In Komoco Motors , the Court of Appeal held that the Registrar of Vehicles had not abdicated to the Customs her discretionary power . Expressing the view of the Court , Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong held that the Lines International conditions " although correct in law , [ were ] inapplicable to the factual context of the appeal " . The Court distinguished the factual context in Lines International from the present case on two bases . First , it found that the Registrar had made the decision in the lawful exercise of her power and for practical reasons , which included the Customs ' reliability in assessing the OMV of vehicles . In any case , an aggrieved importer had a statutory right to object to and be heard on the Customs ' determination of OMVs . Secondly , while Lines International involved a determination of whether a vessel should be given berthing space , the PSA had to exercise its judgment as to how to weigh up various relevant factors . However , in Komoco Motors , once the Registrar had decided to adopt the Customs ' OMV of a motor vehicle as its " value " for the purposes of the ARF Scheme , no further exercise of judgment was required of the Registrar . The Court held that the calculation of the ARF was simply an arithmetical exercise of applying the percentage stated in subsidiary legislation to the Customs ' OMVs , and hence did not involve the taking of instructions by the Registrar from another statutory agency . 
 While the Court found that there was a suggestion that the Registrar could only decide whether to reconsider the ARF imposed on cars if she received Customs ' further advice , she nevertheless had not abdicated her power as she could determine the value of vehicles , " after making such enquiries , if any , as [ she ] thinks fit " . Thus , the Registrar did not need to make any inquiries at all as she had a reliable means of determining each vehicle 's value . Furthermore , her statutory discretion was so wide that she could exercise it to determine the appropriate value of a motor vehicle in every case by relying on the Customs ' OMV . 
 The plaintiff in Lines International argued that the guidelines adopted by the multi @-@ agency committee set up by the PSA , STPB and GSB were invalid as the committee had no existence at law . The High Court held that there was nothing unlawful or even intrinsically wrong with these government agencies setting up such a committee to discuss matters of relevance to their respective jurisdictions as long as each agency made its own decisions within the ambit of its own statutory powers . The notion that such a committee fettered PSA 's discretion was dismissed by a further finding of fact that the ad @-@ hoc committee had not acted as an entity in itself . Enforcement and appropriate action were left to the agencies . A meeting attended by the plaintiff 's representatives at which the guidelines relating to cruises @-@ to @-@ nowhere were announced was facilitated by a moderator rather than a chairperson , and each of the agencies read out guidelines which they themselves would be adopting and implementing . 
 = = = = Delegation by minister = = = = 
 Under section 35 of the Interpretation Act , if written law confers power on a minister to give a direction , issue an order or authorize something to be done , exercise of the power may be done ( unless the law states otherwise ) under the signature of the permanent secretary to the ministry which the minister is responsible for , or of any public officer authorized in writing by the minister . Section 36 of the Act permits a minister empowered to exercise a power or perform a duty to , in the absence of any statutory provision to the contrary , depute another person to exercise the power or perform the duty on his or her behalf . The delegation must be approved by the President ( acting on Cabinet 's advice ) ; may be made subject to conditions , exceptions and qualifications ; and must be published in the Government Gazette . The minister remains capable of exercising the power or performing the duty personally . The power to make subsidiary legislation cannot be delegated . 
 = = = Relevance of delegatus non potest delegare maxim = = = 
 The doctrine of wrongful delegation is sometimes said to be a reflection of the Latin maxim delegatus non potest delegare ( a delegate cannot appoint another ) , which means that a body to which or person to whom power was delegated by Parliament cannot further delegate the power to another . Academics have submitted that the maxim does not state a rule of law , but is " at most a rule of construction " and in applying it to a statute " there , of course must be a consideration of the language of the whole enactment and of its purposes and objects " . Thus , in reality , there is no such principle as delegatus non potest delegare ; the maxim plays no real part in the decision of cases but is sometimes used as a convenient label . Consequently , in most cases the courts have adopted such a construction as will best accord with the facts of modern governmental agencies . For statutory powers , the important question is whether it is intended that a power conferred upon A may be exercised on A 's authority by B. The maxim is merely the pencil with which the court is able to draw the line between authorized and unauthorized sub @-@ delegation , and the courts must then ask whether statutory discretion remains in the hands of the proper authority , or whether some other person purports to exercise it . Thus where an Act said that an inspector of nuisances " may procure any sample " of goods for analysis , it was held that the inspector might validly send his assistant to buy a sample of coffee , as he had in no way authorized his assistant to exercise the discretion legally reposed in himself . Ultimately , the courts must decide the issue based on what Parliament has authorized according to what may be summarized as the language , scope and objects of the empowering statute . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Lines International Holding ( S ) Pte . Ltd. v. Singapore Tourist Promotion Board [ 1997 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 56 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 Komoco Motors Pte . Ltd. v. Registrar of Vehicles [ 2007 ] SGHC 74 , [ 2007 ] 4 S.L.R. ( R. ) 145 , H.C. ( Singapore ) ( " Komoco Motors ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Registrar of Vehicles v. Komoco Motors Pte . Ltd . [ 2008 ] SGCA 19 , [ 2008 ] 3 S.L.R. ( R. ) 340 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Komoco Motors ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Interpretation Act ( Cap . 1 , 2002 Rev. Ed . ) ( " IA " ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Cane , Peter ( 2004 ) , " Making Decisions and Rules " , Administrative Law ( 4th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 192 – 220 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 926898 @-@ 6 . 
 Leyland , Peter ; Anthony , Gordon ( 2009 ) , " Illegality II " , Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 258 – 283 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 921776 @-@ 2 . 
 Lord Woolf ; Jowell , Jeffrey ; Le Sueur , Andrew ( 2007 ) , " Illegality " , De Smith 's Judicial Review ( 6th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , pp. 225 – 317 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 421 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Wade , William ; Forsyth , Christopher ( 2009 ) , " Retention of Discretion " , Administrative Law ( 10th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 259 – 285 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 923161 @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Hilson , Chris ( 2002 ) , " Judicial Review , Policies and the Fettering of Discretion " , Public Law : 111 – 129 . 
 Hilson , Chris ( December 2006 ) , " Policies , the Non @-@ Fetter Principle and the Principle of Substantive Legitimate Expectations : Between a Rock and a Hard Place " , Judicial Review 11 ( 4 ) : 289 – 293 . 
 Keyes , John Mark ( 1987 ) , " From <unk> to the Duty to Make Law " , McGill Law Journal 33 : 49 – 89 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 26 January 2013 . 
 Lanham , David ( 1984 ) , " Delegation and the Alter Ego Principle " , Law Quarterly Review 100 : 587 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Craig , Paul [ P. ] ( 2008 ) , " Failure to Exercise Discretion [ ch . 16 ] " , Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , pp. 501 – 530 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84703 @-@ 283 @-@ 6 . 
 = Carlos Ruiz ( baseball ) = 
 Carlos Joaquín Ruiz ( born January 22 , 1979 ) is a Panamanian professional baseball catcher for the Philadelphia Phillies of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . His nicknames include Chooch , Bad Dude and Señor Octubre . He grew up in David , Chiriquí , Panama , and resolved to play Major League Baseball after his father and grandmother both died within two weeks of each other when he was seven years old . He made his way through the Phillies ' farm system from 1998 until 2006 , playing at each level of Minor League Baseball , until finally making his debut with the Phillies in 2006 , fulfilling his childhood dream . He battled adversity in his progression through the system , including feeling homesick , a position change and the language barrier ( he spoke Spanish , while most teammates and team officials spoke English ) . 
 He spent his first full season in the major leagues in 2007 and has remained there since . In 2008 , for his strong postseason performance , including a walk @-@ off hit , during the Phillies playoff run that concluded with victory in the 2008 World Series , he earned the nickname " Señor Octubre " ( Mr. October ) . Despite being one of the quietest players on the team , he was subsequently called the " heart and soul " of the Phillies ; he serves as a constant source of encouragement and rebuke alike to his teammates . Over the following seasons , he was a part of the core group of players that led the Phillies to five consecutive playoff appearances from 2007 until 2011 . He had his best season in 2012 , holding a batting average of over .300 , earning his first appearance in the Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , and finishing in the top 30 of the National League Most Valuable Player voting . In 2013 , he began the season with a 25 @-@ game suspension for using Adderall , and subsequently spent time on the disabled list , ultimately playing in fewer than 100 games for the first time in his MLB career . 
 Ruiz is the only player in the National League to catch four no @-@ hitters , and one of only two catchers in Major League Baseball , the other being Jason Varitek . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ruiz grew up in David , Panama , and was the oldest of three sons . His father was a police officer and his mother was an elementary school teacher . When he was seven years old , his father Joaquin was patrolling in his police jeep when a tire blew out , causing the vehicle to flip , throwing Joaquin into a ditch , and then crushing him when it fell on top of him . Just weeks before , his grandmother died of cancer . As a result , Ruiz became " the new father " , starting work shortly thereafter as a laborer on a coffee farm to supplement the family income , and by age 10 was earning about US $ 3 per day . He also promised his widowed mother that he would make it to Major League Baseball to support the family . Subsequently , he began attending college to earn a degree in physical education , but dropped out shortly after he began to attend the Phillies baseball academy . 
 Ruiz 's upbringing contributed to his approach to the game . His mother insisted that he excel academically , and would not allow him to play baseball unless he did well in school . Baseball was his first love , and he was responsible for organizing the community 's games : 
 " Ruiz 's natural leadership skills flourished . As a boy , Ruiz , who had chosen to play with baseballs instead of toy cars even as a toddler , was always the one in his neighborhood to organize pickup baseball games . It was he who brought the balls and bats , and it was he who picked the teams and ordered everyone to their positions . He had an acute understanding of the game . Ruiz was made to lead , and playing catcher eventually suited him perfectly . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 In 1998 , Ruiz followed his dream of playing professional baseball first by attending the Phillies Baseball Academy in La Vega , Dominican Republic , where he played catcher for the first time , moving from his initial position of second base . Though he was ready to quit because " he looked and felt like a 10 @-@ year @-@ old among the tall , athletic prospects surrounding him " , his uncle convinced him in a phone conversation to stick with it . The Phillies signed him as an amateur free agent on December 4 , 1998 for US $ 8 @,@ 000 , and he made his professional debut in 1999 with the Dominican Summer League ( DSL ) team DSL Phillies , with whom he compiled a .305 batting average , 4 home runs , and 35 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 60 games . Prior to the 2000 season , Ruiz met Mick Billmeyer , the Phillies ' minor league catching coordinator , who served as his mentor . Billmeyer sought to learn Spanish while Ruiz sought to learn English , and the two bonded as Billmeyer helped mold Ruiz into an eventual top prospect and ultimately a starting catcher . In 2000 , he came to America , progressing to play in the Gulf Coast League ( GCL ) for the GCL Phillies , and hitting .277 in 38 games . He earned another promotion in 2001 , playing for the Lakewood BlueClaws of Class A Minor League Baseball . In 2001 , his performance was similar in quality to his first two seasons , and he was promoted to the Clearwater Threshers of Class A @-@ Advanced , with whom he played over parts of the next two seasons . He struggled at the plate in 2002 , compiling just a <unk> batting average in 92 games , but hit .315 in 15 games in 2003 , and that year earned another promotion . 
 In 2004 , Ruiz spent the entire season with the Double @-@ A Reading Phillies , posting a .284 batting average and hitting 17 home runs , the latter of which was second among catchers in the Eastern League . In addition to his strong offensive numbers , he threw out 25 of 76 attempted base stealers ( 32 @.@ 9 % ) . Off the field , it was in 2004 that Ruiz first gained the original form of his nickname " Chooch " . Though a quiet individual , Ruiz frequently muttered " <unk> " ( a word equivalent to the f @-@ bomb in Panama ) under his breath , and teammate Anderson Machado thus began to address Ruiz as " <unk> " , which was later shortened to " Chooch " , and the nickname 's usage snowballed from there . His strong performance earned him another promotion in 2005 when he played for the Triple @-@ A Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Red Barons , and posted a better batting average but fewer home runs than in Reading : .300 , 4 home runs , 40 RBIs in 100 games . Before the 2006 season , he played for his native Panama in the first World Baseball Classic . His final season in the minor leagues was 2006 . During 100 games , he hit .307 with 16 home runs and 69 RBIs , earning International League all @-@ star accolades . He moved back and forth between Triple @-@ A and the major league Phillies all year long , making his MLB debut on May 6 , 2006 . 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies ( 2006 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Ruiz was first brought up to the major league level when Phillies ' starting catcher Mike Lieberthal went on the disabled list ( DL ) in May 2006 , and Ruiz debuted on May 6 . When Lieberthal returned , Ruiz was sent back to the minors . When Lieberthal went once again on the DL in June , the Phillies used Sal Fasano and Chris Coste rather than recalling Ruiz . He was recalled on July 4 , when he hit his first major league home run off San Diego Padres ' pitcher Clay Hensley . He was optioned back to the minor leagues once more before his recall on August 31 — essentially a September callup . Overall , with the big league club , he hit .261 with 3 home runs and 10 RBIs . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Ruiz permanently joined the Phillies ' roster on opening day 2007 , after eight seasons in the minor leagues . He ultimately " grabbed hold of the top job [ as starting catcher ] and never let go " . The Phillies signed Rod Barajas before the season because of concerns about Ruiz 's ability to catch , hit , and generally hold up over a full season at the major league level , as seasons there are longer than in the minor leagues . During the season , he honed his confidence and earned the trust of the Phillies ' pitching staff , including veteran Jamie Moyer , who commented , " I see a real assuredness to his body language . He 's not cocky or brash . He just seems very confident in what 's going on . " On June 26 , Ruiz stole home on the front end of a double steal in an 11 – 4 home win over the Cincinnati Reds , becoming the first Phillie to steal home since Scott Rolen in 1997 . He eventually played 115 games over the season , and from then on was the Phillies ' regular starting catcher . Statistically , he committed only two errors , which tied for second @-@ best among MLB catchers with at least 100 games played . He had 27 multi @-@ hit games , hit 6 home runs and 51 RBIs with a .259 batting average . At the conclusion of the season , he was named to the Topps All @-@ Star Rookie Team . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Ruiz entered the 2008 season focused predominantly on defense , specifically helping the pitcher : 
 " ... Ruiz invests himself in the pitcher 's performance . He and the pitcher succeed or fail together ... Everything starts with pitching . ' Hitting is nice , but working with the pitcher is my No. 1 job . ... I want to feel like we are one person . ' " 
 Ruiz struggled to hit consistently throughout the season , specifically in the first half ; from the beginning of the year until July 11 , he hit .206 with 2 home runs and 20 RBIs . Nevertheless , due to his rapport with the pitching staff ( pitchers ' ERA when throwing to him ( catcher 's ERA ) was 3 @.@ 56 , the best for any catcher in the National League ( NL ) ) , and a vote of confidence from manager Charlie Manuel , he was secure in his position . In late July , he had a multi @-@ hit game against the New York Mets , which may have helped him break out of his slump . Ultimately , during the regular season , he hit .219 with 4 home runs and 31 RBIs . 
 Despite his struggles at the plate during the regular season , Ruiz was an integral part of the Phillies ' postseason success . After the Phillies clinched the 2008 National League Championship Series , he commented that the glory of winning a crucial baseball game that clinched the series , which he had witnessed while growing up in Panama on television , " happened to me " , noting the aura of the moment , and that it culminated and validated the hard work he had put in over the years . Subsequently , in game 3 of the 2008 World Series , Ruiz tapped a ground ball up the third @-@ base line for a walk @-@ off infield single , the first in MLB history . Ruiz noted , " I heard them cheering . And that 's when I knew , ' Okay it 's over ' ... I 'll take a win . " The Phillies eventually won the World Series for the first time since 1980 , doing so in five games , the last of which began on October 27 and ended on October 29 after it was suspended part @-@ way through due to rain . For his performance in the playoffs , he earned the nickname " Señor Octubre " ( Mr. October in Spanish ) . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 Initially , Ruiz elected not to play in the 2009 World Baseball Classic , but after receiving a call from Martín Torrijos , the President of Panama , he agreed to play for the Panamanian team . Early in the season , he suffered a muscle strain in his right oblique , which lost him playing time while on the disabled list . Also early in the season , there was debate as to who should be the Phillies starting catcher , Ruiz or Chris Coste . Rob Neyer summarized the debate and ultimately endorsed Ruiz when he wrote , 
 " It 's Ruiz who has established himself as the superior hitter , almost solely because we expect him to draw more walks than Coste . Yes , Coste does have superior stats as a major leaguer ... But he is 36 , and with a couple of exceptions he 's not fared all that well in the high minors . Meanwhile , <unk> [ sic ] is six years younger and he 's been relatively impressive in the high minors . " 
 Ultimately , Ruiz was the regular starter . He finished the season on a hot streak ; over the last 24 games , he hit .355 with 9 doubles , 1 home run , 11 RBIs , and .446 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) . In late September , he missed a week of games with inflammation in his left wrist . Despite his missed time , he started 100 games and set career highs in home runs ( 9 ) and base on balls ( 47 ) , as well as posting a .255 batting average and 43 RBIs . Moreover , he walked more times than he struck out , a rare feat among modern major league hitters . In the postseason , he led the team with a .341 batting average , and recorded a <unk> OBP , having reached base in each of the Phillies ' 15 games , which perpetuated the usage of his nickname " Señor Octubre " . Marcus Hayes of The Philadelphia Daily News wrote that Ruiz is " ... the Phillies ' Senor Octubre , a No. 8 hitter who hits like John Buck in the regular season , then turns into Johnny Bench come autumn . " 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 In 2010 , Ruiz had a season filled with " indelible moments " . He was catcher for Roy Halladay 's perfect game on May 29 , 2010 against the Florida Marlins and Halladay 's no @-@ hitter against the Cincinnati Reds in the first game of the National League Divisional Series on October 6 , 2010 , the first time a catcher had caught two no @-@ hitters in one season since 1972 . On May 4 , he hit a walk @-@ off home run , the second of his career , to lead the Phillies over the St. Louis Cardinals . Ruiz spent time on the DL in late June and early July with a concussion , but according to manager Charlie Manuel returned with a more efficient swing that allowed him to hit better against power pitchers . He led the team with a .302 batting average and a .400 on @-@ base percentage . Both statistics also led National League catchers , and he even received a few votes for NL most valuable player . During the 2010 postseason , he did not perform as well as in past years — in nine games , he hit .192 with two home runs and four RBIs . Fans voted Ruiz the " X @-@ Factor Player of the Year " in MLB 's This Year in Baseball Awards . He also received the Pride of Philadelphia Award from the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame . Halladay called Ruiz a " rock " behind the plate , and presented him with a replica of his Cy Young Award . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Ruiz returned for the Phillies ' 2011 season as their everyday starting catcher , and started 113 games , of which the Phillies won 70 ( <unk> winning percentage ) . In May , he spent time on the DL with inflammation in his lower back . Over the Phillies ' final 36 games , he posted a .342 batting average . Overall , he finished with the best catcher 's ERA in the major leagues ( 3 @.@ 06 ) , a .283 batting average , 6 home runs , and 40 RBIs . His batting average was second on the team trailing only Hunter Pence . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 Ruiz began the 2012 season strongly , and throughout the season was a bright spot on an otherwise disappointing team . Through June 27 , he led the Major Leagues with a .364 average . This contributed to a stellar first half of the season earned him his first placement on the National League All @-@ Star team . He was a reserve , though some analysts , including ESPN 's John Kruk , felt his numbers warranted a starting nod , which ultimately went to the San Francisco Giants ' Buster Posey through the fan voting . Shortly after the announcement that he was an all @-@ star , a piece in The Philadelphia Daily News entitled " The evolution of Carlos Ruiz " summarized his career : " Ruiz , though , was never a major prospect . He was a reserve catcher before he was a starting catcher . He was a bottom @-@ of @-@ the @-@ order hitter before he was a middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ order hitter . And now , for the first time in his career , Carlos Ruiz is an All @-@ Star . " After the all @-@ star break , he spent over a month on the disabled list with plantar fasciitis , hindering his statistical totals , which at the time of his injury were among the best in the National League . He led all NL catchers in doubles , en route to posting a .325 batting average with 16 home runs and 68 RBIs , all of which were career highs . He finished 28th in MVP voting , the third consecutive season he had received votes . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 On November 27 , 2012 , Ruiz was suspended for 25 games without pay by the MLB for testing positive for an amphetamine called Adderall . The suspension of Ruiz was effective at the start of the 2013 season . Adderall is a drug prescribed for treating ADHD , described as a " central nervous system stimulant used to increase the attention span and decrease distractibility . " He made his 2013 season debut on April 28 against the New York Mets at Citi Field . On May 20 , he was placed on the DL with a Grade 2 strained hamstring . He came back with a four @-@ hit game , which tied his career high , against the Los Angeles Dodgers on August 18 , and hit .288 over the final two months of the season , commensurate with his past performance . 
 In the 2013 season , Ruiz compiled a .268 batting average , five home runs , and 37 RBIs in 92 games , his lowest major league total since 2006 . After the season , Ruiz became a free agent . He re @-@ signed on November 21 , 2013 to a three @-@ year contract worth US $ 26 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 plus a club option for a fourth season , giving the Phillies have an option to bring Ruiz back for a fourth season , at their discretion . Though one writer suggested his 2013 year might just have been an " aberration " , most thought the Phillies overpaid to keep Ruiz , who turned 35 during the subsequent offseason . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Before the 2014 season , he received an exemption from MLB to use Adderall , an exemption given to nine percent of MLB players despite only four percent of the American population diagnosed with the condition . After a slow start , Ruiz earned NL player of the week accolades in late April after he hit .500 during a Phillies ' road trip . He sustained a concussion on June 26 that forced him to go on the disabled list ; he began a rehabilitation assignment on July 17 with the Clearwater Threshers . On September 1 , Ruiz was behind the plate for the combined no @-@ hitter thrown by Cole Hamels , Jake Diekman , Ken Giles , and Jonathan Papelbon in a 7 @-@ 0 victory over the Atlanta Braves . It was the third no @-@ hitter caught by Ruiz in his career , which ties him for second in Major League history behind Jason Varitek , who caught four . In 2014 , Ruiz played 110 games batting .252 with six home runs and 31 RBI , and overall , had " a fine season ... [ that ] shouldn ’ t get lost amid the many negatives . " On October 1 , 2014 , Ruiz underwent a minor arthroscopic shoulder surgery . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 Cognizant of his increasing age and the wear catching places on one 's body , the Phillies reduced Ruiz 's workload during spring training , hoping to keep him fresh throughout the regular season . Regardless , he insisted upon catching pitchers ' bullpen sessions so he could develop a feel and rapport with each pitcher . On July 25 , Ruiz became the first catcher in the National League , and the second catcher in Major League Baseball history , to catch four no @-@ hitters when teammate Cole Hamels no @-@ hit the Chicago Cubs . Overall , Ruiz lost his starting job to Cameron Rupp , and had significant declines in many aspects of his game , particularly those at which he previously excelled , including framing pitches – in 2015 , Baseball Prospectus ranked him worst in the league at doing so – and the mental aspect of the game , as he made several uncharacteristic errors . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 Offensively , Ruiz developed from a " bottom @-@ of @-@ the @-@ order hitter " , to a patient hitter inclined to work the count , and finally to a hitter with solid gap @-@ to @-@ gap power . Ruiz has strong plate discipline that helps him draw walks and avoid strikeouts ; he has almost as many walks as strikeouts over the course of his career , a rarity in the modern era of baseball . However , as his career progressed and he hit more towards the middle of the lineup , he has taken a more aggressive approach at the plate , and consequently he has struck out more often , but his home run totals have also increased . In 2014 , his versatility and production at the plate encouraged his manager , Ryne Sandberg , to utilize him in various spots ranging from second through seventh in the batting order . At the prime of his career , he was among the best hitting catchers in MLB . Entering 2014 , Ruiz had stolen only 16 bases over his first eight seasons ; he had never been particularly fast , which initially caused his conversion from infielder to catcher , but because of his " hustle " on the basepaths , he won the Major League Baseball Players Alumni Association Heart and Hustle Award in 2012 . 
 = = = Catching = = = 
 When catching , Ruiz seeks to become " one " with the day 's pitcher ; he takes their successes and failures personally , refusing to blame pitchers , and accepts equal responsibility . Phillies pitchers trust Ruiz and his ability to call games , and this ability 's improvement has coincided with his increased proficiency in English . Cole Hamels attributes Ruiz 's prowess in calling games to astute preparation , commenting , 
 " I think he 's very aware of what the hitter is trying to do in each count . He gives you a good target . It 's almost like he understands what you 're thinking and he 's speaking to you without saying anything . ... If a catcher can help you , it makes your job so much easier and he can do that so well . " 
 Ruiz realizes the importance of his role with the Phillies , opining , " It 's the catcher 's job to bring energy and happiness to the game . " Ruiz has a good throwing arm that has improved over the years ; over the course of his career he has thrown out 29 % of attempted base stealers , which is exactly the average percentage of hitters thrown out by catchers . 
 = = = Playing style = = = 
 A Sports Illustrated piece featuring Ruiz published in July 2011 encapsulated Ruiz 's role as " heart and soul " of the team : 
 The most silent and timid Phillie might even become — by consensus of teammates and in the words of closer Brad Lidge — " the heart and soul of this team . " The player who was the runaway winner in a team poll asking Phillies whom — if they were Batman — they 'd choose as their Robin , proving that his effect extends far beyond his superhero pitching staff . The player who circulated in the clubhouse asking them how their families were doing , and how their hearts and minds and bodies felt . The man who went to each player in the dugout as each game was about to start to exchange a new touch : knuckles yesterday , low @-@ fives today , fist pounds to their hearts tomorrow , so hard that they 'd yearn for his chest protector . The one who tore into them when they were lax and <unk> what team leaders Chase Utley and Halladay kept tight under wraps . The one taking charge as if he has been here forever and yet still asking questions as if he has just been called up . The most endearing player to the sold @-@ out crowds at Citizens Bank Park every night , even when his average dips to .255 , as it has this season , crossing a cultural moat that Hispanic players often can 't — the Phillie whom bartender Tubby Kushner impersonates every game he attends , from uniform down to the shin guards , chest protector , mask and , yes , even cup — because fans feel like he 's their little secret , their little golden nugget . 
 He is a favorite among Phillies fans , and crossed " a cultural moat that Hispanic players often can 't " to endear himself to not only the fan base , but also his teammates . Before games , he humorously imitates teammates to help keep the team loose and relaxed , furthering his role as a leader . Overall , Ruiz " is a man who refuses to conceal his emotions " , positive or negative , and serves as a constant source of encouragement and rebuke alike to his teammates . 
 = Cowboys & Aliens = 
 Cowboys & Aliens is a 2011 American space western @-@ action film directed by Jon Favreau and starring Daniel Craig , Harrison Ford , and Olivia Wilde . The film is based on the 2006 graphic novel of the same name created by Scott Mitchell Rosenberg . The plot revolves around an amnesiac outlaw ( Craig ) , a wealthy cattleman ( Ford ) , and a mysterious traveler ( Wilde ) who must ally to save a group of townspeople abducted by aliens . The screenplay was written by Roberto Orci , Alex Kurtzman , Damon Lindelof , Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby , based on a screen story by the latter two along with Steve Oedekerk . The film was produced by Brian Grazer , Ron Howard , Kurtzman , Orci and Rosenberg , with Steven Spielberg and Favreau serving as executive producers . 
 The project began development in April 1997 , when Universal Pictures and DreamWorks Pictures bought film rights to a concept pitched by Rosenberg , former president at Malibu Comics , which he described as a graphic novel in development . After the graphic novel was published in 2006 , development on the film was begun again , and Favreau signed on as director in September 2009 . On a budget of $ 163 million , filming for Cowboys & Aliens began in June 2010 , in New Mexico and California . Despite studio pressure to release the film in 3 @-@ D , Favreau chose to film traditionally and in anamorphic format ( widescreen picture on standard 35 mm film ) to further a " classic movie feel " . Measures were taken to maintain a serious Western element despite the film 's " inherently comic " title and premise . The film 's aliens were designed to be " cool and captivating " , with some details , such as a fungus that grows on their wounds , created to depict the creatures as frontiersmen facing adversity in an unfamiliar place . 
 Cowboys & Aliens premiered at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con and was released theatrically in the United States and Canada on July 29 , 2011 . The film was considered to be a financial disappointment , taking $ 174 @.@ 8 million in box office receipts on a $ 163 million budget . Cowboys & Aliens received mixed reviews , with critics generally praising its acting and production but criticizing its blend of the Western and science fiction genres . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1873 New Mexico Territory , an unnamed loner awakens injured in the desert with no memory and with a strange metal object on his wrist . He wanders into the town of Absolution , where preacher Meacham treats his wound . Sheriff Taggart recognizes the stranger as wanted outlaw Jake Lonergan and attempts to arrest him . Jake beats up the posse sent to take him in and nearly escapes , but a woman named Ella Swenson knocks him out . Taggart prepares to transport both Jake and volatile drunk Percy Dolarhyde to Santa Fe for trial . 
 Percy 's father , Colonel Woodrow Dolarhyde , a ruthless cattle baron , demands Percy be released . He also demands Jake be released to him , since Jake had stolen gold from him . During the standoff , alien spacecraft begin attacking the town . Percy , the sheriff and other townsfolk are abducted by long , whip @-@ like feelers hanging from the bottom of the ships . Jake 's shackle unfolds and becomes a weapon ; he shoots down a ship , ending the attack . 
 Dolarhyde , Ella , and other townsfolk form a posse to track an injured alien that escaped from the downed ship . Meanwhile , Jake travels to an abandoned cabin and , in a flashback , recalls returning to it with stolen gold and then being abducted , along with a woman named Alice , by the aliens . His memories returning , Jake joins up with the posse . During the evening , the group comes upon a capsized paddle wheel steamboat that the aliens apparently dumped miles from any water . They camp in it , and during the night the alien they were tracking kills Meacham , who sacrifices himself to save Emmett , Taggart 's grandson . 
 By morning , most of the posse has deserted , and those remaining are attacked by Jake 's former gang . Jake , who had stolen the gang 's loot after their last heist , attempts to retake control but it is foiled . The aliens begin attacking them again and Ella is captured . Jake jumps aboard the ship and attacks the alien pilot , causing the ship to crash fatally wounding Ella . 
 The remaining posse is captured by Chiricahua Apache Native Americans , who blame them for the alien attacks . After Ella 's corpse is dumped on a fire by a Chiricahua warrior , she is resurrected and emerges from the fire . Ella reveals herself to be from another alien race , who had travelled to Earth to help resist the invaders after they destroyed her home world . The aliens , who are mining gold and abducting people to conduct experiments to find humans ' weaknesses , are far stronger and more durable than humans , and have superior weaponry , but are not invulnerable . They can be stabbed and shot to death , but only Jake 's gauntlet weapon or a well @-@ aimed shot with a rifle can kill them with a single blast . Ella says the aliens that previously attacked them are just scouts . 
 She also claims Jake holds the secret to the aliens ' whereabouts and argues they must defeat the aliens before the invaders exterminate all life on earth . After taking medicine offered by the Apaches ' medicine man , Jake recalls that Alice was euthanized after she was used in an alien experiment , but he had escaped , inadvertently stealing the gauntlet @-@ like alien weapon encasing his wrist . He then also remembers the location of the aliens ' base of operations . 
 Armed with this knowledge , the group , now led by Dolarhyde , prepares to attack the aliens ' grounded mother ship . Meanwhile , Jake returns to his old gang and persuades them to join the fight . After the humans maneuver the aliens into a ground battle , Jake and Ella board the ship and free the captives , but Jake is captured . Dolarhyde rescues him and both men escape the ship after killing the alien responsible for Alice 's death . As the remaining aliens are taking off in their damaged craft , Ella sacrifices herself by entering the ship 's core and destroying it by using Jake 's wrist gauntlet as a bomb , obliterating the alien ship . 
 With the aliens gone the abducted townsfolk begin to remember their pasts . Still a wanted man , Jake decides to leave , though the sheriff and Dolarhyde say they will claim he was killed in the invasion . The citizens intend to reconstruct their town . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The cast includes : 
 Daniel Craig as Jake Lonergan , an amnesiac outlaw . 
 Harrison Ford as Colonel Woodrow Dolarhyde , a powerful cattleman . 
 Olivia Wilde as Ella Swenson , a mysterious traveler who aids Lonergan . 
 Sam Rockwell as Doc , owner of Absolution 's local saloon ( when he isn 't tending to patients ) . 
 Paul Dano as Percy Dolarhyde , Woodrow 's trouble @-@ making son . 
 Clancy Brown as Meacham , Absolution 's preacher and doctor ( when the real one is too busy tending bar ) . 
 Keith Carradine as Sheriff John Taggart , Absolution 's sheriff . 
 Noah Ringer as Emmett Taggart , John Taggart 's grandson . 
 Adam Beach as Nat Colorado , Dolarhyde 's Native American right @-@ hand man . 
 Abigail Spencer as Alice , Jake 's lost love . 
 Ana de la <unk> as María , Absolution 's saloon maid and Doc 's wife . 
 Walton Goggins as Hunt , a bandit and friend of Lonergan . 
 Julio Cedillo as <unk> , a Mexican bandit . 
 David O 'Hara as Pat Dolan , Lonergan 's former gang @-@ member . 
 Toby Huss as Roy Murphy 
 Raoul Trujillo as Black Knife , the Chiricahua Apache chief . 
 Paul Ortega as Apache Medicine Man 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and casting = = = 
 The project began development in 1997 , when Universal Pictures and DreamWorks bought film rights to a concept pitched by Scott Mitchell Rosenberg , former president at Malibu Comics , which he described as a graphic novel in development . They hired Steve Oedekerk to write and direct the film , which Oedekerk planned to do after completing Nutty Professor II : The Klumps . Rosenberg , who formed Platinum Studios to pursue adapting Cowboys & Aliens and other Malibu Comics properties into film and television , joined as a producer . By 1998 , Oedekerk left the project to pursue a remake of the 1964 film The Incredible Mr. Limpet with Jim Carrey . By 2004 , the film rights were acquired by Columbia Pictures , who did not move the project beyond development . 
 In 2006 , Rosenberg published Cowboys & Aliens as a graphic novel . In the following year , Universal and DreamWorks partnered again to adapt Cowboys & Aliens into a film . In June 2008 , Robert Downey , Jr. entered negotiations to star in the film as Zeke Jackson , a former Union Army gunslinger . While Downey , Jr. was making Iron Man 2 , he told director Jon Favreau about Cowboys & Aliens . Favreau investigated the project , and in September 2009 , he joined as director . Downey , Jr. left the project in January 2010 , to star in Sherlock Holmes : A Game of Shadows , and later in the month , Daniel Craig was hired to replace him . Favreau said Craig 's portrayal of James Bond " brings a certain virtuosity " . He also described Craig , " On the one hand , he 's like this Jason Bourne type , a leading man who 's also a lethal character , but on the other hand , he 's also got a lot of humanity and vulnerability to him . " 
 In April 2010 , Harrison Ford was cast alongside Craig . Favreau had cast Craig and Ford in the film because they were actors who suited the action @-@ adventure roles so the characters would be less seen as comedic . The director compared Ford , in particular , with John Wayne in having " a sense of history " with the actor and the role . Before Cowboys & Aliens , Ford had previously acted in the Western films A Time for Killing in 1967 , Journey to Shiloh in 1969 and The Frisco Kid in 1979 . While Ford is well known for playing Indiana Jones , the filmmakers wanted to avoid giving him a cowboy hat that would remind audiences too much of Jones . Writer Alex Kurtzman said , " We needed to make sure that — no pun intended — we tipped a hat to iconography of Harrison Ford and also presented the audience with a very different version . " 
 Olivia Wilde was cast in one of the lead roles , and Favreau called Wilde 's character the key to the film . Sam Rockwell was cast in a supporting role as Doc . The character was described as a large Mexican in the original script , but when Favreau and the writers learned of Rockwell 's interest in the film , they reconceived and expanded the role . Favreau himself is known for appearing in his films , but for Cowboys & Aliens , he chose not to make a cameo appearance because he thought it would affect the tone of the film . However , his face does appear on a wanted poster as " Todd Kravitz " in the scene establishing Craig as " Lonergan " . 
 When asked about how the film was developing , Rosenberg stated , " It 's incredible . Sometimes it 's like seeing exactly what was going through my head when I first had that spark in my head as a kid . Jon Favreau 's bringing his own talent and vision with the adaptation , but at the same time it remains true to what I was really trying to get at in the original story . " 
 Steven Spielberg , one of the film 's executive producers , visited the director and the writers during pre @-@ production to look over the script and the artwork . He provided Favreau with a collection of classic Western films . Spielberg also invited the director and the writers to a private screening of several Western films and provided live commentary on how to make one properly . The films included Stagecoach , My Darling Clementine , and Destry Rides Again . Spielberg made several other suggestions : a main enemy alien , Jake 's final use of the gauntlet being to decapitate an alien , and that Jake and Ella 's first kiss should occur in the climax of the film . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In the film 's period as a developing project under several studios , different versions of the screenplay were drafted by numerous screenwriters , beginning with Steve Oedekerk . Other screenwriters involved included David Hayter , Thomas Dean Donnelly , Joshua Oppenheimer , Jeffrey Boam , Thompson Evans , and Chris <unk> . When Universal and DreamWorks re @-@ partnered in 2007 , they hired Hawk Ostby and Mark Fergus . In 2009 , Ostby and Fergus were replaced by Alex Kurtzman , Roberto Orci , and Damon Lindelof . Kurtzman and Orci analyzed American Western films including The Searchers . Orci said , " The first draft was very kind of jokey and broad and then it went very serious . You kind of swing back and forth between the two extremes and the tone until you find the exact right point where a Western and a sci @-@ fi movie can really shake hands without it seeming unnatural . " " Imagine you 're watching Unforgiven and then Aliens land , " Orci explained . 
 Orci also said , " The comic has the themes of enemies uniting to fight a common enemy and has the setting of that specific time period , so we kept the inspiration from all of that . In terms of the specifics of the story and who these characters are , we wanted the audience to be surprised and to not feel like they 've already seen everything if they were fans of the comic . So , while the themes and the setting and many of the elements are a great inspiration , the story is completely adapted and translated for live action . " The aliens were loosely based on the Anunnaki gods of Zecharia Sitchin 's interpretation of the Babylonian religion , who have a distinct interest in gold . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens was not originally planned to be shown in 3 @-@ D. When approached with the idea by DreamWorks , Favreau was not interested , stating that Westerns should be shot only on film ( as opposed to being shot digitally , which is required for modern 3D technology ) , and didn 't want it to be converted after filming . " That would be like filming in black and white and colorizing it , " he reasoned . Director of photography Matthew Libatique shot Cowboys & Aliens in the anamorphic format on 35 mm film to further a " classic movie feel " . 
 On a budget of $ 163 million , principal photography for Cowboys & Aliens began at Albuquerque Studios in New Mexico on June 30 , 2010 . One of the filming locations was Plaza Blanca , " The White Place " , where Western films like The Missing , 3 : 10 to Yuma , City Slickers , Young Guns , and The Legend of the Lone Ranger had been filmed . Sound stage work took place in Los Angeles , with additional location shooting at <unk> , California . Filming finished on September 30 . 
 A scene in which Craig 's character rides a horse alongside a ravine and jumps down it onto a spacecraft emulated many scenes in American Western films where cowboys rode along a moving train and jumped on it . Favreau said the scene referenced the one in the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark where Indiana Jones chases a truck and noted that a similar scene existed in the 1939 film Stagecoach , saying " We 're constantly referencing back to our roots . " Cowboys & Aliens also make multiple references to Close Encounters of the Third Kind , such as the introduction to the aliens through the bright lights on their aircraft and an upturned paddle steamer in the middle of the desert . The film also " tease [ s ] " monster movies , and the scenes in the paddle steamer were a deliberate homage to Alien . 
 = = = Design and effects = = = 
 Scott Chambliss was hired as the production designer based on his work on Star Trek , produced by Orci and Kurtzman . The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , represented by Roger Guyett and Eddie <unk> as visual effects supervisors . Under the supervision of Shane Mahan , Legacy Effects created practical puppet aliens and full scale alien speeders . New Deal Studios constructed a miniature of the paddle steamer that is seen upturned in the film . Kerner Optical built a miniature of the alien ship and bluescreen stand @-@ ins . The film also featured visual effects by Fuel VFX , The Embassy , Ghost , and Shade VFX , with previsualization from <unk> Entertainment . 
 Favreau noted that Cowboys & Aliens focuses on a specific aspect of the alien genre which primarily revolves around the films of the 1980s : " And although we have quite a bit of CG — I like the way they told stories before — before you could show everything with CG . And it was a real unveiling of the creature , little by little , and using lighting and camera work and music to make it a very subjective experience . And so we tried to preserve that here . " In designing the film 's aliens , ILM was careful to make the creatures " cool and captivating " . Guyett stated that they adopted a similar approach to that of District 9 : 
 The trick was to make [ the aliens ] interesting through their behavior and what happens to them , and that was something that District 9 did very well . You were drawn into their world a bit and their idiosyncrasies had an immediate impact : they ate cat food . But those details overwhelm certain design aspects , so I was striving to find some behavior that fit in well with the Western genre , where you have people in very arduous conditions fighting the elements . And I thought that the irony of all this was that the aliens turn up and it could be more exaggerated for them . They 're frontiersmen in a way : traveling to another place and having to deal with all the adversities of the climate . And in our case , we played up the fact that they weren 't comfortable in our world . There are flies all around them ; they don 't like the light ; and when they were wounded and exposed , a strange fungus grows around them . 
 The use of anamorphic widescreen ( rather than shooting full @-@ frame " flat " and cropping later ) gave ILM no extra room to re @-@ frame shots ; it was a challenge to show both nine @-@ foot @-@ tall aliens and smaller humans in the same space . Instead , Guyett said , they shot more areas in case portions of the shots were lost . In filming the gun battle between the cowboys and aliens , in which the aliens move at twice the speed of the humans , actors were required to ride through the scene on horseback and shoot at men in gray suits and three @-@ foot @-@ tall hats ; they aimed at faces drawn by Jon Favreau on the top of the hats . A big challenge for ILM 's texture artists was to show the aliens in both a dark cave environment and harsh sunlight . The creatures were rendered in high resolution for close @-@ ups ; dirt and wounds were added to the aliens to emphasize the injuries they sustained in battle . After Favreau requested that the aliens experience a very unpleasant biological reaction to being wounded on Earth , the texture team created a yellow fungus @-@ like look on the scars of the aliens . To design the fungus , texture supervisor Martin Murphy searched the Internet for real pictures of mold and growth on trees and eventually designed a " fried egg pattern " . The heads of the aliens were based on those of sea turtles , after Favreau encountered sea turtles during a trip to Hawaii . 
 At the suggestion of Steven Spielberg , an " über @-@ alien " was also designed . It was unclear if the red scar Jake gives the über @-@ alien after escaping vivisection would be enough of an identifier to distinguish it from other aliens , so the creature was redesigned with translucent , pale skin due to the lack of time spent outside . Favreau described the über @-@ alien as more fleshy and anthropomorphic than the other aliens and Murphy commented , " There are some parts of him like his arm that you can see into . It 's almost like glass or ice or <unk> surface that blends into a dryer area . The [ sic ] there 's pieces of him that are more like a soft @-@ shell crab or shiny and wet . " 
 In addition to the aliens , other visual effects were required for the speeders , the alien spaceship , its interior , environment re @-@ creations , and the head @-@ up display for Jake 's arm gauntlet . For the invasion of the town of Absolution , both practical laser lighting and fire effects were utilized , along with practical ships and effects enhancements . ILM artists had to enhance the initial look of the alien " <unk> " , the cables used to abduct people , with renderings such as extra lights , after viewers thought the studio had failed to " paint out " the cables in the film ’ s first trailer . For a scene in which Jake and Ella ride on a speeder , the actors were filming on a practical mock @-@ up against bluescreen ; they were digitally replaced in wider shots . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In Cowboys & Aliens , Director Jon Favreau sought a plausible approach to how humans from the late 19th century could confront extraterrestrial beings armed with advanced weaponry . He said , " It was very well laid out , well planned , and there were a lot of discussions with a lot of actors who called me to task on things that seemed too convenient , so we made sure we earned each step . " The director also sought to maintain a Western tone as aliens appeared in the film , saying , " It 's very easy to just cut the string and then all of a sudden the action starts and you 're in Independence Day . " Favreau cited the works of John Ford and Sergio Leone as sources of inspiration as well as Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid . Favreau also wanted the science @-@ fiction element to stand on its own , referencing Alien , Predator , and Close Encounters of the Third Kind . He said of both genres , " It 's about finding the intersection of those two genres . . . If you do it right , it honors both , and it becomes interesting and clever and a reinvention of two things that people understand the conventions of , instead of just a retread or remake or sequel or reboot of a film you 've seen before . " 
 In the Americas , Native American nations were severely damaged by European settlers , specifically because of the Europeans ' advanced military technology . Favreau compared the film to the historical confrontation " in the frustration of not having the technology to allow you to prevail . It 's always the low @-@ tech culture that feels powerless when faced with an enemy that has technology on their side . " In the film , the cowboys are the low @-@ tech culture , and the aliens with advanced technology possess the belief of Manifest Destiny . Favreau also said of the premise , " It allows the cowboys and Native Americans to come together , which would be impossible had there not been a greater common enemy . It sets the Western up in a very classic way and then turns it on its ear . " When the aliens appear , the film becomes a road movie in which the main characters try to track the aliens , team up with different groups , and ultimately confront the aliens . Favreau compared the gathering to The Magnificent Seven in facing seemingly insurmountable odds in their confrontation . 
 The character of Meacham also presents an unconventional take on Christian principles to support the film 's main theme of redemption . According to Favreau , Meacham 's teaching Doc how to shoot not only references similar scenes in other Westerns but also " teach [ es ] him how to be a person " . Meacham 's dying words to Jake , " God don 't care who you were , Son , only who you are " , speaks of the central theme of redemption . The hummingbird that Jake sees at various points in the film is a " good spirit " that could represent either Alice or Ella ; an alternate theory is that Ella was an angel that helped Jake " get over " Alice . Favreau also suggested a back @-@ story to Cowboys & Aliens : the über @-@ alien is the mastermind of the invasion ; all other aliens are " worker bees " , possibly genetically engineered by another species of aliens that remained on their home planet and sent the worker bees as conquistadors . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens , which crosses genres with the American Western element of cowboys and the science @-@ fiction element of extraterrestrials , has an " inherently comic " title and premise . At the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in July 2010 , director Jon Favreau hosted a presentation and was accompanied by the film 's primary cast members , including Harrison Ford in his first Comic @-@ Con appearance . In the presentation , Favreau explained to audiences that he intended the film as a serious mix of the Western styles of Sergio Leone and John Ford and " really scary " science fiction like Alien and Predator . The first trailer for the film appeared in the following November , and The New York Times reported that film audiences found the premise comedic . Eddie Egan , the president of marketing at Universal Pictures , acknowledged the misconception and said , " The trailer is the first very public step in reconciling the tone of the movie with the more immediate effect of the title on its own . " The studio anticipated a marketing campaign that would demonstrate that the film is " a tough @-@ minded adventure " like Unforgiven by Clint Eastwood . 
 During Super Bowl XLV on February 6 , 2011 , the studio aired a TV spot for Cowboys & Aliens . Hours before the American football game , Favreau used Twitter to link followers to the spot online . Entertainment Weekly reported , " It . . . roused the geek @-@ hive fan base and stirred new speculation about his hybrid of classic Westerns and extraterrestrial @-@ invasion thrillers . " After the spot aired , Favreau said the first trailer was intended as an introduction to pique people 's curiosity and that the Super Bowl TV spot was " showing more of the sense of adventure as things unfold " . 
 In April 2011 , Favreau and Roberto Orci appeared at WonderCon in San Francisco , where they presented nine minutes of film footage and answered questions about the film . Favreau explained that marketing would show " only a brief glimpse of the aliens of the title " before the film is released . He explained the withholding of certain elements , " I think there are enough visionary people involved with this film that there is an understanding that there is a personality that the marketing campaign can take on as well as the film itself . . . I want to make sure that if the audience goes to see [ the film ] , there is going to be a lot of surprises in it that they haven 't seen in the marketing materials . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens had its world premiere at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego on July 23 , 2011 . It was commercially released in the United States and Canada on July 29 , 2011 , and in other territories in ensuing weekends . Paramount Pictures International also released the film in IMAX theaters around the world , as it did for Favreau 's previous film , Iron Man 2 . 
 Box Office Mojo forecast that Cowboys & Aliens would gross $ 95 million total in the United States and Canada . For the comparatively low figure , the website cited that the marketing had not contextualized the film effectively and that hybridized Western films like Jonah Hex and Wild Wild West were not successful at the box office . In territories outside the United States and Canada , the website forecast $ 140 million total , citing that American Western films are not historically popular , but that the premise of the alien invasion and the presence of international stars like Daniel Craig and Harrison Ford would generate interest . In contrast , box office tracker Paul Dergarabedian said the film 's combination of cowboy and extraterrestrial themes in particular would attract audiences . Dergarabedian also believed that audiences ' familiarity with Craig as character James Bond would help the film . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 On the opening day of Cowboys & Aliens , estimates showed that its opening day gross was $ 13 @.@ 0 million and it came in second place to The Smurfs ' opening day gross of $ 13 @.@ 3 million . This was considered a surprise since Cowboys & Aliens was expected to be the clear winner for the weekend . Estimates then showed Cowboys & Aliens and The Smurfs tied at the # 1 spot for the weekend with $ 36 @.@ 2 million each . However , when the actual results for the weekend were announced Cowboys & Aliens won the weekend with $ 36 @.@ 4 million just beating out The Smurfs , which grossed $ 35 @.@ 6 million . The film grossed $ 100 @,@ 240 @,@ 551 in the U.S. and Canada ( making it the 500th $ 100 million domestic movie ) as well as $ 74 @,@ 581 @,@ 774 internationally , bringing its worldwide total to $ 174 @,@ 822 @,@ 325 . The film is considered to be a financial disappointment , narrowly grossing its budget back . In 2014 , the LA Times listed the film as one of the most expensive box office flops of all time . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens earned 44 % approval from 235 critics on the review @-@ aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 6 / 10 and garnering a score of 50 out of 100 from 41 critics on Metacritic . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was a B on an A plus to F scale , indicating a mixed reaction from paying audiences . In general , the performances , particularly from Craig , Ford and Wilde , were praised whereas the combination of Western and science fiction genres was frequently criticized . 
 Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film , saying , " It sounds kooky on paper but on the screen cowboys and aliens make beautiful , fun music together . " Honeycutt felt that the success of the film 's blend of aliens and western themes was due to " the determination by everyone involved to play the damn thing straight . Even the slightest goofiness , the tiniest touch of camp , and the whole thing would blow sky high . But it doesn 't . " He criticized the aliens , which he said " don 't rate as characters " , existing as " moving blobs you shoot at in a video game . " Variety 's Peter Debruge echoed Honeycutt 's sentiments that the " potential <unk> " of the premise is offset by the cast , particularly Craig through a " mix of ruthlessness and sensitivity . " He considered however , that Wilde had the opposite effect , stating she " appears out of place among her grizzled co @-@ stars " . Debruge appreciated the attention paid to the roots of the two genres , saying " beneath all the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art special effects beats an old @-@ fashioned heart , one that prizes both of the genres in play " and concluded that " a canny blend of CG and practical effects serve the sci @-@ fi elements well , while location shooting and Mary <unk> ' form @-@ fitting period duds make the West look its best . " Nick Pinkerton of The Village Voice said the Western elements of the film were " lovingly " handled but called felt the science aspects a " gimmick " and " much more standard fare " in comparison . He added that " Ford , enlivened by dude garb , seems to enjoy himself in front of a camera for the first time in decades " . 
 Roger Ebert wrote that " as preposterous moneymakers go , it 's ambitious and well @-@ made . The acting from the large cast is of a high standard , Craig and Ford were more or less born into their roles , and director Jon Favreau actually develops his characters and gives them things to do , instead of posing them in front of special effects . " He lamented however that the film was not a pure Western , saying of the aliens , " [ T ] here is more genuine suspense when [ Percy Dolarhyde ] starts shooting up the town than when countless aliens appear " . Salon 's Andrew O 'Hehir offered a mixed response , claiming the film to be well made and clever , and singling out Craig and Ford for their performances . O 'Hehir was , however , critical of the combination of western and science @-@ fiction elements , calling it " a mediocre western clumsily welded to a mediocre alien shoot- ' em @-@ up " . 
 Slant 's Nick Schager reacted negatively , stating " Cowboys & Aliens mashes up genres with a staunch dedication to getting everything wrong , making sure that each scene is more inane than the one that preceded it " ; giving the film one star out of four . Schager continued " Cowboys & Aliens 's western accoutrements are [ ... ] so false as to be stunning , with every steely @-@ eyed glare from Craig 's Man With No Memory , every confrontation between his Jake and Ford 's grizzled Dolarhyde , and every silhouetted horseback ride across a sunset range seeming like a wan approximation of a familiar genre staple . [ ... ] Favreau 's visuals have an inauthentic and bland blockbuster sheen , and his actors are similarly afflicted with a case of poseur @-@ itis ( Craig 's affected silent @-@ type glowering , Ford 's gruff racism , or Wilde 's blank , wide @-@ eyed stares ) , failing to deliver a single believable line @-@ reading or gesture . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens received five nominations . At the 39th Annie Awards , the film was nominated in Animated Effects in a Live Action Production for both Gary Wu and Lee Uren , but lost to Transformers : Dark of the Moon . The ceremony took place on February 4 , 2011 . The film received nominations from the Art Directors Guild for Fantasy Film , honoring production designer Scott Chambliss , and for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Motion Picture at the 18th Screen Actors Guild Awards , but lost to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 in both ceremonies . Ford received a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Cowboys & Aliens was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on December 6 , 2011 . The release includes three behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , plus feature commentary with director Jon Favreau . 
 = = = Infringement lawsuit = = = 
 On November 30 , 2011 , Steven John Busti filed a lawsuit was filed against Universal , DreamWorks , Platinum Studios , and Scott Mitchell Rosenberg , claiming copyright infringement . He stating he wrote a preview for his story Cowboys and Aliens in 1994 , which was published in the April 1995 issue of Bizarre Fantasy # 1 . The story was also previewed in a 1995 issue of " Comic Shop News " , which on the same page that featured coverage of Scott Mitchell Rosenberg . Rosenberg and Platinum produced a one sheet depicting a cowboy being chased by an alien , which eventually led to Universal and DreamWorks buying film rights to their concept . 
 = G.G. ( Gossip Girl ) = 
 " G.G. " is the thirteenth episode of the fifth season of the American television teen drama , Gossip Girl and the show 's 100th episode overall . The episode was written by executive producer Joshua Safran and directed by Mark Piznarski . It premiered on The CW Television Network ( The CW ) in the United States on January 30 , 2012 . In the episode , the wedding of Blair Waldorf ( Leighton Meester ) to Prince Louis Grimaldi ( Hugo Becker ) takes place . 
 The episode opened to favorable reviews , with television critics praising the fact it honored the series ' successful days . Michelle Trachtenberg 's performance as Georgina Sparks was also well received . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 39 million Americans and garnered a 0 @.@ 7 / 2 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were slightly up in comparison to the previous episode " Father and the Bride " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a musical dream sequence of Serena ( Blake Lively ) , featuring herself as Marilyn Monroe singing " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " and Blair ( Leighton Meester ) as Audrey Hepburn . Everyone prepares for the wedding of Blair to Prince Louis Grimaldi of Monaco ( Hugo Becker ) . Father <unk> ( Marc Menard ) visits Chuck ( Ed Westwick ) to tell him the plan to ruin the wedding – Father <unk> will replace Father Smythe who will mistakenly have taken sleeping pills , and when he asks during the ceremony if anyone has any objection to the marriage , Chuck will tell that Blair is still in love with him . Though he first agreed on helping him , Chuck changes his mind because he doesn 't want to destroy Blair 's dream and only wants her happiness . 
 Georgina Sparks ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) , who has just come back in New York , then teams up with the priest in an act of revenge for everything Blair has done to her in the past . In the meantime , Serena continues to show an interest in Dan ( Penn Badgley ) , even though he is still unaware of her love . Nate ( Chace Crawford ) reflects on his past failed relationships , while also taking an interest in Lola , who happens to be the real Charlie Rhodes . Blair ' s mother tries to dissuade her from marrying Louis but she doesn 't want to listen to her so she finds help in Chuck , who agrees to try to convince Blair to stop the wedding . Meanwhile , Georgina tries to seduce Louis and have her husband film it . Unfortunately , it doesn 't work as Rufus and Lily stop her . 
 Before the ceremony , Chuck talks to Blair who professes her undying love for him <unk> has been filmed by <unk> but still refuses to call off the wedding . During the ceremony , someone sends the video of the discussion between Blair and Chuck to everyone 's cell phones . The ceremony is temporarily suspended until Blair comes back to the aisle determined to marry Louis . As a result , she becomes Her Serene Highness , Princess Blair of Monaco . At the reception , Serena tells Dan how she feels about him but quickly leaves before he can answer . During their first dance , Louis reveals to Blair that it will be a loveless , contracted marriage . After hearing that , Blair runs away in a limousine with Dan at the wheel . At the end of the episode , the identity of Gossip Girl is seemingly revealed to be Georgina Sparks . 
 = = Production = = 
 " G.G. " was written by Joshua Safran and directed by Mark Piznarski . The wedding scene was filmed at the St. James ' Episcopal Church in New York on November 9 , 2011 . The reception that followed it was shot at The St. Regis Hotel . On November 19 , 2011 , news from the episode , including the title , were reported . Later on , the episode was also reported to feature a dream musical number with Serena as Marilyn Monroe , Blair as Audrey Hepburn , and the men in both their lives . Blair 's wedding dress as well as Serena 's maid of honor dress were designed by Vera Wang . Blair 's dress appeared in InStyle 's top 20 TV fashion moments of the season . 
 On November 1 , 2011 , it was announced that Michelle Trachtenberg would reprise her role as troublemaker Georgina Sparks . Other cast members included Sparks ' husband Philip ( Nick Cornish ) , Blair 's father Harold ( John Shea ) , Blair 's mother ( Margaret Colin ) , Cyrus Rose ( Wallace Shawn ) , Princess Sophie ( Joanne Whalley ) , and Father <unk> ( Marc Menard ) . Blair 's minions , Penelope <unk> ( Amanda Setton ) , Kati Farkas ( Nan Zhang ) and Jessica ( Alice Callahan ) were also present as bridesmaids . 
 Featured music included Peter Bjorn and John 's " Young Folks " performed by The Kooks , Marilyn Monroe 's " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " performed by Serena , Jon Hastings ' " Endless Summer " , Grouplove 's " Slow " , Ludwig van Beethoven 's " Rondo in C Major , Op 51 " , INXS ' " Never Tear Us Apart " performed by the Vitamin String Quartet , Pat Benatar 's " We Belong " also performed by the Vitamin String Quartet and Wolf Gang 's " <unk> Faults " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " G.G. " was first broadcast on January 30 , 2012 in the United States on The CW . The episode was watched by 1 @.@ 39 million Americans and scored a 0 @.@ 7 / 2 Nielsen rating / share in the adults among the 18 – 49 demographic , a season high in viewership . It was also up 25 % and 17 % in viewers and adults 18 – 49 , respectively , from the previous episode " Father and the Bride " , which netted 1 @.@ 11 million American viewers and a 0 @.@ 6 / 2 Nielsen rating / share during its initial airing . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally favorable reviews . Zap2it wrote , " Sure , Blair 's ( Leighton Meester ) been dreaming of her fairytale wedding since she was just a little girl . But it 's also true that producers of Gossip Girl have been dreaming of this moment for a long time as well . And the Upper East Side drama didn 't disappoint . In fact , it was easy the best episode this season . " Steve Marsi from TV Fanatic gave the episode a four stars rating out of five writing , " In what has come to be sort of a make @-@ or @-@ break episode , Gossip Girl had a golden opportunity to redeem its recent mediocrity and prove itself worthy of all the passion and loyalty we 've invested over the years . While there were some gaping plot holes and disappointments tonight - especially depending on your couple of choice - you can 't find fault with the pure number of twists , especially during the last five minutes . " Marsi appreciated the references to Gossip Girl 's early days , " The promised homages to the old days were there in spades , and incorporated in ways that actually fit the present @-@ day story . Case in point : A memorable Gossip Girl quote ( " I love you , always have , always will " ) which was spoken to a very different character long ago . Also , the cover of " Young Folks " at the onset was fun . " The Huffington Post 's Laura Prudom also found the episode had honored Gossip Girl 's past , " For the first time in recent memory , this week 's milestone episode of Gossip Girl finally recaptured the confident plotting and razor sharp shocks of its first two seasons . " She also praised the fact Georgina is Gossip Girl which was totally unexpected . The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " In classic Gossip Girl fashion , the 100th episode was full of witty one @-@ liners , many of them from the mouth of Georgina Sparks and one in honor of The Princess Bride ; paid homage to the pilot ; and featured several head @-@ turning moments . " Ology gave the episode a 9 / 10 grade . 
 Digital Spy writer Catriona Wightman found the episode " completely absurd " but " brillantly entertaining . " Morgan Glennon of BuddyTV wrote , " Despite how ridiculous it was seeing character after character after character try to save Blair from her own stupid decisions , Gossip Girl really knows how to do big events . After 100 episodes , the show understood that it needed to go big to top off the royal wedding storyline . So the wedding , and attendant quest to stop it , was as big , dramatic and heartfelt as Gossip Girl at its best . " Glennon also conceded about the Gossip Girl reveal , the show can still pull out those OMG moments . Glennon found Georgina " amazing " in the episode , " you can 't even take your eyes off her because she 's so great in every scene . " However , The Atlantic Wire thought the writers " should have waited until the last @-@ ever episode to do the unveiling " of Gossip Girl and questioned , " isn 't that indicative of the show 's greater failings over these past four and a half years ? That constant need of this once @-@ promising show to tip its hand too soon ? " and concluded " we think the time has finally come to remove Gossip Girl from our bookmarks . " 
 = Patrick Star = 
 Patrick Star is a fictional character in the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . He is voiced by actor Bill Fagerbakke , who also voices numerous other characters on the show . Created and designed by marine biologist and cartoonist Stephen Hillenburg , the series creator , Patrick first appeared on television in the show 's pilot episode " Help Wanted " on May 1 , 1999 . 
 Depicted as an overweight , dimwitted pink starfish , Patrick lives under a rock in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom next door to Squidward Tentacles ' moai . His most significant character trait is his lack of common sense , which sometimes leads him and his best friend , main character SpongeBob SquarePants , into trouble . Patrick is unemployed and a self @-@ proclaimed expert in the " art of doing nothing " . 
 The character has received positive reactions from critics and fans alike ; however , he has been involved in a public controversy that centered on speculation over his relationship with SpongeBob . Patrick has been included in various SpongeBob SquarePants @-@ related merchandise , including trading cards , video games , plush toys , and comic books . He appears in the 2004 full @-@ length feature film The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie and in its 2015 sequel . 
 = = Role in SpongeBob SquarePants = = 
 Patrick is the ignorant but humorous best friend of main character SpongeBob SquarePants . He is portrayed as being an overweight , dimwitted , pink starfish residing in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . Patrick has been shown to make many ludicrous mistakes ; despite this , he has occasionally been portrayed as a savant , with articulate observance to certain subjects in specific detail . However , he always reverts quickly back to his usual , unintelligent self after displaying a moment of wisdom . He holds no form of occupation except for several very brief stints working at the Krusty Krab and at the Chum Bucket in a variety of positions , and mostly spends his time either clowning around with SpongeBob , catching jellyfish with him , or lounging beneath the rock under which he resides . 
 At home , Patrick is typically depicted either sleeping , watching TV , or engaged in the " art of doing nothing " , at which he is an expert . All the furnishings in the space under his rock are made of sand , and Patrick can simply opt to quickly build up furniture as needed ; even so , his living space is sparse and contains only the barest essentials . Aside from his best friend SpongeBob , who is often impressed by Patrick 's capacity to come up with naïve yet genius plans or solutions , Patrick frequently irritates those around him and is confounded by the simplest of questions or subjects . The characters of Mr. Krabs and Squidward have no patience for Patrick 's stupidity , and the former does not pay him much regard ; Clancy Brown , who provides Mr. Krabs ' voice , said , " The only person that he [ Mr. Krabs ] doesn 't hire is Patrick because Patrick is just too stupid to work for nothing . " Sandy often gets annoyed by Patrick , but still sees him as a friend . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean and began developing his artistic abilities as a child . During college , he majored in marine biology and minored in art . He planned to return to college eventually to pursue a master 's degree in art . After graduating in 1984 , he joined the Ocean Institute , an organization dedicated to educating the public about marine science and maritime history . While he was there , he initially had the idea that would lead to the creation of SpongeBob SquarePants : a comic book titled The Intertidal Zone . In 1987 , Hillenburg left the institute to pursue a career in animation . 
 A few years after studying experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts , Hillenburg met Joe Murray , creator of the Nickelodeon series Rocko 's Modern Life , at an animation festival , and was offered a job as a director of the show . Martin Olson , one of the writers for Rocko 's Modern Life , read The Intertidal Zone and encouraged Hillenburg to create a television series with a similar concept . At that point , Hillenburg had not even considered creating his own series . However , he realized that if he ever did , this would be the best approach . Production on Rocko 's Modern Life ended in 1996 . Shortly afterwards , Hillenburg began working on SpongeBob SquarePants . 
 For the show 's characters , Hillenburg started to draw and used character designs from his comic book — including starfish , crab , and sponge . He described Patrick as " probably the dumbest guy in town " . The character was conceived as a starfish to embody the animal 's nature ; according to Hillenburg , starfish look " dumb and slow " , but they are " very active and aggressive " in reality , like Patrick . Hillenburg incorporated character comedy rather than topical humor on the show to emphasize " things that are more about humorous situations and about characters and their flaws . " He designed Patrick and SpongeBob as such because " they 're whipping themselves up into situations — that 's always where the humor comes from . The rule is : Follow the innocence and avoid topical [ humor ] . " 
 In spite of being depicted as having a good temperament or state of mind , Patrick has been shown in some episodes to have a tantrum . Patrick 's emotional outbreak was originally written only for the first season episode " Valentine 's Day " , where SpongeBob and Sandy try to give Patrick a Valentine 's Day gift , and " was supposed to be a one @-@ time thing " . However , according to episode writer Jay Lender , " when that show came back it felt so right that his dark side started popping up everywhere . You can plan ahead all you want , but the characters eventually tell you who they are . " 
 Every main character in the show has its own unique footstep sound . The sound of Patrick 's footsteps is recorded by the show 's Foley crew , with a Foley talent wearing a slip @-@ on shoe . Jeff Hutchins , show 's sound designer said , " [ Going ] barefoot makes it tough to have much presence , so we decided that Patrick would be performed with shoes on . " 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Patrick 's voice is provided by actor Bill Fagerbakke , who also does the voices of numerous other characters on SpongeBob SquarePants . While creating the show and writing its pilot episode in 1997 , Hillenburg and Derek Drymon , the show 's then @-@ creative director , were also conducting auditions to find voices for the show 's characters . Fagerbakke auditioned for the role of Patrick after Tom Kenny , SpongeBob 's voice actor , had been cast . Fagerbakke said , " Steve is such a lovely guy , and I had absolutely no feeling for the material whatsoever . " He described his experience in the audition , saying " I was just going in for another audition , and I had no idea what was in store there in terms of the remarkable visual wit and really the kind of endearing child @-@ like humanity in the show . I couldn 't pick that up from the audition material at all . I was just kind of perfunctorially trying to give the guy what he wanted . " 
 Steve Hillenburg actually played for me a portion of Tom [ Kenny ] ' s performance as the character , and they were looking for a counterpoint . And I do the big dumb stuff . That 's my deal ... that 's what I do [ sic ] . It was such a neat experience . Typically , when you audition for any kind of voiceover stuff , you 're in a studio , but as I remember it , this was , like , in a weird conference room somewhere , and he had one of those little old cassette decks that ’ s about half the size of a shoebox , and there was something so endearing about it . 
 Fagerbakke referred Patrick as " <unk> " ( a reference to his role as Michael " Dauber " <unk> on the 1990s sitcom Coach ) in the first few years of working on the show . Patrick is " enormously entertaining to portray " because , according to Fagerbakke , " when I 'm performing Patrick , there are many secrets that I could never divulge " . Fagerbakke 's approach in voicing Patrick is " much the same way I would do [ to ] any kind of character . " " I 'm always looking for opportunities to explore that freewheeling imagination and insanity of children . To be able to plug in to that and let that carry you in to a performance is such a gas , I have so much fun with that . I love kids ; I raised two girls and I love being a parent , " he said . The cast members record as a whole cast . Fagerbakke says that the situation improves his performance as a voice actor because " there is something remarkable that happens when people are working together that is unique to that . " Fagerbakke modeled his performance whenever Patrick is angry after that of American actress Shelley Winters . 
 Fagerbakke has been compared to Patrick 's character , which he concurs with . Kenny said that " Bill [ Fagerbakke ] is a big guy . The world is almost too small for him . He 's a force of nature , like Patrick . " Writer Jay Lender said , describing Fagerbakke in the recording studio , " Bill Fagerbakke is the most thoughtful performer I 've ever seen in the booth — he was always asking questions and really trying to get into the mindset , such as it is , of Patrick . " Writer Kent Osborne said of Fagerbakke , " He is this big guy , and he plays Patrick so well . He 's just this big guy , and he <unk> around . " Fagerbakke said , " I 'm clumsy . I 'm goofy . I make mistakes all the time " and agreed that " I guess I 'm a lot of Patrick . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical reception for the character from both professionals and fans has been positive . In his DVD review for DVD Verdict , Bill Treadway called Patrick " the village idiot , who sometimes gives SpongeBob some really bad advice , but he is a loyal friend and that 's something we don 't see much of these days . " He said , " Patrick is the definition of stupid and his antics will have you laughing out loud . " In a review published in 2007 , Peter Keepnews of The New York Times said , " Patrick is a popular character , and the new episodes illustrate why : He is unfailingly enthusiastic , touchingly loyal and absolutely undeterred by his intellectual limitations . <unk> voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , he is not just an endearing comic creation but a role model for idiots everywhere . " 
 Nancy Basile of About.com called Patrick " one of the silliest characters on SpongeBob SquarePants " . In her " SpongeBob and Friends : Patrick SquarePants " , a Patrick @-@ themed SpongeBob SquarePants home video release , DVD review , Basile said , " The episodes included [ ... ] are hilarious . They 're not only some of Patrick 's best episodes , but also some of the show 's classic episodes . " She ranked " That 's No Lady " as Patrick 's best episode and said , " I was remiss not to include this episode in my top ten [ SpongeBob SquarePants episodes ] list . " She cited her favorite scene from the episode , where " Patrick can 't read the number on Mr. Krabs ' table , saying , ' Ford knee . ' Mr. Krabs replies , ' That 's a seven , Patricia . ' " The Kids ' Choice Awards , an annual awards show presented by Nickelodeon , added several new categories , including " Favorite Animated Animal Sidekick " , in its 2014 ceremony . Patrick received the Kids ' Choice Award Blimp for the category , winning to Perry the Platypus ( Phineas and Ferb ) , Sparky ( The Fairly OddParents ) and <unk> ( Gravity Falls ) . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 In 2002 , the show 's popularity among the gay community grew , and it was reported that they had embraced the show , according to BBC Online . The Wall Street Journal also raised questions about SpongeBob and Patrick in a recent article that pointed out the show 's popularity in the gay community . Tom Kenny , in response to the article , said " [ I ] felt the insinuation was a stretch . " " I had heard that gay viewers enjoy the show in the same way that lots of people — college students , parents and children — like the show [ ... ] I thought it was rather silly to hang an entire article on that . I don 't think it 's a case of it being a gay @-@ friendly show — It 's a human @-@ being @-@ friendly show . They 're all welcome , " Kenny said . 
 In 2005 , a promotional video that involves SpongeBob promoting diversity and tolerance was criticized by two U.S. Christian evangelical groups , most notably Focus on the Family , because they saw the character was being used as an advocate for homosexuality though the video contained " no reference to sex , sexual lifestyle or sexual identity . " The incident led to questions as to whether or not SpongeBob , his best friend Patrick , and the rest of the series ' characters are homosexual characters . After this speculation and comments , Hillenburg repeated his assertion that sexual preference was never considered during the creation of the show . He clarified the issue and said " We never intended them to be gay . I consider them to be almost asexual . We 're just trying to be funny and this has got nothing to do with the show . " Tom Kenny and other production members were shocked and surprised that such an issue had arisen . Derek Drymon , show 's creative director , said , " If SpongeBob holds hands with Patrick it 's because he 's his best friend and he loves him . I think the whole thing is a part of a larger agenda to stigmatize gay people . " Focus on the Family founder James Dobson later stated that his comments were taken out of context and that his original complaints were not with SpongeBob or any of the characters in the video but with the organization that sponsored the video , the We Are Family Foundation . Dobson noted that the foundation had posted pro @-@ homosexual material on its website , but later removed it . 
 Queer theorist Jeffrey P. Dennis , author of the journal article " The Same Thing We Do Every Night : Signifying Same @-@ Sex Desire in Television Cartoons , " argued that SpongeBob and Sandy are not romantically in love , while adding that he believed that SpongeBob and Patrick " are paired with arguably erotic intensity . " Dennis noted the two are " not consistently coded as romantic partners , " since they live in separate residences , and have distinct groups of friends , but claimed that in the series , " the possibility of same @-@ sex desire is never excluded . " Martin Goodman of Animation World Magazine described Dennis 's comments regarding SpongeBob and Patrick as " interesting . " 
 = = In other media = = 
 Patrick has appeared in other SpongeBob SquarePants @-@ related media , including board games , comic books , keychains , plush toys , trading cards and video games . Patrick has a major role in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , the first feature @-@ length film adaptation of the show . The film was released on November 19 , 2004 and has been a financial success , grossing over $ 140 million worldwide . He has also appeared in the film 's sequel , which was released in theaters on February 6 , 2015 . In the second film , Patrick ( along with SpongeBob , Squidward , Mr. Krabs , and Plankton ) is rendered in 3D ( using CGI ) in the live action scenes . The group becomes an " Avengers @-@ type team " ; Patrick transforms to Mr. <unk> . 
 In 2009 , actor John Fricker portrayed Patrick in the musical adaptation of the third season episode " The Sponge Who Could Fly " . Fricker and the musical itself were well received by most critics . Gordon Barr and Roger Domeneghetti of the Evening Chronicle described the musical as " a silly riot of colour [ ... ] as you 'd have to expect from an adaptation of a cartoon TV show " , while Viv Hardwick of The Northern Echo said that Fricker and Martin Johnston ( Mr. Krabs ) " win the biggest costume contest . " A critic from the Chichester Observer wrote , " John Fricker is in his element as the simple but lovable Patrick Star " . 
 The character of Patrick has become viral in the Internet in the forms of memes or image macros . A still from The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , which displays Patrick in a drop @-@ jawed look , inspired YouTube user to create a presentation of Patrick 's expression using a number of different filters . Following this , a YouTube user uploaded another video featuring Patrick reacting to Canadian singer Justin Bieber 's 2010 single , " Baby " . The meme called " Surprised Patrick " started to disseminate , with one of the first images was posted to Reddit by <unk> , and then reblogged onto I Can Has <unk> ? ' s <unk> . Comedy websites — including <unk> , CollegeHumor , Mashable and Smosh — have published their own " Best of " lists and compilations , covering the " Surprised Patrick " meme 's popularity . Mashable 's Nena Prakash said , " For years , Patrick Star helped hold down Bikini Bottom while SpongeBob was flippin ' burgers at [ t ] he Krusty Krab . But now it 's time for Patrick to come out from under that rock and take a seat upon his royal meme throne , because he 's an Internet star ( fish ) . " Another popular meme based on the character is the " Push It Somewhere Else Patrick " image macro , which was taken from the second season episode " Sandy , SpongeBob , and the Worm " . 
 = Por Amarte Así = 
 " Por Amarte Así " ( English : " Loving You This Way " ) is a song written by Alejandro Montalbán and Eduardo Reyes and performed by Mexican recording artist Cristian Castro . It was produced by Kike Santander and released in 2000 as the fourth single from his sixth studio album Mi Vida Sin Tu Amor ( 1999 ) . Lyrically , the song is about a man who promises to keep loving his lover even though she is gone . In the United States , it peaked at number three and two on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts and received a Billboard Latin Music nomination for Pop Track of the Year . " Por Amarte Así " was the fifth best @-@ performing Latin single of 2001 in the United States . 
 The song has been recorded by several artists including Jay Lozada , <unk> y Su Punto , Alacranes Musical , and Ana Isabelle . Lozada recorded the song in salsa for his eponymous debut album which peaked at number two on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . Alacranes Musical 's version peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs as well as number one on the Billboard Regional Mexican Songs and was nominated a Billboard Latin Music Award for Regional Mexican Airplay of the Year by a Male Group . Isabelle 's cover features Castro as a duet artist which was well received by music critics and peaked at number 14 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . Montalbán and Reyes received three American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Latin Awards for Castro , Lozada , and Alacranes Musical 's recording of " Por Amarte Así " . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Por Amarte Así " is a song written by Alejandro Montalbán and Eduardo Reyes and performed by Mexican recording artist Cristian Castro for his sixth studio album Mi Vida Sin Tu Amor ( 1999 ) . Produced by Colombian musician Kike Santander , it was released as the fourth and final single from the album . In the song , the protagonist tells his lover he will keep loving her no matter how long she has been gone . " Por Amarte Así " has been included on his greatest albums Grandes Hits ( 2002 ) and Nunca Voy a Olvidarte ... Los Exitos ( 2005 ) . In addition , a remixed version by DJ Greco was included on Castro 's album Remixes ( 2000 ) . In 2012 , Castro recorded a live version of " Por Amarte Así " with new arrangements by Matt Rolling and produced <unk> <unk> . This version was included on his second live album En Primera Fila : Día 2 in 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the United States , " Por Amarte Así " debuted at number 34 at the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart on the week of August 5 , 2000 . It climbed on the top ten six weeks later and peaked at number three on the week of November 11 , 2000 In the same week , the song peaked at number two on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart with the number one position held off by Chayanne 's song " Yo Te Amo " . " Por Amarte Así " ended 2001 as the fifth best @-@ performing Latin single of the year in the United States as well as the second best @-@ performing Latin pop single in the country after " <unk> Muy Fuerte " by Juan Gabriel . 
 At the 2001 Billboard Latin Music Awards , " Por Amarte Así " was nominated Pop Track of the Year but lost to " A Puro Dolor " by Son by Four . Montalbán and Reyes received an American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Latin Award on the Pop / Ballad category for their compositions of the song . It was recognized by the Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems at the June 2003 SPIN Awards for playing over 50 @,@ 000 spins . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Ana Isabelle version = = 
 In 2009 , Puerto Rican singer Ana Isabelle covered " Por Amarte Así " on her second studio album , Mi Sueño ( 2010 ) . It was released on November 29 , 2009 after she won the reality show ¡ Viva el Sueño ! . Isabelle 's version features Cristian Castro as a duet . Isabelle 's version peaked at number fourteen and six on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts respectively . On the review of the album , David Jeffries of Allmusic said that Isabelle performed " Por Amarte Así " " convincingly " . Ayala Ben @-@ Yehuda of Billboard magazine called her rendition of the song a " well @-@ chosen ballad single " . 
 A music video for the song was filmed in Miami and directed by Pablo Croce which features Isabelle and Castro performing inside a building where the two attempt to visit each other 's room . Isabelle also recorded " Por Amarte Así " in bachata which features American group 24 Horas as well as an urban remix featuring J @-@ King and <unk> . Isabelle and Castro performed the song live during the 22nd Annual Lo Nuestro Award ceremony in 2010 after the latter sang " Ten Valor " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = = Weekly charts = = = = 
 = = Other cover versions = = 
 In 2000 , Puerto Rican musician Jay Lozada recorded a cover of " Por Amarte Así " in salsa for his eponymous debut album which was produced by Eddy Marrero . His version peaked at number thirty @-@ five on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and number two on the Tropical Songs charts respectively . A music video for his rendition was filmed which shows scenes of Lozada and woman in various parts of Miami . The success of Lozada 's cover led to him receiving a nomination for Tropical New Artist at the 14th Annual Lo Nuestro Award ceremony in 2002 but lost to Huey Dunbar . Montalbán and Reyes were awarded an ASCAP Latin music award on the Salsa category for Lozada 's cover in 2002 . In 2001 , Dominican music group <unk> y Su Punto covered the song in merengue for their second studio album <unk> ( 2001 ) . Their version peaked at number 35 on the Tropical Songs chart . 
 Six years later , American <unk> band Alacranes Musical recorded a rendition of " Por Amarte Así " on their studio album Ahora y Siempre ( 2007 ) . Their cover peaked at number two at the Hot Latin Songs chart and became their first number @-@ one song on the Billboard Regional Mexican Songs chart . An editor for Allmusic described as one of that songs in the album " the group 's festive sound is showcased on fast @-@ paced songs of romance " . The music video shows the group performing at a stage with various scenes involving a woman shot in gray scale until the end of the video . It received a nomination for Regional Mexican Airplay of the Year by a Male Group at the 2008 Billboard Latin Music Awards which went to La <unk> Banda El Limón for their song " De Ti <unk> " . Montalbán and Reyes won an ASCAP Latin Music Award on the Regional Mexican field for Alacranes Musical 's version . It was included on their greatest hits album La Historia de Los Exitos ( 2009 ) and Por Siempre Alacranes ( 2010 ) . A live version of the song was recorded on their album Live – En Vivo Desde Mexico ( 2009 ) . 
 = 1968 Thule Air Base B @-@ 52 crash = 
 On 21 January 1968 , an aircraft accident ( sometimes known as the Thule affair or Thule accident ( / <unk> / ) ; Danish : <unk> ) involving a United States Air Force ( USAF ) B @-@ 52 bomber occurred near Thule Air Base in the Danish territory of Greenland . The aircraft was carrying four hydrogen bombs on a Cold War " Chrome Dome " alert mission over Baffin Bay when a cabin fire forced the crew to abandon the aircraft before they could carry out an emergency landing at Thule Air Base . Six crew members ejected safely , but one who did not have an ejection seat was killed while trying to bail out . The bomber crashed onto sea ice in North Star Bay , Greenland , causing the conventional explosives aboard to detonate and the nuclear payload to rupture and disperse , which resulted in radioactive contamination . 
 The United States and Denmark launched an intensive clean @-@ up and recovery operation , but the secondary stage of one of the nuclear weapons could not be accounted for after the operation completed . USAF Strategic Air Command " Chrome Dome " operations were discontinued immediately after the accident , which highlighted the safety and political risks of the missions . Safety procedures were reviewed and more stable explosives were developed for use in nuclear weapons . 
 In 1995 , a political scandal resulted in Denmark after a report revealed the government had given tacit permission for nuclear weapons to be located in Greenland , in contravention of Denmark 's 1957 nuclear @-@ free zone policy . Workers involved in the clean @-@ up program have been campaigning for compensation for radiation @-@ related illnesses they experienced in the years after the accident . 
 = = Thule Monitor Mission = = 
 In 1960 , the USAF Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) began Operation Chrome Dome , a Cold War airborne alert program devised by General Thomas S. Power to fly nuclear @-@ armed B @-@ 52 Stratofortresses to the borders of the Soviet Union . The flights were scheduled to ensure that twelve bombers were aloft at all times . These bombers gave SAC offensive capability in the event of a Soviet first strike , and provided a significant Cold War nuclear deterrent . Beginning in 1961 , B @-@ 52 bombers also flew secret " Hard Head " missions ( or " Thule Monitor Missions " ) over Thule Air Base with the purpose of maintaining visual surveillance of the base 's strategically important Ballistic Missile Early Warning System ( BMEWS ) , which provided early warning of Soviet missile launches . If the communication link between North American Aerospace Defense Command and the base was severed , the aircraft crew could determine if the interruption resulted from an attack or a technical failure . The monitoring mission started when the designated aircraft reached a waypoint at 75 ° 0 ′ N 67 ° 30 ′ W in Baffin Bay and entered a figure @-@ eight holding pattern above the air base at an altitude of 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 In 1966 , United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara proposed cutting " Chrome Dome " flights because the BMEWS system was fully operational , the bombers had been made redundant by missiles , and $ 123 million ( $ 897 million as of 2016 ) could be saved . SAC and the Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed the plan , so a compromise was reached whereby a smaller force of four bombers would be on alert each day . Despite the reduced program and the risks highlighted by the 1966 Palomares B @-@ 52 crash , SAC continued to dedicate one of the aircraft to monitoring Thule Air Base . This assignment was without the knowledge of civilian authorities in the United States , who SAC determined did not have the " need to know " about specific operational points . 
 = = Broken Arrow = = 
 On 21 January 1968 , a B @-@ 52G Stratofortress , serial number 58 @-@ <unk> , with the callsign " <unk> 28 " from the 380th Strategic Bomb Wing at Plattsburgh Air Force Base , New York was assigned the " Hard Head " mission over Thule and nearby Baffin Bay . The bomber crew consisted of five regular crew members , including Captain John Haug , the aircraft commander . Also aboard were a substitute navigator ( Captain Curtis R. Criss ) and a mandatory third pilot ( Major Alfred D 'Mario ) . 
 Before take @-@ off , D 'Mario placed three cloth @-@ covered foam cushions on top of a heating vent under the instructor navigator 's seat in the aft section of the lower deck . Shortly after take @-@ off , another cushion was placed under the seat . The flight was uneventful until the scheduled mid @-@ air refueling from a KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker , which had to be conducted manually because of an error with the B @-@ 52G 's autopilot . About one hour after refueling , while the aircraft was circling above its designated area , Captain Haug directed co @-@ pilot <unk> to take his rest period . His seat was taken by the spare pilot , D 'Mario . The crew was uncomfortable because of the cold , although the heater 's <unk> was turned up , so D 'Mario opened an engine bleed valve to draw additional hot air into the heater from the engine manifold . Because of a heater malfunction , the air barely cooled as it traveled from the engine manifold to the cabin 's heating ducts . During the next half @-@ hour , the cabin 's temperature became uncomfortably hot , and the stowed cushions ignited . After one crew member reported smelling burning rubber , they looked for a fire . The navigator searched the lower compartment twice before discovering the fire behind a metal box . He attempted to fight it with two fire extinguishers , but could not put it out . 
 At 15 : 22 EST , about six hours into the flight and 90 miles ( 140 km ) south of Thule Air Base , Haug declared an emergency . He told Thule air traffic control that he had a fire on board and requested permission to perform an emergency landing at the air base . Within five minutes , the aircraft 's fire extinguishers were depleted , electrical power was lost and smoke filled the cockpit to the point that the pilots could not read their instruments . As the situation worsened , the captain realized he would not be able to land the aircraft and told the crew to prepare to abandon it . They awaited word from D 'Mario that they were over land , and when he confirmed that the aircraft was directly over the lights of Thule Air Base , the four crewmen ejected , followed shortly thereafter by Haug and D 'Mario . The co @-@ pilot , Leonard <unk> , who had given up his ejection seat when the spare pilot took over from him , sustained fatal head injuries when he attempted to bail out through one of the lower hatches . 
 The pilotless aircraft initially continued north , then turned left through 180 ° and crashed onto sea ice in North Star Bay at a relatively shallow angle of 20 degrees — about 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) west of Thule Air Base — at 15 : 39 EST . The conventional high explosive ( HE ) components of four 1 @.@ 1 megaton <unk> model hydrogen bombs detonated on impact , spreading radioactive material over a large area in a manner similar to a dirty bomb . " Weak links " in the weapon design ensured that a nuclear explosion was not triggered . The extreme heat generated by the burning of 225 @,@ 000 pounds ( 102 t ) of jet fuel during the five to six hours after the crash melted the ice sheet , causing wreckage and munitions to sink to the ocean floor . 
 Haug and D 'Mario parachuted onto the grounds of the air base and made contact with the base commander within ten minutes of each other . They informed him that at least six crew ejected successfully and the aircraft was carrying four nuclear weapons . Off @-@ duty staff were mustered to conduct search and rescue operations for the remaining crew members . Owing to the extreme weather conditions , Arctic darkness , and unnavigable ice , the base relied largely on the Thule representative of the Royal Greenland Trade Department , Ministry of Greenland , Jens <unk> , to raise and mount the search using native dog sled teams . Three of the survivors landed within 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of the base and were rescued within two hours . For his initial actions and later services , <unk> received the Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal on 26 February 1968 at the hands of the U.S. Ambassador , K.E. White . Captain Criss , who was first to eject , landed 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from the base — he remained lost on an ice floe for 21 hours and suffered hypothermia in the − 23 ° F ( − 31 ° C ) temperatures , but he survived by wrapping himself in his parachute . 
 An aerial survey of the crash site immediately afterwards showed only six engines , a tire and small items of debris on the blackened surface of the ice . The accident was designated a " Broken Arrow " — a United States military term that describes an accident involving a nuclear weapon but which does not present a risk of war . 
 = = Project Crested Ice = = 
 The resulting explosion and fire destroyed many of the components that the crash scattered widely in a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) by 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) area . Parts of the bomb bay were found 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the impact area , indicating the aircraft started to break up before impact . The ice was disrupted at the point of impact , temporarily exposing an area of seawater approximately 160 feet ( 50 m ) in diameter ; ice floes in the area were scattered , upturned and displaced . South of the impact area , a 400 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) by 2 @,@ 200 @-@ foot ( 670 m ) blackened patch was visible where fuel from the aircraft had burned — this area was highly contaminated with JP @-@ 4 aviation fuel and radioactive elements that included plutonium , uranium , americium and tritium . Plutonium levels as high as 380 mg / m2 were registered in the area . 
 American and Danish officials immediately launched " Project Crested Ice " ( informally known as " Dr. <unk> " ) , a clean @-@ up operation to remove the debris and contain environmental damage . Despite the cold , dark Arctic winter , there was considerable pressure to complete the clean @-@ up operation before the sea ice melted in the spring and deposited further contaminants into the sea . 
 Weather conditions at the site were extreme ; the average temperature was − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) , at times dropping to − 76 ° F ( − 60 ° C ) . These temperatures were accompanied by winds of up to 89 miles per hour ( 40 m / s ) . Equipment suffered high failure rates and batteries worked for shorter periods in the cold ; operators modified their scientific instruments to allow the battery packs to be carried under their coats to extend the batteries ' lifespan . The operation was conducted in arctic darkness until 14 February , when sunlight gradually began appearing . 
 A base camp ( named " Camp Hunziker " after Richard Overton Hunziker , the USAF general in charge of the operation ) was created at the crash site ; it included a heliport , igloos , generators and communications facilities . A " zero line " delineating the 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) by 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) area in which alpha particle contamination could be measured was established by 25 January , four days after the crash . The line was subsequently used to control decontamination of personnel and vehicles . An ice road was constructed to Thule from the site . This was followed by a second , more direct , road so the ice on the first road was not fatigued by overuse . The camp later included a large prefabricated building , two ski @-@ mounted buildings , several huts , a decontamination trailer and a latrine . These facilities allowed for 24 @-@ hour operations at the crash site . 
 The USAF worked with Danish nuclear scientists to consider the clean @-@ up options . The spilt fuel in the blackened area carried the weapons material very well , raising concerns that when the ice melted in the summer , the radioactive fuel would float on the sea and subsequently contaminate the shore — the Danes thus insisted on the removal of the blackened area to avoid this possibility . The Danes also requested that the nuclear material not be left in Greenland after the cleanup operation was complete , therefore requiring General Hunziker to remove the contaminated ice and wreckage to the United States for disposal . USAF personnel used graders to collect the contaminated snow and ice , which was loaded into wooden boxes at the crash site . The boxes were moved to a holding area near Thule Air Base known as the " Tank Farm " . There , contaminated material was loaded into steel tanks prior to being loaded onto ships . Debris from the weapons was sent to the Pantex plant in Texas for evaluation , and the tanks were shipped to Savannah River in South Carolina . According to General Hunziker , 93 % of the contaminated material was successfully removed from the accident site . 
 In 1987 – 88 and again in 2000 , reports surfaced in the Danish press that one of the bombs had not been recovered . SAC stated at the time of the accident that all four bombs were destroyed . In 2008 , the BBC published an article that was based on its examination of partly declassified documents obtained some years earlier via the United States Freedom of Information Act . The documents appeared to confirm that within weeks of the accident , investigators realized only three of the weapons could be accounted for . One of the declassified documents — dated to January 1968 — details a blackened section of ice which had <unk> with shroud lines from a weapon parachute : " <unk> something melted through the ice such as burning primary or secondary . " A July 1968 report states , " An analysis by the AEC of the recovered secondary components indicates recovery of 85 % of the uranium and 94 % , by weight , of three secondaries . No parts of the fourth secondary have been identified . " 
 The BBC tracked down several officials involved in the accident 's aftermath . One was William H. Chambers , a former nuclear weapons designer at the Los Alamos National Laboratory . Chambers headed a team dealing with nuclear accidents , including the Thule crash . He explained the logic behind the decision to abandon the search : " There was disappointment in what you might call a failure to return all of the components ... it would be very difficult for anyone else to recover classified pieces if we couldn 't find them . " 
 In August 1968 , the United States military sent a Star III mini @-@ submarine to the base to look for weapon debris , especially the uranium @-@ 235 fissile core of a secondary . A much bigger operation at Palomares off the coast of Spain two years earlier led to the successful recovery of a lost nuclear weapon from the Mediterranean Sea ; the <unk> bomb was lost for 80 days after a mid @-@ air collision between a B @-@ 52 on a " Chrome Dome " mission and its refueling KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker . Christensen asserts that the purpose of the underwater search at Thule was obvious to the Danish authorities , contrary to other reports that suggested its true purpose had been hidden from them . At lower levels , however , the dives were surrounded by some confidentiality . One document from July 1968 reads , " Fact that this operation includes search for object or missing weapon part is to be treated as Confidential <unk> " , meaning it was not to be disclosed to non @-@ US nationals . It continues , " For discussion with Danes , this operation should be referred to as a survey , repeat survey of bottom under impact point . " Further indications of the search are apparent in a September 1968 interim report by the United States Atomic Energy Commission , which stated , " It was further speculated that the missing < redacted > , in view of its ballistic characteristics , may have come to rest beyond the observed concentration of heavy debris . " This discussion was a reference to the unsuccessful search for the uranium cylinder of one of the secondaries . 
 The underwater search was beset by technical problems and eventually abandoned . Diagrams and notes included in the declassified documents make clear it was not possible to search the entire area where crash debris had spread . Four bomb reservoirs , one nearly intact secondary , and parts equaling two secondaries were recovered on the sea ice ; parts equaling one secondary were not accounted for . The search also revealed a weapon cable fairing , polar cap , and a one @-@ foot by three @-@ foot section of a warhead 's ballistic case . 
 The United States Air Force monitored airborne contamination through nasal swabs of onsite personnel . Of the 9 @,@ 837 nasal swabs taken , 335 samples had detectable levels of alpha particle activity , although none was above acceptable levels . <unk> was also performed , but none of the 756 samples displayed any detectable level of plutonium . 
 By the time the operation concluded , 700 specialized personnel from both countries and more than 70 United States government agencies had worked for nine months to clean up the site , often without adequate protective clothing or decontamination measures . In total , more than 550 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 100 m3 ) of contaminated liquid — along with thirty tanks of miscellaneous material , some of it contaminated — was collected at the Tank Farm . Project Crested Ice ended on 13 September 1968 when the last tank was loaded onto a ship bound for the United States . The operation is estimated to have cost $ 9 @.@ 4 million ( $ 64 million as of 2016 ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Operation Chrome Dome = = = 
 The accident caused controversy at the time and in the years since . It highlighted the risks Thule Air Base posed to Greenlanders from nuclear accidents and potential superpower conflicts . The accident , which occurred two years after the Palomares crash , signaled the immediate end of the airborne alert program , which had become untenable because of the political and operational risks involved . Scott Sagan , a political science academic and anti @-@ nuclear writer , postulated that if the <unk> 28 monitoring aircraft had crashed into the BMEWS early warning array instead of Baffin Bay , it would have presented NORAD with a scenario ( radio link to Hard Head aircraft and BMEWS both dead , no nuclear detonation detected ) that also matched that of a surprise conventional missile attack on Thule , leaving the unreliable submarine telecommunications cable between Thule and the US mainland as the only source of information to the contrary . This risk was apparently also recognized by US planners , as the cable was replaced with a more reliable satellite link in 1974 . 
 According to Greenpeace , the United States and USSR were concerned enough by accidents such as the 1961 Goldsboro B @-@ 52 crash , the 1966 Palomares B @-@ 52 crash and the Thule accident that they agreed to take measures to ensure that a future nuclear accident would not lead the other party to conclude incorrectly that a first strike was under way . Consequently , on 30 September 1971 , the two superpowers signed the " Agreement on Measures to Reduce the Risk of Nuclear War " . Each party agreed to notify the other immediately in the event of an accidental , unauthorized or unexplained incident involving a nuclear weapon that could increase the risk of nuclear war . They agreed to use the Moscow – Washington hotline , which was upgraded at the same time , for any communications . 
 The decision not to restart on @-@ alert bomber missions was also a reflection of the strategic decline of manned nuclear weapon delivery in favor of unmanned delivery via ICBMs , which had already eclipsed the number of bombers in the United States by April 1964 . 
 = = = Weapon safety = = = 
 Following the Palomares and Thule accidents — the only cases where the conventional explosives of U.S. nuclear bombs accidentally detonated and dispersed nuclear materials — investigators concluded the high explosive ( HE ) used in nuclear weapons was not chemically stable enough to withstand the forces involved in an aircraft accident . They also determined that the electrical circuits of the weapons ' safety devices became unreliable in a fire and allowed connections to short circuit . The findings triggered research by scientists in the United States into safer conventional explosives and fireproof casings for nuclear weapons . 
 The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory developed the " Susan Test " , which uses a special projectile whose design simulates an aircraft accident by squeezing and nipping explosive material between its metal surfaces . The test projectile is fired under controlled conditions at a hard surface to measure the reactions and thresholds of different explosives to an impact . By 1979 , the Los Alamos National Laboratory developed a new , safer type of explosive , called insensitive high explosive ( <unk> ) , for use in U.S. nuclear weapons ; the physicist and nuclear weapons designer Ray Kidder speculated that the weapons in the Palomares and Thule accidents would probably not have detonated had <unk> been available at the time . 
 = = = " <unk> " political scandal = = = 
 Denmark 's nuclear @-@ free zone policy originated in 1957 , when the coalition government decided in the lead @-@ up to the Paris NATO summit not to stockpile nuclear weapons on its soil in peacetime . The presence of the bomber in Greenland airspace in 1968 therefore triggered public suspicions and accusations that the policy was being violated . The nature of the " Hard Head " missions was suppressed at the time of the accident ; the Danish and American governments instead claimed the bomber was not on a routine mission over Greenland and that it diverted there because of a one @-@ off emergency . United States documents declassified in the 1990s contradicted the Danish government 's position , and therefore resulted in a 1995 political scandal that the press dubbed " <unk> " . 
 The Danish parliament commissioned a report from the Danish Institute of International Affairs ( <unk> ) to determine the history of United States nuclear overflights of Greenland and the role of Thule Air Base in this regard . When the two @-@ volume work was published on 17 January 1997 it confirmed that the nuclear @-@ armed flights over Greenland were recurrent , but that the United States had acted in good faith . The report blamed Danish Prime Minister H. C. Hansen for intentionally introducing ambiguity in the Danish – U.S. security agreement : he was not asked about , nor did he mention , the official Danish nuclear policy when meeting with the United States ambassador in 1957 to discuss Thule Air Base . Hansen followed up the discussion with an infamous letter pointing out that the issue of " supplies of munition of a special kind " was not raised during the discussion , but that he had nothing further to add . In doing so , the report concluded , he tacitly gave the United States the go @-@ ahead to store nuclear weapons at Thule . 
 The report also confirmed that the United States stockpiled nuclear weapons in Greenland until 1965 , contradicting assurances by Danish foreign minister Niels <unk> Petersen that the weapons were in Greenland 's airspace , but never on the ground . The <unk> report also revealed details of Project <unk> , a hitherto secret United States Army plan to store up to 600 nuclear missiles under the Greenland ice cap . 
 = = = Workers ' compensation claims = = = 
 Danish workers involved in the clean @-@ up operation claimed long @-@ term health problems resulted from their exposure to the radiation . Although they did not work at Camp Hunziker , the Danes worked at the Tank Farm where the contaminated ice was collected , in the port where the contaminated debris was shipped from , and they also serviced the vehicles used in the clean @-@ up . It is also possible that they were exposed to radiation in the local atmosphere . Many of the workers surveyed in the years following Project Crested Ice reported health problems . A 1995 survey found 410 deaths by cancers out of a sample of 1 @,@ 500 workers . 
 In 1986 , Danish Prime Minister Poul Schlüter commissioned a radiological examination of the surviving workers . The Danish Institute for Clinical Epidemiology concluded 11 months later that cancer incidents were 40 percent higher in Project Crested Ice workers than in workers who had visited the base before and after the operation . The Institute of Cancer Epidemiology found a 50 percent higher cancer rate in the workers than in the general population , but could not conclude that radiation exposure was to blame . 
 In 1987 , almost 200 former cleanup workers took legal action against the United States . The action was unsuccessful , but resulted in the release of hundreds of classified documents . The documents revealed that USAF personnel involved in the clean @-@ up were not subsequently monitored for health problems , despite the likelihood of greater exposure to radiation than the Danes . The United States has since instigated regular examinations of its workers . In 1995 , the Danish government paid 1 @,@ 700 workers compensation of 50 @,@ 000 kroner each . 
 Danish workers ' health has not been regularly monitored , despite a European Court directive to the Danish government to begin examinations in the year 2000 , and a May 2007 European Parliament resolution instructing the same . In 2008 , the Association of Former Thule Workers took the case to the European courts . The petitioners claimed that Denmark 's failure to comply with the rulings led to delays in detecting their illnesses , resulting in worsened prognoses . The country joined the European Atomic Energy Community in 1973 , and is therefore not legally bound by the European treaty with respect to events in 1968 : " When the accident occurred , Denmark was not a Member State and could not therefore be considered as being bound by the Community legislation applicable at that time . The obligations of Denmark towards the workers and the population likely to be affected by the accident could only flow from national legislation . " 
 The Danish government rejected a link between the accident and long @-@ term health issues . Dr. Kaare <unk> of the Danish National Institute of Radiation Protection said , " We have very good registers for cancer incidents and cancer mortality and we have made a very thorough investigation . " The workers said the lack of proof was attributable to the lack of appropriate medical monitoring . As of November 2008 , the case has been unsuccessful . A 2011 report by the Danish National Board of Health found that " the total radiation dose for representative persons in the Thule area for plutonium contamination resulting from the 1968 Thule accident is lower than the recommended reference level , even under extreme conditions and situations . " 
 = = = Scientific studies = = = 
 Radioactive contamination occurred particularly in the marine environment . The fissile material in the weapons consisted mostly of uranium @-@ 235 , while the radioactive debris consists of at least two different " source terms " . Scientific monitoring of the site has been carried out periodically , with expeditions in 1968 , 1970 , 1974 , 1979 , 1984 , 1991 , 1997 and 2003 . 
 A 1997 international expedition of mainly Danish and Finnish scientists carried out a comprehensive sediment sampling program in North Star Bay . The main conclusions were : plutonium has not moved from the contaminated sediments into the surface water in the shelf sea ; the debris has been buried to a great depth in the sediment as a result of biological activity ; transfer of plutonium to benthic biota is low . Other research indicates that uranium is leaching from the contaminated particles faster than plutonium and americium . Research conducted in 2003 concluded , " Plutonium in the marine environment at Thule presents an insignificant risk to man . Most plutonium remains in the seabed under Bylot Sound far from man under relatively stable conditions and concentrations of plutonium in seawater and animals are low . However , the plutonium contamination of surface soil at <unk> could constitute a small risk to humans visiting the location if radioactive particles are resuspended in the air so that they might be inhaled . " In 2003 , 2007 and 2008 , the first samples were taken on land by the Risø National Laboratory — the findings were published in 2011 . 
 = = = Literature review of declassified documents = = = 
 The Danish foreign ministry reviewed the 348 documents that the BBC obtained in 2001 under the Freedom of Information Act . In January 2009 , foreign minister Per Stig Møller commissioned a study by the Danish Institute for International Studies ( <unk> ) to compare the 348 documents with 317 documents released by the Department of Energy in 1994 in order to determine if the 348 documents contained any new information about an intact nuclear weapon at Thule . In August 2009 , <unk> published its report , which contradicted the assertions of the BBC . The report concluded that there was no missing bomb , and that the American underwater operation was a search for the uranium @-@ 235 of the fissile core of a secondary . For the first time , the report was able to present an estimate of the amount of plutonium contained in the pits of the primaries . 
 = Ace Books = 
 Ace Books is an American specialty publisher of science fiction and fantasy books . The company was founded in New York City in 1952 by Aaron A. Wyn and began as a genre publisher of mysteries and westerns . It soon branched out into other genres , publishing its first science fiction ( sf ) title in 1953 . This was successful , and science fiction titles outnumbered both mysteries and westerns within a few years . Other genres also made an appearance , including nonfiction , gothic novels , media tie @-@ in novelizations , and romances . Ace became known for the tête @-@ bêche binding format used for many of its early books , although it did not originate the format . Most of the early titles were published in this " Ace Double " format , and Ace continued to issue books in varied genres , bound tête @-@ bêche , until 1973 . 
 Ace , along with Ballantine Books , was one of the leading science fiction publishers for its first ten years of operation . With the death of owner A. A. Wyn in 1967 , however , the company 's fortunes began to decline . Two prominent editors , Donald A. Wollheim and Terry Carr , left in 1971 , and in 1972 Ace was sold to Grosset & Dunlap . Despite financial troubles , there were further successes , particularly with the third Ace Science Fiction Specials series , for which Carr was the editor . Further mergers and acquisitions resulted in the company becoming a part of Berkley Books . Ace then became an imprint of Penguin Group ( USA ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1952 : Ace Doubles concept = = = 
 Editor Donald A. Wollheim was working at Avon Books in 1952 , but disliked his job . While looking for other work , he tried to persuade A. A. Wyn to begin a new paperback publishing company . Wyn was already a well @-@ established publisher of books and pulp magazines under the name A. A. Wyn 's Magazine Publishers . His magazines included Ace Mystery and Ace Sports , and it is perhaps from these titles that Ace Books got its name . Wyn liked Wollheim 's idea but delayed for several months ; meanwhile , Wollheim was applying for other jobs , including assistant editor at Pyramid Books . Pyramid mistakenly called Wyn 's wife Rose for a reference , thinking Wollheim had worked for her . When Rose told her husband that Wollheim was applying for another job , Wyn made up his mind : he hired Wollheim immediately as an editor . 
 The first book published by Ace was a pair of mysteries bound tête @-@ bêche : Keith Vining 's Too Hot for Hell , backed with Samuel W. Taylor 's The Grinning <unk> , priced at 35 cents , with serial number D @-@ 01 . A tête @-@ bêche book has the two titles bound upside @-@ down with respect to each other , so that there are two front covers and the two texts meet in the middle ( sometimes with advertising pages in between ) . This format is generally regarded as an innovation of Ace 's ; it was not , but Ace published hundreds of titles bound this way over the next twenty @-@ one years . Books by established authors were often bound with those by lesser @-@ known writers , on the premise that this would help new writers gain readers . The main drawback of the " Ace Double " format was that the two books had to fit a fixed page length ( usually totalling between 256 and 320 low @-@ height pages ) ; thus one or both novels might be cut or revised to fit . Despite the tag " Complete and Unabridged " on the cover , books so labeled were sometimes still abridged . 
 Some important titles in the early D @-@ series novels are D @-@ 15 , which features William S. Burroughs 's first novel , Junkie ( written under the pseudonym " William Lee " ) , and many novels by Philip K. Dick , Robert Bloch , Harlan Ellison , Harry Whittington , and Louis L 'Amour , including those written under his pseudonym " Jim Mayo " . 
 The last Ace Double in the first series was John T. <unk> 's Life with Lancelot , backed with William Barton 's Hunting on <unk> , issued August 1973 ( serial # <unk> ) . Although Ace resumed using the " Ace Double " name in 1974 , the books were arranged conventionally rather than tête @-@ bêche . 
 = = = 1953 – 63 : Genre specialization = = = 
 Ace 's second title was a western ( also tête @-@ bêche ) : William Colt MacDonald 's Bad Man 's Return , bound with J. Edward <unk> 's Bloody <unk> . Mysteries and westerns alternated regularly for the first thirty titles , with a few books not in either genre , such as P. G. Wodehouse 's Quick Service , bound with his The Code of the <unk> . In 1953 , A.E. van Vogt 's The World of Null @-@ A , bound with his The Universe Maker , appeared ; this was Ace 's first foray into science fiction . ( Earlier in 1953 , Ace had released Theodore S. <unk> 's Cry Plague ! , with a plot that could be regarded as sf , but the book it was bound with — Leslie <unk> 's The Judas Goat — was not sf . ) Another sf double followed later in 1953 , and sf rapidly established itself , alongside westerns and mysteries , as an important part of Ace 's business . By 1955 , the company released more sf titles each year than in either of the other two genres , and from 1961 onward , sf titles outnumbered mysteries and westerns combined . Ace also published a number of lurid juvenile delinquent novels in the 1950s that are now very collectible , such as D @-@ 343 , The Young Wolves by Edward De Roo and D @-@ 378 , Out For Kicks by <unk> Shaw . 
 By the late 1950s , Ace 's output was approaching one hundred titles a year , still heavily dominated by the primary genres . Almost all the books were 35 cents , though some slim single volumes were 25 cents , and a handful were half a dollar . In the early ' 60s , rising costs finally forced an increase in the price of the books , and more books appeared at 40 cents , 45 cents and higher . A few thick volumes , such as the 1967 paperback of Frank Herbert 's Dune , were priced at 95 cents . With Ballantine Books , Ace was the dominant American science fiction paperback publisher in the 1950s and 1960s . Other publishers followed their lead , catering to the increasing audience for sf , but none matched the influence of either company . 
 Market dominance was not only reflected in numbers of books published — Ace published , during this period , the first novels of authors such as Philip K. Dick ( Solar Lottery , 1955 , D @-@ 103 , bound with Leigh Brackett 's The Big Jump ) ; Gordon R. Dickson ( Alien from Arcturus , 1956 , D @-@ 139 , bound with Nick Boddie Williams ' The Atom Curtain ) , Samuel R. Delany ( The Jewels of <unk> , 1962 , F @-@ 173 , bound with James White 's Second Ending ) , Ursula K. Le Guin ( Rocannon 's World , 1966 , G @-@ 574 , bound with Avram Davidson 's The Kar @-@ Chee Reign ) , Roger Zelazny ( This Immortal , 1966 , F @-@ 393 ) , and R. A. Lafferty 's Past Master ( 1968 , H @-@ 54 ) . 
 = = = 1964 – 70 : Financial struggles = = = 
 In 1964 , science fiction author Terry Carr joined the company , and in 1967 , he initiated the Ace Science Fiction Specials line , publishing critically acclaimed original novels by such authors as R. A. Lafferty , Joanna Russ and Ursula K. Le Guin . Carr and Wollheim also co @-@ edited an annual Year 's Best Science Fiction anthology series ; and Carr also edited Universe , a well @-@ received original anthology series . Universe was initially published by Ace , although when Carr left in 1971 the series moved elsewhere . 
 In 1965 , Wollheim argued that there was a copyright loophole in the American edition of The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien . The Houghton Mifflin edition had been bound using pages printed in the United Kingdom for the George Allen & Unwin edition , and as a result , U.S. copyright law might not protect the text . Based on this view , Ace Books published the first @-@ ever paperback edition of Tolkien 's work , featuring cover art and hand @-@ drawn title pages by Jack Gaughan . After considerable controversy and the release of a competitive authorized ( and revised ) edition by Ballantine Books ( the back covers of which included a message from Tolkien urging consumers to buy the Ballantine edition and boycott any " unauthorized " versions – referring directly to the Ace editions ) , Ace agreed to pay royalties to Tolkien and let its still @-@ popular edition go out of print . 
 Wyn died in 1967 , and the company grew financially overextended , failing to pay its authors reliably . Without money to pay the signing bonus , Wollheim was unwilling to send signed contracts to authors . On at least one occasion , a book without a valid contract went to the printer , and Wollheim later found out that the author , who was owed $ 3 @,@ 000 by Ace , was reduced to picking fruit for a living . 
 = = = 1971 – 2015 : Ace becomes a subsidiary = = = 
 Both Wollheim and Carr left Ace in 1971 . Wollheim had made plans to launch a separate paperback house , and in cooperation with New American Library , he proceeded to set up DAW Books . Carr became a freelance editor ; both Carr and Wollheim went on to edit competing Year 's Best Science Fiction anthology series . 
 By the early 1970s , Ace Books became a major division of the old publisher , Charter Communications Inc . , which was based out of the Hippodrome Building , 1120 Avenue of the Americas , in New York City . In 1972 , Ace was acquired by Grosset & Dunlap , and in 1982 , Grosset & Dunlap was in turn acquired by G.P. Putnam 's Sons . Ace was reputedly the only profitable element of the Grosset & Dunlap empire by this time . Ace soon became the science fiction imprint of its parent company . 
 Carr returned to Ace Books in 1984 as a freelance editor , launching a new series of Ace Specials devoted entirely to first novels . This series was even more successful than the first : it included , in 1984 alone , William Gibson 's Neuromancer , Kim Stanley Robinson 's The Wild Shore , Lucius Shepard 's Green Eyes , and Michael Swanwick 's In the Drift . All were first novels by authors now regarded as major figures in the sf genre . Other prominent sf publishing figures who have worked at Ace include Tom Doherty , who left to start Tor Books , and Jim Baen , who left to work at Tor and who eventually founded Baen Books . Writers who have worked at Ace include Frederik Pohl and Ellen Kushner . 
 In 1996 , Penguin Group ( USA ) acquired the Putnam Berkley Group , and has retained Ace as its sf imprint . As of December 2012 , recently published authors included Joe Haldeman , Charles Stross , <unk> K. Hamilton , Alastair Reynolds , and Jack McDevitt . As of 2015 , Penguin Group ( USA ) still owns and successfully operates Ace as its science fiction and fantasy division . Ace 's editorial team is also responsible for the Roc Books imprint , although the two imprints maintain a separate identity . 
 = = People = = 
 The following people have worked at Ace Books in various editorial roles . The list is sorted in order of the date they started working at Ace , where known . It includes editors who are notable for some reason , as well as the most recent editors at the imprint . 
 A. A. Wyn , owner ( 1952 – 67 ) 
 Donald A. Wollheim , editor ( 1952 – 71 ) 
 Terry Carr , editor ( 1964 – 71 ) ; freelance editor ( 1983 – 87 ) 
 Pat LoBrutto , mail room ( 1969 – 72 ) ; science fiction editor ( 1974 – 77 ) 
 Frederik Pohl , executive editor ( December 1971 – July 1972 ) 
 Tom Doherty , publisher ( 1975 – 80 ) 
 Jim Baen , complaints department ( c . 1973 – 74 ) ; <unk> editor ( c . 1974 ) ; sf editor ( c . 1977 – 80 ) 
 Ellen Kushner 
 Terri Windling , editor ( 1979 – 87 ) 
 Harriet McDougal , editorial director 
 Susan Allison , editor ( 1980 – 82 ) ; editor @-@ in @-@ chief ( 1982 – 2006 ) ; vice president ( 1985 – July 2015 ) 
 Beth Meacham , editorial assistant ( 1981 – 82 ) ; editor ( 1982 – 83 ) 
 <unk> Buchanan , editor ( 1984 – 87 ) ; senior editor ( 1987 – 94 ) ; executive editor , sf and fantasy ( 1994 – January 1996 ) ; senior executive editor and marketing director ( January 1996 – 2006 ) ; editor @-@ in @-@ chief ( 2006 – 2014 ) . 
 Peter Heck ( c . 1991 – 92 ) 
 Laura Anne Gilman ( c . 1991 ) 
 Lou <unk> , editor ( ? – c . 1994 ) 
 Anne Sowards , editorial assistant / associate editor ( 1996 – 2003 ) ; editor ( 2003 – February 2007 ) , senior editor ( from February 2007 ) , executive editor ( by September 2010 ) 
 = = Ace nomenclature = = 
 Until the late 1980s , Ace titles had two main types of serial numbers : letter series , such as " D @-@ 31 " and " H @-@ 77 " , and numeric , such as " <unk> " and " <unk> " . The letters were used to indicate a price . The following is a list of letter series with their date ranges and prices . 
 D @-@ series — 35 ¢ , 1952 to 1962 . 
 S @-@ series — 25 ¢ , 1952 to 1956 . 
 T @-@ series — 40 ¢ . This series is listed in Tuck 's Encyclopedia , but he gives no examples in his index and there are none cited in other bibliographic sources . This series may therefore not exist . 
 F @-@ series — 40 ¢ , 1961 to 1967 . 
 M @-@ series — 45 ¢ , 1964 to 1967 . 
 G @-@ series — 50 ¢ , 1958 to 1960 ( D / S / G series ) ; 1964 to 1968 ( later series ) . 
 K @-@ series — various prices , 1959 to 1966 . 
 H @-@ series — 60 ¢ , 1966 to 1968 . 
 A @-@ series — 75 ¢ , 1963 to 1968 . 
 N @-@ series — 95 ¢ , 1968 . 
 The first series of Ace books began in 1952 with D @-@ 01 , a western in tête @-@ bêche format : Keith Vining 's Too Hot for Hell backed with Samuel W. Taylor 's The Grinning <unk> . That series continued until D @-@ 599 , Patricia Libby 's Winged Victory for Nurse Kerry , but the series also included several G and S serial numbers , depending on the price . The D and S did not indicate " Double " ( i.e. , tête @-@ bêche ) or " Single " ; there are D @-@ series titles that are not tête @-@ bêche , although none of the tête @-@ bêche titles have an S serial number . Towards the end of this initial series , the F series began ( at a new price ) , and thereafter there were always several different letter series in publication simultaneously . The D and S prefixes did not appear again after the first series , but the G prefix acquired its own series starting with G @-@ 501 . Hence the eight earlier G @-@ series titles can be considered part of a different series to the G @-@ series proper . All later series after the first kept independent numbering systems , starting at 1 or 101 . The tête @-@ bêche format proved attractive to book collectors , and some rare titles in mint condition command prices over $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = Billy Sunday = 
 William Ashley " Billy " Sunday ( November 19 , 1862 – November 6 , 1935 ) was an American athlete who , after being a popular outfielder in baseball 's National League during the 1880s , became the most celebrated and influential American evangelist during the first two decades of the 20th century . 
 Born into poverty in Iowa , Sunday spent some years at the Iowa Soldiers ' Orphans ' Home before working at odd jobs and playing for local running and baseball teams . His speed and agility provided him the opportunity to play baseball in the major leagues for eight years , where he was an average hitter and a good fielder known for his base @-@ running . 
 Converting to evangelical Christianity in the 1880s , Sunday left baseball for the Christian ministry . He gradually developed his skills as a pulpit evangelist in the Midwest and then , during the early 20th century , he became the nation 's most famous evangelist with his colloquial sermons and frenetic delivery . Sunday held widely reported campaigns in America 's largest cities , and he attracted the largest crowds of any evangelist before the advent of electronic sound systems . He also made a great deal of money and was welcomed into the homes of the wealthy and influential . Sunday was a strong supporter of Prohibition , and his preaching likely played a significant role in the adoption of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919 . 
 Despite questions about his income , no scandal ever touched Sunday . He was sincerely devoted to his wife , who also managed his campaigns , but his three sons disappointed him . His audiences grew smaller during the 1920s as Sunday grew older , religious revivals became less popular , and alternative sources of entertainment appeared . Nevertheless , Sunday continued to preach and remained a stalwart defender of conservative Christianity until his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
