 Billy Sunday was born near Ames , Iowa . His father was the son of German immigrants named Sonntag , who anglicized their name to " Sunday " when they settled in Chambersburg , Pennsylvania . William Sunday was a bricklayer who worked his way to Iowa , where he married Mary Jane Corey , daughter of " Squire " Martin Corey , a local farmer , miller , blacksmith , and wheelwright . William Sunday enlisted in the Iowa Twenty @-@ Third Volunteer Infantry on August 14 , 1862 . He died four months later of pneumonia at an army camp in Patterson , Missouri , five weeks after the birth of his youngest son , William Ashley . Mary Jane Sunday and her children moved in with her parents for a few years , and young Billy became close to his grandparents and especially his grandmother . Mary Jane Sunday later remarried , but her second husband soon deserted the family . 
 When Billy Sunday was ten years old , his impoverished mother sent him and an older brother to the Soldiers ' Orphans Home in Glenwood , Iowa , and later to the Iowa Soldiers ' Orphans ' Home in Davenport , Iowa . At the orphanage , Sunday gained orderly habits , a decent primary education , and the realization that he was a good athlete . 
 By fourteen , Sunday was shifting for himself . In Nevada , Iowa , he worked for Colonel John Scott , a former lieutenant governor , tending Shetland ponies and doing other farm chores . The Scotts provided Sunday a good home and the opportunity to attend Nevada High School . Although Sunday never received a high school diploma , by 1880 he was better educated than many of his contemporaries . 
 In 1880 , Sunday relocated to Marshalltown , Iowa , where , because of his athleticism , he had been recruited for a fire brigade team . In Marshalltown , Sunday worked at odd jobs , competed in fire brigade tournaments , and played for the town baseball team . In 1882 , with Sunday in left field , the Marshalltown team defeated the state champion Des Moines team 13 – 4 . 
 = = Professional baseball player = = 
 Sunday 's professional baseball career was launched by Adrian " Cap " Anson , a Marshalltown native and future Hall of Famer , after his aunt , an avid fan of the Marshalltown team , gave him an enthusiastic account of Sunday 's prowess . In 1883 , on Anson 's recommendation , A.G. Spalding , president of the Chicago White Stockings , signed Sunday to the defending National League champions . 
 Sunday struck out four times in his first game , and there were seven more strikeouts and three more games before he got a hit . During his first four seasons with Chicago , he was a part @-@ time player , taking Mike " King " Kelly 's place in right field when Kelly served as catcher . 
 Sunday 's speed was his greatest asset , and he displayed it on the basepaths and in the outfield . In 1885 , the White Stockings arranged a race between Sunday and Arlie Latham , the fastest runner in the American Association . Sunday won the hundred @-@ yard dash by about ten feet . 
 Sunday 's personality , demeanor , and athleticism made him popular with the fans , as well as with his teammates . Manager Cap Anson considered Sunday reliable enough to make him the team 's business manager , which included such duties as handling the ticket receipts and paying the team 's travel expenses . 
 In 1887 , when Kelly was sold to another team , Sunday became Chicago 's regular right fielder , but an injury limited his playing time to fifty games . During the following winter Sunday was sold to the Pittsburgh <unk> for the 1888 season . He was their starting center fielder , playing a full season for the first time in his career . The crowds in Pittsburgh took to Sunday immediately ; one reporter wrote that " the whole town is wild over Sunday . " Although Pittsburgh had a losing team during the 1888 and 1889 seasons , Sunday performed well in center field and was among the league leaders in stolen bases . 
 In 1890 , a labor dispute led to the formation of a new league , composed of most of the better players from the National League . Although he was invited to join the competing league , Sunday 's conscience would not allow him to break his contract with Pittsburgh . Sunday was named team captain , and he was their star player , but the team suffered one of the worst seasons in baseball history . By August the team had no money to meet its payroll , and Sunday was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies for two players and $ 1 @,@ 000 in cash . 
 The Philadelphia team had an opportunity to win the National League pennant , and the owners hoped that adding Sunday to the roster would improve their chances . Although Sunday played well in his thirty @-@ one games with Philadelphia , the team finished in third place . 
 In March 1891 , Sunday requested and was granted a release from his contract with the Philadelphia ball club . Over his career , Sunday was never much of a hitter : his batting average was .248 over 499 games , about the median for the 1880s . In his best season , in 1887 , Sunday hit .291 , ranking 17th in the league . He was an exciting but inconsistent fielder . In the days before outfielders wore gloves , Sunday was noted for thrilling catches featuring long sprints and athletic dives , but he also committed a great many errors . Sunday was best known as an exciting base @-@ runner , regarded by his peers as one of the fastest in the game , even though he never placed better than third in the National League in stolen bases . 
 Sunday remained a prominent baseball fan throughout his life . He gave interviews and opinions about baseball to the popular press ; he frequently umpired minor league and amateur games in the cities where he held revivals ; and he attended baseball games whenever he could , including a 1935 World Series game two months before he died . 
 = = Conversion = = 
 On a Sunday afternoon in Chicago , during either the 1886 or 1887 baseball season , Sunday and several of his teammates were out on the town on their day off . At one street corner , they stopped to listen to a gospel preaching team from the Pacific Garden Mission . Attracted by the hymns he had heard his mother sing , Sunday began attending services at the mission . After talking with a former society matron who worked there , Sunday – after some struggle on his part – decided to be a Christian . He began attending the fashionable Jefferson Park Presbyterian Church , a congregation handy to both the ball park and his rented room . 
 Although he socialized with his teammates and sometimes gambled , Sunday was never a heavy drinker . In his autobiography , he said , " I never drank much . I was never drunk but four times in my life . ... I used to go to the saloons with the baseball players , and while they would drink <unk> and gin fizzes and beer , I would take lemonade . " Following his conversion , Sunday denounced drinking , swearing , and gambling , and he changed his behavior , which was recognized by both teammates and fans . Shortly thereafter , Sunday began speaking in churches and at YMCAs . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 In 1886 , Sunday was introduced at Jefferson Park Presbyterian Church to Helen Amelia " Nell " Thompson , daughter of the owner of one of Chicago 's largest dairy products businesses . Although Sunday was immediately smitten with her , both had serious on @-@ going relationships that bordered on engagements . Furthermore , Nell Thompson had grown to maturity in a much more privileged environment than had Sunday , and her father strongly discouraged the courtship , viewing all professional baseball players as " transient ne 'er @-@ do @-@ wells who were unstable and destined to be misfits once they were too old to play . " Nevertheless , Sunday pursued and eventually married her . On several occasions , Sunday said , " She was a Presbyterian , so I am a Presbyterian . Had she been a Catholic , I would have been a Catholic — because I was hot on the trail of Nell . " Mrs. Thompson had liked Sunday from the start and weighed in on his side , and Mr. Thompson finally relented . The couple was married on September 5 , 1888 . 
 = = Apprenticeship for evangelism = = 
 In the spring of 1891 , Sunday turned down a baseball contract for $ 3 @,@ 500 a year to accept a position with the Chicago YMCA at $ 83 per month . Sunday 's job title at the YMCA was Assistant Secretary , yet the position involved a great deal of ministerial work . It proved to be good preparation for his later evangelistic career . For three years Sunday visited the sick , prayed with the troubled , counseled the suicidal , and visited saloons to invite patrons to evangelistic meetings . 
 In 1893 , Sunday became the full @-@ time assistant to J. Wilbur Chapman , one of the best known evangelists in the United States at the time . Chapman was well educated and was a meticulous dresser , " suave and urbane . " Personally shy , like Sunday , Chapman commanded respect in the pulpit both because of his strong voice and his sophisticated demeanor . Sunday 's job as Chapman 's advance man was to precede the evangelist to cities in which he was scheduled to preach , organize prayer meetings and choirs , and in general take care of necessary details . When tents were used , Sunday would often help erect them . 
 By listening to Chapman preach night after night , Sunday received a valuable course in <unk> . Chapman also critiqued Sunday 's own attempts at evangelistic preaching and showed him how to put a good sermon together . Further , Chapman encouraged Sunday 's theological development , especially by emphasizing the importance of prayer and by helping to " reinforce Billy 's commitment to conservative biblical Christianity . " 
 = = Popular evangelist = = 
 = = = Kerosene circuit = = = 
 When Chapman unexpectedly returned to the pastorate in 1896 , Sunday struck out on his own , beginning with meetings in tiny Garner , Iowa . For the next twelve years Sunday preached in approximately seventy communities , most of them in Iowa and Illinois . Sunday referred to these towns as the " kerosene circuit " because , unlike Chicago , most were not yet electrified . Towns often booked Sunday meetings informally , sometimes by sending a delegation to hear him preach and then telegraphing him while he was holding services somewhere else . 
 Sunday also took advantage of his reputation as a baseball player to generate advertising for his meetings . In 1907 in Fairfield , Iowa , Sunday organized local businesses into two baseball teams and scheduled a game between them . Sunday came dressed in his professional uniform and played on both sides . Although baseball was his primary means of publicity , Sunday also once hired a circus giant to serve as an usher . 
 When Sunday began to attract crowds larger than could be accommodated in rural churches or town halls , he pitched rented canvas tents . Again , Sunday did much of the physical work of putting them up , manipulating ropes during storms , and seeing to their security by sleeping in them at night . Not until 1905 was he well @-@ off enough to hire his own advance man . 
 In 1906 , an October snowstorm in Salida , Colorado , destroyed Sunday 's tent — a special disaster because revivalists were typically paid with a <unk> offering at the end of their meetings . Thereafter he insisted that towns build him temporary wooden tabernacles at their expense . The tabernacles were comparatively costly to build ( although most of the lumber could be salvaged and resold at the end of the meetings ) , and locals had to put up the money for them in advance . This change in Sunday 's operation began to push the finances of the campaign to the fore . At least at first , raising tabernacles provided good public relations for the coming meetings as townspeople joined together in what was effectively a giant <unk> . Sunday built rapport by participating in the process , and the tabernacles were also a status symbol , because they had previously been built only for major evangelists such as Chapman . 
 = = = Under the administration of Nell = = = 
 Eleven years into Sunday 's evangelistic career , both he and his wife had been pushed to their emotional limits . Long separations had exacerbated his natural feelings of inadequacy and insecurity . As a product of a childhood that could well be described as a series of losses , he was extremely dependent on his wife 's love and encouragement . For her part , Nell found it increasingly difficult to handle household responsibilities , the needs of four children ( including a newborn ) , and the long @-@ distance emotional welfare of her husband . His ministry was also expanding , and he needed an administrator , a job for which his wife was ideally suited . In 1908 , the Sundays decided to entrust their children to a nanny so that Nell could manage the revival campaigns . 
 Nell Sunday transformed her husband 's out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ back @-@ pocket organization into a " nationally renowned phenomenon . " New personnel were hired , and by the New York campaign of 1917 , the Sundays had a paid staff of twenty @-@ six . There were musicians , custodians , and advance men ; but the Sundays also hired Bible teachers of both sexes , who among other responsibilities , held daytime meetings at schools and shops and encouraged their audiences to attend the main tabernacle services in the evenings . The most significant of these new staff members were Homer Rodeheaver , an exceptional song leader and music director who worked with the Sundays for almost twenty years , and Virginia Healey Asher , who ( besides regularly singing duets with Rodeheaver ) directed the women 's ministries , especially the evangelization of young working women . 
 = = = Campaign platform = = = 
 With his wife administering the campaign organization , Sunday was free to do what he did best : compose and deliver colloquial sermons . Typically , Homer Rodeheaver would first warm up the crowd with congregational singing that alternated with numbers from gigantic choirs and music performed by the staff . When Sunday felt the moment right , he would launch into his message . Sunday gyrated , stood on the pulpit , ran from one end of the platform to the other , and dove across the stage , pretending to slide into home plate . Sometimes he even smashed chairs to emphasize his points . His sermon notes had to be printed in large letters so that he could catch a glimpse of them as he raced by the pulpit . In messages attacking sexual sin to groups of men only , Sunday could be graphic for the era . A theological opponent , Universalist minister Frederick William Betts , wrote , " Many of the things said and done bordered upon things prohibited in decent society . The sermon on amusements was preached three times , to mixed audience of men and women , boys and girls . If the sermons to women had been preached to married women , if the sermons to men had been preached to mature men , if the sermon on amusements had been preached to grown folks , there might have been an excuse for them , and perhaps good from them . But an experienced newspaper reporter told me that the sermon on amusements was ' the rawest thing ever put over in Syracuse . ' I can not , must not , quote from this sermon ... " , " fainted under that awful definition ; " , " if you do not ' hit the trail ' then watch out for the fireworks " ... [ a friend ] says that Mr. Sunday 's sermon on the sex question was raw and disgusting . He also heard the famous sermons on amusements and booze . [ He ] says that all in all they were the ugliest , nastiest , most disgusting addresses he ever listened to from a religious platform or a preacher of religion . He saw people carried out who had fainted under that awful definition of sensuality and depravity . Homer Rodeheaver said that " One of these sermons , until he tempered it down a little , had one ten @-@ minute period in it where from two to twelve men fainted and had to be carried out every time I heard him preach it . " Some religious and social leaders criticized Sunday 's exaggerated gestures as well as the slang and colloquialisms that filled his sermons , but audiences clearly enjoyed them . 
 In 1907 , journalist Lindsay Denison complained that Sunday preached " the old , old doctrine of damnation " , getting results by " inspiring fear and gloom in the hearts of sinners . " In spite of his conviction that the truly religious man should take his religion joyfully , he gets his results by inspiring fear and gloom in the hearts of sinners . The fear of death , with torment beyond it — intensified by examples of the frightful <unk> of those who have carelessly or <unk> put off salvation until it is too late — it is with this mighty menace that he drives sinners into the fold . But Sunday himself told reporters " with ill @-@ concealed annoyance " , that his revivals had " no emotionalism . " Certainly contemporary comparisons to the extravagances of mid @-@ nineteenth @-@ century camp meetings — as in the famous drawing by George Bellows — were overdrawn . Sunday told one reporter that he believed that people could " be converted without any fuss , " and , at Sunday 's meetings , " instances of spasm , shakes , or fainting fits caused by hysteria were few and far between . " 
 Crowd noise , especially coughing and crying babies , was a significant impediment to Sunday 's preaching because the wooden tabernacles were so acoustically live . During his preliminaries , Rodeheaver often instructed audiences about how to muffle their coughs . Nurseries were always provided , infants forbidden , and Sunday sometimes appeared rude in his haste to rid the hall of noisy children who had slipped through the ushers . Tabernacle floors were covered with sawdust to dampen the noise of shuffling feet ( as well as for its pleasant smell and its ability to hold down the dust of dirt floors ) , and coming forward during the invitation became known as " hitting the sawdust trail . " The term was first used in a Sunday campaign in Bellingham , Washington , in 1910 . Apparently , " hitting the sawdust trail " had first been used by loggers in the Pacific Northwest to describe following home a trail of previously dropped sawdust through an uncut forest — a metaphor for coming from , in Nell Sunday 's words , " a lost condition to a saved condition . " 
 By 1910 , Sunday began to conduct meetings ( usually longer than a month ) in small cities like Youngstown , Wilkes @-@ Barre , South Bend , and Denver , and then finally , between 1915 and 1917 , the major cities of Philadelphia , Syracuse , Kansas City , Detroit , Boston , Buffalo , and New York City . During the 1910s , Sunday was front page news in the cities where he held campaigns . Newspapers often printed his sermons in full , and during World War I , local coverage of his campaigns often surpassed that of the war . Sunday was the subject of over sixty articles in major periodicals , and he was a staple of the religious press regardless of denomination . 
 Over the course of his career , Sunday probably preached to more than one hundred million people face @-@ to @-@ face — and , to the great majority , without electronic amplification . Vast numbers " hit the sawdust trail . " Although the usual total given for those who came forward at invitations is an even million , one modern historian estimates the true figure to be closer to 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 . Sunday did not preach to a hundred million different individuals but to many of the same people repeatedly over the course of a campaign . Before his death , Sunday estimated that he had preached nearly 20 @,@ 000 sermons , an average of 42 per month from 1896 to 1935 . During his heyday , when he was preaching more than twenty times each week , his crowds were often huge . Even in 1923 , well into the period of his decline , 479 @,@ 300 people attended the 79 meetings of the six @-@ week 1923 Columbia , South Carolina , campaign – 23 times the white population of Columbia . Nevertheless , " trail hitters " were not necessarily conversions ( or even " <unk> " ) to Christianity . Sometimes whole groups of club members came forward en masse at Sunday 's prodding . By 1927 , Rodeheaver was complaining that Sunday 's invitations had become so general that they were meaningless . 
 = = = Wages of success = = = 
 Large crowds and an efficient organization meant that Sunday , the former resident of an orphan home , was soon netting hefty offerings . The first questions about Sunday 's income were apparently raised during the Columbus , Ohio , campaign at the turn of 1912 – 13 . During the Pittsburgh campaign a year later , Sunday spoke four times per day and effectively made $ 217 per sermon or $ 870 a day at a time when the average gainfully employed worker made $ 836 per year . The major cities of Chicago , Philadelphia , Baltimore , Boston , and New York City gave Sunday even larger offerings . Sunday donated Chicago 's offering of $ 58 @,@ 000 to Pacific Garden Mission and the $ 120 @,@ 500 New York offering to war charities . Nevertheless , between 1908 and 1920 , the Sundays earned over a million dollars ; an average worker during the same period earned less than $ 14 @,@ 000 . 
 Sunday was welcomed into the circle of the social , economic , and political elite . He counted among his neighbors and acquaintances several prominent businessmen . Sunday dined with numerous politicians , including Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson , and counted both Herbert Hoover and John D. Rockefeller , Jr. as friends . During and after the 1917 Los Angeles campaign , the Sundays visited with Hollywood stars , and members of Sunday 's organization played a charity baseball game against a team of show business personalities that included Douglas Fairbanks , Sr. 
 The Sundays enjoyed dressing well and dressing their children well ; the family sported expensive but tasteful coats , boots , and jewelry . Nell Sunday also bought land as an investment . In 1909 , the Sundays bought an apple orchard in Hood River , Oregon , where they vacationed for several years . Although the property sported only a rustic cabin , reporters called it a " ranch . " Sunday was a soft touch with money and gave away much of his earnings . Neither of the Sundays were extravagant spenders . Although Sunday enjoyed driving , the couple never owned a car . In 1911 , the Sundays moved to Winona Lake , Indiana , and built an American Craftsman @-@ style bungalow , which they called " Mount Hood " , probably as a reminder of their Oregon vacation cabin . The bungalow , furnished in the popular Arts and Crafts style , had two porches and a terraced garden but only nine rooms , 2 @,@ 500 square feet ( 230 m2 ) of living space , and no garage . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Sunday was a conservative evangelical who accepted fundamentalist doctrines . He affirmed and preached the inerrancy of the Bible , the virgin birth of Christ , the doctrine of substitutionary atonement , the bodily resurrection of Christ , a literal devil and hell , and the imminent return of Jesus Christ . At the turn of the 20th century , most Protestant church members , regardless of denomination , gave assent to these doctrines . Sunday refused to hold meetings in cities where he was not welcomed by the vast majority of the Protestant churches and their clergy . 
 Sunday was not a <unk> as were many Protestants of his era . He went out of his way to avoid criticizing the Roman Catholic Church and even met with Cardinal Gibbons during his 1916 Baltimore campaign . Also , cards filled out by " trail hitters " were faithfully returned to the church or denomination that the writers had indicated as their choice , including Catholic and Unitarian . 
 Although Sunday was ordained by the Presbyterian Church in 1903 , his ministry was nondenominational and he was not a strict Calvinist . He preached that individuals were , at least in part , responsible for their own salvation . " Trail hitters " were given a four @-@ page tract that stated , " if you have done your part ( i.e. believe that Christ died in your place , and receive Him as your Saviour and Master ) God has done HIS part and imparted to you His own nature . " 
 Sunday never attended seminary and made no pretense of being a theologian or an intellectual , but he had a thorough knowledge of the Bible and was well read on religious and social issues of his day . His surviving Winona Lake library of six hundred books gives evidence of heavy use , including underscoring and reader 's notes in his characteristic all @-@ caps printing . Some of Sunday 's books were even those of religious opponents . He was later charged with plagiarizing a Decoration Day speech given by the noted agnostic Robert Ingersoll . 
 Sunday 's homespun preaching had a wide appeal to his audiences , who were " entertained , reproached , exhorted , and astonished . " Sunday claimed to be " an old @-@ fashioned preacher of the old @-@ time religion " and his uncomplicated sermons spoke of a personal God , salvation through Jesus Christ , and following the moral lessons of the Bible . Sunday 's theology , although sometimes denigrated as simplistic , was situated within the mainstream Protestantism of his time . 
 = = Social and political views = = 
 Sunday was a lifelong Republican , and he espoused the mainstream political and social views of his native Midwest : individualism , competitiveness , personal discipline , and opposition to government regulation . Writers such as Sinclair Lewis , Henry M. Tichenor , and John Reed attacked Sunday as a tool of big business , and poet Carl Sandburg called him a " four @-@ <unk> " and a " <unk> . " Nevertheless , Sunday sided with Progressives on some issues . For example , he denounced child labor and supported urban reform and women 's suffrage . Sunday condemned capitalists " whose private lives are good , but whose public lives are very bad " , as well as those " who would not pick the pockets of one man with the fingers of their hand " but who would " without hesitation pick the pockets of eighty million people with fingers of their monopoly or commercial advantage . " He never lost his sympathy for the poor , and he sincerely tried to bridge the gulf between the races during the zenith of the Jim Crow era , although on at least two occasions in the mid @-@ 1920s Sunday received contributions from the Ku Klux Klan . 
 Sunday was a passionate supporter of World War I. In 1918 he said , " I tell you it is [ Kaiser ] Bill against Woodrow , Germany against America , Hell against Heaven . " Sunday raised large amounts of money for the troops , sold war bonds , and stumped for recruitment . 
 Sunday had been an ardent champion of temperance from his earliest days as an evangelist , and his ministry at the Chicago YMCA had given him first @-@ hand experience with the destructive potential of alcohol . Sunday 's most famous sermon was " Get on the Water Wagon " , which he preached on countless occasions with both histrionic emotion and a " mountain of economic and moral evidence . " Sunday said , " I am the sworn , eternal and uncompromising enemy of the Liquor Traffic . I have been , and will go on , fighting that damnable , dirty , rotten business with all the power at my command . " Sunday played a significant role in arousing public interest in Prohibition and in the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919 . When the tide of public opinion turned against Prohibition , he continued to support it . After its repeal in 1933 , Sunday called for its reintroduction . 
 Sunday also opposed eugenics , recent immigration from southern and eastern Europe , and the teaching of evolution . Further , he criticized such popular middle @-@ class amusements as dancing , playing cards , attending the theater , and reading novels . However , he believed baseball was a healthy and even patriotic form of recreation , so long as it was not played on Sundays . 
 = = Decline and death = = 
 Sunday 's popularity waned after World War I , when many people in his revival audiences were attracted to radio broadcasts and moving pictures instead . The Sundays ' health also declined even as they continued to drive themselves through rounds of revivals — smaller but also with fewer staff members to assist them . 
 Tragedy marred Sunday 's final years . His three sons engaged in many of the activities he preached against , and the Sundays paid blackmail to several women to keep the scandals relatively quiet . In 1930 , their housekeeper and nanny , who had become a virtual member of the family , died . Then the Sundays ' daughter , the only child actually raised by Nell , died in 1932 of what seems to have been multiple sclerosis . Their oldest son George , rescued from financial ruin by the Sundays , committed suicide in 1933 . 
 Nevertheless , even as the crowds declined during the last 15 years of his life , Sunday soldiered on , accepting preaching invitations and speaking with effect . In early 1935 , he had a mild heart attack , and his doctor advised him to stay out of the pulpit . Sunday ignored the advice . He died on November 6 , a week after preaching his last sermon on the text " What must I do to be saved ? " 
 = Chick Cancer = 
 " Chick Cancer " is the seventh episode of season five of Family Guy . The episode originally broadcast on November 26 , 2006 . In the episode , Stewie 's old friend and child actress , Olivia Fuller ( voiced by Rachael MacFarlane ) returns to Quahog . Stewie intends to sabotage what little is left of her career , but ends up falling in love with her , only for the relationship to end in ruins due to his personality . Meanwhile , Peter decides to make a chick flick after enjoying one he saw in the cinema with Lois . 
 The episode was written by Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild and directed by Pete Michels . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 49 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Drew Barrymore , Jeff Bergman , Dave Boat , Lizzy Caplan , Rachael MacFarlane and Stacey Scowley , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stewie discovers that his old friend , Olivia , a child actress , is coming to the end of her Hollywood career because her " Tasty Juice : Drink it then Convert it to Pee " advertisement campaign has been dropped . Olivia is now making an appearance at the Quahog mall to open a new store . Stewie decides to go the mall where he intends to ridicule her , but falls in love with her after seeing her again . Olivia , however , does not return the same feelings , so Stewie seeks advice from Brian on how to make Olivia like him . Brian and Stewie observe next @-@ door neighbor Glenn Quagmire get his way by being mean to a woman , and Stewie comes to the conclusion that women respond to men who mistreat them . 
 Stewie and Olivia begin to bond shortly afterward , and the two spend their time bonding by sitting in a park while eating ice cream . As they sit and eat their ice cream , they observe various people , such as a man smelling his own hand , a Jewish cowboy , a man who cuts his own hair , and an uptight and hardworking Asian man who is looking at his watch . They also go to a birthday party for one of Olivia 's friends . Olivia introduces Stewie to her old friend , a child actor named Victor , and she obliges Stewie to get both of them punch , but a jealous Stewie only wishes Victor to go away . The couple begin to argue constantly , and their latest argument ends with them getting married . After the marriage , which Rupert officiates , their relationship does not get any better . Later , the couple decide to accompany Brian on a double @-@ date with his girlfriend , Jillian . During the date , the pair continue to bicker throughout , leading to Stewie starting an argument with a person in the restaurant who asks him to be quiet . He feels the relationship is failing , but Brian encourages him to reconsider and Stewie agrees to return to Olivia . Returning to his playhouse , Stewie discovers Olivia is " cheating " on him with her friend Victor ( although the two are just playing with silly putty ) . With the relationship over , a seemingly distraught Stewie leaves the playhouse , which he then sets on fire with both Olivia and Victor inside . 
 Meanwhile , Peter watches a chick flick with Lois , and is deeply moved by it . After renting several other chick flicks , Peter decides to make one of his own with his friends , entitled " Steel <unk> " . The plot stars Peter as a man who claims he does not care much for women until he meets " <unk> Hertz " , played by Lois , who is also his own daughter in the film . After <unk> almost drowns , she is rushed to the hospital , but dies of an angry hymen . The film ends and is received badly by Peter 's friends due to its poor plot outline , structure and not making any sense . This leaves Peter crushed and , of course , he realizes that he 's not cut out for making movies . 
 During the closing credits of the episode , Stewie talks with Brian about how he does not like women and relationships , he talks about how he wishes that he could do the same thing with the same sex so Brian says , " They do ; it 's called being gay . " to which Stewie replies , " Oh , that 's what gay is ? Oh , yeah , I could totally get into that . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Many of the jokes used in the storyline of this episode were originally pitched for a subplot of this episode , which saw Stewie building a robot suit to make him look like an adult to woo Jillian 's best friend Ana , but this particular subplot was never used . The scene showing a mayor advertising a 1980s @-@ related CD was included in the original draft for the episode , and , as MacFarlane states , is one of the rare occasions that an act break that is unrelated entirely to the storyline can be included in an episode . Originally , the gag of Stewie using some of Brian 's fur to pass it off as his pubic hair was going to be the only area of his body where he would tell Jillian about his hair , but MacFarlane states that the show was not allowed to mention only pubic hair , and had to steer to a different area on the body that would have hair too , if they wanted to include it . Broadcasting standards allowed the sketch where Peter says " before , women only made me cry through my penis , " as he states they " gave in . " Additionally , while on the version broadcast Lois dies of an angry hymen , on the DVD version she dies of a rotten vagina . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actress Drew Barrymore , voice actor Jeff Bergman , voice actor Dave Boat , actress Lizzy Caplan , voice actress Rachael MacFarlane and actress Stacey Scowley guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , actress Alex Breckenridge , voice actor John G. Brennan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 This episode references three Woody Allen films . Stewie and Olivia watching people in the park is a reference to a scene from Annie Hall . 
 While referencing Star Wars , the theme from Curb Your Enthusiasm is played . 
 Stewie and Olivia sitting under a bridge while on a date is a reference to Manhattan , and the music playing in the background is " Someone to Watch over Me " , a song composed by George Gershwin . 
 Victor , the person with whom Olivia is revealed to be having an affair , is based on a character portrayed by Alan Alda in 1989 film Crimes and Misdemeanors . 
 Brian repeatedly telling Stewie that it is not his fault after his break @-@ up with Olivia is a reference to Good Will Hunting . 
 Stewie reflects on how it was easier being Q * bert 's room mate and an animation of him on the game board is shown . 
 The song " Ain 't No Mountain High Enough " , by Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell , is played during a scene in the chick flick Peter and Lois go watch at the beginning of the episode . 
 After asking out Olivia , Stewie claims he 's as cool as that cheetah from the commercials . Then a scene shows Chester Cheetah the Cheetos ' mascot sitting in a rundown apartment inhaling crushed Cheetos like cocaine . At the same time he is listening to " Tom Sawyer " by Canadian rock band Rush . He then smashes his hands into a coffee table and says " It ain 't easy , being Cheesy . " in the uncensored version ( released on DVD ) this follows the line " there is no fucking drummer better than Neil Peart " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous week , the episode was viewed in 9 @.@ 49 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 3 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly being edged out by The Simpsons , while still winning over American Dad ! . 
 Dan Iverson of IGN wrote " this week was confirmation of the show 's quality , as ' Chick Cancer ' proved that the program could create hilarious flashbacks , while presenting a story that added a lick of satire to improve on the overall quality of the show . " In a review of the episode , Brett Love of TV Squad wrote " I 'm still calling this an up and down season overall , but this episode was one of the <unk> , " adding that " There were some truly great moments . " Later in the review , Love comments " If there was anything I didn 't like about the story it was that bad boy Stewie was so short lived . " 
 = Garrett Rivas = 
 Garrett Rivas ( born June 1 , 1985 ) is a former American football kicker who played in af2 and the Arena Football League ( AFL ) . He played college football at Michigan ; he set the current school records for career scoring , field goals and point after touchdowns and was a three @-@ time All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection during his time there . As a professional he played for the Florida <unk> of af2 and the Tampa Bay Storm of the AFL . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Rivas attended Jesuit High School in Tampa , Florida where he played wide receiver and kicker . He played kicker because it increased his chance to make the team . Among his high school honors was selection to the Tampa Chapter of the Hall of Fame for Scholar Athletes . Rivas also played in the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl in San Antonio and played in the Florida @-@ Georgia All @-@ Star Game . In high school , Rivals.com ranked him as the 24th best kicker in the nation . Jesuit is fellow kicking Michigan <unk> Jay Feely 's alma mater . Professional kicker Xavier Beitia is also an alumnus of the school . 
 = = College career = = 
 As a freshman for the 2003 Wolverines , he was the regular kicker for the team from the start , making four point after touchdowns ( PATs ) in the first game of the season . Beginning his streak of many game @-@ winning kicks for the Wolverines , he made the game @-@ winner in the largest comeback in Michigan history , capping a 21 @-@ point 38 – 35 comeback victory against Minnesota with a 33 @-@ yard field goal with 50 seconds left in the Battle for the Little Brown Jug . Rivas was involved in a controversial national story in the October 4 , 2003 when Michigan head coach Lloyd Carr changed the punting gameplan in the middle of the game by asking Rivas to line up as a punter and carry the ball or kick while rolling to his right behind a wall of blockers . After it worked twice , the Iowa Hawkeyes blocked the third attempt ; the resulting great field position led to Iowa taking the lead , breaking a 20 – 20 tie en route to a 30 – 27 win . 
 As a sophomore for the 2004 Michigan team , his season @-@ best 4 – 4 field goal performance came in a September 11 , 2004 28 – 20 loss to Notre Dame in the Michigan – Notre Dame football rivalry game . He posted a 4th @-@ quarter field goal to bring the Wolverines to within 24 – 20 in their October 9 27 – 24 win against Minnesota . He made the go @-@ ahead 35 @-@ yard field goal with 2 : 45 remaining against Purdue in an October 23 , 2004 , 16 – 14 win . He also went 3 – 3 on field goals and 4 – 4 on extra points in the October 30 , 2004 , overtime 45 – 37 win against Michigan State in the Paul Bunyan Trophy game . In the season @-@ ending 38 – 37 loss to Texas in the 2005 Rose Bowl , Rivas was 3 – 3 on field goals and 4 – 4 on extra points . Following the season he was recognized as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten selection . 
 As a junior for the 2005 Wolverines , he was involved in many close games . The team 's first five conference games were all decided in the final 24 seconds of regulation or in overtime . After missing a 27 @-@ yard potential game @-@ winner in the final minute , he made the winning field goal in overtime against Michigan State . In the October 8 , 2005 23 – 20 loss to Minnesota , Rivas missed two late chances to break a 20 – 20 tie : a 42 @-@ yard field goal late in the third quarter and a 34 @-@ yard kick with 8 : 27 left in the game . In the October 15 , 27 – 25 last @-@ play win against Penn State , he gave the team a 21 – 18 lead on a 47 @-@ yard field goal with 3 : 45 remaining . Rivas posted 15 points in an October 29 , 2005 , 33 – 17 win against Northwestern . At the end of the season , Rivas was named an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten selection for the second @-@ straight year . 
 As a senior for the 2006 Wolverines , he never made more than two field goals in a game yet still managed to score a total of 93 points , one shy of his career @-@ high set back in 2004 . That year Michigan won all eleven its victories by at least seven points . At the conclusion of the Big Ten schedule , he was selected as a 2006 first team All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection . 
 Rivas set a new Michigan Wolverines football record for career scoring ( 354 ) , surpassing Anthony Thomas ' record of 336 set back in 2000 . He also broke Remy Hamilton 's field goal record of 63 , set back in 1996 , with 64 career field goals , and J. D. Carlson 's PAT record of 137 , set back in 1991 , with 162 . He additionally tied Mike Gillette 's record from 1998 of 13 career 40 @-@ yard field goals . 
 = = Pro career = = 
 He signed with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on May 3 , 2007 as an undrafted free agent , but was released on June 2 , 2007 . Rivas signed to the Florida <unk> of the af2 league on April 25 , 2008 , for the 2008 and 2009 seasons . In 2009 , he played in nine of the first ten games , but he did not appear in any of the last six games . During his final af2 season he completed 41 of 58 point after touchdown conversions and missed both of his field goal attempts . He played for the Tampa Bay Storm in the reincarnated Arena Football League in 2010 and participated in the Arena Bowl with the team . 
 He also serves as an assistant football coach and physical education teacher at Berkeley Preparatory School , where he runs the offseason football conditioning program . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Michigan 
 Professional 
 Playoffs 
 = Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity = 
 Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity ( タユタマ <unk> on my Deity- ) is a Japanese visual novel developed by Lump of Sugar . It was first released as an adult game for Windows PCs on July 11 , 2008 in both limited and regular editions , and was later followed by an Xbox 360 version . Tayutama is Lump of Sugar 's third title after their previous titles Nursery Rhyme and Itsuka , Todoku , Ano Sora ni . The story centers on the male protagonist Yuri Mito , a high school student who is the son of a family that presides over the local Shinto shrine . As Yuri performs a ritual to transfer a relic that hosts a fictional , supernatural race called Tayutai , he and his friends accidentally summon a goddess , who incarnates as a young girl . 
 The gameplay in Tayutama mainly consists of reading a text @-@ based , branching plot line with multiple endings , and offers pre @-@ determined scenarios and courses of interaction based on the player 's decisions . The game received two awards from the 2008 Bishōjo Game Awards for its visuals . It received a fan disc titled Tayutama : It 's Happy Days in May 2009 , and made several transitions to other media . It received a manga adaptation illustrated by artist <unk> , who co @-@ created an original story for the adaptation . A twelve @-@ episode anime series produced by the animation studio Silver Link was broadcast in Japan between April and June 2009 . A manga anthology series drawn by multiple artists , an Internet radio talk show used to promote the anime adaptation , and several music albums were also released . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tayutama is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Yuri Mito . Its gameplay mainly consists of reading and progressing through the story 's narrative and dialogue . The game 's text is accompanied by character sprites , which represent who Yuri is talking to , appearing on top of background artwork . Throughout the game , the player encounters CG artwork at certain points in the story , which take the place of the regular background art and character sprites . When the game is completed at least once , a gallery of the viewed CGs and played background music is available on the game 's title screen . Tayutama follows a branching plot line with nonlinear sequences and multiple endings , where the plot 's direction is affected by the player 's decisions . 
 Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a decision is made . These decisions determine the sequence in which the story 's events will occur , and progress the plot toward a specific heroine 's ending . There are four main plot lines in the original Windows version that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . This is increased to five plot lines in the Xbox 360 version with the extended scenario for Nue . In order to view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and make different decisions to progress the plot in alternate directions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 The main part of Tayutama takes place in a town called <unk> @-@ chō ( <unk> ) , which houses various landmarks such as the Sosei Academy ( <unk> , <unk> Gakuin ) , which the main characters attend , and the Yachimata Shrine ( <unk> , Yachimata Jinja ) , a local Shinto shrine managed by Yuri 's family . Sosei Academy consists of two departments : a notorious all @-@ girls department named Flawless ( <unk> , <unk> ) , which stems its roots from the Sosei Girls ' Academy ; and a recently added coeducation department named Slightly ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The campus grounds are separated into two parts which houses the two separate departments . Students attending the Flawless department live in a dormitory across from the school building , which is separated from Slightly 's school building and schoolyard by a small forest . 
 Supernatural phenomena are a recurring theme in Tayutama . The fictional , mythological race Tayutai ( <unk> ) is worshiped by the Yachimata Shrine , and its members are able to take shape in various forms , including humans . Various characters also possess supernatural abilities , such as Yuri who excels in Shinto studies and practices , and Mashiro , who is a Tayutai herself . Yumina and Ameri both receive wings as a result of gaining the favor and allying respectively with Houou and Ouryu , two Tayutai . Mifuyu is befriended by Nue , another Tayutai , and is physically powerful enough to engage a Tayutai in battle . 
 = = = Principal characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Yuri Mito ( <unk> <unk> , Mito <unk> , voiced by Satoshi Hino ) , the protagonist of Tayutama . Yuri comes from a family that presides over the Yachimata Shrine , and holds a vast knowledge in Shinto practices . He takes an interest in automobile maintenance , and also aspires to be an auto mechanic or designer . Mashiro Mito ( <unk> <unk> , Mito Mashiro , voiced by Noriko <unk> ) , the main heroine of Tayutama , is a Tayutai girl with a high understanding of spiritual powers . She is the incarnation of the goddess Kikuramikami no Hime ( <unk> , voiced by Haruka <unk> ) , and wishes for a mutual harmony between humans and Tayutai . She falls in love with Yuri soon after being left in his care , to the extent that she claims to be his wife . 
 Several characters also become involved in Yuri and Mashiro 's attempt to create a world where both humans and Tayutai can coexist together . Ameri Kawai ( <unk> <unk> , Kawai Ameri , voiced by Asami Shimoda ) , another heroine , is Yuri 's energetic and outgoing childhood friend . She frequently carries around candies , which she often shares with others , and has a crush towards Yuri , but is unable to carry her feelings further . Yumina Takanashi ( <unk> <unk> , Takanashi Yumina , voiced by Kaori <unk> ) , also a heroine , is Yuri 's stepsister who resided with his family until their mother 's death . She is often shy and quiet in front of others , and takes an interest in activities such as drawing and cooking . Yumina transfers into Flawless early in the story , and often voluntarily takes care of the household chores for Yuri 's family . Mifuyu Kisaragi ( <unk> <unk> , Kisaragi Mifuyu , voiced by Shizuka Itō ) , the last of Tayutama 's heroines , is an honor student from Flawless . She is calm and intelligent , and tends to act as an elder sister figure to other Flawless students . She is skilled in various martial arts , and is in particular proficient in kenjutsu . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The story of Tayutama revolves around the male protagonist Yuri Mito , whose family manages the local Shinto shrine . One day during spring break , Yuri and his friends Ameri Kawai and <unk> Kaname find in the school 's woods a mysterious relic that was used in the past to seal the Tayutai , an ancient , mythological race . Yuri discovers that the school board has determined that the relic is insignificant for preservation , and that it will be demolished to allow the school to expand . After coming to the conclusion that destroying the relic may have adverse consequences , the trio attempts to relocate the relic 's spirits . As Yuri performs the ritual , he summons Kikuramikami no Hime , a Tayutai goddess who explains to him the belligerent relationship between humans and Tayutai ; Kikuramikami then incarnates as a young girl , Mashiro , in hopes of maintaining a mutual relationship with humans . Shortly afterwards , the relic is destroyed in an accident , releasing the entire race of Tayutai . Among them are Nue , Houou , and Ouryu , three influential Tayutai who hold humans in low regard and are referred to collectively as the " Three Mightiest " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Following the incident , Yuri takes Mashiro to the Yachimata Shrine to live with his family , and later finds Mashiro as a teenager , who proclaims herself to be Yuri 's wife . 
 In their attempt to create a world where humans and Tayutai can peacefully coexist , Yuri and Mashiro battle the members of the Three Mightiest in a successive , nonlinear order determined by the player 's decisions . In one scenario , Nue , a young female Tayutai , begins to steal undergarments from the Flawless dormitories due to her curiosity in them . She is defeated by Mashiro and Mifuyu Kisaragi , and finds herself befriended by Mifuyu , who later begins to take care of her as a guardian . Yumina Takanashi , Yuri 's stepsister , also begins to take care of Hou , an exhausted bird Tayutai who begins to nest on Yumina 's head . Yumina is later attacked by Ou , another Tayutai who makes up the Houou couple with Hou , before the couple reconciles with the help of Yuri and Mashiro . Lastly , Ameri allies herself with Ouryu , the last of the Three Mightiest , out of jealousy from the amount of attention Mashiro receives from Yuri . After Ameri reconciles with Yuri , Ouryu agrees to stop attacking humans , and acknowledges Mashiro 's goal . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Tayutama is the third title developed by Lump of Sugar . The visual novel 's scenario was written by Chihiro <unk> . The character designs and illustrations for the visual novel were drawn by <unk> Moekibara ; Moekibara also served the same position for Lump of Sugar 's previous titles . The game 's music was composed entirely by <unk> <unk> , who was also one of the two composers for Itsuka , Todoku , Ano Sora ni . 
 Tayutama was first released for Windows on July 11 , 2008 in both limited and regular editions . The limited edition contained the game itself , a vocal collection CD , an official fan book , character portraits , and a phone strap ; the regular edition did not contain the aforementioned extras . A fan disc of Tayutama , titled Tayutama : It 's Happy Days , was released on May 29 , 2009 in both limited and regular editions . The limited edition of It 's Happy Days contained the game itself and a visual fan book with short summaries of the game 's characters , illustrations , conception materials , and an interview with the game 's development team . 5pb. released an Xbox 360 version of the original game on November 5 , 2009 . The Xbox 360 version contains remastered graphics , additional music , and additional scenarios for Nue , a supporting female character being promoted to a heroine . It was released in both limited and regular editions , and the limited edition contains the game itself , a phone strap , and a drama CD adaptation . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 A manga adaptation based on Tayutama was serialized between the January and July 2009 issues of the manga magazine Comp Ace . The manga series was drawn by illustrator <unk> and written by Yūya , and features an original story in which Yuri becomes a girl . The individual chapters were later compiled into a single bound volume published by Kadokawa Shoten on June 26 , 2009 . Enterbrain published a series of four @-@ panel comic strip anthologies , titled Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity . The anthology series spanned four volumes , and it was released under Enterbrain 's Magi @-@ Cu Comics imprint between April 25 and October 26 , 2009 . The contents of the anthologies were drawn by numerous artists , and eighteen different illustrators contributed to the first volume . 
 An art book titled Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity Official Book was released with the game 's limited edition release on July 11 , 2008 . The book included content such as sketches of the characters and staff comments . A 112 @-@ page visual fan book for the fan disc , Tayutama : It 's Happy Days , was first released with the game 's limited edition release on May 29 , 2009 ; it was also released separately on January 22 , 2010 . The book contains content such as illustrations and computer graphic artwork from the game , development materials , and staff interviews . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A Tayutama anime adaptation was first announced in Enterbrain 's Tech Gian magazine on December 20 , 2008 . The anime series was produced by Silver Link , directed by Keitaro <unk> and written by Makoto Ueda . The anime was first exhibited as a video at Media Factory 's Spring Anime Festival in the Ryōgoku KFC Hall in Tokyo , on March 29 , 2009 . The exhibition featured a public showing of the anime 's first episode along with Phantom : Requiem for the Phantom and Queen 's Blade 's respective episodes , and also talk shows featuring voice actors from the three series . The anime was first broadcast in Japan between April 5 and June 21 , 2009 on the Chiba TV broadcasting network , and was later broadcast on other independent stations and the AT @-@ X network . The series was released in Japan as six separate Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD volumes between June 25 and November 25 , 2009 ; each volume also contains an animated extra titled <unk> : Pure my Heart ( <unk> <unk> my <unk> ) . Sentai Filmworks licensed the anime for distribution by Section23 Films in North America , and the series was released as a volume of two DVDs on March 16 , 2010 . 
 An Internet radio talk show titled Tayutama Radio : <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) was hosted by Noriko <unk> and Asami Shimoda , who voiced Mashiro and Ameri respectively in the anime . The radio show was first streamed on the Japanese Internet radio network Onsen on March 9 , 2009 , and continued to do so every Monday until its tenth episode on July 13 , 2009 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Windows version of Tayutama has four main theme songs : " Konna Haru no Sora o " ( <unk> ) , the first opening theme , and " Niji o <unk> Yō na Iro de " ( <unk> ) , the ending theme , were sung by Haruka Shimotsuki ; " Shunkan Spline " ( <unk> , " Shunkan <unk> " , " Instantaneous Spline " ) , the second opening theme , and " Cherry " , an insert song , were sung by Kicco . The Xbox 360 version featured three theme songs : " Ōka <unk> " ( <unk> ) , the first opening theme song , and " Eien o <unk> " ( <unk> , " Let 's Begin Eternity " ) , the ending theme , were both performed by Kicco ; " Doko made mo Tomo ni " ( <unk> , " Together Anywhere " ) , the second opening theme , was performed by Shimotsuki . There are also four additional insert songs , one for each heroine and was sung by their respective voice actresses . The insert song for Mashiro is " Marital Vows " ; the insert song for Ameri is " Going My Way " ( <unk> , <unk> Mai <unk> ) ; the insert song for Yumina is " Flower Doll " ; and lastly , the insert song for Mifuyu is " Rainy Pain " . 
 The first music release was a maxi single entitled " Shunkan Spline " . The single contains the titular theme song and " Cherry " , and was released on June 27 , 2008 . The game 's original soundtrack was released on July 9 , 2008 . Of the 31 tracks collected in the album , two are the theme songs " Konna Haru no Sora o " and " Niji o <unk> Yō na Iro de " . Another maxi single , titled " The Fine Every Day " , was released on April 22 , 2009 . The single contains the opening theme for the anime , " The Fine Every Day " , and the opening theme for Tayutama : It 's Happy Days , " <unk> no <unk> " ( <unk> , " Passionate Wobble " ) , both sung by Kicco . A maxi single by Ui Miyazaki , titled " Kizuna no Uta " ( <unk> , " Song of Bonds " ) , was released on May 27 , 2009 featuring the titular ending theme for the anime . An image song album , titled Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity Chara @-@ son + ( 「 タユタマ @-@ Kiss on my Deity- 」 <unk> + , Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity <unk> + ) , was released on July 24 , 2009 containing the Windows version 's second opening theme and inserts . Lastly , an album titled Xbox 360 Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity Theme Songs ( <unk> 「 タユタマ @-@ Kiss on my Deity- 」 <unk> , Xbox 360 <unk> " Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity " <unk> @-@ shū ) was released on November 25 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 According to a sales ranking conducted by <unk> , Tayutama : Kiss on my Deity was the second best @-@ selling bishōjo game in July 2008 , only falling behind Key 's Little Busters ! Ecstasy . It was also the second most widely sold game on Getchu.com for July 2008 , and was the sixth most widely sold game of the year on the website . The game was also the twenty @-@ seventh most widely sold game on the website for the month of April 2009 . The game received two awards from the 2008 Bishōjo Game Awards panel , a silver prize for graphics , coming behind <unk> 's G Senjō no Maō , and a gold prize for character designs . <unk> <unk> , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Japanese bishōjo magazine <unk> , praised Moekibara for his heroines ' appealing character designs , and cited Mashiro as a character fitting for the award . 
 The anime adaptation received mixed reviews . Chris Beveridge of Mania.com praised the series ' aesthetics . He stated that it " has a solid looking presentation to it with its animation style and character design , " and in particular found the costume and setting designs appealing . However , he criticized how the storyline " has a whole lot of the familiar ... that keeps it from standing well on its own , " and described the series as " not bad , it 's just another show that we 've seen before . " Stig Høgset of THEM Anime Reviews also noted the characters are " generally pleasant to look at . " He described the adaptation 's story as " fairly straightforward and hardly difficult to follow , " but criticized it as " basically written with a complete disregard for logic and common sense . " Høgset concluded by comparing Tayutama 's anime adaptation to Natsume 's Book of Friends , stating that although the former is " honestly trying to tell a decent story about the possible friendship between two different races ... [ the latter ] does this a hell of a lot better . " 
 Several characters from Tayutama also appear in video games created by other developers . Ameri , Mashiro , and Mifuyu were featured as playable characters in the fighting game Twinkle Queen . The game was released on August 26 , 2010 for Wii , and also featured characters from G Senjō no Maō , Windmill 's <unk> no Campanella , and BaseSon 's Shin <unk> <unk> . Ameri and Mashiro were also featured as characters in Illusion 's Characolle ! 3D animation program series . The program 's fourth entry , Characolle ! Lump of Sugar , was released on July 1 , 2011 , and included the characters ' models and scenery assets based on Tayutama 's locales as part of the package . 
 = Edmund Evans = 
 Edmund Evans ( 23 February 1826 – 21 August 1905 ) was a prominent English wood engraver and colour printer during the Victorian era . Evans specialized in full @-@ colour printing , which , in part because of his work , became popular in the mid @-@ 19th century . He employed and collaborated with illustrators such as Walter Crane , Randolph Caldecott , Kate Greenaway and Richard Doyle to produce what are now considered to be classic children 's books . Although little is known about his life , he wrote a short autobiography before his death in 1905 in which he described his life as a printer in Victorian London . 
 After finishing an apprenticeship , Evans went into business for himself . By the early 1850s , he had established a reputation as a printer of covers for a type of cheap novels known as yellow @-@ backs . In the early 1860s , he began to print children 's toy books and picture books in association with the printing house Routledge and Warne . His intention was to produce books for children that were beautiful and inexpensive . For three decades he produced multiple volumes each year , first illustrated by Crane , and later by Caldecott and Greenaway . 
 Evans used a woodblock printing technique known as chromoxylography , which was used primarily for inexpensive serialised books and children 's books requiring few colours , so as to maximize profits . However , chromoxylography allowed a variety of hues and tones to be produced by mixing colours . The process was complicated and required intricate engraving to achieve the best results . Evans possessed a meticulous eye for detail and used a hand @-@ press and as many as a dozen colour blocks for a single image . He went on to become the preeminent wood engraver and colour printer in Britain during the second half of the 19th century . 
 = = Apprenticeship and early work = = 
 Evans was born in Southwark , London , on 23 February 1826 , to Henry and Mary Evans . He attended school in Jamaica Row , where he enjoyed mathematics but wished he had learned Latin . As a 13 @-@ year @-@ old he began work as a " reading boy " at the printing house of Samuel Bentley in London in 1839 . However , he was reassigned as a general errand boy because his stutter interfered with his duties . The hours were long — from seven in the morning until nine or ten at night — but the printmaking process itself , and the books produced by the establishment , fascinated Evans . Bentley soon realized the boy was talented after seeing his early attempts at scratching illustrations on slate , and arranged for Evans to begin an apprenticeship with wood @-@ engraver Ebenezer Landells . 
 Evans started with Landells in 1840 . His duties included delivering proofs of drawings to be approved by artists such as Edward Dalziel , or authors such as Charles Dickens . A year later , Landells launched Punch magazine , and as early as 1842 had Evans illustrate covers for the new publication . Evans worked and became friends with Myles Birket Foster , John Greenaway and George Dalziel . Foster and Evans became lifelong friends . When Landells received a commission from the Illustrated London News to provide illustrations of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert , he sent Evans and Foster to Balmoral to make sketches , which Evans engraved . Toward the end of his apprenticeship , the demands of the Illustrated London News caused Evans to work late into the night and return early in the morning . 
 When his apprenticeship ended in 1847 , Evans , then 21 , refused an offer of employment from Landells , deciding instead to go into business for himself as a wood @-@ engraver and colour printer . In 1848 Evans engraved a title @-@ page illustration , among other commissions , for the Illustrated London News . However , the Illustrated London News stopped employing him on the basis that his wood engraving was too fine for newspaper work . His final print for the Illustrated London News showed the four seasons , and was illustrated by Foster . In fact Foster received his first commission from the publisher Ingram , Cook , and Company to reproduce the four scenes in oil . In 1851 , Ingram chose Evans to engrave three prints for Ida Pfeiffer 's Travels in the Holy Land . He used three blocks for the work : the key @-@ block , outlining the illustration , was printed in a dark @-@ brown hue ; the other two were in a buff colour and a grayish @-@ blue colour . For the same firm , Evans completed an order for a book @-@ cover using bright reds and blues on white paper . That year he received the first commission to print a book , written by Fanny Fern and illustrated by Foster . Evans had enough business to apprentice his two younger brothers , Wilfred and Herbert , and to buy a hand @-@ press . Soon he moved his premises to Racquet Court , and bought three more hand @-@ presses . 
 In the early 1850s , Evans designed book @-@ covers known as yellow @-@ backs , a " book bound in yellow @-@ glazed paper over boards " . He perfected the method and became the printer of choice for many London publishers ; by 1853 he was the chief yellow @-@ back printer in the city . He developed the yellow @-@ back as he disliked the white paper book @-@ covers that became soiled and discoloured ; as a result of this aversion he experimented with yellow paper by treating before adding the printed illustration . Often yellow @-@ backs were used for unsold editions , so that they functioned as reprints or waste ; typically " enormous number of these covers " were left behind for publishers . Other terms for the books were " Penny dreadfuls " , " railway novels " and " mustard <unk> " . For the illustrations , Evans commissioned artists such as George Cruikshank , <unk> , Randolph Caldecott and Walter Crane . Evans ' first cover was brightly coloured , utilising only reds and blues , overprinting blue over black to create what appeared as a black background . He continued the practice of using red and blue , engraving " in graduation " for lighter tints of reds used for faces and hands , and engraving the blue blocks in a manner that created textures and patterns . Evans realised books that may have been unsuccessful in a first printing were easy to sell with well @-@ designed cover art . 
 In the mid @-@ 1850s , Evans and Foster visited Scotland to create sketches for a series of guide books , which Evans printed . He later engraved Foster 's illustrations for Lady of the Lake , and Foster 's illustrations for The Poetical Works of George Herbert ( 1856 ) , printed in Edinburgh . Of the George Herbert engravings he states : " these illustrations I consider the best that I ever engraved " . By 1856 Evans had " perfected a process of colour printing from wood blocks " , and achieved a reputation as the preeminent wood engraver and best colour printer in London . 
 In the late 1850s Evans worked on an edition of The Poems of Oliver Goldsmith , illustrated by Foster , published in 1859 . The volume was successful enough to warrant a second edition , with 11 more colour @-@ printed illustrations , which was published in 1860 . During the 1860s , his most notable work was for James Doyle 's A Chronicle of England , which includes 80 illustrations , and is considered evidence of his capability as a master of colour . His method of coloured wood engraving allowed for watercolours to be reproduced , and was used for The Art Album : Sixteen <unk> of Water @-@ colour Drawings , which he engraved and printed in 1861 . Before he began printing children 's books , much of Evans ' business was to provide colour <unk> for magazines such as <unk> , The Sunday School Companion and Chatterbox . With increased print orders , Evans leased space on Fleet Street to expand the business , adding steam engines , boilers and " many extra machines " . 
 From the late 1850s to the early 1860s , Evans produced the blocks and printed for , among others , books illustrated by W. S. Coleman including , Common Objects of the Sea Shore , Common Objects of the Country , Our Woodlands , Heaths , and Hedges , and British Butterflies . The printing process used up to 12 colours and , as was his usual practice , a hand @-@ press . During these years he also completed work on Foster 's Bible Emblem Anniversary Book , and Little Bird Red and Little Bird Blue . In 1870 , Evans printed In Fairyland , a Series of Pictures from the Elf @-@ World , illustrated by James Doyle 's brother Richard in which Doyle depicted fairies living " among birds , snails , butterflies and beetles as large as themselves " , and Evans produced his largest wood @-@ engravings for the volume . The 36 illustrations contained within are " often considered the masterpiece of Victorian illustration . " During the 1860s and 1870s , he was employing up to 30 engravers . 
 In 1864 , Evans married Mary Spence Brown , Foster 's niece , and the couple lived in Witley , Surrey . Foster was their neighbour , as was George Eliot . Commenting on his work , Evans said that it " kept me fully employed mind and body : I had to direct the engravers to the direction of the lines in the colour blocks , and the printers for the tones of the inks for printing , often mixing the inks " . Whenever possible he visited Brighton , where he enjoyed the air . 
 = = Process and techniques = = 
 During the Victorian period , the art of book illustration gained popularity , supported through the work of wood engravers . Woodcut extended back centuries in Europe and further in Asia . Typically the parts to be printed in black were left in relief by the carver , allowing illustrations to be printed along with the text . Thomas Bewick developed the technique in the 18th century and " perfected the process that was used extensively throughout the 19th century , which necessitated the use of hardwood blocks and tools for metal engraving " . The preferred method of relief engraving had been to work with the grain on the plank side of a block ; however Bewick worked the end of the block and carved against the grain using a burin . Bewick passed his techniques to apprentices , including Landells , who in turn passed them to Evans . In the 1860s , Thomas Bolton developed a method for transferring a photographic image onto block , which enabled the engraver " to work on the surface " . 
 In the 1830s George Baxter <unk> colour relief printing , known as chromoxylography , by using a " background detail plate printed in aquatint intaglio , followed by colours printed in oil inks from relief plates — usually wood blocks " . Evans followed the Baxter process , with the modification of using relief wood blocks only . For The Poems of Oliver Goldsmith , Evans created a facsimile of a watercolour , by superimposing colours with the use of separate colour blocks , one by one , to achieve the graduated colours of the original . First , Foster drew the illustration directly on the woodblocks that were to be cut , and he then recreated a coloured paper copy of the drawing . Evans , using the same pigments as Foster , grinding them himself , produced inks to match Foster 's colours . The printing was done using a hand @-@ press , with nine or ten print runs required for each illustration . For A Chronicle of England , Evans engraved prints dropped into the text at six @-@ page intervals . Doyle drew the illustrations directly onto the wood blocks and created coloured proofs . Nine or ten wood blocks ( colour blocks ) were used for each of the 80 illustrations , which Evans again printed on a hand @-@ press . The use of colour and the ability to create subtle tones are characteristic of Evans ' skill as a colourist . His work was distinctive because of the characteristic quality of the wood engraving ( carving ) and his manner of limiting the use of ink to create a more striking result . 
 Evans ' process involved a number of steps . First , the line drawing of an illustration was photographed and printed onto block while the line drawing was engraved . Proofs of the key block were coloured by the illustrator ; Evans would then " determine the sequencing and register ... to arrive at a close reproduction of the artist 's original " . Blocks were painted and engraved ; one for each colour . A proof of each colour block was made before a final proof from the key block . Ideally , the proof would be a faithful reproduction of the original drawing , but Evans believed a print was never as good as a drawing . He took care to grind and mix his inks so they closely emulated the original . Finally , each block was placed so as to allow the individual colours to print on the page exactly as intended . Aware of costs and printing efficiencies , he used as few colours as possible . Illustrations were produced with a base of black , along with one or two colours and a flesh tone for faces and hands . In some cases , Evans may have used as few as four colour blocks : likely black , flesh and two primary colours ; the addition of yellow allowed him a greater range . Each colour was printed from a separately engraved block ; there were often between five or ten blocks . The chief problem was to maintain correct register , achieved by placing small holes in precise positions on each block to which the paper was pinned . If done correctly , the register of colours match , although sometimes ink squash is visible along the edges of an illustration . 
 Often the artist drew the illustration in reverse , and directly onto a block ; in other cases the printer copied the illustration from a drawing . After the 1860s , images could be photographically projected onto the blocks , although it was more difficult for the printer to carve the reliefs without leaving the distinctive lines of the illustration . Books printed by Evans have been reproduced using some of the original blocks which have " remained in continuous use for over a century " . 
 = = Children 's books = = 
 Critics regard Evans ' most important work to be his prints of children 's books with from the latter part of the century with Walter Crane , Kate Greenaway , and Randolph Caldecott which revolutionized children 's publishing . Early in the century children 's book were often hand colored , and the chromoxylography processes Evans perfected " brought an immense improvement in coloured picture books for children in the last quarter of the century " . In 1865 , Evans agreed with publishing house Routledge and Warne to provide toy books — <unk> books of six pages , to be sold for sixpence each . They " revolutionized the field of children 's books " and lent Evans his association with children 's book illustrators . The market for toy books became so great that he began to self @-@ publish and commission the artists for illustrations . When demand swelled beyond his capacity , he employed other engraving firms to fill the orders . 
 The concept of a picture book for children , with the art dominating the text rather than illustrations supplementing the text , was an invention of the mid @-@ 19th century . According to Judith Saltman of the University of British Columbia , Evans ' work as a printer of children 's picture @-@ books is particularly notable ; she believes he printed the " most memorable body of illustrated books for children " in the Victorian era , and the three illustrators , whose works he printed , can be regarded as the " founders of the picture @-@ book tradition in English and American children 's books " . He considered full @-@ colour printing a technique well @-@ suited to the simple illustrations in children 's books . Evans reacted against crudely coloured children 's book illustrations , which he believed could be beautiful and inexpensive if the print run was large enough to maintain the costs . In doing so , Evans hired Walter Crane , Kate Greenaway and Randolph Caldecott as illustrators , all of whom became successful because of Evans ' " recognition , encouragement , and brilliant colour reproduction " . 
 = = = Walter Crane = = = 
 In 1863 , Evans employed Walter Crane to illustrate covers for inexpensive novels sold in railroad stations called " yellow backs " — after their yellow covers . In 1865 , they began to collaborate on toy books of nursery rhymes and fairy tales . Between 1865 and 1876 , Crane and Evans produced two or three <unk> a year . The earliest of the series ( which grew in popularity ) showed only two colours — red and blue — with black or blue used for the key block . Crane illustrated the early books , printed by Evans , This Is the House That Jack Built and Sing a Song of Sixpence , in which the simple designs are presented without background ornamentation and printed only in red , blue and black . Between 1865 and 1886 , Crane illustrated 50 <unk> , all of which were engraved and printed by Evans . These commercially successful books established Crane as one of the most popular illustrators of children 's books in England . 
 Crane drew his designs directly on the blocks . The designs gradually became more elaborate , as Crane became influenced by Japanese prints . In 1869 , Evans added yellow , which he mixed with red and blue to create a greater variety of hues . The following year , Crane was given a set of Japanese prints and , impressed with " the definite black outline , the flat brilliance as well as delicate colours " he applied the techniques to toy book illustrations . His interest in design details , such as furniture and clothing , are reflected in his illustrations . During these years Crane and Evans worked for the publishing house Routledge and collaborated on books such as The Yellow Dwarf , Beauty and the Beast , Princess Belle – <unk> , and Goody Two Shoes . Crane sold his illustrations directly to the publisher and , with printing and engraving expenses , large print runs were required . 
 Crane was abroad from 1871 to 1873 while Evans continued to print his work . Evans received Crane 's illustrations via post , photographed the image to the <unk> to be engraved , and then returned a proof to Crane for colouring . In 1878 Crane and Evans collaborated on The Baby 's Opera , a complex project with a dozen fully illustrated pages , and decorative borders on each of the 56 pages . Crane visited Evans at his home in Witley to design the book . Evans gave Crane a dummy book to design the layout of the entire volume . The first print run consisted of 10 @,@ 000 copies , but Evans quickly added more as demand for the volume grew . Evans added more hues to the illustrations , with " light blues , yellows , and brick reds , delicately blended " replacing the brighter colours of earlier work . 
 In 1880 , Crane illustrated and Evans printed , The Baby 's Bouquet : a Fresh Bunch of Old Rhymes and Tunes , which went on to sell hundreds of thousands of copies . The book shows influences ranging from the Pre @-@ Raphaelites , Japanese art to the incipient arts and crafts movement . In 1889 , Flora 's Feast : A Masque of Flowers was published , featuring flowers represented as human figures , for which Evans used as many as eight colour blocks . Their later collaborations includes an edition of Alice in Wonderland with coloured versions of John Tenniel 's 1890 illustrations , and the 1899 A Floral Fantasy in an Old English Garden . 
 = = = Randolph Caldecott = = = 
 The pressure of such steady production caused Crane to stop his work for a period , and Evans replaced him with Randolph Caldecott , whose magazine illustrations he had seen and liked . Initially Evans hired Caldecott to draw illustrations for nursery rhyme books , beginning with another printing of The House that Jack Built in 1877 . Evans proposed to fill each page with an illustration , which were " often little more than outlines " to avoid the blank pages which were customary in toy books of the period . In 1878 The Diverting Story of John Gilpin was published , illustrated by Caldecott and printed by Evans . Evans supplied Caldecott with materials for the illustrations and payment based on sales quantities . Evans explained the business arrangement : 
 I agreed to run all the risks of engraving the key blocks which he drew on wood ; after he finished colouring a proof I would furnish him , on drawing paper , I would engrave the blocks to be printed in as few colours as necessary ... the key block in dark brown , then a flesh tint for the faces , hands , and wherever it would bring the other colours as nearly as possible to his painted copy , a red , a blue , a yellow and a grey . 
 Beginning in 1878 through 1885 , Caldecott illustrated two books a year for Evans , and secured his reputation as an illustrator . The books were released for the Christmas season , when sales would be sufficient to warrant print runs as large as 100 @,@ 000 . Later , collected editions of four works reprinted in a single volume were published . Throughout the late 1870s , Evans and Caldecott collaborated on 17 books , considered Caldecott 's best , and to have changed the " course of children 's illustrated books " . Caldecott drew pen and ink illustrations on plain paper that were photographed to wood . Evans " engraved in facsimile " the illustration to the woodblock . Six blocks ( one for each colour ) were used to create a multi @-@ colour " image of extremely delicate quality " . 
 Caldecott died of tuberculosis in 1886 , and the following year Evans printed a collection of his picture books , titled The Complete Collection of Pictures & Songs . Ruari McLean explains in the introduction to Evans ' Reminiscences , that as late as the 1960s reprints of Caldecott 's The House that Jack Built were " astonishingly , still being printed from the plates made from the original wood @-@ blocks engraved by Edmund Evans " . 
 = = = Kate Greenaway = = = 
 In the late 1870s , Kate Greenaway — who spent her earlier career illustrating greeting cards — persuaded her father , also in the engraving business , to show Evans her poetry manuscript , Under the Window . Evans invited her to Witley , and as he explains : " I was at once fascinated by the originality of the drawings and the ideas of the verse , so I at once purchased them . " Evans believed her illustrations to be commercially appealing and encouraged Routledge to publish the book . Of Greenaway 's first collection of illustrations and verse , Evans writes : 
 After I had engraved the blocks and colour blocks , I printed the first edition of 20 @,@ 000 copies , and was ridiculed by the publishers for risking such a large edition of a six @-@ shilling book ; but the edition sold before I could reprint another edition ; in the meantime copies were sold at a premium . Reprinting kept on till 70 @,@ 000 was reached . 
 When George Eliot saw Greenaway 's drawings , while visiting the <unk> at their home , she " was much charmed by them " , however , she refused Evans ' request to write a children 's story to be illustrated by Greenaway . Published in 1879 , Evans produced 100 @,@ 000 copies of Under the Window ( including French and German editions ) which helped launch Greenaway 's career as an author and illustrator of children 's books . For Under the Window , Evans paid Greenaway outright for her artwork , and royalties up to one @-@ third of proceeds , after the costs of printing ; for subsequent books he paid half of the proceeds after deducting the printing costs . Evans photographed Greenaway 's drawings to wood , engraved in facsimile , and created colour blocks of red , blue , yellow and flesh tint . 
 Evans paid particular attention to detail in the printing of her Mother Goose . The " antique look " added to the Regency style artwork , while his ink and colouring choices conveyed the look of a hand @-@ coloured book suitable for a mass @-@ market edition . To achieve the antique look , rough paper was pressed and printed , with the roughness restored after printing by dipping the paper in water . As an example of 19th @-@ century book production , Mother Goose is considered exceptional , and facsimiles were printed well into the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 During the 1880s , Evans printed two to three Greenaway books a year , including a run of 150 @,@ 000 copies of Kate Greenaway 's Birthday Book ( 1880 ) , as well as Mother Goose ( 1881 ) , The Language of Flowers ( 1884 ) , Marigold Garden ( 1885 ) , The Pied Piper of Hamelin ( 1887 ) , and King <unk> ( 1889 ) . From the mid @-@ 1880s to the mid @-@ 1890s Evans printed , and Greenaway illustrated , nine almanacs — one each year . Greenaway benefitted from her association with Evans . As the leading publisher of children 's books , Routledge provided Greenaway with a commercial base she may not have achieved without Evans ' influence . Children 's literature scholar Anne Lundin claims the distinctive quality of Evans ' printing , as wells as his popularity as a children 's book printer , linked Greenaway 's name with his , thereby increasing her commercial appeal . Greenaway often visited the Evans family , played with their three daughters and continued to visit Evans after his move to Ventnor . During her career as an illustrator , Greenaway used Evans as sole engraver and printer . 
 = = Later work and retirement = = 
 Evans eventually converted to the three @-@ colour printing technique . In 1902 he used the " recently developed Hentschel three @-@ colour process " , at Beatrix Potter 's request , to print her watercolour illustrations for her first book , The Tale of Peter Rabbit . Towards the end of his career , not all of his work was devoted to the three @-@ colour process ; in 1902 he engraved and printed Old English Songs and Dances for W. Graham Robertson , which was described as " harmonious " and " delicate " . 
 In 1892 , Evans moved to Ventnor on the Isle of Wight , and turned the printing business over to his sons Wilfred and Herbert , although when he stopped engraving wood is unknown . During his last decade he wrote The Reminiscences of Edmund Evans , a short volume he described as " the rambling jottings of an old man " . In that book Evans includes few details of his business practices and processes , and is significant because it adds to the scant information available on the colour printers of the era . In the 1960s , Ruari McLean edited the unrevised 102 @-@ page typescript released to him by Evans ' grandson which was published by the Oxford University Press in 1967 . 
 Evans died in 1905 , and is buried in Ventnor cemetery . He was survived by his two sons and three daughters . The firm was bought in 1953 by W. P Griffith , Ltd ; Evans ' grandson Rex became managing director . Before his death Evans offered Beatrix Potter an interest in the company which she refused , having recently bought a farm in the Lake District . 
 = = Additional Evans images = = 
 = = Detail of John Gilpin = = 
 = HMS Tiger ( 1913 ) = 
 HMS Tiger was a battlecruiser of the Royal Navy and the eleventh ship to bear that name . She was built by John Brown and Company of Clydebank , Scotland , and launched in 1913 . Tiger was the most heavily armoured battlecruiser of the Royal Navy at the start of the First World War , but was not yet ready for service . The ship was assigned to the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron ( 1st BCS ) for the duration of the war and participated in the Battle of Dogger Bank in early 1915 , though she was still shaking down and did not perform well . Tiger next participated in the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , where she was only lightly damaged despite suffering many hits by German shells . Apart from providing distant cover during the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in 1917 , she spent the rest of the war on uneventful patrols in the North Sea . 
 Tiger was the oldest battlecruiser retained by the Royal Navy after the tonnage limits of the Washington Naval Treaty came into effect in 1922 . She became a gunnery training ship in 1924 and then joined the Battlecruiser Squadron in 1929 when its flagship , HMS Hood , underwent a lengthy refit . Upon Hood 's return to service in 1931 , Tiger was decommissioned and sold for scrap in 1932 in accordance with the terms of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Tiger was the sole battlecruiser authorised in the 1911 – 12 Naval Programme . According to naval historian Siegfried Breyer , a sister ship named Leopard was considered in the 1912 – 13 Programme and deferred until 1914 as a sixth member of the Queen Elizabeth class , but there is no record of any additional battlecruiser being provided for in any naval estimates before 1914 . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Tiger had an overall length of 704 feet ( 214 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 90 feet 6 inches ( 27 @.@ 6 m ) , and a mean draught of 32 feet 5 inches ( 9 @.@ 88 m ) at deep load . She normally displaced 28 @,@ 430 long tons ( 28 @,@ 890 t ) and 33 @,@ 260 long tons ( 33 @,@ 790 t ) at deep load . Although Tiger was only 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) longer and 1 foot 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 0 @.@ 4 m ) wider than the previous battlecruiser , HMS Queen Mary , she displaced almost 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) more than the older ship . She had a metacentric height of 6 @.@ 1 feet ( 1 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . In September 1914 , her complement consisted of 1 @,@ 112 officers and enlisted men ; in April 1918 , they totalled 1 @,@ 459 . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Tiger had two paired sets of Brown @-@ Curtis direct @-@ drive steam turbines housed in separate engine @-@ rooms . Each set consisted of high @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines driving an outboard shaft and low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines , housed in the same casing , driving an inner shaft . Her three @-@ bladed propellers were 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) in diameter . The turbines were powered by 39 Babcock & Wilcox water @-@ tube boilers in five boiler rooms at a working pressure of 235 psi ( 1 @,@ 620 kPa ; 17 kgf / cm2 ) . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 85 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 63 @,@ 000 kW ) and a maximum of 108 @,@ 000 shp ( 81 @,@ 000 kW ) when forced , but only achieved 104 @,@ 635 shp ( 78 @,@ 026 kW ) during her sea trials , although she managed to exceed her maximum designed speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) by over a knot . 
 The ship 's fuel stowage capacity was 3 @,@ 800 long tons ( 3 @,@ 900 t ) of fuel oil and 3 @,@ 340 long tons ( 3 @,@ 390 t ) of coal , giving a total fuel supply of 7 @,@ 140 long tons ( 7 @,@ 250 t ) — much more than Queen Mary 's total of 4 @,@ 800 long tons ( 4 @,@ 900 t ) . The sole ( unofficial ) figure for Tiger 's daily fuel consumption of 1 @,@ 245 long tons ( 1 @,@ 265 t ) a day at 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) would have given a maximum endurance of 3 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 100 km ; 3 @,@ 800 mi ) . The equivalent figure for Queen Mary was roughly 2 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 400 km ; 2 @,@ 800 mi ) . Four direct current electric dynamos with a total capacity of 750 kilowatts ( 1 @,@ 010 hp ) supplied the common ring main at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Tiger mounted eight 45 @-@ calibre BL 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk V guns in four twin hydraulically powered turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' Q ' and ' Y ' from front to rear . The guns could be depressed to − 5 ° and elevated to + 20 ° , although the directors controlling the turrets were limited to 15 ° 21 ' until superelevating prisms were installed before the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 to allow full elevation . They fired 1 @,@ 250 @-@ pound ( 567 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) ; at 20 ° elevation , this provided a maximum range of 23 @,@ 820 yards ( 21 @,@ 780 m ) . The rate of fire of these guns was approximately 2 rounds per minute . The ship carried a total of 1040 rounds during wartime for 130 shells per gun . 
 Her secondary armament consisted of twelve BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns in casemates . The guns could depress to − 7 ° and had a maximum elevation of 14 ° . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of approximately 2 @,@ 770 ft / s ( 840 m / s ) ; this gave a maximum range of 12 @,@ 200 yd ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) at + 14 ° elevation . They were provided with 120 rounds per gun . The ship mounted a pair of QF 3 inch 20 cwt Mk I anti @-@ aircraft guns on high @-@ angle Mark II mounts . The gun had a maximum elevation of + 90 ° and fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 604 ft / s ( 794 m / s ) . It had a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) . Originally Tiger carried 300 rounds per gun , but this was reduced during the war to 150 rounds per gun . 
 Four 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were fitted on the beam , one pair port and starboard forward of ' A ' barbette and aft of ' X ' barbette . The ship carried 20 Mark II * * * torpedoes , each with a warhead of 400 pounds ( 181 kg ) of TNT . They had two speed settings which governed their range ; at 45 knots ( 83 km / h ; 52 mph ) they could reach 4 @,@ 500 yards ( 4 @,@ 100 m ) , or 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) at 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 The main guns of Tiger were controlled from either of the two fire @-@ control directors . The primary director was in the fore @-@ top on the foremast and the other was mounted on the aft superstructure in the torpedo control tower . Data from 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinders in the armoured hood above the conning tower and in ' B ' and ' Q ' turrets was transmitted to the Mk IV Dreyer Fire Control Table located in the transmitting station below the waterline . The observations were then plotted and converted into range and deflection data for use by the director and guns . A Mark VII * Dumaresq in the armoured tower was trained on the target to supply bearing data to one transmitting station for use in plotting and calculations , and a second station was fitted for the ship 's secondary armament , although a pair of fire @-@ control directors for those guns , one for each broadside , were not fitted until 1915 . 
 Fire @-@ control technology advanced quickly during the years immediately preceding the First World War and the development of the director firing system was a major advance . This consisted of a fire @-@ control director mounted high in the ship which electrically provided elevation and training angles to the turrets via pointers , which the turret crewmen had only to follow . The director layer fired the guns simultaneously by an electrical trigger which aided in spotting the shell splashes and minimised the effects of the roll on the dispersion of the shells . 
 During the war Tiger 's rangefinders had increased in number and in size . By the end of the war ' A ' and ' Q ' turrets mounted 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinders while ' X ' turret , the armoured hood above the conning tower ( also known as the gun control tower ) , and the torpedo control tower had 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) instruments . A 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder was fitted in the fore @-@ top and three 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) instruments were fitted on ' B ' turret , the gun control tower and above the compass platform . A high @-@ angle 6 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) rangefinder was mounted above the roof of the fore @-@ top for use by the anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Tiger 's armour protection was similar to that of Queen Mary ; her waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour measured 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick amidships . It thinned to four inches towards the ship 's ends , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . The depth of the main belt below the waterline was reduced from 36 to 27 inches ( 914 to 686 mm ) , although a strake of three @-@ inch armour 3 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 14 m ) tall was added below the main belt that stretched from the front of ' A ' barbette to the rear of ' B ' barbette . It was based on that used on the Japanese battlecruiser Kongo , the only design influence on Tiger that can be attributed to the Japanese ship . 
 Like the Lion @-@ class ships and Queen Mary , Tiger was given an upper armour belt with a maximum thickness of six inches over the same length as the thickest part of the waterline armour and thinned to 5 inches ( 127 mm ) abreast the end turrets . Unlike those ships , Tiger had an additional strake of 6 @-@ inch armour above the upper belt protecting her secondary armament . Four @-@ inch transverse bulkheads closed off the ends of the armoured citadel . High @-@ tensile steel was used for the protective decks . They generally ranged from 1 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 to 38 mm ) in thickness . 
 The gun turrets had 9 @-@ inch front and sides while their roofs were 2 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 64 to 83 mm ) thick . The barbettes were protected above the citadel by 8 to 9 inches ( 203 to 229 mm ) of armour , thinning to three to four inches inside the citadel . The main conning tower had a three @-@ inch roof and sides 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick . The walls of the communication tube were three to four inches thick . The aft conning tower had 6 @-@ inch walls and a 3 @-@ inch cast steel roof . High @-@ tensile steel torpedo bulkheads 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 to 64 mm ) thick were fitted abreast the magazines and shell rooms . After the Battle of Jutland revealed the ship 's vulnerability to plunging shellfire , around 295 long tons ( 300 t ) of additional armour was added to the turret roofs , the decks over the magazines , and the bulkheads separating the 6 @-@ inch guns . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Tiger was laid down at the John Brown and Company shipyard in Clydebank on 6 June 1912 . She was launched on 15 December 1913 and commissioned into the Royal Navy on 3 October 1914 , at the cost of £ 2 @,@ 593 @,@ 100 , including armament . The ship was still under construction when the First World War broke out in August 1914 . On 3 August 1914 Captain Henry Bertram Pelly was appointed to command the incomplete ship . Beatty described Pelly at the time as " a very charming person and , what is more important just now , a very efficient officer " . After the Battle of Coronel and the deployment of three battlecruisers to hunt for the German East Asia Squadron , Tiger was ordered to cut short her firing trials off Berehaven and was commissioned into the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron ( 1st BCS ) two months later , on 3 October , and began trials and working up . Beatty described Tiger to the First Sea Lord , Admiral of the Fleet Lord Fisher of <unk> , as " not yet fit to fight . Three out of her four <unk> are out of action for an indefinite period , and her training is impeded by bad weather , which might continue for many weeks at this time of year , and at present is quite unprepared and inefficient . " 
 = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = 
 On 23 January 1915 , a force of German battlecruisers under the command of Admiral Franz von Hipper sortied to clear the Dogger Bank of any British fishing boats or small craft that might be there to collect intelligence on German movements . However , the British were reading their coded messages and sailed to intercept them with a larger force of British battlecruisers under the command of Admiral Beatty . Contact was initiated at 7 : 20 a.m. on the 24th when the British light cruiser Arethusa spotted the German light cruiser SMS Kolberg . By 7 : 35 the Germans had spotted Beatty 's force and Hipper ordered a turn to the south at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , believing that this would suffice if the ships that he saw to his north @-@ west were British battleships and that he could always increase speed to Blücher 's maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) if they were British battlecruisers . 
 Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to make all practicable speed to catch the Germans before they could escape . The leading ships , Lion , Princess Royal and Tiger , were doing 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) in pursuit and Lion opened fire at 8 : 52 at a range of 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) . The other ships followed a few minutes later but , hampered by the extreme range and decreasing visibility , they did not score their first hit on Blücher until 9 : 09 . The German battlecruisers opened fire themselves a few minutes later at 9 : 11 , at a range of 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) , and concentrated their fire on Lion . At 9 : 35 Beatty signalled " Engage the corresponding ships in the enemy 's line " , but Captain Pelly , believing that Indomitable was already engaging Blücher , fired at Seydlitz , as did Lion , which left Moltke free to continue attacking Lion without risk . 
 In the meantime Blücher had been heavily damaged by fire from all the other battlecruisers ; her speed had dropped to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) and her steering gear had been jammed . Beatty ordered Indomitable to attack her at 10 : 48 a.m. Six minutes later Beatty spotted what he thought was a submarine periscope on the starboard bow and ordered an immediate 90 ° turn to port to avoid the submarine , although he failed to hoist the " Submarine Warning " flag because most of Lion 's signal halyards had been shot away . Shortly afterward Lion lost her remaining dynamo to the rising water which knocked out all remaining light and power . He ordered " Course north @-@ east " at 11 : 02 to bring his ships back to their pursuit of Hipper . He also hoisted " Attack the rear of the enemy " on the other halyard although there was no connection between the two signals . Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Gordon Moore , temporarily commanding in New Zealand , thought that the signals meant for him to attack Blücher , which was about 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) to the north @-@ east , which he did , turning away from Hipper 's main body . Beatty tried to correct the mistake , but he was so far behind the leading battlecruisers that his signals could not be read amidst the smoke and haze . 
 He transferred his flag to the destroyer Attack at 11 : 50 and set off in pursuit of his battlecruisers . He caught up to them shortly before Blücher sank and boarded Princess Royal at 12 : 20 . He ordered the pursuit of the German battlecruisers to be resumed , but rescinded the order when it became clear that too much time had been wasted sinking Blücher and Hipper 's ships would be able to reach German waters before the British could catch them . Lion was headed home at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) when the rest of the battlecruisers caught up with her around 12 : 45 . 
 During the action , Tiger was hit by six German shells , the most significant of which was a 28 @-@ centimetre ( 11 in ) shell that burst on the roof of ' Q ' turret . Although most of the shell was deflected overboard , fragments penetrated the roof , damaged the left gun 's breech mechanism and jammed the training gear , knocking the turret out of action . Ten men were killed during the battle and 11 wounded . Tiger 's repairs were completed on 8 February . Like the rest of the battlecruisers , Tiger 's own gunnery was rapid , but inaccurate , and she achieved only two hits out of 355 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) shells fired , scoring one hit each on Seydlitz and Derfflinger . Her performance was noted and commented upon by the senior leadership of the Royal Navy : Lord Fisher criticised Pelly 's performance , calling him a " <unk> " and adding " The Tiger 's gunnery seems to have been <unk> bad on January 24 , yet she seems to have had a lot of practice . " . In a memorandum of 11 February 1915 Beatty explained to Pelly where the latter had misconstrued the standing orders , going through Tiger 's part in the battle blow by blow and comparing it to that of other ships . His final paragraph was conciliatory however : " In making these remarks I have no wish to express censure in any form . I realise that a newly @-@ commissioned ship in her first action has many difficulties to contend with , and I am quite ready to make the fullest allowance for them . My chief aim is to ensure that our next action shall be a complete success . " The ship was given a refit in December 1915 . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 On 31 May 1916 , Tiger and the 1st BCS had put to sea with the rest of the Battlecruiser Fleet , under Beatty 's overall command , to intercept a sortie by the High Seas Fleet into the North Sea . The British had decoded the German radio messages , and left their bases before the Germans put to sea . Hipper 's battlecruisers spotted the Battlecruiser Fleet to their west at 3 : 20 p.m. , but Beatty 's ships did not see the Germans to their east until 3 : 30 . Two minutes later , Beatty ordered a course change to east @-@ southeast , positioning the British ships to cut off the German 's line of retreat , and signalled action stations . Hipper ordered his ships to turn to starboard , away from the British , to assume a south @-@ easterly course , and reduced speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) to allow three light cruisers of the 2nd Scouting Group to catch up . With this turn , Hipper was falling back on the High Seas Fleet , 60 miles ( 97 km ) behind him . Beatty altered course to the east , as he was still too far north to cut Hipper off . 
 This was later characterised as the " Run to the South " as Beatty changed course to steer east @-@ southeast at 3 : 45 , now paralleling Hipper 's course less than 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) away . The Germans opened fire first at 3 : 48 , followed by the British . The British ships were still in the process of making their turn as only the two leading ships , Lion and Princess Royal , had steadied on their course when the Germans opened fire . The 1st BCS was echeloned to the right with Tiger in the rear and the furthest to the west , closest to the Germans . Tiger missed Beatty 's fire distribution order , as had Queen Mary , and Tiger engaged Moltke , instead of Seydlitz as Beatty intended . The German fire was accurate from the start , with Tiger hit six times by Moltke within the first seven minutes ; although two of these hits temporarily disabled both ' Q ' and ' X ' turrets , she was not seriously damaged . By 3 : 54 , the range was down to 12 @,@ 900 yards ( 11 @,@ 800 m ) ; Beatty ordered a course change two points to starboard to open up the range at 3 : 57 . 
 The range gradually increased until the distance between the British and German ships was too great for accurate fire , so Beatty altered course four points to port between 4 : 12 and 4 : 15 to close the range . By 4 : 25 , the range was down to 14 @,@ 400 yards ( 13 @,@ 200 m ) and Beatty turned two points to starboard to open the range again . Around this time , Queen Mary was hit multiple times in quick succession and her forward magazines exploded . Tiger , following in Queen Mary 's wake at a distance of only 500 yards ( 460 m ) , had to put her helm hard @-@ a @-@ starboard to avoid colliding with the wreckage . At 4 : 30 , the light cruiser Southampton , scouting in front of Beatty 's ships , spotted the lead elements of the High Seas Fleet coming north at top speed . Three minutes later , she sighted the topmasts of Vice @-@ Admiral Reinhard Scheer 's battleships , but did not report this for another five minutes . Beatty continued south for another two minutes to confirm the sighting before ordering his force to turn north . By this time Tiger had been hit a total of 17 times , all but one fired by Moltke , but she remained fit to fight . 
 The German battlecruisers made their own turn north in pursuit , but Beatty 's ships maintained full speed , and gradually moved out of range . The British battlecruisers turned north , then north @-@ east , to try to rendezvous with the main body of the Grand Fleet , and at 5 : 40 p.m. opened fire again on their German counterparts . The setting sun blinded the German gunners and they could not make out the British ships and turned away to the north @-@ east at 5 : 47 . Beatty gradually turned towards the east so his ships could cover the Grand Fleet as it deployed into battle formation , but he mistimed his manoeuvre and forced the leading British division further from the Germans . By 6 : 35 , Beatty was following the 3rd BCS as they were leading the Grand Fleet east @-@ southeast , and continuing to engage Hipper 's battlecruisers to their south @-@ west . A few minutes earlier , Scheer had ordered a simultaneous 180 ° starboard turn , and Beatty lost sight of them in the haze . At 6 : 44 , Beatty turned his ships south @-@ east , then south @-@ southeast four minutes later , to find Hipper 's force . He then ordered the two surviving ships of the 3rd BCS to take position astern of New Zealand , while slowing to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) and altering course to the south to stay close to the Grand Fleet . At this moment Lion 's gyrocompass failed and she , followed by the rest of the battlecruisers , made a complete circle before her steering was brought back under control . At 6 : 55 , Scheer ordered another 180 ° turn , which put the German ships on a converging course again with the Grand Fleet . However , the British had altered course to the south , allowing the Grand Fleet to cross Scheer 's " T " and inflict damage on the leading German ships . Scheer ordered yet another 180 ° turn at 7 : 13 , and successfully extricated the High Seas Fleet from the trap his manoeuvring caused . 
 The British lost sight of the Germans until HMS Castor spotted smoke to the west @-@ northwest at 8 : 05 p.m. , then identified and engaged several German torpedo boats . On hearing the sound of gunfire , Beatty ordered his ships west , and spotted the German battlecruisers only 8 @,@ 500 yards ( 7 @,@ 800 m ) away . Inflexible opened fire at 8 : 20 , followed almost immediately by the rest of the battlecruisers . Shortly after 8 : 30 , the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of Rear Admiral Franz Mauve 's II Battle Squadron were spotted . The British battlecruisers and German pre @-@ dreadnoughts exchanged fire ; the Germans only fired a few times before turning away to the west because of poor visibility and the more accurate British gunnery , and disappeared into the mist around 8 : 40 . Beatty 's battlecruisers sailed south @-@ southeast , ahead of both the Grand Fleet and the High Seas Fleet , until the order to reverse course for home was given at 2 : 55 a.m. 
 Tiger and the rest of the battlecruisers reached Rosyth Dockyard in Scotland on the morning of 2 June . Docked the next day for repairs which took until 1 July , she was the first of the " Splendid Cats " to be repaired . Tiger was hit a total of 18 times during the battle , mostly by shells fired by Moltke , suffering 24 men killed and 46 wounded . The battlecruiser fired 303 shells from her main guns during the battle and is credited with one hit on Moltke and two on Von der Tann . The ship also fired 136 rounds from her 6 @-@ inch guns at the light cruiser Wiesbaden and German destroyers . 
 = = = Post @-@ Jutland service = = = 
 After her repairs were completed , Tiger served as the temporary flagship of the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron while Lion was under repair . In the meantime , on the evening of 18 August the Grand Fleet put to sea in response to a message deciphered by Room 40 which indicated that the High Seas Fleet , less the II Squadron , would be leaving harbour that night . The German objective was to bombard Sunderland on the 19th , with extensive reconnaissance provided by airships and submarines . The Grand Fleet sailed with 29 dreadnought battleships and six battlecruisers . Throughout the 19th , Jellicoe and Scheer received conflicting intelligence , with the result that having reached its rendezvous in the North Sea , the Grand Fleet steered north in the erroneous belief that it had entered a minefield before turning south again . Scheer steered south @-@ eastward pursuing a lone British battle squadron reported by an airship , which was in fact the Harwich Force under Commodore Tyrwhitt . Having realised their mistake the Germans then steered for home . The only contact came in the evening when Tyrwhitt sighted the High Seas Fleet but was unable to achieve an advantageous attack position before dark , and broke off contact . Both the British and the German fleets returned home ; the British had lost two cruisers to submarine attacks , and a German dreadnought had been damaged by a torpedo . 
 The ship received a lengthy refit from 10 November 1916 to 29 January 1917 at Rosyth where her deck and turret roof armour were reinforced and additional rangefinders were added over her conning tower and the rear of ' X ' turret . For the remainder of the war , Tiger uneventfully patrolled the North Sea , as both fleets were essentially forbidden to risk any more losses . She provided support for British light forces involved in the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight on 17 November 1917 , but never came within range of any German forces . The same year saw her undergo a minor refit during which a flying @-@ off platform for a Sopwith Camel was mounted on ' Q ' turret and a searchlight platform was added to her third funnel . She underwent a more extensive refit in 1918 which saw her topmast shifted to the top of the derrick @-@ stump and a more substantial observation platform added to the foremast . Some of her short rangefinders were replaced by longer ones as well . 
 = = Post @-@ war service = = 
 Tiger remained in service with the Royal Navy after the Armistice with Germany and she had a flying @-@ off platform added on ' B ' turret 's roof in 1919 . The ship collided with the battleship Royal Sovereign in late 1920 while assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . Tiger survived the culling of older capital ships following the Washington Naval Treaty , although she was placed in reserve on 22 August 1921 . The ship was refitted in March 1922 with a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinder fitted on ' X ' turret , her original pair of 3 @-@ inch AA guns replaced by four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns , and the flying @-@ off platform on ' Q ' turret was removed . On 14 February 1924 , Tiger was recommissioned and became a seagoing training ship , a role she served in throughout the 1920s . Her last major period of activity came in 1929 , when Hood went into dockyard hands for refit . While Hood was out of commission , Tiger returned to active service to keep the Royal Navy 's three @-@ ship Battlecruiser Squadron ( normally made up of Hood plus the smaller Renown and Repulse ) up to strength . Although by the 1930s Tiger was still in reasonable condition , the decision was taken to discard her following the London Naval Conference of 1930 as part of an overall reduction in world battleship fleets . Under the command of Captain Kenneth Dewar from 1928 to 1929 , her final commander was Arthur Bedford , and she remained in service with the fleet until Hood came out of refit in early 1931 , at which time she was taken out of commission in accordance with the terms of the London Naval Treaty . 
 Tiger took the cheers of the Atlantic Fleet on 30 March 1931 at Devonport . She paid off on 15 May 1931 at Rosyth , before being sold to T. W. Ward of Inverkeithing for breaking up in February 1932 . 
 = HD 154672 b = 
 HD 154672 b is an extrasolar planet located approximately 210 light @-@ years away in the constellation of Ara , orbiting the metal @-@ rich and aged star HD 154672 . This planet has a minimum mass five times that of Jupiter and orbits at about 60 % the distance between the Earth to the Sun . Its orbit is very elliptical , which causes temperatures on the planet to vary significantly as it proceeds along its orbit . This planet was discovered in Las Campanas Observatory on September 5 , 2008 using the radial velocity method ( Doppler spectroscopy ) . Along with HD 205739 b , the planets were the first to be discovered by the N2K Consortium using the Magellan Telescopes . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Astronomers hoped to implement a survey called the N2K Consortium , a collaboration which uses Doppler spectroscopy to find radial velocity measurements of stars that hadn 't been previously surveyed . The project searched particularly for gas giants with short orbits around metal @-@ rich stars to find how the metallicity of the star and the mass of the planet are related . 
 Radial velocity observations had been taken by the N2K program using the Magellan Telescopes ' Magellan Inamori Kyocera Echelle spectrograph ( MIKE ) at Las Campanas Observatory in Chile since 2004 . Based on these observations , the stars HD 154672 and HD 205739 were among those flagged as potential planetary host stars . The two stars were identified originally as having short @-@ orbit hot Jupiter planets , but 3 @.@ 5 years of additional observations revealed that the planetary candidates ' orbits were far longer than initially anticipated . HD 154672 b 's discovery was reported in the Astronomical Journal by the American Astronomical Society , appearing in the journal on October 7 , 2008 alongside the planet HD 205739 b . The two planets were the first to be discovered by the N2K program that worked out of the Magellan telescopes . 
 HD 154672 b was later observed by a different team of astronomers investigating the role of metallicity , or the amount of metal present in a star , in the formation of planets . Six radial velocity measurements of the host star , collected using the HARPS instrument at Chile 's La Silla Observatory . The team used the radial velocity data to refine the parameters of HD 154672 b from what was published in its discovery paper a year earlier . 
 = = Host star = = 
 HD 154672 is a G @-@ type star like the Sun . The star has a mass that is 1 @.@ 06 times that of the Sun , and a radius 1 @.@ 27 times the solar radius . The effective temperature , or the temperature it would emit if it were a black body , is <unk> K , slightly cooler than that of the Sun . However , with an [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 26 and an age of 9 @.@ 28 billion years , HD 154672 has 182 % more iron than the Sun , and is over two times older than the Sun . Based on its spectrum , HD 154672 is not a very active star . 
 The apparent magnitude ( v ) of HD 154672 is 8 @.@ 22 , which means that it is not visible to the naked eye . It is slightly dimmer than Neptune , which has an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 78 at its brightest . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 HD 154672 b is a closely orbiting planet that is larger than Jupiter . Its mass was estimated as 5 @.@ 02 that of Jupiter . HD 154672 b also orbits its host star at a distance of 0 @.@ 6 AU every 163 @.@ 91 days . Earth , in comparison , orbits the Sun at a distance of 1 AU every 365 @.@ 25 days . However , HD 154672 b has an orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 61 , which indicates a very elliptical orbit . Because HD 154672 b has such an eccentric orbit , the equilibrium temperature of the planet varies between 300 K and 600 K , which is significantly higher than that of Jupiter ( 124 K ) . If liquid water is present in the atmosphere of HD 154672 b , it could possibly convert between gaseous and liquid phases as the planet moves along its orbit . 
 The high eccentricity of the planet 's orbit suggests that either the Kozai mechanism ( there is an exchange between the inclination of a planet and its eccentricity ) is at work , or that the planet 's orbit was distorted by the unstable orbit of other planets that used to be part of the HD 154672 system . 
 HD 154672 b had , at the time of its 2008 discovery , an orbital period larger than 90 % of all discovered planets . It was the seventh planet known to have an eccentricity over 0 @.@ 6 and an orbit shorter than 300 days . 
 = Caleb V. Haynes = 
 Caleb Vance Haynes ( March 15 , 1895 – April 5 , 1966 ) was a United States Air Force ( USAF ) major general . The grandson of Chang Bunker , a famous Siamese Twin , he served in the Air Force as an organizer , able to create air units from scratch . He commanded a large number of groups , squadrons and task forces before , during and after World War II . 
 In the 1930s , Haynes , a rated command pilot , led experimental long @-@ range over @-@ water interception flights that were key to the development of U.S. air defense doctrine . Haynes demonstrated by piloting one of the bombers that intercepted the Italian liner SS Rex that enemy ships could be located and sunk by American aircraft . As well , Haynes helped promote air power by flying long range missions to various countries in South America . 
 Described as " a big , hulking mountaineer " , Haynes was a " pilot 's pilot " , the kind of air officer who led from the front . Fighting in China in 1942 , Haynes commanded a small force of bombers under Claire Chennault , and was known for his expert flying ability and his daring . Chennault said that " Haynes looked like a gorilla and flew like an angel . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Caleb Vance Haynes was born in Dobson , the county seat of Surry County , North Carolina , on March 15 , 1895 . His paternal grandfather was Caleb Hill Haynes , who died at the end of April 1863 , two weeks after the birth of Caleb Hill Haynes , Jr . This son grew up and married Margaret Elizabeth " Lizzie " Bunker on January 10 , 1889 . The couple produced five daughters and four sons — Caleb Vance Haynes was the fourth child and the second son . At the time of his birth , his father was the County Registrar of Deeds . The father continued to rise in North Carolina Democratic Party politics , serving as one of the delegates to the Democratic National Convention in 1912 . A Mason , Caleb Hill Haynes , Jr. was the county sheriff for twenty years following which he was elected to the North Carolina General Assembly in 1931 . 
 On his mother 's side , Caleb Vance Haynes had Thai and Chinese ancestors through his grandfather Chang Bunker , one of the original Siamese Twins . The conjoined twins married sisters , with Chang Bunker marrying Adelaide Yates . The couple produced seven daughters and three sons , and lived west of Mount Airy , North Carolina . Three of their Anglo @-@ Chinese offspring , including Lizzie Bunker , Haynes 's mother , married into the local Haynes clan . 
 Young Caleb Vance Haynes grew up and went to school in Mount Airy . He moved some 140 miles ( 230 km ) to the southeast to attend Wake Forest College . There , he graduated in 1917 with a Bachelor of Laws degree . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Two months after receiving his law degree , Haynes entered the United States Army as a flying cadet on August 15 , 1917 . From August to November 1917 , he attended the School of Military Aeronautics at Georgia Polytechnic Institute , after which he sailed for France . He served at Saint @-@ Maixent @-@ l 'École until the following March and then entered the Machine Gun School at <unk> @-@ le @-@ Château . In May 1918 , he was commissioned a temporary second lieutenant in the Air Service , and sent to Tours as a test pilot . In July of that year , he became an instructor at the Second Aviation Instructor Center at Issoudun and the following September was transferred to Orly as a test pilot . After the Armistice in November 1918 , he served as an aide to President Woodrow Wilson during the Paris Peace Conference . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 = = = Air Service duty = = = 
 Returning to the U.S. in June 1919 , he was assigned to Mitchel Field on Long Island , New York . The following August he went to Speedway , Indiana , for duty as supply officer of the Aviation Repair Depot . In July 1920 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Air Service of the Regular Army and in September became a test officer at the Fairfield , Ohio , Air Intermediate Depot . In May 1922 , he went to Washington , D.C. where he served as officer @-@ in @-@ charge of gasoline and oil supply systems in the Office of the Chief of Air Service . In 1923 , he piloted one of the six Army planes that flew from the U.S. to San Juan , Puerto Rico , on a goodwill tour . 
 Haynes was ordered to Crissy Field in San Francisco in August 1924 , and transferred to Camp Lewis , Washington , the following June where he served three months as commanding officer of the Air Corps detachment . In September 1925 , he returned to Crissy Field . 
 = = = Air Corps duty = = = 
 Under Major John T. " Jack " Fancher in March 1927 , Haynes became an instructor of the 116th Observation Squadron , the aerial component of the 41st Division of the Washington National Guard , stationed at Felts Field . Haynes was one of the directors of the 1927 Spokane National Air Derby and Air Races , September 21 – 25 , with finish lines established at Felts for air races starting from New York and also from San Francisco . Fancher died in April 1928 , and Haynes succeeded him in command of the 116th . Haynes married and became a father during his time in Spokane , and he improved Felts Field , adding a photography laboratory . In August 1931 after four years in Washington state , he entered the Air Corps Tactical School at Maxwell Field in Alabama , at the rank of first lieutenant . 
 Following graduation from the school in June 1932 , he went to Langley Field , Virginia , for duty as engineering officer of the Eighth Pursuit Group , a unit of fighter aircraft at which he attained the rank of captain . In February 1934 , he assumed command of the Second Station , Eastern Zone , for the Army Air Corps Mail Operation ( <unk> ) based at Bolling Field , Washington , D.C. ; Haynes was frustrated that his men in Richmond , Virginia were " forced to establish headquarters in rear of hangars , in tents , sheds , and other places " unsuited to winter operations . Haynes urgently requested air temperature thermometers to be supplied to all mail planes so that pilots could be warned of possible atmospheric icing conditions , but was forced to operate without them as procurement was to take two months . From July 1934 until January 1935 , Haynes was the commanding officer of the 37th Pursuit Squadron at Langley Field . This turned out to be Haynes 's last posting to a fighter unit . 
 Haynes went to Rockwell Field , California , for special training in air navigation and instrument flying . Returning to Langley field in March 1935 , he was appointed commanding officer of the 37th Attack Squadron there . He entered the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , in August 1935 , and graduated the following June . He returned to Langley Field , where he served as commanding officer of the 49th Bombardment Squadron of the 2nd Bombardment Group , and rose to the temporary rank of major . 
 The first YB @-@ 17 Flying Fortress service test aircraft were assigned in March 1937 to the 2nd Bombardment Group , commanded by Lt. Col. Robert Olds . Following Barney M. Giles in the first one , Haynes flew the second one to Langley . By early August , a squadron of 12 were gathered . On August 12 – 13 , 1937 , Haynes took part in a joint Army @-@ Navy exercise in which the battleship USS Utah was to be searched for off the coast of San Francisco , and hit with 50 @-@ pound ( 23 kg ) water bombs if found . The timing and location had been selected by Admiral William D. Leahy to provide the Utah with the greatest likelihood of fog and cloud cover in which to hide from air observation . The navy supplied the water bombs , but the airmen had never employed them , and were not practiced in their aerodynamics . Delos Carleton Emmons commanded the Air Corps units from his headquarters at Hamilton Field , and Curtis LeMay served as the main navigator for the bomber group , composed of thirty twin @-@ engine Martin B @-@ 10s , seven of the new YB @-@ 17s , four B @-@ 18 <unk> , and three amphibious aircraft . On the afternoon of August 12 , the Navy sent to the airmen directions which were off by one degree of latitude , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the east of the ship 's actual position , and the bombers did not find the battleship . The next morning , Haynes and Olds flew the lead YB @-@ 17 with LeMay as navigator , and General Headquarters Air Force commander General Frank M. Andrews as an observer to witness the results . Haynes descended below the fog to find the Utah , and commenced bombing at 11 : 47 a.m at a low altitude of 600 feet ( 180 m ) . At 11 : 59 , the last YB @-@ 17 dropped its bombs , for a total of three direct hits out of fifty water bombs dropped . The larger flight of B @-@ 10s arrived three minutes after noon , three minutes too late for the exercise . 
 In February 1938 , he participated in the Army flight from Langley Field to Buenos Aires , Argentina , commanded by Olds , and in August of that year took part in the Army flight to Bogotá , Colombia . The following January he returned to the Air Corps Tactical School at Maxwell Field to take a month 's course in Naval Operations . 
 = = = Interception of the Rex = = = 
 See main article Interception of the Rex 
 In May 1938 during Army maneuvers , bomber advocates wished to attempt an interception of a ship at sea , as far from land as the B @-@ 17 's practical range would allow . The U.S. Navy refused to cooperate — instead , Reserve Lieutenant Harris Hull suggested intercepting an ocean liner . The War Department agreed , and arranged for coordination with the Italian ocean liner SS Rex which would be crossing the Atlantic . Lieutenant Colonel Ira C. Eaker , head of Air Corps public relations , contacted major news agencies for national publicity . Haynes flew one of the three B @-@ 17s specially prepared for the task . Aboard Haynes 's aircraft were LeMay as navigator and the two theoretical war @-@ maneuver adversaries : Major Vincent L. Meloy , another squadron commander acting as the attacking force 's commander , and Olds as defending group commander . Positioned further back in the body of the bomber was one NBC radio announcer served by two broadcast engineers operating a powerful radio transmitter and a smaller transceiver tuned to the Rex . On May 12 through poor weather , the morning position report from the Rex placed the ship 725 miles ( 1 @,@ 167 km ) at sea and the three B @-@ 17s took off in a driving rain . 
 LeMay 's expert navigation plot resulted in visual contact with the ship at 12 : 25 pm some 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) east of Sandy Hook . NBC began broadcasting to the U.S. on the main transmitter , while Meloy spoke over the other radio with Captain <unk> of the Rex , who jokingly invited all of the airmen down for lunch at his table . Aboard another B @-@ 17 , USAAC 's top photographer , Major George W. Goddard , snapped a shot of Haynes and fellow pilot Archibald Y. Smith flying their two B @-@ 17s over the Rex " at smokestack level " — Goddard later enthused that the photo " made the front page of every newspaper around the world " . 
 = = = 1938 to Pearl Harbor = = = 
 Late in 1938 , Haynes commanded a provisional group of nine YB @-@ 17s that were to test bombing accuracy over Plum Tree Island , a bombing range near Langley at the mouth of Chesapeake Bay . Carrying two 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) bombs each , the aircraft flew at 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) in single file , and aimed at a single point , dropping their bombs in quick succession . Observation showed exactly half the bombs striking inside of a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) diameter circle centered on the target . 
 Haynes received the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Order of the Merit of Chile for his role in February 1939 as commander of the experimental aircraft , the Boeing XB @-@ 15 , carrying 3 @,@ 250 pounds ( 1 @,@ 470 kg ) of American Red Cross emergency supplies to Santiago , Chile , to help the survivors of the 1939 <unk> earthquake . Haynes and his ten @-@ man crew won the Mackay Trophy for their part in the nearly 10 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 16 @,@ 000 km ) round trip voyage . The flight showed the world not only the lengths to which the U.S. could go to mount a humanitarian relief mission but also the range and payload capability of the new bomber . 
 Haynes piloted the XB @-@ 15 again on June 10 to return home the body of Mexican flier Francisco <unk> who had died in a crash in the Potomac River . After flying back from Mexico City , Haynes and his copilot William D. Old undertook flight tests at Fairfield , Ohio , lifting very heavy loads . They used the XB @-@ 15 to lift 22 @,@ 046 pounds ( 10 @,@ 000 kg ) to 8 @,@ 228 feet ( 2 @,@ 508 m ) , and 31 @,@ 164 pounds ( 14 @,@ 136 kg ) to 6 @,@ 561 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 @,@ 000 @.@ 0 m ) , setting two world records . Haynes was awarded certificates issued by the National Aeronautics Association ( NAA ) for an international record for " the greatest payload carried to an altitude of 2 @,@ 000 metres " . The following month he received certificates from the NAA for the establishment of an international 5 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) speed record with a 2 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) payload . The latter performance also established a national closed circuit distance record of 3 @,@ 129 @.@ 241 miles ( 5 @,@ 036 @.@ 025 km ) . He was promoted to the permanent rank of major in November . 
 In February 1940 , he was named commanding officer of the 41st Reconnaissance Squadron ( Long Range ) flying modified bomber aircraft at Langley Field . From October to December 1940 , Haynes was an aide to Brigadier General Arnold N. <unk> at that station . He then became training adviser of the 13th Composite Wing primarily flying Douglas B @-@ 18 <unk> at Borinquen Field , Puerto Rico . 
 From January 7 to June 1 , 1941 , Haynes was in command of the original 25th Bombardment Group at Borinquen Field and at that time organized the Puerto Rico Sector of the VI Bomber Command . He was promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel . 
 Haynes was called to Washington , D.C. in June to command a single B @-@ 24 Liberator to be used to test a northern Atlantic air route to Great Britain . On July 1 , 1941 , he took off from Bolling Field and refueled in Montreal , then again at Gander Lake , Newfoundland before arriving in Ayr , Scotland in the first B @-@ 24 delivered overseas . A total of 22 round trip flights were made by others in the next three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months , however , Haynes was directed to scout another air route across the southern Atlantic from the U.S. to Brazil to Africa , with the terminus in Cairo , Egypt . On August 31 with Major Curtis LeMay as his co @-@ pilot and Chief of the Air Corps Major General George H. Brett as a passenger , Haynes took off from Bolling Field to begin a 26 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 42 @,@ 000 km ) round trip journey to Egypt and beyond , conveying Brett to Basra , Iraq , on a special mission . Haynes and LeMay retraced their flight to land back in the U.S. on October 7 . With the southern route thus proved satisfactory , the UK agreed to purchase 16 B @-@ 24s to be delivered by this method to Cairo — one quarter of that number made the trip before the remainder were redirected into American service . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In December 1941 at the start of direct involvement of the U.S. in World War II , Haynes was made base commander of Borinquen Field , an important defensive stronghold in the Caribbean and the first refueling stop after Florida in the southern route to Cairo . The following February he returned to Washington , D.C. , to organize Force Aquila , the advance party of the Tenth Air Force , an operation that intended to bomb Tokyo using B @-@ 17s and B @-@ 24s flying from bases in the Zhejiang province of eastern China , supplied by C @-@ 47 Skytrains . In Florida , Haynes gathered a force of one B @-@ 24 , 12 B @-@ 17 bombers and a small group of C @-@ 47s . Haynes and his mixed unit flew individually to Brazil , then Africa , and on to Karachi , India ; landing in April 1942 with no losses . One of the B @-@ 17 pilots , Robert Lee Scott , Jr . , wrote about his view of the voyage in his autobiography , God Is My Co @-@ Pilot . Haynes began organizing the supply lines for HALPRO , beginning with aviation fuel deliveries to China . On April 9 , Colonel William D. Old piloted the first flight over the Hump ; Haynes the second . The airmen were chagrined to hear that , with the Doolittle Raid , other Americans had beaten them in being first to attack Tokyo . A further blow came in May 1942 when Japanese forces captured the Chinese bases HALPRO was to use . The project was canceled and its men and B @-@ 17s were reassigned by General Lewis H. Brereton to become part of the Tenth Air Force . The HALPRO group of B @-@ 24s never reached Karachi ; instead , the initial group was diverted to the Ninth Air Force in North Africa . 
 Brereton sent Haynes to <unk> Airfield in the Indian state of Assam to continue his supply @-@ line work under the name Assam @-@ Burma @-@ China Ferry Command , or ABC Ferry Command , with the mission of supplying American forces in China . This air organization was formed to carry supplies over the Hump , the air route replacement for the enemy @-@ held Burma Road . At first , Haynes worked with only two C @-@ 47 transports , and was accompanied on some missions by just one P @-@ 40 Warhawk fighter flown by the outfit 's executive of operations , Colonel Robert Lee Scott , Jr . , who had shifted to flying a fighter once HALPRO was canceled . When Burma appeared to be falling to the Japanese , Haynes and a handful of other airmen of the Chinese National Aviation Corporation and the Royal Air Force flew hundreds of evacuation missions from April to mid @-@ June , bringing some 4 @,@ 500 passengers westward to safety in India . The American ferry aircraft would typically deliver supplies to China then stop in Burma on the way back to Assam . 
 On May 4 , 1942 , Haynes flew to rescue 30 members of General Joseph Stilwell 's mission when they got cut off in Northern Burma , though " Vinegar Joe " himself refused the lift , preferring to walk out with the remainder of his force . Haynes subsequently dropped supplies to Stilwell 's group as they made their way west through the jungle . On one such mission , a Japanese fighter attacking his C @-@ 47 was discouraged into retreat when the crewmen of the supposedly unarmed transport opened up on it with fire from Thompson submachine guns and 45 @-@ caliber M1911 pistols . Around this time Tokyo Rose announced on the radio about Haynes that the Japanese would no longer have anything to worry about because the Americans " made that old broken @-@ down transport pilot commander @-@ in @-@ chief " . Haynes , in command of no bombers with which to retaliate , instead loaded a transport with 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) fragmentation bombs and had some soldiers throw them out over enemy forces . He returned the next day to drop leaflets which read " Compliments of the Old Broken @-@ Down Transport Pilot " . For this action , Haynes was awarded the Silver Star . 
 In June 1942 , Haynes went to China to organize and command the Bomber Command of the China Air Task Force ( CATF ) under General Claire Chennault . His fighter group counterpart was Scott — the three air leaders were the subject of a Life magazine article in August which described them as like @-@ minded Southerners who " are quietly tough , despise the word can 't , eliminate all red tape and allow subordinates full range for individual initiative " . Haynes told Jack Belden , the Life journalist , that he " used to like pursuits better but now he likes bombers " , and other airmen confirmed to Belden that Haynes handled bombers as easily as fighters . Belden wrote that the open and frank bomber group leader " does not give a damn about playing Army politics " . Chennault , Haynes and Scott were said to " form just about the smartest , don 't @-@ give @-@ a @-@ damned @-@ est trio Asia has ever seen . " Rarely able to send out more than four or five B @-@ 25 Mitchell twin @-@ engine bombers at a time , supported by P @-@ 40s each carrying another bomb , Haynes constantly shifted his targets and kept the enemy guessing . Fuel and bomb scarcity limited the scope of operations . For instance , the only sortie on July 8 was Haynes piloting a single B @-@ 25 to bomb Japanese headquarters in <unk> , China , near the border of Burma . Claims and losses in July proved the value of the strategy : One B @-@ 25 and five P @-@ 40s were lost in the destruction of 24 enemy fighters and 12 bombers . Supplies began to increase in the following months . 
 In October 1942 at the rank of brigadier general , he returned to India where he organized and commanded the India Air Task Force ( IATF ) of the Tenth Air Force under General Clayton Bissell . In Bissell 's re @-@ organization , five commanders reported to him : Haynes ran the IATF , Chennault ran the CATF , Robert F. Tate ran the India – China Ferry Command , Robert C. Oliver ran the Tenth 's service arm and Francis M. Brady operated the large air base at Karachi . Haynes 's task force assembled three bomber groups : the 7th BG Heavy , the 51st Fighter Group and the 341st BG ( Medium ) . On paper were more squadrons not yet prepared for war — some had no aircraft , some had too little training and some were bare cadres . Haynes used what few aircraft were available , mostly war @-@ weary medium bombers . The bombing missions often included in their payloads some of the " Compliments of " leaflets as a continuation of the defiant response to Tokyo Rose . Men under Haynes noted that the general was never flown by others — he always did his own flying . He emphasized operational preparedness and self @-@ motivation , yet his personal style put people at their ease . Sergeant John Boyd observed that Haynes was " not a desk general but a field and operations commander who believed in getting things done . " One of the earliest offensive efforts made by the new task force was a multi @-@ stage 5 @,@ 500 @-@ mile ( 8 @,@ 900 km ) voyage from the main base at Karachi , through various Chinese airfields with the ultimate goal of attacking the docks of Hong Kong and returning . During this attack , Life journalist Theodore H. White rode in one of the bombers , and wrote a story about the experience for the magazine . On October 25 , ten B @-@ 25 Mitchells led by Haynes took off on the final leg from an advance airfield at Kunming , accompanied by seven P @-@ 40s commanded by Scott . The small force destroyed a transport ship , bombed Hong Kong 's vital Kowloon Harbor and claimed 27 enemy aircraft for the loss of one bomber and one fighter . Haynes asked Bissell for more Norden bombsights — the Mitchell mediums shared only two between all the squadrons , and their supplied D @-@ 8 bombsights were ones Haynes considered to be of no value . 
 He sent a small force of eight B @-@ 24s to bomb Mandalay on November 8 followed in two days with a repeat visit by six of the heavy bombers . Further B @-@ 24 missions continued with slowly increasing numbers of sorties flown . In January 1943 , IATF moved to Barrackpore , more than 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km ) nearer its targets in Burma . The combat strength of IATF , though not yet 100 % , was strong enough to challenge Japanese air superiority in Burma . 
 Haynes returned to Assam in June 1943 , to organize for Bissell the Assam @-@ American Air Base Command ( AAABC ) which he led as a mixed force composed primarily of Tenth Air Force units with some elements of the Fourteenth Air Force . Haynes was tasked with coordinating area defense and offensive destruction of the enemy , the emphasis on the former . For the first two months , Haynes was given fewer officers and men than he deemed necessary , and the AAABC made little headway in its mission . In mid @-@ August , large @-@ scale re @-@ organization of Allied forces in Asia resulted in the AAABC being renamed the American Air Base Command 1 , and placed under George E. Stratemeyer . Haynes led the group until September 1943 , when he returned to the U.S. after 18 months in Asia . Before he left , he told American reporters that his forces had helped deny the port of Rangoon to the enemy , and helped soften Burma for invasion . He stated that the highlight of his time in Asia was the air raid against Hong Kong . After his upcoming air crossing of the Atlantic , his eighth such , Haynes said that the first thing he intended to do was look up his 14 @-@ year @-@ old son in high school and his wife who was working in the drafting department at Sperry in Garden City , New York . 
 In October of that year , he became commanding general of the I Bomber Command of First Air Force at Mitchel Field , flying anti @-@ submarine warfare missions along the Eastern Seaboard . In July 1944 , he went to MacDill Field in Florida , where he took over the III Bomber Command , a bomber training group that also hunted for submarines . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 In December 1945 , he was assigned to headquarters of the Atlantic Division of Air Transport Command at Fort Totten , New York , and the following month was appointed commanding general of the Newfoundland Base command at Fort Pepperell , Newfoundland . There , he oversaw operations of American stations in Greenland , northern Quebec , Baffin Island and Labrador . Haynes told a National Geographic reporter that , even though the air stations were remote , " our troops ' morale is high " . 
 In July 1949 , Haynes became Inspector General , Military Air Transport Service ( MATS ) at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland . He was appointed deputy commander for services of MATS two @-@ month later , at the rank of major general . In January 1951 , he assumed command of the <unk> Technical Training Wing at Sheppard Air Force Base , Wichita Falls , Texas . Haynes retired in 1953 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Haynes married Margery McLeod , born about 1899 in California , and the couple welcomed a child , Caleb Vance Haynes , Jr . , born in Spokane , Washington in 1928 . The son , known as Vance Haynes , served in the USAF 1951 – 1954 in special weapons , then studied archaeology and geology , earning a doctorate from the University of Arizona in 1965 . He became a professor of archaeology at universities in Texas and Arizona , and through his excavation work at Sandia Cave , helped establish the timeline of human migration through North America . 
 Haynes and his wife toured the American West after his retirement , indulging themselves while searching for a permanent residence . Some of the general 's friends suggested Wichita Falls , the city of his last military post , but he left to assess the possibility of living in Taos , New Mexico , where he and his airman son hiked and explored ancient human settlements . Deciding against Taos , Haynes and his wife continued in their tour , soon finding Carmel @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea , California , to their liking . There , he bought two adjoining lots on North Carmelo Street with one existing house . Rather than accepting any of the offers he received promising an executive career in the aeronautics industry , he relaxed by hunting and fishing . 
 Haynes joined a number of men 's clubs . He was a Freemason in the Granite Lodge of Mount Airy , a holder of the 32nd degree in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite , and a Shriner . He was a member of the Quiet <unk> , a secretive fraternal order of pilots , and he joined the American Legion . He enjoyed visits by friends , especially playing cards and sipping bourbon with his former military colleagues . He died at his home during the night of April 4 – 5 , 1966 , of acute peritonitis flaring up from a chronic duodenal ulcer . He was survived by his wife Margery , by his son who was living in Tucson , Arizona , and by his granddaughter Elizabeth Anne " Lisa " Haynes . He was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery on April 8 . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Haynes was awarded : 
 Distinguished Service Medal 
 Silver Star with oak leaf cluster 
 Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters 
 Air Medal with oak leaf cluster 
 Commendation Medal with oak leaf cluster 
 Mackay Trophy 
 Order of the Merit of Chile 
 = = Effective dates of promotion = = 
 Private , First Class , Aviation Section , Signal Corps – August 15 , 1917 
 Second lieutenant ( temporary ) , Air Service – May 31 , 1918 
 Second lieutenant – June 1920 
 First lieutenant – July 1 , 1920 
 Captain – October 14 , 1932 
 Major ( temporary ) – August 27 , 1936 
 Major – November 1 , 1939 
 Lieutenant colonel ( temporary ) – March 21 , 1941 
 Colonel ( temporary ) – January 5 , 1942 
 Lieutenant colonel – March 4 , 1942 
 Brigadier general – September 5 , 1942 
 Major general – September 1949 
 = Dream Days at the Hotel Existence = 
 Dream Days at the Hotel Existence is the sixth studio album by Australian rock band Powderfinger , released by Universal Music on 2 June 2007 in Australia , 19 November 2007 in the United Kingdom , and 11 November 2008 in the United States on the Dew Process label . It was released in Australia with a limited edition bonus DVD , titled Powderfinger 's First XI , featuring eleven music videos spanning the band 's career , from the first single , " Tail " to " Bless My Soul " , the band 's latest single before the release of the album . A collector 's edition , including a CD and DVD , was released on 18 April 2008 . 
 Powderfinger reunited in late 2006 , after a three @-@ year hiatus , to write songs for Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , which was recorded in Los Angeles , California , in early 2007 by producer Rob Schnapf . The first single from the album , " Lost and Running " was released on 12 May 2007 , and reached number five on the ARIA singles chart . Three further singles were released ; " I Don 't Remember " , " Nobody Sees " , and " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " , though they failed to equal " Lost and Running " ' s chart performance . 
 The album received critical acclaim , with many reviewers commenting that the album was " consistent " and " distinctly Australian " . The album encountered controversy relating to the song " Black Tears " with claims that it may have influenced the Palm Island death in custody trial . Powderfinger released an abridged version of the song as a result of these accusations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bernard Fanning stated in television interviews in 2006 that Powderfinger was working on a new album to be released the following year . On Powderfinger 's website , guitarist Ian Haug said that the upcoming album was an " exciting new direction " for the band 's music . After a month of recording , on 2 March 2007 , Fanning made an announcement on Australian radio station Triple J that tracking was complete , mixing the album was to follow , and the approximate release date was June . Fanning also stated that several of the tracks on the album feature session pianist Benmont Tench . 
 The title of the album was drawn from the book Brooklyn Follies by Paul Auster , which Fanning had read during the recording . He stated the concept of the title related to escapism , and that he felt it an appropriate sentiment to attach to the music of the album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Following their hiatus , which commenced after the release of Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 @-@ 2000 , the band reconvened in late 2006 to write songs for Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . The band sought a new sound on the album , causing the recording process to be different from prior albums ; Melbourne 's Sing Sing studios were not used and Nick DiDia was no longer the producer . 
 Dream Days at the Hotel Existence was recorded at Sunset Sound Studio , Los Angeles , California , in early 2007 by producer Rob Schnapf , best known for his work with Beck and The Vines . Powderfinger had already written most of the album before departing to the United States . In particular , Powderfinger wrote songs in parts and brought them together ; some songs were written in pairs or trios , while others were written in parts by different people , and then combined . According to the band , this brought a " diverse " and " fresh " approach to songwriting . The band used different methods in putting the album together as " it comes back to the sound the five of us can make together " . Powderfinger guitarist Darren Middleton commented that as a rule they preferred not to put together an album that was just " plain " . As the style of writing differed , the band identified the need for piano performances in many of their songs , enlisting veteran pianist Benmont Tench to play parts throughout . 
 = = Album and single releases = = 
 The album was released in Australia on 2 June 2007 , and in the United Kingdom on 19 November of the same year . A " limited edition " version of the album included a DVD featuring a collection of Powderfinger music videos , titled Powderfinger 's First XI . The music video for " Lost and Running " was also included , and was dubbed The Twelfth Man . A collector 's edition , including a CD and DVD , was released on 18 April 2008 . 
 Several songs from the album were launched to Perth fans as free music downloads via PerthNow , a Perth @-@ based newspaper . Fans were required to obtain a codeword from the newspaper , then submit it online to download the tracks . 
 The first single from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence was " Lost and Running " and the video clip , which was directed by Damon Escott and Stephen Lance of Head Pictures , began showing in Australia on 21 April 2007 . The single made its Australian radio debut on 16 April 2007 , but had been available for several days beforehand on the Powderfinger 's MySpace web page . An exclusive early release of the song was played by Triple J on 13 April 2007 . " Lost and Running " reached number five on the ARIA singles chart . 
 The second single from the album was " I Don 't Remember " . The film clip for the song was created by Fifty Fifty Films , who have created music videos for the group before including " Passenger " and " Like a Dog " . The song was aired on radio on 9 July 2007 , the music video was released in July , and the CD single was released for sales on 4 August 2007 . The video was shot at Samford State School in Powderfinger 's home city of Brisbane and features many of the school 's students . 
 On 16 November 2007 , it was announced that the third single from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence would be the album 's sixth track , " Nobody Sees " . A video was released on the same day as the announcement and the single is set to be released as a digital single on 1 December 2007 . In February 2008 , Powderfinger announced the release of the album 's fourth single , " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " . In late May , " Wishing On The Same Moon " was released as the album 's fifth single . 
 Surprisingly , the eighth track , " Long Way to Go " was played on Australian radio leading up to the release of the album in 2007 . 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The album debuted in the ARIA Album Charts on 11 June 2007 at number one , becoming Powderfinger 's fourth album to peak at the top spot . The album was certified platinum in its first week of sales , and its double platinum certification was announced later . A week after its release , the album achieved the highest first @-@ week sales figures of any new release in 2007 , with total sales of 40 @,@ 847 , thus making it the fastest selling album of the year in Australia . In its first week of release , Dream Days at the Hotel Existence broke the Australian digital album sales record , with over 3 @,@ 000 digital sales . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Sydney Morning Herald commentator Bernard Zuel described Dream Days at the Hotel Existence as Powderfinger 's first dull album , noting that on numerous songs " It promises to become exciting but never quite gets there . " He complained that most of the songs were uneventful , or uninspiring , and that they do not " lift you as a listener . " PerthNow 's Jay Hanna disagreed , claiming the album was " rippling with emotions " . He said the album contained some " incredible moments " , praising " Head Up in the Clouds " , and calling " Nobody Sees " " Powderfinger at their devastating best " , while giving the album four stars . 
 Cameron Adams of Herald Sun HiT stated that the album contained no new directions for the band , and was highly consistent . He noted that the album contained less " rough edges and attitude " than predecessor Vulture Street , and likening the album more to Odyssey Number Five . Sputnikmusic 's James Bishop agreed , claiming the band should be concerned by the " lack of experimentation or ambition " on the album . He again stated that the album was consistent , noting that " there actually isn 't a bad song present " . The review , which gave the album three and a half stars , commented that it seemed the band were trying to move towards the bluegrass genre , and " edging their way into the adult @-@ contemporary section " of a music store , something they had not shown on their previous works . 
 Allmusic 's Clayton Bolger drew comparisons to Internationalist in his review , which gave the album 3 and a half stars . He said the album contained " all the trademarks of classic Powderfinger " , praising Fanning 's vocals , Middleton and Haug 's " twin @-@ guitar attack " , Collins ' basslines and Coghill 's " powerhouse drum work " . While praising " I Don 't Remember " as an excellent anthem , and " Surviving " for containing " a sonic blast of rock " , he was critical of " Lost and Running " , which he said felt " tired and sluggish " , while " Ballad of a Dead Man " was described as " tedious " . 
 = = = " Black Tears " controversy = = = 
 On 2 May 2007 , " Black Tears " , the ninth song on Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , sparked controversy after claims that its lyrics could invoke prejudice in the Palm Island death in custody trial . Lawyers for the accused , Senior Sergeant Chris Hurley , lodged a complaint to the Queensland Attorney @-@ General relating to the lyrics of the song . According to Hurley 's legal team , the initial lyrics dealt with the " death of a Palm Island man , Mulrunji Doomadgee " , in stating " an island watch @-@ house bed , a black man 's lying dead " . Bernard Fanning made a media statement in response to the complaint , stating that the band had never intended for the song to contain " even the slightest suggestion of any prejudice " . He also said that the band would still release the album on the planned date , but with an alternate version of " Black Tears " . Fanning later stated that he was not angry about having to change his lyrics , but lamented the lack of Australian musicians willing to challenge the status quo . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 Dream Days at the Hotel Existence 's cover art was designed by Aaron Hayward & David Homer of Debaser , a New South Wales @-@ based design organisation . The recipient of the 2007 ARIA Award for " Best Cover Art " , the album art features a photograph of a road leading into the Australian outback horizon . In the centre , placed in the sky in relation to the background , there is a window with a crimson curtain . Within this window is a hotel room , as per the name of the album , in which a man with no head in a suit is seated at the end of the bed while watching the television . 
 Above the window is the album title and at the top of the cover is the band 's name in a typeface more crafty than on previous album covers . Though the general design of the cover is that of a 1930s hotel in style , the typeface juxtaposes the general design with being a rather futuristic , science @-@ fiction styled typeset . This is the second futuristic style that the band has used for their name , the first appearing on Vulture Street . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Tickets for a nationwide tour of launch shows for Dream Days at the Hotel Existence went on sale on 10 May 2007 on the band 's website , with tickets to the general public being released a day later . Powderfinger also toured in New South Wales and northern Victoria . Australian pianist Lachlan Doley was enlisted to play piano and keyboard parts on their live performances in these shows . His performances were welcomed by critics and audiences , with <unk> commenting that " local ring @-@ in Lachlan Doley added shimmering keys to the band 's richly textured sound " . Powderfinger and Doley performed the single " Lost and Running " on popular Australian variety show Rove on 17 June 2007 . The group performed at Splendour in the Grass on 4 August 2007 , and then followed it up by performing at Triple J 's AWOL Concert in Karratha , Western Australia on 18 August 2007 . 
 Powderfinger announced the Across the Great Divide tour on 12 June 2007 . The band were accompanied on the nationwide concert tour by Australian rock group Silverchair . The tour is not only featured in the capital cities , but in fourteen Australian and New Zealand regional centres as well . According to Fanning , " the idea is to show both bands are behind the idea of reconciliation [ of Indigenous Australians ] . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Head Up in the Clouds " – 3 : 47 
 " I Don 't Remember " – 3 : 41 
 " Lost and Running " – 3 : 42 
 " Wishing on the Same Moon " – 4 : 32 
 " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " – 5 : 10 
 " Nobody Sees " – 4 : 14 
 " Surviving " – 3 : 45 
 " Long Way to Go " – 3 : 46 
 " Black Tears " – 2 : 30 
 " Ballad of a Dead Man " – 5 : 29 
 " Drifting Further Away " – 3 : 40 
 All songs were written and performed by Powderfinger with performances by pianist Benmont Tench . 
 Bonus Tracks : 
 " Down by the Dam " – 4 : 29 [ A ] 
 " Glory Box " – 4 : 32 [ B ] 
 = = = Limited edition bonus DVD = = = 
 Released under the titles Powderfinger 's First XI and The Twelfth Man , the bonus DVD features eleven music videos by Powderfinger spanning their entire recording career , and also includes the launch single to Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , " Lost and Running " . 
 Powderfinger 's First XI 
 " Tail " – 4 : 24 
 " Living Type " – 3 : 25 
 " Pick You Up " – 3 : 30 
 " Passenger " – 4 : 39 
 " Good Day Ray " [ C ] – 1 : 50 
 " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " – 2 : 18 
 " My Kind of Scene " – 4 : 31 
 " Like a Dog " – 4 : 41 
 " On My Mind " [ D ] – 3 : 40 
 " Sunsets " ( Acoustic version ) – 3 : 57 
 " Bless My Soul " – 4 : 06 
 The Twelfth Man - " Lost and Running " – 3 : 52 
 = Bobbili Fort = 
 The Bobbili Fort , located in the Vizianagaram district of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh , was built during the middle of the 19th century in Bobbili . It has a historical link to the nearby mud fort of the same name which was destroyed during the Bobbili war in 1757 in a feud between the Rajas of Bobbili and the neighbouring landlord of Vizianagaram . 
 Chinna Ranga Rao , who survived the Battle of Bobbili as a child was , at a later date , installed as the Raja of Bobbili . The successors of his lineage constructed the present Bobbili Fort following their improved economic conditions in the middle of the 19th century . 
 The existing fort covers an area of 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) and was built by Chinna Ranga Rao after he regained his kingdom which was improved upon by his successors in the mid @-@ 19th century . The fort complex has an impressive entrance gate in Indo @-@ <unk> architectural style with high dome and many mantapas , Durbar Hall , four major palaces and two temples . 
 = = Location = = 
 Bobbili is 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) away from Vizianagaram , which is well @-@ connected by rail , road and air links . The nearest railway station is Vizianagaram , a key railway junction on the Raipur @-@ Vizianagaram railway line . There is a bridge across Vedavati River which provides access to the area . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The history of Bobbili can be traced to 1652 , when Sher Muhammad Khan , <unk> of the Nawab of Srikakulam under the Nizam , had come to the Vizianagaram district . He was then accompanied by <unk> , the 15th scion of the Rajas of <unk> , of Velama community and the ancestor of the Raja of Bobbili , and <unk> Madhava Varma , the ancestor of <unk> family who were rivals . In one version it is said that the Nawab , pleased with the gallant services rendered by <unk> , granted land holdings to him . <unk> then constructed a fort and named it " Bobbili " , meaning " the royal tiger " , as a token of appreciation for the benevolent gift of the Nawab , who was known as " Sher " ( ' <unk> ' means " tiger " in Hindi language ) . In another version it is said that <unk> 's son Lingappa chose Bobbili as his capital , built a fort and established a town there , and named it " Pedda @-@ <unk> " ( in Telugu language meaning " big tiger " ) ; this name eventually changed to <unk> and then <unk> , finally to become Bobbili . During this period Sher Khan 's son was abducted and Lingappa rescued him . In appreciation , Sher Khan gifted 12 villages to Lingappa and gave him the title " Ranga Rao " . Lingappa was succeeded by his adopted son , Vengal Ranga Rao who was then succeeded by his son <unk> followed by his son Rayadappa . Rayadappa 's whose adopted son Gopalakrishna took over the rule from his father . At the time of building the old fort a Muslim saint had cautioned the two royal brothers of the Bobbili family that the place they had chosen to build the fort was ill @-@ fated but they ignored this warning . 
 It was during Gopalakrishna 's reign in 1753 , that the Nizam of Hyderabad gave Northern Circars to the French . The then French General Charles Bussy leased <unk> and Rajahmundry circles to Pedda <unk> Raju , the Raja of Vizianagaram . This resulted in break up of relations between General Bussy and the Nizam . 
 = = = Battle of Bobbili = = = 
 On account of the rivalry between the chiefs of Bobbili and Vizianagaram , in 1756 there was a rebellion among the local chieftains which necessitated strong military measures . General Bussy attacked the rebel forces with a contingent of European forces , supported by 11 @,@ 000 troops of the Raja of Vizianagaram as a token of his loyalty . The Raja of Vizianagaram instigated General Bussy by a canard stating that the Raja of Bobbili was behind the rebellion . It is also said that the Raja bribed his interpreters to persuade General Bussy to direct Ranga Rao , the Raja of Bobbili to vacate the Bobbili Fort and shift southward . General Bussy cautiously made an offer to the Chief of Bobbili that he would be pardoned if he moved away from Bobbili , and in return given a compensatory package of equivalent land elsewhere . But this was not acceptable to the Chief of Bobbili . Then , General Bussy attacked the fort several times , breached the mud fort with cannons , and took control of the ramparts of the fort . Although the Raja of Bobbili and his defenders realized their precarious condition , they fought fiercely but eventually lost the battle . When General Bussy entered the fort with his depleted strength of soldiers he found dead bodies scattered in the fort area . At that time an old man approached General Bussy and handed him a child who he said was the son of the dead Raja of Bobbili . The Raja of Vizianagaram , happy with his victory in the hard fought battle , rejoiced by entering the Bobbili city and hoisted the Flag of France . But his jubilation was short lived . Three days after this event , the Raja of Vizianagaram 's camp was attacked in the night by three people of Bobbili , including <unk> <unk> who had rushed to the demolished Bobbili Fort to help his sister 's family . He killed the Raja of Vizianagaram and then committed suicide along with his accomplices . 
 = = = Post Bobbili war = = = 
 As of 24 January 1757 , members of the Bobbili family who had survived the war were the Raja 's brother Vengal Ranga Rao , also called Chinna Ranga Rao , and his baby son . They first escaped to Bhadrachalam . Two years later , in 1759 , they were offered their old holdings in the presence of colonel Forde ( representative of the British authorities in Bengal ) by Ananda Raju of <unk> at Masulipatam . Under this compromise package , the Bobbili royals , on returning to Bobbili would receive the <unk> and Rajam taluks and the fort area for an annuity lease value of Rs 20 @,@ 000 . Vengal Ranga Rao died three years later . Thereafter his son lived for two years and was succeeded by Chinna Ranga Rao , also known as Venkata Ranga Rao . After four years , in 1766 , Sitaram , the new Raja of Vizianagaram , disturbed by the clout of Chinna Ranga Rao arrested him and incarcerated him in the fort at Vizianagaram . However , in 1790 Chinna Ranga Rao managed to escape from the prison and reached the Nizam 's Hyderabad seeking protection . Later , in 1794 , Ranga Rao regained his property at the initiative of the Collector of the Northern Division , when <unk> Zamindari splintered . Chinna Ranga Rao then adopted Rayadappa as his son . 
 After Ranga Rao died in 1801 , there were efforts to merge Bobbili with Vizianagaram but these were thwarted and a lasting settlement of the property was made with the adopted son of Ranga Rao . Rayadappa and his son <unk> who succeeded in 1830 and lived till 1862 managed their property very well . In the middle of the 19th century , successors of this lineage constructed the present Bobbili Fort , following their improved economic conditions . 
 In 1891 , a stone monument was erected with inscriptions commemorating the Bobbili tragedy . 
 = = Features = = 
 The existing fort is spread over an area of 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) . It was built , in the Indo @-@ Saracenic architectural style , as Ranga Rao and his son had probably liked this style during their exile in Hyderabad where they had spent more than a decade and a half under the protection of the Nizam of Hyderabad . Chinna Ranga Rao had built the oldest part of the main palace with its Saracenic arches supporting the first level . However , in 1861 in a report submitted by the Acting District Engineer to the Chief Secretary to the British Government at Saint George it was said that the stone fort at Bobbili did not have adequate defense capability . 
 The facade of the fort has the elegance of a palace with its high walls , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high at places , rather than a castle . The royal family lived in this fort . The northeastern entry to the fort is a tall domed structure . The entire palace complex covers an area of 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) . 
 Within the fort area there are four major monuments . These are : the Durbar Hall , the palace of the prince , the palace for guests , and the Raja 's palace , where the royal family members live , which is the largest with three floors . The Durbar Hall , or the main meeting hall , is where the Rajas held their crowning ceremonies . The main palace , which has an area of 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) , also houses a museum and offices of the family . 
 Within the fort complex there are two temples : one is dedicated to the family deity of the Venugopala Swamy and was built at the time of founding of Bobbili ; the another one was erected by Chinna Ranga Rao in the aftermath of the war , after he regained his territory . The Gopura or entrance of this temple was constructed in 1851 . Another mandapa built at the centre of a lake is known as the Vasant <unk> where , according to the local belief , Venugopala Swamy takes rest for a day with his consort . After this the image of the Venugopala Swamy is kept at the Dola Yatra <unk> on the shores of the lake for one day and then moved back to the main shrine . These <unk> were built in 1825 by Maharaja Krishna Das Ranga Rao . Another functional palace in the fort is the Pooja Mahal . Opposite to this palace is the <unk> , the residence of the Raja , which is very well preserved and decorated with elegant " tapestry , paintings and porcelain " brought from many countries . 
 = Evangelical Missionary Church of Besançon = 
 The Evangelical Missionary Church of Besançon ( French : Église <unk> <unk> de Besançon ) , formerly known as the Evangelical Pentecostal Church of Besançon and The Mission , is a Christian movement established in Besançon , France , in December 1963 . In close communion with the Protestant Federation of France , this church belongs to the Pentecostal movement and in 1969 founded the Evangelical Missionary Federation ( Fédération <unk> <unk> , or <unk> ) to gather the various Pentecostal churches it created . The assemblies , which developed very quickly throughout eastern and northern France , numbered well over 2 @,@ 000 members . 
 The church was founded by Aldo Benzi , who converted to Christianity after being healed from a pleurisy . Subsequent leader René Kennel , a former Mennonite farmer who became pastor of the churches in Saint @-@ Dizier and in Joinville after discovering Pentecostalism through an evangelical Roma mission , has directed the church since 1977 . Its main beliefs ( expressed in a creed of eight articles of faith ) and practices are nearly identical with those of most Evangelical and Pentecostal groups , with a special focus on miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit and proselytism . In the late 1990s the church was embroiled in many trials ( often on the grounds of defamation or for financial issues ) , losing most of them . In 2006 a sex scandal within the church led the federation to be dissolved , and the church in Besançon became independent . 
 Since 1988 the church has been the subject of recurring public controversy ; anti @-@ cult associations and organizations ( UNADFI , CCMM and <unk> – then MIVILUDES ) , former members and the vast majority of media presented it as a dangerous group , mainly because of its intensive missionary activities and healing practices . The church was eventually listed as a cult in the 1995 and 1999 parliamentary reports established by the French National Assembly . Protestant and academic circles , however , disagreed with this assessment , considering the church to be a genuine Pentecostal group . The latter responded to criticism through a defensive strategy , which included outreach to sociologists and historians and better ties with mainstream religions , local and national institutions . 
 = = History = = 
 The founder , Aldo Benzi ( born in 1919 , now deceased ) , is said to have been miraculously healed of recurrent pleurisy by the Rev. De <unk> ( a leader of religious groups in Switzerland ) , which led him to be baptized on 15 June 1941 . Thereafter , with Pierre Nicole he created the Evangelical Pentecostal Church of Besançon ( documented in files with the Prefecture of the Doubs in 1963 ) . Benzi was the church 's president , followed by Nicole and then by René Kennel in 1977 . 
 Kennel was born in 1925 to a Mennonite family who lived in <unk> @-@ Beaupré . His father was a farmer and mayor of the city , and Kennel was expected to run the family farm when he was older . At age 20 , Kennel developed an interest in pastoral ministry and attended theological training at the Bible Institute of Nogent @-@ sur @-@ Marne in 1945 – 46 , training which was later completed by studies at the European Mennonite Bible School in 1948 – 49 . While still a farmer , he became a Mennonite missionary in the Meuse , Marne and Haute @-@ Marne departments . In 1960 , he discovered Pentecostalism through Roma missions , notably the Life and Light Evangelical Roma Mission ( Mission <unk> <unk> " Vie et Lumière " ) ; he was attracted to this form of Christianity , since it emphasized missionary zeal and legitimized his ministry . He founded an evangelical group in his city , which caused conflict with his family , other religious leaders and his neighbors . In the early 1960s , Kennel became pastor of the church at Joinville ; he conducted humanitarian activities on his farm , providing relief to homeless , former prisoners , drug addicts and alcoholics . In 1964 , he also directed the church of Saint @-@ Dizier ; three years later , he decided to give up farming to fully devote himself to religious activities . In 1975 he was appointed treasurer of the Federation of Free Evangelical Pentecostals , and elected president seven years later . Under Kennel 's leadership of the Pentecostal Church of Besançon , the church quickly opened many places of worship in Northern and Eastern France ; Kennel trained pastors among his converts ( including his son Étienne , who was ordained in 1981 ) , and sent them to direct the new assemblies . In 1989 Kennel legally registered the Evangelical Missionary Federation , whose purpose was to federate all the churches ( then composed of over thirty pastors ) . 
 However , in 2005 Pastor Étienne Kennel was accused of adultery by church members , which resulted in his expulsion in January 2006 . His father ( considered guilty of covering up his son 's actions ) refused to retire , which led many believers to leave the church and pastors to vote for the federation 's dissolution ; this one was officially announced as defunct on 25 November 2006 . 14 churches in the northwest , previously members of the <unk> , are ( as of 2011 ) gathered under the name Union of Missionary Churches ( Union d <unk> <unk> , or <unk> ) , an association registered in Châlons @-@ en @-@ Champagne . Other places of worship are independent – including the church in Besançon , which was reregistered as an " Evangelical church " in late 2006 . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 About his church Kennel said : " We are situated at the crossroads of the Pentecostal and Mennonite movements " . Various explanations were provided by sociologists to define the place of the religious group within Christianity : Danièle Hervieu @-@ Léger wrote that the church was created from " the meeting between a movement of evangelic sensibility inside the Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine , and a French Mennonite movement from the tradition of peaceful <unk> " , Laurent Amiotte @-@ Suchet considered that it " fits into the Assemblies of God " , but also " in the history of a second wave of European Pentecostalism which experienced its revival in the 1970s and 1980s " , and J. Gordon Melton described it , in his 2005 Encyclopedia of Protestantism , as one of the " newest Protestant groups " . Evangelical Protestantism expert Sébastien Fath deemed the church a " non Baptist " group , but " with some common characteristics " and explained that it professed a very high degree of religious activism , <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . According to the Protestant Federation of France , the church displayed a " classical and structured Pentecostalism , with very little contact with other churches . " The anti @-@ cult association Centre contre les manipulations <unk> said the church " comes from the classical Pentecostal movement which emerged in France in the 1950s and which now includes various groups " . 
 The church 's main beliefs are expressed in a creed , initially composed of twelve articles of faith based on biblical passages and adopted by the church . These beliefs are almost identical to the ones of most evangelical and Pentecostal groups , including biblical authority viewed as the Word of God , literal biblical interpretation and the Trinity , with a special focus on miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit and proselytism . Later , the number of articles of faith were reduced to eight points , and Amiotte @-@ Suchet noted that they were reworded in 1998 to become less explicit concerning issues which were the subject of public controversies . He also said that the pastors ' sermons show an evolution linked to a generation gap ; René Kennel continues to advocate healthy living , illustrating his speeches with stories of curses resulting from a non @-@ Christian lifestyle , while his son placed more emphasis on " the discernment of spiritual gifts and the depth of faith " . On its website the church defines itself as apolitical ; it respects current principles of secularism and freedom of conscience , does not discourage medical treatment , encourages believers to participate in social life and does not claim exclusive salvation . 
 = = Practices = = 
 The church has six weekly services , one of them located in the Rue <unk> especially for people with disabilities . Each meeting is devoted to a particular Christian practice : evangelization , prayer , Bible reading , singing , and weekly worship . Meetings are composed of biblical sermons and studies , testimonies of religious experiences , hymns , meditation , worship , and prayers . Services are dynamic , charismatic and emotional , often evolving into ecstasy and trance ; <unk> results when the pastor calls the Holy Spirit to come upon the congregation , and usually lasts 30 to 60 minutes . Women must have their heads covered during worship . 
 Pastors established a record of public testimonies of every baptized member . Kennel 's life is known by the faithful , and has an important place in the church . The pastor 's break with his former religious affiliation , and his determined foundation of a new group despite many obstacles , are said to be directed by God 's will ; therefore , Kennel 's spiritual course ( which mixes " extraordinary and intransigence " ) is presented as an example to follow . As noted by Amiotte @-@ Suchet , all testimonies ( whose purpose is to strengthen the converts ' faith ) generally have a common thread ; the former lifestyle of the faithful is almost always presented as " a story of an aimless wandering , covered with failures , disappointments and misfortunes " until God decides to manifest himself in the life of the future member . The future convert then demands a sign of God 's reality , requires a variable length of time to strength his faith and experience the Holy Spirit , then engages fully in the church . Conversion is always said to lead to a healthier lifestyle and provide an expanded network of friends . 
 All members actively participate in evangelization , both personally ( family , friends and professional associates ) and with the church ( door @-@ to @-@ door , proselytism under the big tent and on public squares , " mission weeks " which follow a tightly planned program ) . The church has denied practising proselytism among Christian people . However , after criticism of its methods the church became more discreet and avoided insisting publicly on miraculous healings , although it continued to highlight evangelization . In particular , it decided to stop proselytizing in hospitals , to discontinue loudspeakers in the streets , and to reduce the frequency of evangelization under the " big top " . 
 The church features religious instruction for various ages , leads a choir and football team and celebrates the Holy Thursday Last Supper , believers ' marriages and funerals . Baptism is practiced by immersion with the pastor 's approval , and is reserved for people aged over 15 years . Fasting on two Sundays a month and between eight and ten conventions per year for each church are also scheduled . The church participates in social and humanitarian activities and organizes recreational days , including activities such as theater , library , trips , a clothing exchange and a paint shop . 
 = = Organization and finances = = 
 The church headquarters in Besançon were first located in the Rue <unk> , then in the Rue de Belfort , and eventually moved in 1994 to 4 Rue <unk> , in a building costing about four million francs . In 1999 , the federation associated with SOS Hope ( SOS Espérance , established in Vesoul to assist suffering people ) , an evangelical musical group , <unk> , and La <unk> in Besançon for property management . The church owns a printing house that publishes writings for worship and evangelization , including a quarterly newsletter , The <unk> 's Ear ( " L 'Oreille du concierge " ) which has been published since 2000 . In 2005 René Kennel was the president , Daniel <unk> vice @-@ president and church spokesman , Étienne Kennel secretary and R. <unk> the treasurer of the federation . Each year , a one @-@ week course is organized in one of the churches belonging to the Evangelical Missionary Federation ; named " Blessing School " ( " École de la <unk> " ) , this intensive Bible training consists of prayers , religious teachings and history , singing lessons , film screenings and debates . 
 In its organizational structure the church is similar to congregationalism , as the local assembly is autonomous . This form of congregationalism , however , is unique ; the centralized organization gives to the Church of Besançon the role of head church , and the other assemblies of the federation are considered annex churches . Thus , Amiotte @-@ Suchet opines that " the unifying spirit is much more coercive than the one in other Protestant groups " . Decisions of the federation are made by all church pastors at monthly pastoral meetings . In the Church of Besançon , the leadership team attending the " brothers ' meeting " is composed of René and Étienne Kennel , six appointed elders and men who have been members for a certain length of time . 
 The church has been criticized for its wealth , as monthly or quarterly donations were encouraged in the second article of the statutes of the Federation of Evangelical Missionary . According to the CCMM , property acquisition was evidence of significant income . The 1999 parliamentary report considered the church a " small cult " ( a cult whose annual income is less than five million francs ) which provided " relatively accurate information " to the Parliamentary Commission . The annual budget of the church was estimated between 2 @.@ 4 and 3 @.@ 1 million francs ( the total of donations in 1998 and 1995 respectively ) , mainly from Sunday offerings , donations , loans , financial products and property income . In 1999 , the commission estimated the church 's property at about 15 million francs . As of 31 December 1998 , the church 's net active wealth ( composed of real estate and stock ) reached 7 @.@ 3 million francs . Concerning its finances , the church said it applies five major principles : economy , recovery , devotion , voluntary work and solidarity . Money comes from Sunday collections , sometimes from personal loans and from donations intended for a particular use ; there is no external financial support . Accounts are published at the annual general assembly of the church , by the financial commission of the Federation and by Social Security . Trainee pastors work outside the church ; permanent pastors receive a low salary , and are affiliated with the Caisse d <unk> <unk> , <unk> et <unk> des <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Membership = = 
 Between 1977 and 1988 , the Church of Besançon enjoyed significant growth , and Professor Grace Davie wrote that the whole religious movement had reached " the status of a small denomination " in the decades following its foundation . In 1983 , there were 150 churchgoers in Besançon ; in 1989 , the number rose to between 400 and 600 . In 1995 , estimations of church membership by the Parliamentary Commission varied from 500 to 2 @,@ 000 members . In 2000 the federation declared that 2 @,@ 800 people regularly attend the Sunday service , including 600 in Besançon . In 2005 there were 4 @,@ 000 members and 500 churchgoers at the Sunday worship in Besançon , according to Fath . In 2006 , Amiotte @-@ Suchet reported that the federation had 2 @,@ 400 members and 37 pastors . He noted that criticism had an impact on the church 's growth ; since 1988 the number of baptisms has fallen to about 50 a year , just enough to compensate for the number of people who leave the church . After the sex scandal in the founding church in 2006 , attendance at the services in Besançon dropped to 70 . 
 In 1989 , there were 18 assemblies belonging to the Evangelical Missionary Federation . In 1995 the church ( then widely established in several French regions ) was called " a big regional cult that has now spread throughout eastern France " by the CCMM . The following year , the parliamentary report of the National Assembly listed 24 places of worship ; the church stated the list was incomplete and incorrect as three places were missed , and eight belonged to other churches . Before it was dissolved in 2006 , the federation counted 35 churches . 
 = = Court cases = = 
 The Direction générale des <unk> contested the religious status of the church and taxed its donations , saying " the association is devoted to proselytize . It has therefore not for exclusive purpose the celebration of a worship " . As a result , a 600 @,@ 000 @-@ franc tax @-@ recovery notification was sent to the church on 20 December 1996 , which rose to 2 @.@ 6 million francs two years later ( penalties included ) . This tax was considered a " tragic situation " by Human Rights Without Frontiers and " fiscal and administrative harassment " by sociologist Régis Dericquebourg . The church deemed this decision discriminatory and tried by all possible legal means to challenge it . On 31 January 2013 , the Church and its president Éric <unk> were awarded 387 @,@ 722 euros by the European Court of Human Rights which overturned the tax considered a " material injury " and sentenced France for violating the freedom of thought , conscience and religion on the basis of the 9th article of the European Convention of Human Rights . 
 On 29 September 1986 , in a case related to custody of a six @-@ year @-@ old child , the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Besançon left the child with his father ( who was not a member of the church ) rather than with his mother ( then a fervent member ) , stating that " people affiliated to [ the church ] submit their behavior of each time to the precepts of their beliefs , practice proselytism , and do not hesitate to involve some very young children in their meetings and religious practices " . 
 In 1992 , the CCMM was sued twice by the church on the grounds of defamation . A first complaint was filed on 4 February after a letter from CCMM in which the movement was labelled as a cult , with the following definition : " Groups whose activities have on others for result a notable mental manipulation of minds , a profound degradation of the human person , managing to make people lose all critical sense in locking them in intellectual ghettos . " On 16 June 1993 the Court of Vesoul , and on 24 March 1994 the Court of Appeal of Besançon , sentenced the church to pay court costs and damages to the CCMM . In a second complaint filed on 27 November , the CCMM and the Centre Information Jeunesse in Haute @-@ Saône were sued after distributing a publication critical of the church . Both complaints were dismissed . In 1996 , the two appeals for cassation filed by the church were rejected ; the court held that the CCMM 's writings did not fall under defamation , said that damages to the church 's honor were not proven , that " no reproach can be done when CCMM called ' cult ' the Evangelical Church of Pentecost " , and that the association " merely assesses the nature and trends of a religious community , reports some of its practices , including those relating to the disease healing and its methods of recruitment through agencies providing relief without indicating that they are the community 's emanations " . 
 On 30 September 1999 , the Administrative Court of Besançon recognized the religious status of the church and granted it tax exemption on its place of worship . In a decision issued on 2 October 2003 , the judge of the Administrative Court stated that the refusal by the prefect to grant donations and bequests to the church was not supported by evidence . In 2008 , MIVILUDES President Jean @-@ Michel <unk> said that complaints from the faithful against Kennel for physical abuse were dismissed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The French Parliamentary Commission on Cults included the church in the list of cults of the 1995 and 1999 parliamentary reports , based on reports by the Direction centrale des <unk> généraux which labelled the church as an " evangelical " and " healer " movement . Despite their similarities , other churches associated with the Evangelical Missionary Federation were not included in the list . The 1995 report said the group was among the " most active evangelical groups " and the Parliamentary Commission said they are " often motivated by genuine pastors who slid into the role of guru " and " always benefit from freedoms by Protestant official structures to prosper at their edge . " However , the parliamentary reports and the list of cults had no legal status and were criticized by religious historians , sociologists and academics . In May 2007 , a circular by Prime Minister Jean @-@ Pierre Raffarin and a statement by MIVILUDES secretary Gilles <unk> , said the list of movements attached to the 1995 parliamentary report had become less relevant and no longer recommended its use . 
 Several anti @-@ cult groups also considered the church a cult . The local branch of the Centre contre les manipulations <unk> ( CCMM , or Centre Roger <unk> ) directed an intense campaign against the group with repeated warnings in the media , and the President of the Union nationale des associations de défense des familles et de l <unk> ( UNADFI ) , Catherine Picard , said on television that she considered the church a cult . Criticism against the Church includes methods of recruitment ( considered aggressive proselytism ) in psychiatric hospitals , schools , buses and similar environments directed to suffering people , a fundamentalist interpretation of the Bible , pressure on prospective members to quickly join the group , family breakdowns , identical language and clothing of followers reflecting a loss of individuality , education of children which is considered indoctrination , many banned activities ( among them music , television , makeup and trousers for women who must also have long hair covered with a scarf ) , an hysterical environment at worship , <unk> of the faithful , excessive appeals for money , unverifiable and dubious healings which may be detrimental to members ' health and the strong influence on members and lack of qualifications of Kennel . A delegate from the CCMM said that criticism was based on facts collected from former members and their families , some of which had been used in court ( as in Vesoul ) . In response to writer in the Protestant journal <unk> Benoît Hervieu @-@ Léger , who contended that a sole case in Besançon would have been sufficient to criticize the whole federation , the delegate also stated that complaints did not come exclusively from the church of Besançon . The association also noted many similarities with another Pentecostal church it considered a cult , the Mission of Full Gospel - Christian Open Door . As of 2010 , MIVILUDES continued to monitor the Church of Besançon because of its hold over the faithful . 
 The media were generally critical of the church , presenting it as a cult . The first negative local press articles appeared in 1988 , mentioning miraculous healings , proselytism , Kennel 's status , fundamentalist beliefs as controversial issues , and included critical reports by former members . Fath noted that the vocabulary and arguments used in the media were intentionally slanted and the repetition of those developed by the CCMM , and that the disproportionate media coverage of the church did not facilitate an objective investigation . According to a study by an expert in new religious movements , Massimo Introvigne , when a former member destroyed furniture belonging to the church in Langres in July 1994 , anti @-@ cult associations and some news media took the former member 's side , presenting him as the " victim " of a " cult " . On the French talk show Ça se <unk> ( broadcast on 25 May 2005 on France 2 ) , a father ( whose nine @-@ year @-@ old daughter was a member of the church with her mother ) said his daughter was brainwashed ; he criticized her proselytism at school , closed @-@ mindedness and the role of women in the church . He explained that when he had suffered from cancer two years earlier , she had tried to miraculously heal him ; however , she considered him a liar and a sinner because of his homosexuality . He said he found her diary , in which she spoke of her imminent death when she would reach heaven to meet her grandparents . The association for the defense of religious freedom and conscience , <unk> , criticized the talk show for its lack of alternative viewpoints . 
 = = Response to criticism = = 
 Before 1988 , the church was the subject of many neutral press articles and appeared " normal and respectable " ; it contends that in the late 1980s Alain Vivien , then @-@ leader of the CCMM , said to its representatives in Épernay that he did not consider it a cult . The church explained that the first criticism came from a Catholic vice @-@ president of CCMM , who opposed the conversion to the Pentecostal church of his son @-@ in @-@ law and several seminarians ( this explanation was later denied by the CCMM ) , by an educator hostile to the group , and by other evangelicals ( including pastor and co @-@ founder of the anti @-@ cult group <unk> @-@ sectes Gérard Dagon , a source for the 1995 parliamentary report who was critical of Pentecostal beliefs ) . The church also reported discriminations after the publication of the report ( including refusals of building permits ) and to have spent , over a period of ten years , € 82 @,@ 000 in legal fees to defend its interests . In 2003 , the church participated in a survey led by <unk> about a possible change in government policy towards new religious movements . 
 Following the publication of the parliamentary report the church reacted by seeking help from academics and sociologists specializing in religious issues , including Jean <unk> , Jean <unk> , Jean @-@ Paul <unk> , Massimo Introvigne , Laurent Amiotte @-@ Suchet , Bernard <unk> and Émile Poulat , who generally criticized its cult classification . <unk> and Poulat , among other sociologists , deemed the church 's danger was never proven . Danièle Hervieu @-@ Léger said the classification as a cult was an " absurd decision " . Sébastien Fath considered the church " a bit radical but overall harmless " , noting that this group had never been sued , and maintained that the church was criticized because of its proselytism and its rapid growth . Amiotte @-@ Suchet deemed that the pastor 's influence on the faithful was far from being as coercive as critics said . Poulat said , " We can debate whether it may be a ' sect ' in the sense of Weber ; it is certainly not a ' secte ' [ cult ] in the popular and parliamentary sense of the term " . <unk> by academics to participate in a documentary about the church , UNADFI and CCMM refused to explain their position . The Center for Studies on New Religions said the church 's theology is " clearly mainline " , but was criticized " because it does not belong to the World Council of Churches or other establishment church bodies " . 
 The church established a dialogue with the Catholic Church and the Protestant Federation of France ( FPF ) ; the latter agreed to meet Daniel <unk> in Châlons @-@ en @-@ Champagne , and Étienne and René Kennel in Besançon . At first reluctant ( since it did not want to serve as an " umbrella " against cult accusations ) , the FPF agreed to establish , at its meeting on 4 – 5 October 1997 , a bilateral dialogue with the church and advised it to develop ecumenical ties ; it publicly deplored the cult status of the church on 22 January 1998 . Many Protestant figures and churches ( including FPF president Jean @-@ Arnold de Clermont , the Protestant Church of Augsburg Confession of Alsace and Lorraine and the Salvation Army ) provided support , expressing a favorable opinion of the church . 
 The church also established ties with local and national institutions , such as administrative courts , municipalities and tax authorities . In 1996 it asked Alain Gest , a member of the French Parliamentary Commission on cults , the reason for its cult designation . In his response Gest did not provide details on the content of the work by the Direction centrale des <unk> généraux used for the report , but advised Kennel to ask the Observatoire <unk> sur les sectes for more information . On 4 June 1997 the church 's representatives met the president of the Observatoire , prefect Antoine Guerrier de <unk> , who advised the movement to integrate the FPF to clarify the situation . The church also appealed to the European Center of Law and Justice , a Christian @-@ oriented organization , to protect its freedom of religion and belief before the European Court of Human Rights . 
 = Zhuangzi ( book ) = 
 The Zhuangzi ( pronounced [ <unk> ̯ <unk> ̀ ] ) is an ancient Chinese text from the late Warring States period ( 476 – 221 BC ) which contains stories and anecdotes that exemplify the carefree nature of the ideal Daoist sage . Named for its traditional author , " Master Zhuang " ( Zhuangzi ) , the Zhuangzi is one of the two foundational texts of Daoism — along with the Dao De Jing ( Laozi ) — and is generally considered the most important of all Daoist writings . 
 The Zhuangzi consists of a large collection of anecdotes , allegories , parables , and fables , which are often humorous or irreverent in nature . Its main themes are of spontaneity in action and of freedom from the human world and its conventions . The fables and anecdotes in the text attempt to illustrate the falseness of human distinctions between good and bad , large and small , life and death , and human and nature . While other philosophers wrote of moral and personal duty , Zhuangzi promoted carefree wandering and becoming one with " the Way " ( Dào 道 ) by following nature . 
 Though primarily known as a philosophical work , the Zhuangzi is regarded as one of the greatest literary works in all of Chinese history , and has been called " the most important pre @-@ Qin text for the study of Chinese literature . " A masterpiece of both philosophical and literary skill , it has significantly influenced writers for more than 2000 years from the Han dynasty to the present . Many major Chinese writers and poets in history — such as Sima Xiangru and Sima Qian during the Han dynasty ( 206 BC – AD 220 ) , Ruan Ji and Tao Yuanming during the Six Dynasties ( 222 – 589 ) , Li Bai during the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) , and Su Shi and Lu You in the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) — were influenced by the Zhuangzi . 
 = = History = = 
 The Zhuangzi is named for and attributed to Zhuang Zhou — " Master Zhuang " ( Chinese : " Zhuangzi " 莊子 ) — a man generally said to have been born around 369 BC at a place called Meng ( <unk> ) in the state of Song ( near modern Shangqiu , Henan Province ) , and died around 301 , 295 , or 286 BC . Almost nothing is concretely known of Zhuangzi 's life . He is thought to have spent time in the southern state of Chu , as well as in <unk> , the capital of the state of Qi . Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian ( Shiji <unk> ) , the first of China 's 24 dynastic histories , has a biography of Zhuangzi , but most of it seems to have simply been drawn from anecdotes in the Zhuangzi itself . East Asia scholar and Zhuangzi translator Burton Watson has noted , " Whoever Zhuang Zhou was , the writings attributed to him bear the stamp of a brilliant and original mind . " 
 Even though the text is generally treated as a single whole , scholars have recognized since at least the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) that some parts of the book could not have been written by Zhuangzi himself . Since ancient times , however , the first seven chapters — the <unk> piān <unk> " inner chapters " — have been considered to be the actual work of Zhuangzi , and most modern scholars agree with this view . How many , if any , of the remaining 26 chapters — the <unk> piān <unk> " outer chapters " and <unk> piān <unk> " miscellaneous chapters " — were written by Zhuangzi has long been debated . It is generally accepted that the middle and later Zhuangzi chapters are the result of a subsequent process of " accretion and redaction " by later authors " responding to the scintillating brilliance " of the inner chapters . All of the 33 surviving chapters are accepted as compositions from the 4th to 2nd centuries BC . 
 Details of the Zhuangzi 's textual history prior to the Han dynasty are largely unknown . Traces of its influence in late Warring States period ( 475 – 221 BC ) philosophical texts such as the <unk> , Han Feizi , Huainanzi , and <unk> Chunqiu suggest that Zhuangzi 's intellectual lineage was already fairly influential in the states of Qi and Chu in the 3rd century BC . The Records of the Grand Historian refers to a 100 @,@ 000 @-@ word Zhuangzi work and references several chapters that are still in the text . The Book of Han ( Han shu <unk> ) , finished in AD 111 , lists a Zhuangzi in 52 chapters , which many scholars believe to be the original form of the work . A number of different forms of the Zhuangzi survived into the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) , but a shorter and more popular 33 @-@ chapter form of the book prepared by the philosopher and writer Guo Xiang around AD 300 is the source of all surviving editions . In 742 , the Zhuangzi was canonized as one of the Chinese Classics by an imperial proclamation from Emperor Xuanzong of Tang , which awarded it the honorific title True Scripture of Southern Florescence ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , though most orthodox scholars did not consider the Zhuangzi to be a true " classic " ( jing <unk> ) due to its non @-@ Confucian nature . 
 = = = Manuscripts = = = 
 Portions of the Zhuangzi have been discovered among bamboo slip texts from Warring States period and Han dynasty tombs , particularly at the <unk> and Zhangjiashan Han bamboo texts sites . One of the slips from the <unk> texts , which date to around 300 BC , contains what appears to be a short fragment from the " <unk> <unk> " ( " Qu <unk> " <unk> ) chapter . 
 A large number of Zhuangzi fragments dating from the early Tang dynasty were discovered among the Dunhuang manuscripts in the early 20th century by the expeditions of Hungarian @-@ British explorer Aurel Stein and French sinologist Paul Pelliot . They collectively form about twelve chapters of Guo Xiang 's version of the Zhuangzi , and are preserved mostly at the British Library and the Bibliothèque Nationale de France . 
 Among the Japanese national treasures preserved in the <unk> @-@ ji temple in Kyoto is a Zhuangzi manuscript from the Muromachi period ( 1338 – 1573 ) . The manuscript has seven complete chapters from the " outer " and " miscellaneous " chapters , and is believed to be a close copy of an annotated edition written in the 7th century by the Chinese Daoist master Cheng <unk> ( <unk> ; fl . 630 – 660 ) . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Almost all of the 33 surviving Zhuangzi chapters contain fables and allegories . Most Zhuangzi stories are fairly short and simple , such as " <unk> " and " Split " drilling seven holes in " Wonton " ( chapter 7 ) or Zhuangzi being discovered sitting and beating on a basin after his wife dies ( chapter 18 ) , although a few are longer and more complex , like the story of Master Lie and the magus ( chapter 14 ) and the account of the Yellow Emperor 's music ( chapter 14 ) . Unlike the other stories and allegories in other pre @-@ Qin texts , the Zhuangzi is unique in that the allegories form the bulk of the text , rather than occasional features , and are always witty , emotional , and are not limited to reality . 
 Unlike other ancient Chinese works , whose allegories were usually based on historical legends and proverbs , most Zhuangzi stories seem to have been invented by Zhuangzi himself . Some are completely whimsical , such as the strange description of evolution from " misty spray " through a series of substances and insects to horses and humans ( chapter 18 ) , while a few other passages seem to be " sheer playful nonsense " which read like Lewis Carroll 's " Jabberwocky " . The Zhuangzi is full of quirky and fantastic characters , such as " Mad Stammerer " , " <unk> Scholar " , " Sir Plow " , and a man who believes his left arm will turn into a rooster , his right arm will turn into a crossbow , and his buttocks will become cartwheels . 
 A master of language , Zhuangzi sometimes engages in logic and reasoning , but then turns it upside down or carries the arguments to absurdity to demonstrate the limitations of human knowledge and the rational world . Some of Zhuangzi 's reasoning , such as his renowned argument with his philosopher friend Huizi ( Master Hui ) about the joy of fish ( chapter 17 ) , have been compared to the Socratic and Platonic dialogue traditions , and Huizi 's paradoxes near the end of the book have been termed " strikingly like those of Zeno of Elea . " 
 = = = Notable passages = = = 
 = = = = " The Butterfly Dream " = = = = 
 The most famous of all Zhuangzi stories – " Zhuang Zhou Dreams of Being a Butterfly " ( Zhuāng Zhōu <unk> <unk> <unk> ) – appears at the end of the second chapter , " On the Equality of Things " . 
 The well known image of Zhuangzi wondering if he was a man who dreamed of being a butterfly or a butterfly dreaming of being a man is so striking that whole dramas have been written on its theme . In it Zhuangzi " [ plays ] with the theme of transformation " , illustrating that " the distinction between waking and dreaming is another false dichotomy . If [ one ] distinguishes them , how can [ one ] tell if [ one ] is now dreaming or awake ? " 
 = = = = " Cook Ding Cuts Up an Ox " = = = = 
 In the story of " Cook Ding Cuts Up an Ox " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , from the " Secrets for <unk> Life " chapter , Zhuangzi famously uses the image of a skilled butcher to illustrate the " mindlessness " characteristic of one who has mastered Daoist principles by completely following nature . 
 = = = = " The Death of Wonton " = = = = 
 Another well known Zhuangzi story — " The Death of Wonton " ( <unk> zhī <unk> <unk> ) — illustrates the dangers Zhuangzi saw in going against the innate nature of things . 
 Zhuangzi believed that the greatest of all human happiness could be achieved through a higher understanding of the nature of things , and that in order to develop oneself fully one needed to express one 's innate ability . In this anecdote , Zhuangzi humorously and absurdly uses " Wonton " — a name for both the Chinese conception of primordial chaos and , by physical analogy , wonton soup — to demonstrate what he believed were the disastrous consequences of going against things ' innate natures . 
 = = = = " The Debate on the Joy of Fish " = = = = 
 The story of " The Debate on the Joy of Fish " ( <unk> <unk> zhī <unk> <unk> ) is a well known anecdote that has been compared to the Socratic dialogue tradition of ancient Greece . 
 The exact point made by Zhuangzi in this debate is not entirely clear . The story seems to make the point that " knowing " a thing is simply a state of mind , and that it is not possible to determine if that knowing has any objective validity . This story has been cited as an example of Zhuangzi 's linguistic mastery , as he subtly uses reason to make an anti @-@ rationalist point . 
 = = = = " Drumming On a Tub and Singing " = = = = 
 Another well @-@ known Zhuangzi story – " Drumming On a Tub and Singing " ( <unk> <unk> ér gē <unk> ) – describes how Zhuangzi did not view death as something to be feared . 
 Zhuangzi seems to have viewed death as a natural process or transformation , where one gives up one form of existence and assumes another . In the second chapter , he makes the point that , for all humans know , death may in fact be better than life : " How do I know that loving life is not a delusion ? How do I know that in hating death I am not like a man who , having left home in his youth , has forgotten the way back ? " His writings teach that " the wise man or woman accepts death with equanimity and thereby achieves absolute happiness . " 
 = = = = ” Zhuangzi and the Skull “ = = = = 
 The story of Zhuangzi and the roadside skull is consistently popular with Western readers as a classic example of the strange and humorous insight that is the hallmark of the stories of the Zhuangzi . 
 = = = List of chapters = = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 The stories and anecdotes of the Zhuangzi embody a highly unique set of principles and attitudes , including living one 's life with natural spontaneity , uniting one 's inner self with the cosmic " Way " ( Dao ) , keeping oneself distant from politics and social obligations , accepting death as a natural transformation , showing appreciation and praise for things others view as useless or aimless , and stridently rejecting social values and conventional reasoning . These principles form the core ideas of philosophical Daoism . The other major philosophical schools of ancient China — such as Confucianism , Legalism , and Mohism — were all concerned with concrete social , political , or ethical reforms designed to reform people and society and thereby alleviate the problems and suffering of the world . However , Zhuangzi believed that the key to true happiness was to free oneself from the world and its standards through the Daoist principle of " inaction " ( <unk> <unk> ) — action that is not based on any purposeful striving or motives for gain — and was fundamentally opposed to systems that impose order on individuals . 
 The Zhuangzi interprets the universe as a thing that changes spontaneously without a conscious God or will driving it , and argues that humans can achieve ultimate happiness by living equally spontaneously . It argues that because of humans ' advanced cognitive abilities , they have a tendency to create artificial distinctions — such as good versus bad , large versus small , usefulness versus uselessness , and social systems like Confucianism — that remove themselves from the natural spontaneity of the universe . In order to illustrate the mindlessness and spontaneity he felt should characterize human action , Zhuangzi most frequently uses the analogy of craftsmen or artisans . As Burton Watson writes , " the skilled woodcarver , the skilled butcher , the skilled swimmer does not ponder or <unk> on the course of action he should take ; his skill has become so much a part of him that he merely acts instinctively and spontaneously and , without knowing why , achieves success . " The term " wandering " ( <unk> <unk> ) is used throughout the stories of the Zhuangzi to describe how an enlightened person " wanders through all of creation , enjoying its delights without ever becoming attached to any one part of it . " 
 The Zhuangzi vigorously opposes formal government , which Zhuangzi seems to have felt was problematic at its foundation " because of the opposition between man and nature . " The text tries to show that " as soon as government intervenes in natural affairs , it destroys all possibility of genuine happiness . " It is unclear if Zhuangzi 's positions were " tantamount to anarchy , and he was by no means in favor of violence . " The political references in the Zhuangzi are more concerned with what government should not do rather than what kind of government should exist . 
 Western scholars have long noticed that the Zhuangzi is often strongly anti @-@ rationalist . Mohism , deriving from Zhuangzi 's possible contemporary <unk> , was the most logically sophisticated school in ancient China . Whereas reason and logic became the hallmark of Greek philosophy and then the entire Western philosophical tradition , in China philosophers preferred to rely on moral persuasion and intuition . The Zhuangzi played a significant role in the traditional Chinese skepticism toward rationalism , as Zhuangzi frequently turns logical arguments upside @-@ down to satirize and discredit them . However , Zhuangzi did not entirely abandon language and reason , but " only wished to point out that overdependence on them could limit the flexibility of thought . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Virtually every major Chinese writer or poet in history , from Sima Xiangru and Sima Qian during the Han dynasty , Ruan Ji and Tao Yuanming during the Six Dynasties , Li Bai during the Tang dynasty , to Su Shi and Lu You in the Song dynasty were " deeply imbued with the ideas and artistry of the Zhuangzi . " 
 = = = Early times = = = 
 Traces of the Zhuangzi 's influence in late Warring States period philosophical texts such as the <unk> , Han Feizi , Huainanzi , and <unk> Chunqiu suggest that Zhuangzi 's intellectual lineage was already fairly influential in the states of Qi and Chu in the 3rd century BC . However , during the Qin and Han dynasties — with their state @-@ sponsored Legalist and Confucian ideologies , respectively — the Zhuangzi does not seem to have been highly regarded . One exception is Han dynasty scholar Jia Yi 's 170 BC work " Fu on the Owl " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , the earliest definitively known fu rhapsody , which does not reference the Zhuangzi by name but cites it for one @-@ sixth of the poem . 
 After the collapse of the Han dynasty in AD 207 and the subsequent chaos of the Three Kingdoms period , both the Zhuangzi and Zhuang Zhou began to rise in popularity and acclaim . The 3rd century AD poets Ruan Ji and Xi Kang , both members of the famous Seven Worthies of the Bamboo Grove , were ardent Zhuangzi admirers , and one of Ruan 's essays , entitled " Discourse on Summing Up the Zhuangzi " ( Dá Zhuāng <unk> <unk> ) , is still extant . This period saw Confucianism temporarily surpassed by a revival of Daoism and old divination texts , such as the Classic of Changes ( I Ching <unk> ) , and many early medieval Chinese poets , artists , and calligraphers were deeply influenced by the Zhuangzi . 
 = = = Daoism and Buddhism = = = 
 The Zhuangzi has been called " the most important of all the Daoist writings " , and its " inner chapters " embody the core ideas of philosophical Daoism . In the fourth century AD , the Zhuangzi became a major source of imagery and terminology for a new form of Daoism known as the " Highest Clarity " ( Shangqing <unk> ) school that was popular among the aristocracy of the Jin dynasty ( AD 265 – 420 ) . Highest Clarity Daoism borrowed notable Zhuangzi terms , such as " perfected man " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , " Great Clarity " ( Tai Qing <unk> ) , and " fasting the mind " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , and though they are used somewhat differently than in the Zhuangzi itself , they still show the important role the Zhuangzi played at the time . 
 The Zhuangzi was very influential in the adaptation of Buddhism to Chinese culture after Buddhism 's introduction to China in the 1st century AD . Zhi Dun , China 's first aristocratic Buddhist monk , wrote a prominent commentary to the Zhuangzi in the mid @-@ 4th century . The Zhuangzi also played a significant role in the formation of Chan ( " Zen " ) Buddhism , which grew out of " a fusion of Buddhist ideology and ancient Daoist thought . " Among the traits Chan / Zen Buddhism borrowed from the Zhuangzi are a distrust of language and logic , an insistence that " the Dao " can be found in everything , even dung and urine , and a fondness for dialogues based on riddles or paradigm @-@ challenging statements known as gong 'an ( <unk> ; Japanese <unk> ) . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Outside of China and the traditional " Sinosphere " , the Zhuangzi lags far behind the Dao De Jing in general popularity , and is rarely known by non @-@ scholars . A number of prominent scholars have attempted to bring the Zhuangzi to wider attention among Western readers . In 1939 , the British translator and sinologist Arthur Waley described the Zhuangzi as " one of the most entertaining as well as one of the profoundest books in the world . " In the introduction to his 1994 translation of the Zhuangzi , the noted sinologist Victor H. Mair wrote : " I feel a sense of injustice that the Dao De Jing is so well known to my fellow citizens while the Zhuangzi is so thoroughly ignored , because I firmly believe that the latter is in every respect a superior work . " 
 = = Selected translations = = 
 Giles , Herbert ( 1889 ) , Chuang <unk> : Mystic , <unk> and Social Reformer , London : Bernard Quaritch ; 2nd edition , revised ( 1926 ) , Shanghai : Kelly and Walsh ; reprinted ( 1961 ) , London : George Allen and Unwin . 
 Legge , James ( 1891 ) , The Texts of Taoism , in Sacred Books of the East , vols . XXXIX , XL , Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
 Fung , Yu @-@ lan ( 1933 ) , Chuang Tzu , a New Selected Translation with an Exposition on the Philosophy of Kuo <unk> , Shanghai : Shang wu . 
 Watson , Burton ( 1964 ) , Chuang tzu : Basic Writings , New York : Columbia University Press ; 2nd edition ( 1996 ) ; 3rd edition ( 2003 ) converted to pinyin . 
 ( Japanese ) Fukunaga , <unk> <unk> ( 1966 ) . Sōshi <unk> [ Zhuangzi ] . 3 vols . Tokyo : Asahi . 
 Watson , Burton ( 1968 ) , The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu , New York : Columbia University Press . 
 ( French ) <unk> , Kia @-@ <unk> <unk> ( 1969 ) , L 'œuvre <unk> de <unk> @-@ <unk> [ The Complete Works of Zhuangzi ] , Paris : Gallimard . 
 ( Japanese ) <unk> , Kiyoshi <unk> ( 1977 ) , Sōshi <unk> [ Zhuangzi ] , in <unk> <unk> taikei <unk> [ Fully Interpreted Chinese Literature Series ] , vols . 16 @-@ 17 , Tokyo : Shūeisha . 
 Graham , A.C. ( 1981 ) , Chuang @-@ tzu , The Seven Inner Chapters and Other Writings from the Book Chuang @-@ tzu , London : George Allen and Unwin . Translation notes published separately in 1982 as Chuang @-@ tzu : Textual Notes to a Partial Translation , London : School of Oriental and African Studies . 
 Mair , Victor H. ( 1994 ) , Wandering on the Way : Early Taoist Tales and Parables of Chuang Tzu , New York : Bantam Books ; republished ( 1997 ) , Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press . 
 <unk> , Brook ( 2009 ) , Zhuangzi : The Essential Writings with Selections from Traditional Commentaries , Indianapolis : Hackett Publishing . 
 = Antioxidant = 
 An antioxidant is a molecule that inhibits the oxidation of other molecules . Oxidation is a chemical reaction that can produce free radicals , leading to chain reactions that may damage cells . Antioxidants such as thiols or ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) terminate these chain reactions . The term " antioxidant " is mainly used for two different groups of substances : industrial chemicals which are added to products to prevent oxidation , and natural chemicals found in foods and body tissue which are said to have beneficial health effects . 
 To balance the oxidative state , plants and animals maintain complex systems of overlapping antioxidants , such as glutathione and enzymes ( e.g. , catalase and superoxide dismutase ) produced internally or the dietary antioxidants , vitamin A , vitamin C and vitamin E. 
 Diets containing antioxidant dietary supplements do not improve health nor are they effective in preventing diseases . <unk> clinical trials including supplements of beta @-@ carotene , vitamin A and vitamin E singly or in different combinations found no effect on mortality rate and cancer risk , or may even increase cancer risk . Supplementation with selenium or vitamin E does not reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease . Oxidative stress can be considered as either a cause or consequence of some diseases , an area of research stimulating drug development for antioxidant compounds for use as potential therapies . 
 Industrial antioxidants have diverse uses , such as food and cosmetics preservatives and inhibitors of rubber or gasoline deterioration . 
 = = Health effects = = 
 = = = Relation to diet = = = 
 Although certain levels of antioxidant vitamins in the diet are required for good health , there is considerable doubt as to whether antioxidant @-@ rich foods or supplements have anti @-@ disease activity ; and if they are actually beneficial , it is unknown which antioxidant ( s ) are needed from the diet and in what amounts beyond typical dietary intake . Some authors dispute the hypothesis that antioxidant vitamins could prevent chronic diseases , while others maintain such a possibility is unproved and misguided from the beginning . 
 <unk> , which have antioxidant properties in vitro , are not proven as dietary antioxidants in vivo , yet may have non @-@ antioxidant roles in minute concentrations that affect cell @-@ to @-@ cell signaling , receptor sensitivity , inflammatory enzyme activity or gene regulation . 
 Although dietary antioxidants have been investigated for potential effects on neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer 's disease , Parkinson 's disease , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , these studies have been inconclusive . 
 = = = Drug candidates = = = 
 <unk> is an antioxidant steroid derivative that inhibits the lipid peroxidation that is believed to play a key in neuronal death in stroke and head injury . It demonstrated activity in animal models of stroke , but human trials demonstrated no effect on mortality or other outcomes in subarachnoid haemorrhage and worsened results in ischemic stroke . 
 Similarly , the designed antioxidant <unk> @-@ 059 exhibited efficacy in animal models , but failed to improve stroke outcomes in a clinical trial . As of November 2014 , other antioxidants are being studied as potential <unk> . 
 Common pharmaceuticals ( and supplements ) with antioxidant properties may interfere with the efficacy of certain anticancer medication and radiation . 
 = = = Physical exercise = = = 
 During exercise , oxygen consumption can increase by a factor of more than 10 . However , no benefits for physical performance to athletes are seen with vitamin E supplementation and 6 weeks of vitamin E supplementation had no effect on muscle damage in ultramarathon runners . Some research suggests that supplementation with amounts as high as 1000 mg of vitamin C inhibits recovery . Other studies indicated that antioxidant supplementation may attenuate the cardiovascular benefits of exercise . 
 = = = Adverse effects = = = 
 Relatively strong reducing acids can have <unk> effects by binding to dietary minerals such as iron and zinc in the gastrointestinal tract and preventing them from being absorbed . Notable examples are oxalic acid , tannins and <unk> acid , which are high in plant @-@ based diets . Calcium and iron deficiencies are not uncommon in diets in developing countries where less meat is eaten and there is high consumption of <unk> acid from beans and unleavened whole grain bread . 
 <unk> antioxidants such as eugenol — a major component of oil of cloves — have toxicity limits that can be exceeded with the misuse of undiluted essential oils . Toxicity associated with high doses of water @-@ soluble antioxidants such as ascorbic acid are less of a concern , as these compounds can be excreted rapidly in urine . More seriously , very high doses of some antioxidants may have harmful long @-@ term effects . The beta @-@ carotene and <unk> Efficacy Trial ( <unk> ) study of lung cancer patients found that smokers given supplements containing beta @-@ carotene and vitamin A had increased rates of lung cancer . Subsequent studies confirmed these adverse effects . 
 These harmful effects may also be seen in non @-@ smokers , as a recent meta @-@ analysis including data from approximately 230 @,@ 000 patients showed that β @-@ carotene , vitamin A or vitamin E supplementation is associated with increased mortality but saw no significant effect from vitamin C. No health risk was seen when all the randomized controlled studies were examined together , but an increase in mortality was detected when only high @-@ quality and low @-@ bias risk trials were examined separately . As the majority of these low @-@ bias trials dealt with either elderly people , or people with disease , these results may not apply to the general population . This meta @-@ analysis was later repeated and extended by the same authors , with the new analysis published by the Cochrane Collaboration ; confirming the previous results . These two publications are consistent with some previous meta @-@ analyzes that also suggested that Vitamin E supplementation increased mortality , and that antioxidant supplements increased the risk of colon cancer . Beta @-@ carotene may also increase lung cancer . Overall , the large number of clinical trials carried out on antioxidant supplements suggest that either these products have no effect on health , or that they cause a small increase in mortality in elderly or vulnerable populations . 
 While antioxidant supplementation is widely used in attempts to prevent the development of cancer , antioxidants may interfere with cancer treatments , since the environment of cancer cells causes high levels of oxidative stress , making these cells more susceptible to the further oxidative stress induced by treatments . As a result , by reducing the redox stress in cancer cells , antioxidant supplements ( and pharmaceuticals ) could decrease the effectiveness of radiotherapy and chemotherapy . On the other hand , other reviews have suggested that antioxidants could reduce side effects or increase survival times . 
 = = Oxidative challenge in biology = = 
 A paradox in metabolism is that , while the vast majority of complex life on Earth requires oxygen for its existence , oxygen is a highly reactive molecule that damages living organisms by producing reactive oxygen species . Consequently , organisms contain a complex network of antioxidant metabolites and enzymes that work together to prevent oxidative damage to cellular components such as DNA , proteins and lipids . In general , antioxidant systems either prevent these reactive species from being formed , or remove them before they can damage vital components of the cell . However , reactive oxygen species also have useful cellular functions , such as redox signaling . Thus , the function of antioxidant systems is not to remove oxidants entirely , but instead to keep them at an optimum level . 
 The reactive oxygen species produced in cells include hydrogen peroxide ( H2O2 ) , <unk> acid ( <unk> ) , and free radicals such as the hydroxyl radical ( · OH ) and the superoxide anion ( O2 − ) . The hydroxyl radical is particularly unstable and will react rapidly and non @-@ specifically with most biological molecules . This species is produced from hydrogen peroxide in metal @-@ catalyzed redox reactions such as the Fenton reaction . These oxidants can damage cells by starting chemical chain reactions such as lipid peroxidation , or by oxidizing DNA or proteins . Damage to DNA can cause mutations and possibly cancer , if not reversed by DNA repair mechanisms , while damage to proteins causes enzyme inhibition , denaturation and protein degradation . 
 The use of oxygen as part of the process for generating metabolic energy produces reactive oxygen species . In this process , the superoxide anion is produced as a by @-@ product of several steps in the electron transport chain . Particularly important is the reduction of coenzyme Q in complex III , since a highly reactive free radical is formed as an intermediate ( Q · − ) . This unstable intermediate can lead to electron " leakage " , when electrons jump directly to oxygen and form the superoxide anion , instead of moving through the normal series of well @-@ controlled reactions of the electron transport chain . Peroxide is also produced from the oxidation of reduced <unk> , such as complex I. However , although these enzymes can produce oxidants , the relative importance of the electron transfer chain to other processes that generate peroxide is unclear . In plants , algae , and cyanobacteria , reactive oxygen species are also produced during photosynthesis , particularly under conditions of high light intensity . This effect is partly offset by the involvement of carotenoids in <unk> , and in algae and cyanobacteria , by large amount of iodide and selenium , which involves these antioxidants reacting with over @-@ reduced forms of the photosynthetic reaction centres to prevent the production of reactive oxygen species . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Antioxidants are classified into two broad divisions , depending on whether they are soluble in water ( hydrophilic ) or in lipids ( lipophilic ) . In general , water @-@ soluble antioxidants react with oxidants in the cell cytosol and the blood plasma , while lipid @-@ soluble antioxidants protect cell membranes from lipid peroxidation . These compounds may be synthesized in the body or obtained from the diet . The different antioxidants are present at a wide range of concentrations in body fluids and tissues , with some such as glutathione or ubiquinone mostly present within cells , while others such as uric acid are more evenly distributed ( see table below ) . Some antioxidants are only found in a few organisms and these compounds can be important in pathogens and can be virulence factors . 
 The relative importance and interactions between these different antioxidants is a very complex question , with the various metabolites and enzyme systems having synergistic and interdependent effects on one another . The action of one antioxidant may therefore depend on the proper function of other members of the antioxidant system . The amount of protection provided by any one antioxidant will also depend on its concentration , its reactivity towards the particular reactive oxygen species being considered , and the status of the antioxidants with which it interacts . 
 Some compounds contribute to antioxidant defense by chelating transition metals and preventing them from catalyzing the production of free radicals in the cell . Particularly important is the ability to sequester iron , which is the function of iron @-@ binding proteins such as transferrin and ferritin . Selenium and zinc are commonly referred to as antioxidant nutrients , but these chemical elements have no antioxidant action themselves and are instead required for the activity of some antioxidant enzymes , as is discussed below . 
 = = = Uric acid = = = 
 Uric acid is by far the highest concentration antioxidant in human blood . Uric acid ( UA ) is an antioxidant <unk> produced from xanthine by the enzyme xanthine oxidase , and is an intermediate product of purine metabolism . In almost all land animals , urate oxidase further catalyzes the oxidation of uric acid to <unk> , but in humans and most higher primates , the urate oxidase gene is nonfunctional , so that UA is not further broken down . The evolutionary reasons for this loss of urate conversion to <unk> remain the topic of active speculation . The antioxidant effects of uric acid have led researchers to suggest this mutation was beneficial to early primates and humans . Studies of high altitude acclimatization support the hypothesis that urate acts as an antioxidant by mitigating the oxidative stress caused by high @-@ altitude hypoxia . In animal studies that investigate diseases facilitated by oxidative stress , introduction of UA both prevents the disease or reduces it , leading researchers to propose this is due to UA 's antioxidant properties . Studies of UA 's antioxidant mechanism support this proposal . 
 With respect to multiple sclerosis , Gwen Scott explains the significance of uric acid as an antioxidant by proposing that " Serum UA levels are inversely associated with the incidence of MS in humans because MS patients have low serum UA levels and individuals with hyperuricemia ( gout ) rarely develop the disease . Moreover , the administration of UA is therapeutic in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis ( <unk> ) , an animal model of MS. " In sum , while the mechanism of UA as an antioxidant is well @-@ supported , the claim that its levels affect MS risk is still controversial , and requires more research . 
 Likewise , UA has the highest concentration of any blood antioxidant and provides over half of the total antioxidant capacity of human serum . Uric acid 's antioxidant activities are also complex , given that it does not react with some oxidants , such as superoxide , but does act against peroxynitrite , peroxides , and <unk> acid . Concerns over elevated UA 's contribution to gout must be considered as one of many risk factors . By itself , UA @-@ related risk of gout at high levels ( 415 – 530 μmol / L ) is only 0 @.@ 5 % per year with an increase to 4 @.@ 5 % per year at UA supersaturation levels ( 535 + μmol / L ) . Many of these aforementioned studies determined UA 's antioxidant actions within normal physiological levels , and some found antioxidant activity at levels as high as 285 μmol / L. 
 = = = Vitamin C = = = 
 Ascorbic acid or " vitamin C " is a monosaccharide oxidation @-@ reduction ( redox ) catalyst found in both animals and plants . As one of the enzymes needed to make ascorbic acid has been lost by mutation during primate evolution , humans must obtain it from the diet ; it is therefore a vitamin . Most other animals are able to produce this compound in their bodies and do not require it in their diets . Ascorbic acid is required for the conversion of the <unk> to collagen by oxidizing proline residues to hydroxyproline . In other cells , it is maintained in its reduced form by reaction with glutathione , which can be catalysed by protein disulfide isomerase and <unk> . Ascorbic acid is a redox catalyst which can reduce , and thereby neutralize , reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide . In addition to its direct antioxidant effects , ascorbic acid is also a substrate for the redox enzyme ascorbate peroxidase , a function that is particularly important in stress resistance in plants . Ascorbic acid is present at high levels in all parts of plants and can reach concentrations of 20 <unk> in chloroplasts . 
 = = = Glutathione = = = 
 Glutathione is a cysteine @-@ containing peptide found in most forms of aerobic life . It is not required in the diet and is instead synthesized in cells from its constituent amino acids . Glutathione has antioxidant properties since the thiol group in its cysteine moiety is a reducing agent and can be reversibly oxidized and reduced . In cells , glutathione is maintained in the reduced form by the enzyme glutathione reductase and in turn reduces other metabolites and enzyme systems , such as ascorbate in the glutathione @-@ ascorbate cycle , glutathione peroxidases and <unk> , as well as reacting directly with oxidants . Due to its high concentration and its central role in maintaining the cell 's redox state , glutathione is one of the most important cellular antioxidants . In some organisms glutathione is replaced by other thiols , such as by <unk> in the <unk> , <unk> in some Gram @-@ positive bacteria , or by trypanothione in the <unk> . 
 = = = Melatonin = = = 
 Melatonin is a powerful antioxidant . Melatonin easily crosses cell membranes and the blood – brain barrier . Unlike other antioxidants , melatonin does not undergo redox cycling , which is the ability of a molecule to undergo repeated reduction and oxidation . <unk> cycling may allow other antioxidants ( such as vitamin C ) to act as pro @-@ oxidants and promote free radical formation . Melatonin , once oxidized , cannot be reduced to its former state because it forms several stable end @-@ products upon reacting with free radicals . Therefore , it has been referred to as a terminal ( or suicidal ) antioxidant . 
 = = = Vitamin E = = = 
 Vitamin E is the collective name for a set of eight related tocopherols and <unk> , which are fat @-@ soluble vitamins with antioxidant properties . Of these , α @-@ tocopherol has been most studied as it has the highest bioavailability , with the body preferentially absorbing and metabolising this form . 
 It has been claimed that the α @-@ tocopherol form is the most important lipid @-@ soluble antioxidant , and that it protects membranes from oxidation by reacting with lipid radicals produced in the lipid peroxidation chain reaction . This removes the free radical intermediates and prevents the propagation reaction from continuing . This reaction produces oxidised α @-@ <unk> radicals that can be recycled back to the active reduced form through reduction by other antioxidants , such as ascorbate , retinol or ubiquinol . This is in line with findings showing that α @-@ tocopherol , but not water @-@ soluble antioxidants , efficiently protects glutathione peroxidase 4 ( <unk> ) <unk> cells from cell death . <unk> is the only known enzyme that efficiently reduces lipid @-@ hydroperoxides within biological membranes . 
 However , the roles and importance of the various forms of vitamin E are presently unclear , and it has even been suggested that the most important function of α @-@ tocopherol is as a signaling molecule , with this molecule having no significant role in antioxidant metabolism . The functions of the other forms of vitamin E are even less well @-@ understood , although γ @-@ tocopherol is a nucleophile that may react with electrophilic mutagens , and <unk> may be important in protecting neurons from damage . 
 = = Pro @-@ oxidant activities = = 
 Antioxidants that are reducing agents can also act as pro @-@ oxidants . For example , vitamin C has antioxidant activity when it reduces oxidizing substances such as hydrogen peroxide , however , it will also reduce metal ions that generate free radicals through the Fenton reaction . 
 2 Fe3 + + <unk> → 2 Fe2 + + <unk> 
 2 Fe2 + + 2 H2O2 → 2 Fe3 + + 2 OH · + 2 OH − 
 The relative importance of the antioxidant and pro @-@ oxidant activities of antioxidants is an area of current research , but vitamin C , which exerts its effects as a vitamin by oxidizing polypeptides , appears to have a mostly antioxidant action in the human body . However , less data is available for other dietary antioxidants , such as vitamin E , or the polyphenols . Likewise , the pathogenesis of diseases involving hyperuricemia likely involve uric acid 's direct and indirect pro @-@ oxidant properties . 
 That is , paradoxically , agents which are normally considered antioxidants can act as conditional pro @-@ oxidants and actually increase oxidative stress . Besides ascorbate , medically important conditional pro @-@ oxidants include uric acid and sulfhydryl amino acids such as homocysteine . Typically , this involves some transition @-@ series metal such as copper or iron as catalyst . The potential role of the pro @-@ oxidant role of uric acid in ( e.g. ) atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke is considered above . Another example is the postulated role of homocysteine in atherosclerosis . 
 = = = Negative health effects = = = 
 Some antioxidant supplements may promote disease and increase mortality in humans under certain conditions . Hypothetically , free radicals induce an endogenous response that protects against exogenous radicals ( and possibly other toxic compounds ) . Free radicals may increase life span . This increase may be prevented by antioxidants , providing direct evidence that toxic radicals may <unk> exert life extending and health promoting effects . 
 = = Enzyme systems = = 
 As with the chemical antioxidants , cells are protected against oxidative stress by an interacting network of antioxidant enzymes . Here , the superoxide released by processes such as oxidative phosphorylation is first converted to hydrogen peroxide and then further reduced to give water . This detoxification pathway is the result of multiple enzymes , with superoxide dismutases catalysing the first step and then <unk> and various peroxidases removing hydrogen peroxide . As with antioxidant metabolites , the contributions of these enzymes to antioxidant defenses can be hard to separate from one another , but the generation of transgenic mice lacking just one antioxidant enzyme can be informative . 
 = = = Superoxide dismutase , catalase and peroxiredoxins = = = 
 Superoxide dismutases ( <unk> ) are a class of closely related enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of the superoxide anion into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide . SOD enzymes are present in almost all aerobic cells and in extracellular fluids . Superoxide dismutase enzymes contain metal ion cofactors that , depending on the isozyme , can be copper , zinc , manganese or iron . In humans , the copper / zinc SOD is present in the cytosol , while manganese SOD is present in the mitochondrion . There also exists a third form of SOD in extracellular fluids , which contains copper and zinc in its active sites . The mitochondrial isozyme seems to be the most biologically important of these three , since mice lacking this enzyme die soon after birth . In contrast , the mice lacking copper / zinc SOD ( <unk> ) are viable but have numerous pathologies and a reduced lifespan ( see article on superoxide ) , while mice without the extracellular SOD have minimal defects ( sensitive to hyperoxia ) . In plants , SOD isozymes are present in the cytosol and mitochondria , with an iron SOD found in chloroplasts that is absent from vertebrates and yeast . 
 <unk> are enzymes that catalyse the conversion of hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen , using either an iron or manganese cofactor . This protein is localized to peroxisomes in most eukaryotic cells . <unk> is an unusual enzyme since , although hydrogen peroxide is its only substrate , it follows a ping @-@ pong mechanism . Here , its cofactor is oxidised by one molecule of hydrogen peroxide and then regenerated by transferring the bound oxygen to a second molecule of substrate . Despite its apparent importance in hydrogen peroxide removal , humans with genetic deficiency of catalase — " <unk> " — or mice genetically engineered to lack catalase completely , suffer few ill effects . 
 <unk> are peroxidases that catalyze the reduction of hydrogen peroxide , organic hydroperoxides , as well as peroxynitrite . They are divided into three classes : typical 2 @-@ cysteine peroxiredoxins ; atypical 2 @-@ cysteine peroxiredoxins ; and 1 @-@ cysteine peroxiredoxins . These enzymes share the same basic catalytic mechanism , in which a redox @-@ active cysteine ( the <unk> cysteine ) in the active site is oxidized to a <unk> acid by the peroxide substrate . Over @-@ oxidation of this cysteine residue in peroxiredoxins inactivates these enzymes , but this can be reversed by the action of <unk> . <unk> seem to be important in antioxidant metabolism , as mice lacking <unk> 1 or 2 have shortened lifespan and suffer from hemolytic anaemia , while plants use peroxiredoxins to remove hydrogen peroxide generated in chloroplasts . 
 = = = <unk> and glutathione systems = = = 
 The thioredoxin system contains the 12 @-@ kDa protein thioredoxin and its companion thioredoxin reductase . Proteins related to thioredoxin are present in all sequenced organisms . Plants , such as Arabidopsis thaliana , have a particularly great diversity of isoforms . The active site of thioredoxin consists of two neighboring cysteines , as part of a highly conserved <unk> motif , that can cycle between an active <unk> form ( reduced ) and an oxidized disulfide form . In its active state , thioredoxin acts as an efficient reducing agent , scavenging reactive oxygen species and maintaining other proteins in their reduced state . After being oxidized , the active thioredoxin is regenerated by the action of thioredoxin reductase , using NADPH as an electron donor . 
 The glutathione system includes glutathione , glutathione reductase , glutathione peroxidases and glutathione S @-@ transferases . This system is found in animals , plants and microorganisms . Glutathione peroxidase is an enzyme containing four selenium @-@ cofactors that catalyzes the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide and organic hydroperoxides . There are at least four different glutathione peroxidase isozymes in animals . Glutathione peroxidase 1 is the most abundant and is a very efficient scavenger of hydrogen peroxide , while glutathione peroxidase 4 is most active with lipid hydroperoxides . Surprisingly , glutathione peroxidase 1 is dispensable , as mice lacking this enzyme have normal lifespans , but they are hypersensitive to induced oxidative stress . In addition , the glutathione S @-@ transferases show high activity with lipid peroxides . These enzymes are at particularly high levels in the liver and also serve in detoxification metabolism . 
 = = Oxidative stress in disease = = 
 Oxidative stress is thought to contribute to the development of a wide range of diseases including Alzheimer 's disease , Parkinson 's disease , the pathologies caused by diabetes , rheumatoid arthritis , and neurodegeneration in motor neuron diseases . In many of these cases , it is unclear if oxidants trigger the disease , or if they are produced as a secondary consequence of the disease and from general tissue damage ; One case in which this link is particularly well @-@ understood is the role of oxidative stress in cardiovascular disease . Here , low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) oxidation appears to trigger the process of <unk> , which results in atherosclerosis , and finally cardiovascular disease . 
 Oxidative damage in DNA can cause cancer . Several antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase , catalase , glutathione peroxidase , glutathione reductase , glutathione S @-@ transferase etc. protect DNA from oxidative stress . It has been proposed that polymorphisms in these enzymes are associated with DNA damage and subsequently the individual 's risk of cancer susceptibility . 
 A low calorie diet extends median and maximum lifespan in many animals . This effect may involve a reduction in oxidative stress . While there is some evidence to support the role of oxidative stress in aging in model organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans , the evidence in mammals is less clear . Indeed , a 2009 review of experiments in mice concluded that almost all manipulations of antioxidant systems had no effect on aging . 
 Diets high in fruit and vegetables , and so possibly being rich in antioxidant vitamins , have no established effect on status of health or aging , yet may have more subtle physiological effects , such as modifying cell @-@ to @-@ cell communication . 
 = = Uses in technology = = 
 = = = Food preservatives = = = 
 Antioxidants are used as food additives to help guard against food deterioration . Exposure to oxygen and sunlight are the two main factors in the oxidation of food , so food is preserved by keeping in the dark and sealing it in containers or even coating it in wax , as with cucumbers . However , as oxygen is also important for plant respiration , storing plant materials in anaerobic conditions produces unpleasant flavors and unappealing colors . Consequently , packaging of fresh fruits and vegetables contains an ~ 8 % oxygen atmosphere . Antioxidants are an especially important class of preservatives as , unlike bacterial or fungal spoilage , oxidation reactions still occur relatively rapidly in frozen or refrigerated food . These preservatives include natural antioxidants such as ascorbic acid ( AA , <unk> ) and tocopherols ( <unk> ) , as well as synthetic antioxidants such as propyl <unk> ( PG , <unk> ) , tertiary <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> <unk> ( BHA , <unk> ) and <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 The most common molecules attacked by oxidation are unsaturated fats ; oxidation causes them to turn rancid . Since oxidized lipids are often discolored and usually have unpleasant tastes such as metallic or sulfurous flavors , it is important to avoid oxidation in fat @-@ rich foods . Thus , these foods are rarely preserved by drying ; instead , they are preserved by smoking , salting or fermenting . Even less fatty foods such as fruits are sprayed with sulfurous antioxidants prior to air drying . Oxidation is often catalyzed by metals , which is why fats such as butter should never be wrapped in aluminium foil or kept in metal containers . Some fatty foods such as olive oil are partially protected from oxidation by their natural content of antioxidants , but remain sensitive to <unk> . Antioxidant preservatives are also added to fat based cosmetics such as lipstick and moisturizers to prevent <unk> . 
 = = = Industrial uses = = = 
 Antioxidants are frequently added to industrial products . A common use is as stabilizers in fuels and lubricants to prevent oxidation , and in <unk> to prevent the polymerization that leads to the formation of engine @-@ fouling residues . In 2007 , the worldwide market for industrial antioxidants had a total volume of around 0 @.@ 88 million tons . This created a revenue of circa 3 @.@ 7 billion US @-@ dollars ( 2 @.@ 4 billion Euros ) . 
 They are widely used to prevent the oxidative degradation of polymers such as rubbers , plastics and adhesives that causes a loss of strength and flexibility in these materials . Polymers containing double bonds in their main chains , such as natural rubber and <unk> , are especially susceptible to oxidation and <unk> . They can be protected by <unk> . Solid polymer products start to crack on exposed surfaces as the material degrades and the chains break . The mode of cracking varies between oxygen and ozone attack , the former causing a " crazy paving " effect , while ozone attack produces deeper cracks aligned at right angles to the tensile strain in the product . Oxidation and UV degradation are also frequently linked , mainly because UV radiation creates free radicals by bond breakage . The free radicals then react with oxygen to produce <unk> radicals which cause yet further damage , often in a chain reaction . Other polymers susceptible to oxidation include polypropylene and polyethylene . The former is more sensitive owing to the presence of secondary carbon atoms present in every repeat unit . Attack occurs at this point because the free radical formed is more stable than one formed on a primary carbon atom . Oxidation of polyethylene tends to occur at weak links in the chain , such as branch points in low @-@ density polyethylene . 
 = = Measurement and levels in food = = 
 Antioxidant vitamins are found in vegetables , fruits , eggs , legumes and nuts . Vitamins A , C , and E can be destroyed by long @-@ term storage or prolonged cooking . The effects of cooking and food processing are complex , as these processes can also increase the bioavailability of antioxidants , such as some carotenoids in vegetables . Processed food contains fewer antioxidant vitamins than fresh and uncooked foods , as preparation exposes food to heat and oxygen . 
 Other antioxidants are not vitamins and are instead made in the body . For example , ubiquinol ( coenzyme Q ) is poorly absorbed from the gut and is made in humans through the mevalonate pathway . Another example is glutathione , which is made from amino acids . As any glutathione in the gut is broken down to free cysteine , glycine and glutamic acid before being absorbed , even large oral doses have little effect on the concentration of glutathione in the body . Although large amounts of sulfur @-@ containing amino acids such as acetylcysteine can increase glutathione , no evidence exists that eating high levels of these glutathione precursors is beneficial for healthy adults . <unk> more of these precursors may be useful as part of the treatment of some diseases , such as acute respiratory distress syndrome , protein @-@ energy malnutrition , or preventing the liver damage produced by paracetamol overdose . 
 Other compounds in the diet can alter the levels of antioxidants by acting as pro @-@ oxidants whereby consuming the compound may cause oxidative stress , possibly resulting in higher levels of antioxidant enzymes . 
 = = = <unk> of ORAC = = = 
 Measurement of antioxidant content in food is not a straightforward process , as this is a diverse group of compounds with different reactivities to various reactive oxygen species . In food science , the oxygen radical absorbance capacity ( ORAC ) used to be the industry standard for antioxidant strength of whole foods , juices and food additives . However , the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) withdrew these ratings in 2012 as biologically invalid , stating that no physiological proof in vivo existed to support the free @-@ radical theory , especially for polyphenols . Consequently , the ORAC method , derived only from in vitro experiments , is no longer considered relevant to human diets or biology . 
 Alternative in vitro measurements include the <unk> @-@ <unk> reagent , and the <unk> equivalent antioxidant capacity assay . 
 = = History = = 
 As part of their adaptation from marine life , terrestrial plants began producing non @-@ marine antioxidants such as ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) , polyphenols and tocopherols . The evolution of angiosperm plants between 50 and 200 million years ago resulted in the development of many antioxidant pigments – particularly during the Jurassic period – as chemical defences against reactive oxygen species that are byproducts of photosynthesis . Originally , the term antioxidant specifically referred to a chemical that prevented the consumption of oxygen . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , extensive study concentrated on the use of antioxidants in important industrial processes , such as the prevention of metal corrosion , the vulcanization of rubber , and the polymerization of fuels in the fouling of internal combustion engines . 
 Early research on the role of antioxidants in biology focused on their use in preventing the oxidation of unsaturated fats , which is the cause of <unk> . Antioxidant activity could be measured simply by placing the fat in a closed container with oxygen and measuring the rate of oxygen consumption . However , it was the identification of vitamins A , C , and E as antioxidants that revolutionized the field and led to the realization of the importance of antioxidants in the biochemistry of living organisms . The possible mechanisms of action of antioxidants were first explored when it was recognized that a substance with anti @-@ oxidative activity is likely to be one that is itself readily oxidized . Research into how vitamin E prevents the process of lipid peroxidation led to the identification of antioxidants as reducing agents that prevent oxidative reactions , often by scavenging reactive oxygen species before they can damage cells . 
 = The Power of Nightmares = 
 The Power of Nightmares : The Rise of the Politics of Fear is a BBC television documentary series by Adam Curtis . It mainly consists of archive footage , with Curtis narrating . The series was originally broadcast in the United Kingdom in 2004 . It has subsequently been aired in multiple countries and shown at various film festivals , including the 2005 Cannes Film Festival . 
 The film compares the rise of the neoconservative movement in the United States and the radical Islamist movement , drawing comparisons between their origins , and remarking on similarities between the two groups . More controversially , it argues that radical Islamism as a massive , sinister organisation , specifically in the form of al @-@ Qaeda , is a myth , or noble lie , perpetuated by leaders of many countries — and particularly neoconservatives in the U.S. — in a renewed attempt to unite and inspire their people after the ultimate failure of utopian ideas . 
 The Power of Nightmares was praised by film critics in Britain and the United States . Its message and content have also been the subject of various critiques and criticisms from conservatives and progressives . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Part 1 . ' Baby It 's Cold Outside ' = = = 
 The first part of the series explains the origins of Islamism and neoconservatism . It shows Egyptian civil servant Sayyid Qutb , depicted as the founder of modern Islamist thinking , visiting the U.S. to learn about its education system , then becoming disgusted at what he judged as the corruption of morals and virtues in western society through individualism . When he returns to Egypt , he is disturbed by westernisation under Gamal Abdel Nasser and becomes convinced that in order to save his own society , it must be completely restructured along the lines of Islamic law while still using western technology . He then becomes convinced that his vision can only be accomplished through use of an elite " vanguard " to lead a revolution against the established order . Qutb becomes a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood and , after being tortured in one of Nasser 's jails , comes to believe that western @-@ influenced leaders can be justifiably killed to remove their corruption . Qutb is executed in 1966 , but he influences Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri , the future mentor of Osama bin Laden , to start his own secret Islamist group . Inspired by the 1979 Iranian revolution , Zawahiri and his allies assassinate Egyptian president Anwar Al @-@ Sadat in 1981 in the hopes of starting their own revolution . However , the revolution does not materialise , and Zawahiri comes to believe that a majority of Muslims have been corrupted , not only by their western @-@ inspired leaders , but Muslims themselves have been affected by <unk> and thus may be legitimate targets of violence if they refuse to join his cause . They continued to believe that a vanguard was necessary to rise up and overthrow the corrupt regime and replace it with a ' pure ' Islamist state . 
 At the same time in the United States , a group of disillusioned liberals , including Irving Kristol and Paul Wolfowitz , look to the political thinking of Leo Strauss after the perceived failure of President Johnson 's " Great Society " . They conclude that an emphasis on individual liberty was the undoing of Johnson 's plans . They envisioned restructuring America by uniting the American people against a common evil , and set about creating a mythical enemy . These factions , the neoconservatives , came to power during the 1980s under the Reagan administration , with their allies Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld . They alleged that the Soviet Union was not following the terms of a disarmament treaty between the two countries , and together with the outcomes of " Team B " , they built a case using dubious evidence and methods to prove it to Ronald Reagan . 
 = = = Part 2 . ' The Phantom Victory ' = = = 
 In the second part , Islamist factions , rapidly falling under the more radical influence of Zawahiri and his rich Saudi acolyte Osama bin Laden , join the neoconservative @-@ influenced Reagan administration to combat the Soviet Union 's invasion of Afghanistan . When the Soviets eventually pull out of Afghanistan , and when the Eastern Bloc begins to collapse in 1989 , both the Islamists and the neoconservatives believe they are the primary architects of the " Evil Empire 's " defeat . Curtis argues that the Soviet Union was on the verge of collapsing anyway . However , the Islamists see it quite differently . In their triumph , they believe they have the power to create ' pure ' Islamic states in Egypt and Algeria . Attempts to create such Islamic states are blocked by force . The Islamists then try to foment revolutions in Egypt and Algeria by using terrorism to scare the people into rising up against their leaders . But the people are terrified by the violence , and the Algerian government exploits that fear as a way to hang on to power . In the end , the Islamists declare the entire populations of the countries to be thoroughly contaminated by western values . Finally , in Algeria , they begin to turn on each other , each believing that members of other terrorist groups are not true Muslims . 
 In America , neoconservative aspirations to use the United States ' military power to further destroy evildoers are thrown off track by the election of George H. W. Bush to the presidency , followed by the election in 1992 of Bill Clinton which left them totally out of power . The neoconservatives , along with their conservative Christian allies , attempt to demonize Clinton throughout his presidency with various real and fabricated stories of corruption and immorality . To their disappointment , the American people do not turn against Clinton . Meanwhile , Islamist attempts at revolution end in massive bloodshed , leaving the Islamists without popular support . Zawahiri and bin Laden flee to the relative safety of Afghanistan and declare a new strategy . To fight Western @-@ inspired moral decay , they must deal a blow to its source : the United States . 
 = = = Part 3 . ' The Shadows in the Cave ' = = = 
 The final part addresses the actual rise of al @-@ Qaeda . Curtis argues that , after their failed revolutions , bin Laden and Zawahiri had little or no popular support , let alone a serious complex organisation of terrorists , and were dependent on independent operatives to carry out their new call for jihad . However , the film argues that in order to prosecute bin Laden in absentia for the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings , U.S. prosecutors had to prove that he is the head of a criminal organisation responsible for the bombings . They find a former associate of bin Laden , Jamal al @-@ Fadl , and pay him to testify that bin Laden is the head of a massive terrorist organisation called " al @-@ Qaeda " . With the September 11 attacks , neoconservatives in the new Republican administration of George W. Bush use this invented concept of an organisation to justify another crusade against a new enemy , culminating in the launch of the War on Terror . 
 After the American invasion of Afghanistan fails to uproot the alleged terrorist organisation , the Bush administration focuses inwards , searching unsuccessfully for terrorist sleeper cells in America . In 2003 , they extend the War on Terror to a war on general perceived evils with the invasion of Iraq . The ideas and tactics also spread to the United Kingdom , where Tony Blair uses the threat of terrorism to give him a new moral authority . The repercussions of the neoconservative strategy are also explored , with an investigation of indefinitely @-@ detained terrorist suspects in Guantanamo Bay , many allegedly taken on the word of the anti @-@ Taliban Northern Alliance without actual investigation on the part of the United States military , and other forms of " preemption " against non @-@ existent and unlikely threats made simply on the grounds that the parties involved had the potential to become a threat . Curtis specifically attempts to allay fears of a dirty bomb attack , and concludes by reassuring viewers that politicians will eventually have to concede that some threats are exaggerated and others have no foundation in reality . He says , " In an age when all the grand ideas have lost credibility , fear of a phantom enemy is all the politicians have left to maintain their power . " 
 = = Contributors = = 
 = = Content = = 
 Adam Curtis originally intended to make a film about conflict within the conservative movement between the ideologies of neoconservative " elitism " and the more individualist libertarian factions . During his research into the conservative movement , Curtis discovered what he saw as similarities in the origins of the neoconservative and Islamist ideologies . The topic of the planned documentary shifted to these other two ideologies , with the libertarian element eventually being phased out . Curtis first pitched the idea of a documentary on conservative ideology in 2003 and spent half a year researching the film . Final recordings were made on 10 October , 19 October and 1 November 2004 . 
 As with many of Curtis 's films , The Power of Nightmares uses a montage of stock footage taken from the BBC archives which Curtis narrates . Curtis has credited James Mossman as the inspiration for his montage technique , which he first employed for the 1992 series Pandora 's Box , while his use of humour has been credited to his first work with television as a talent @-@ scout for the magazine programme That 's Life ! Curtis has also compared the entertainment aspect of his films to the Fox News channel in America , claiming that the network is successful because of " [ their viewers ] really enjoying what they 're doing . " 
 To help drive his points , Curtis uses interviews with various political and intellectual figures . In the first two parts , former Arms Control and Disarmament Agency member Anne Cahn and former American Spectator writer David Brock accuse the neoconservatives of knowingly using false evidence of wrongdoing in their campaigns against the Soviet Union and President Bill Clinton . Jason Burke , author of Al @-@ Qaeda : Casting a Shadow of Terror , comments in The Shadows in the Cave on the failure to expose a massive terrorist network in Afghanistan . Additional interviews with major figures are added to drive the film 's narrative . <unk> William and Irving Kristol , Richard Pipes , Richard Perle and Michael <unk> are invited to provide a neoconservative view of the film 's subject . The history of Islamism is discussed by the Institute of Islamic Political Thought 's Azzam Tamimi , political scientist Roxanne <unk> , and Islamist Abdullah Anas . 
 The film 's soundtrack includes at least two pieces of music from the films of John Carpenter , who Curtis credited as inspiration for his soundtrack arrangement techniques , as well as tracks from Brian Eno 's Another Green World . There is also music by composers Charles Ives and Ennio Morricone , while Curtis has credited the industrial band Skinny Puppy for the " best " music in the films . 
 = = Airings and distribution = = 
 The Power of Nightmares was first broadcast in three parts on BBC Two in 2004 in the United Kingdom , beginning with ' Baby it 's Cold Outside ' on 20 October , ' The Phantom Victory ' on 27 October , and ' The Shadows in the Cave ' on 3 November . The murder of Kenneth Bigley led the BBC to cease publicising the final episode prior to its airing . It was broadcast again over three days in January 2005 , with the third part updated to note the Law Lords ruling from the previous December that detaining foreign terrorist suspects without trial was illegal . 
 In May 2005 , the film was screened in a 2 ½ hour edit at the Cannes Film Festival . Pathé purchased distribution rights for this cut of the film . 
 By 2008 , the film had yet to be aired in the United States . Curtis has remarked on this failure , 
 Although the series has never been shown on U.S. television , its three parts were shown on 26 February 2005 as part of the True / False Film Festival in Columbia , Missouri , with a personal appearance made by Curtis . It has also been featured at the 2006 Seattle International Film Festival and the San Francisco International Film Festival , the latter awarding Curtis their Persistence of Vision Award . The film was also screened at the Tribeca Film Festival in New York , and there was a brief theatrical run in New York City in 2005 . 
 The film was first aired by CBC in Canada in April 2005 , and again in July 2006 . The Australian channel SBS had originally planned to air the series in July 2005 , but it was cancelled , reportedly in light of the London bombings of 7 July . It was ultimately aired in December , followed by Peter Taylor 's The New Al @-@ Qaeda under the billing of a counter @-@ argument to Curtis . 
 In April 2005 , Curtis expressed interest in releasing an official DVD because of popular demand , but noted that his montage technique created serious legal problems with getting such a release approved . An unofficial DVD release was made in the quarterly DVD magazine <unk> over three issues . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The Power of Nightmares received generally favourable reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 86 % of critics gave the film positive write @-@ ups , with an average score of 8 @.@ 1 / 10 , based upon a sample of seven reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 78 , based on six reviews . Entertainment Weekly described the film as " a fluid cinematic essay , rooted in painstakingly assembled evidence , that heightens and cleanses your perceptions " while Variety called it " a superb , eye @-@ opening and often absurdly funny deconstruction of the myths and realities of global terrorism . " The San Francisco Chronicle had an equally enthusiastic view of the film and likened it to " a brilliant piece in the Atlantic Monthly that 's ( thankfully ) come to cinematic life . " The New York Times had a more skeptical review , unimpressed by efforts to compare attacks on Bill Clinton by American conservatives with Islamist revolutionary activities , claiming ( in a review by literary and film critic A. O. Scott ) that , " its understanding of politics , <unk> and national , can seem curiously thin . " In May 2005 , Adam Curtis was quoted as saying that 94 % of e @-@ mails to the BBC in response to the film were supportive . 
 The film won a BAFTA Award in the category of Best Factual Series in 2005 . Other awards were given by the Director 's Guild of Great Britain and the Royal Television Society . 
 = = = Political reaction = = = 
 Progressive observers were particularly pleased with the film . Common Dreams had a highly positive response to the film , comparing it to the " red pill " of the Matrix series , a comparison Curtis appreciated . Commentary in The Village Voice was also mostly favorable , noting , " As partisan filmmaking , it is often brilliant and sometimes hilarious – a superior version of Syriana . " The Nation , while offering a detailed critique on the film 's content , said of the film itself " [ it ] is arguably the most important film about the ' war on terrorism ' since the events of September 11 . " 
 Among conservative and neoconservative critics in the United States , The Power of Nightmares has been described as " conspiracy theory " , anti @-@ American or both . David <unk> of <unk> said , " We wish we didn 't have to keep presenting examples of how the European media have become obsessively anti @-@ American . But they keep pushing the barrier , now to the point of absurdity . " His views were shared by commentator Clive Davis , ending his commentary on the film for National Review by saying , " British producers , hooked on <unk> visions of ' Amerika ' as the fount of all evil , are clearly not interested in even beginning to dig for the truth . " Other commentators have variously described the film as pushing a conspiracy theory . Davis and British commentator David Aaronovitch both explicitly labelled the film 's message as a conspiracy theory , with the latter saying of Curtis " his argument is as subtle as a house @-@ brick . " Attacks in this vein continued after the 7 July 2005 London bombings , with the Christian Broadcasting Network referencing the film as a source for claims by the " British left " that " the U.S. War on Terror was a fraud " , and the Australia Israel & Jewish Affairs Council calling it " the <unk> , most extreme anti @-@ war documentary series ever sponsored by the BBC . " In The Shadows in the Cave , Curtis emphasises that he does not discount the possibility of any terrorist activity taking place , but that the threat of terrorism had been greatly exaggerated . He responded to accusations of creating a conspiracy theory by saying he believes the alleged use of fear as a force in politics is not the result of a conspiracy but rather the subjects of the film " have stumbled on it . " 
 Peter Bergen , writing for The Nation , offered a detailed critique of the film . Bergen wrote that even if al @-@ Qaeda is not as organised as the Bush administration stressed , it is still a very dangerous force due to the fanaticism of its followers and the resources available to bin Laden . On Curtis 's claim that al @-@ Qaeda was a creation of neoconservative politicians , Bergen said , " This is nonsense . There is substantial evidence that Al Qaeda was founded in 1988 by bin Laden and a small group of like @-@ minded militants , and that the group would mushroom into the secretive , disciplined organisation that implemented the 9 / 11 attacks . " Bergen further claimed that Curtis 's arguments serve as a defence of Bush 's failure to capture bin Laden in the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan and his ignoring warnings of a terrorist attack prior to September 11 . 
 Additional issues have been raised over Curtis 's depiction of the neoconservatives . Davis 's article in National Review showed his displeasure with Curtis 's depiction of Leo Strauss , claiming , " In Curtis 's world , it is Strauss , not Osama bin Laden , who is the real evil genius . " Peter Bergen claimed the film exaggerated the influence of Strauss over neoconservatism , crediting the political philosophy more to Albert <unk> . A 2005 review on Christopher Null 's Filmcritic.com took issue with Curtis 's retelling of the attacks on Bill Clinton in ' The Phantom Victory ' , crediting these more to the American Religious Right than the " bookish university types " of the neoconservative movement . 
 Daniel Pipes , a conservative American political commentator and son of Richard Pipes who was interviewed in the film , wrote that the film dismisses the threat posed by Communism to the United States as , in Pipes words , " only a scattering of countries that had harmless Communist parties , who could in no way threaten America . " Pipes noted that the film adopts this conclusion without mentioning the Comintern , Julius and Ethel Rosenberg , Klaus Fuchs or Igor Gouzenko . 
 Allegations have been made of omissions in the history described by the film . The absence of discussion of the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict was noticed by some viewers . Davis claimed that Leo Strauss 's ideas had been formed by his experiences in Germany during the Weimar Republic , and alleged that the film 's failure to mention this was motivated by a wish to portray Strauss as concerned with American suburban culture , like Qutb . 
 = = = Comparisons to Fahrenheit 9 / 11 = = = 
 After its release , The Power of Nightmares received multiple comparisons to Fahrenheit 9 / 11 , American filmmaker Michael Moore 's 2004 critique of the first four years of George W. Bush 's presidency of the United States . The Village Voice directly named The Power of Nightmares as , " the most widely discussed docu agitprop since Fahrenheit 9 / 11 . " The Nation and Variety both gave comments lauding Curtis 's film as superior to Fahrenheit and other political documentaries in various fields ; the former cited Curtis 's work as being more " intellectually engaging " and " historically probing " , while the latter cited " balance , broad @-@ mindedness and sense of historical perspective . " Moore 's work has also been used as a point of comparison by conservative critics of Curtis . 
 Curtis has attempted to distinguish his work from Moore 's film , describing Moore as " a political agitprop film @-@ maker , " arguing that , " you 'd be hard pushed to tell my politics from watching [ The Power of Nightmares ] . " 
 = Hydro @-@ Québec 's electricity transmission system = 
 Hydro @-@ Québec 's electricity transmission system is an international power transmission system centred in Quebec , Canada . The system pioneered the use of very high voltage 735 kV alternating current ( AC ) power lines that link the population centers of Montreal and Quebec City to distant hydroelectric power stations like the Daniel @-@ Johnson Dam and the James Bay Project in northwestern Quebec and the Churchill Falls Generating Station in Labrador . 
 The system contains more than 34 @,@ 187 kilometres ( 21 @,@ 243 mi ) of lines and 530 electrical substations . It is managed by Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie , a division of the crown corporation Hydro @-@ Québec and is part of the Northeast Power Coordinating Council . It has 15 interconnections with the systems in Ontario , New Brunswick and the Northeastern United States and 6 @,@ 025 MW of interconnection import capacity and 7 @,@ 974 MW of interconnection export capacity . 
 Major expansion of the network began with the commissioning of the 735 kV AC power line in November 1965 , as there was a need for electricity transmission over vast distances from the north to southern Quebec . 
 Much of Quebec 's population is served by a few 735 kV power lines . This contributed to the severity of the power outage following the North American ice storm of 1998 . The extent and duration of this blackout has generated criticism of the transmission system , and there is controversy concerning the use of hydroelectric dams . 
 = = History = = 
 The first hydroelectric stations in Québec were built by private entrepreneurs in the late 1800s . In 1903 the first long distance high @-@ voltage transmission line in North America was built , a 50 kV line connecting a Shawinigan <unk> to Montréal , 135 km away . In the first half of the 1900s , the market was dominated by regional monopolies , whose service was publicly criticised . In response , in 1944 the provincial government created Hydro Quebec from the expropriated Montreal Light , Heat & Power 
 In 1963 Hydro @-@ Québec purchased the shares of nearly all remaining privately owned electrical utilities then operating in Québec and undertook construction of the Manicouagan @-@ Outardes hydroelectric complex . To transmit the complex 's annual production of about 30 billion kWh over a distance of nearly 700 km , Hydro @-@ Québec had to innovate . Led by Jean @-@ Jacques Archambault , it became the first utility in the world to transmit electricity at 735 kV , rather than 300 – 400 kV which was the world standard at that time . In 1962 , Hydro @-@ Québec proceeded with the construction of the first 735 kV power line in the world . The line , stretching from the Manic @-@ Outardes dam to the Levis substation , was brought into service on 29 November 1965 . 
 Over the next twenty years , from 1965 to 1985 , Quebec underwent a massive expansion of its 735 kV power grid and its hydroelectric generating capacity . Hydro @-@ Québec <unk> , another division of Hydro @-@ Québec , and Société d ’ <unk> de la Baie James built these transmission lines , electrical substations , and generating stations . Constructing the transmission system for the La Grande Phase One , part of the James Bay Project , took 12 @,@ 500 towers , 13 electrical substations , 10 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 000 mi ) of ground wire , and 60 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 40 @,@ 000 mi ) of electrical conductor at a cost of C $ 3 @.@ 1 billion alone . In less than four decades , Hydro @-@ Québec 's generating capacity went from 3 @,@ 000 MW in 1963 to nearly 33 @,@ 000 MW in 2002 , with 25 @,@ 000 MW of that power sent to population centers on 735 kV power lines . 
 = = Source of the electricity = = 
 Much of the electricity generated by Hydro @-@ Québec Generation comes from hydroelectric dams located far from load centres such as Montreal . Of the 33 @,@ 000 MW of electrical power generated , over 93 % of that comes from hydroelectric dams and 85 % of that generation capacity comes from three hydroelectric generation centers : James Bay , Manic @-@ Outardes , and Churchill Falls . 
 James Bay 
 The James Bay Project encompasses the La Grande project , which is located on the La Grande River and on its tributaries , such as the <unk> River , in northwestern Quebec . The La Grande project was built in two phases ; the first phase lasted twelve years from 1973 to 1985 and the second phase lasted from 1985 to present time . In all , the nine hydroelectric dams there produce over 16 @,@ 500 MW of electric power , with the Robert @-@ Bourassa or La Grande @-@ 2 station generating over 5 @,@ 600 MW alone . In total , the project cost over C $ 20 billion to construct . 
 Manic @-@ Outardes power stations 
 The Manic @-@ Outardes river area in the Côte @-@ Nord or North Shore region consists of several hydroelectric facilities located on three principal rivers , from west to east : <unk> River , Rivière aux Outardes , and the Manicouagan River . A single plant named Sainte @-@ Marguerite @-@ 3 is located to the east on the Sainte @-@ Marguerite River . The facilities located in the region were constructed over a period of five decades , from 1956 to 2005 . The total generation capacity from these power stations is 10 @,@ 500 MW . A 21 @-@ MW hydroelectric power station , the Lac @-@ Robertson generating station on the Lower North Shore , is not connected to the main Quebec grid . 
 Churchill Falls 
 Churchill Falls is a single underground generation station located on the Churchill River near the town of Churchill Falls and the Smallwood Reservoir in Labrador . It was constructed over a period of five to six years from 1966 to 1971 – 72 by the Churchill Falls ( Labrador ) Corporation ( <unk> ) , though generators were installed after major construction was completed . The single generation facility cost C $ 946 million to construct and produced 5 @,@ 225 MW of power initially after all eleven generating units were installed . A station upgrade in 1985 raised the generating capacity to over 5 @,@ 400 MW . Hydro @-@ Québec Generation owns a 34 @.@ 2 % interest in <unk> , which is the same company that constructed the generating plant . However , Hydro @-@ Québec has rights to most of the 5 @,@ 400 MW of power the station produces under a 65 @-@ year power purchase agreement , expiring in 2041 . 
 = = Electricity transmission system features = = 
 The system contains more than 34 @,@ 187 kilometres ( 21 @,@ 243 mi ) of lines and 530 electrical substations . It is managed by Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie , a division of the crown corporation Hydro @-@ Québec and is part of the Northeast Power Coordinating Council . It has 15 interconnections with the systems in Ontario , New Brunswick and the Northeastern United States and 6 @,@ 025 MW of interconnection import capacity and 7 @,@ 974 MW of interconnection export capacity . The system has transmission lines reaching to power generation facilities located more than 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 600 mi ) away from population centers . For this reason , TransÉnergie uses a voltage of AC 735 kV to transmit and distribute electrical power produced from Hydro @-@ Québec 's dams , although 315 kV is used as well . The total value of TransÉnergie 's entire electricity transmission system is C $ 15 @.@ 9 billion . For these reasons , Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie is considered to be a world leader in power transmission . 
 = = = AC 735 / 765 kV power lines = = = 
 From 1965 onwards , the 735 kV power line became an integral part of Québec 's power transmission backbone . More than one @-@ third of Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie 's system consists of high voltage AC 735 / 765 kV power lines , totaling 11 @,@ 422 kilometres ( 7 @,@ 097 mi ) strung between 38 substations with equipment of that voltage . The first transmission system from 1965 is an IEEE Milestone . 
 The physical size of the Hydro @-@ Québec 's 735 kV transmission lines is unmatched in North America . Only two other utility companies in the same region , the New York Power Authority ( <unk> ) and American Electric Power ( AEP ) contain at least one 765 kV line in their power system . However , only AEP has a significant mileage of 765 kV power lines , with over 3 @,@ 400 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 100 mi ) of 765 kV line traversing its broad transmission system ; this system contains the most mileage in the United States under one electrical company . <unk> has only 219 kilometres ( 136 mi ) of 765 kV line , all of it contained in a single direct interconnection with Hydro @-@ Québec . 
 The 735 kV power line is said to lessen the environmental impact of power lines , as one single power line operating at this voltage carries the same amount of electric power as four 315 kV power lines , which would require a right @-@ of @-@ way wider than the 80 @.@ 0 metres ( 262 @.@ 5 ft ) – 91 @.@ 5 metres ( 300 @.@ 2 ft ) width required for a single 735 kV line . Each 735 kV line is capable of transmitting 2 @,@ 000 MW of electric power at a distance of over 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 600 mi ) and the entire 735 kV grid can carry 25 @,@ 000 MW of power . Power transmission losses over the 735 kV grid range from 4 @.@ 5 to 8 % , varying due to temperature and operating situations . The Ordre des <unk> du Québec named the 735 kV power line system as the technological innovation of the 20th century for Quebec . 
 In the wake of the 1998 ice storm the Levis De @-@ <unk> was installed and began testing in 2007 and 2008 . 
 = = = = Routes = = = = 
 Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie 's 735 kV system consists of a set of six lines running from James Bay to Montreal and a set of four lines from Churchill Falls and the Manic @-@ Outardes power stations to Quebec City . The South Shore region of Montreal and the Saint Lawrence River between Montreal and Quebec City contain 735 kV power line loops or rings . 
 James Bay 
 The James Bay hydroelectric dam complex contains several relatively short 735 kV power lines that send electricity to three principal substations , ordered from west to east : Radisson , <unk> , and Lemoyne . From these substations , six 735 kV power lines traverse the vast expanses of taiga and boreal forest in clear @-@ cut stretches of land ; this shows up clearly in aerial photos . The terrain that the power lines cross is for the most part not mountainous , but smooth and replete with lakes . Generally , four of the lines runs together in two pairs and the other two run solo , although the two single lines sometimes do run in a pair . Two intermediate 735 kV power lines , one in the north and one in the south , connect all six power lines along their path to southern Quebec . 
 As the lines continue south , they diverge into two sets of three 735 kV transmission lines . The eastern set heads to Quebec City , where it connects with power lines from Churchill Falls and the 735 kV power line loops in the Saint Lawrence River region . The western set heads to Montreal , where it too forms a ring of 735 kV power lines around the city , linking to other power loops in the region . This section of Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie 's power grid contains 7 @,@ 400 km ( 4 @,@ 600 mi ) of 735 kV AC and 450 kV DC power line . 
 Manic @-@ Outardes power stations / Churchill Falls 
 Electrical power generated from the Churchill Falls power station is sent to Montreal and the population centers of the Northeastern United States , more than 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 700 mi ) away . Starting from the generation station in Labrador , the power lines span a distance of 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 6 @,@ 000 ft ) over the Churchill River gorge and run generally south @-@ southwest for 203 kilometres ( 126 mi ) as three side @-@ by @-@ side power lines in a cleared right @-@ of @-@ way with a width of 216 metres ( 710 ft ) . As they head southwest through boreal forest , the lines generally traverse flat , smooth rolling hills . 
 After the lines cross the Quebec @-@ Labrador border , also known as the Hydro @-@ Québec point of delivery , the direction of the lines becomes due south , and they head to the <unk> Substation , a substation accessible only by an airport adjacent to it . A lone 735 kV line stems off from the substation , heading to an open pit mine 142 kilometres ( 88 mi ) the northwest . The terrain crossed by the power lines becomes hilly and mountainous south of the border . The lines reach over 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) in elevation before descending . The three lines continue heading south until they reach a substation on the North Shore of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . From there on , the three lines parallel the North Shore as the Gulf narrows to the southwest toward the Saint Lawrence River discharge mouth . The northernmost power line then diverges from the other two to connect with Manic @-@ Outardes power stations located on and around the Rivière aux Outardes and the Manicouagan River . 
 As the lines near Quebec City , the northern power line rejoins the other two 735 kV power lines . The three lines , paralleled by another 735 kV power line some distance to the north , span over the Saint Lawrence River to the South Shore region , where the lines form loops encompassing part of the Saint Lawrence River and the south shore . The loops are also connected to the ring of 735 kV power lines around Montreal and power lines running south from James Bay . 
 = = = Electricity pylons = = = 
 Quebec 's transmission system contains a variety of electrical pylons depending on era and voltage level . Older pylon designs tend to consume more material than the newer pylons and the higher the voltage level , the larger the tower . 
 735 kV pylons 
 Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie uses several different types of electricity pylons to support their 735 kV power lines . All of them are single @-@ circuit , meaning that each pylon carries one power line with three bundles of four electrical <unk> separated by spacers , with each bundle transmitting one phase of current . 
 The earliest type of tower used was a massive self @-@ supporting delta pylon , or waist pylon , which consumed 21 tonnes of steel per kilometre of line . This type of pylon was used for the first 735 kV power line from the Manic @-@ Outardes power stations to the load centre of Montreal . There are two significant variations of the delta pylon ; one has longer side crossbars such that all three bundles of conductors are suspended on V @-@ shaped insulators . The other has shorter side crossbars , such that the two outside bundles are hung on a vertical insulator string and only the middle bundle is hung with a V @-@ shaped insulator . 
 Over the years , Hydro @-@ Québec researchers engineered a new type of pylon , the V @-@ guyed tower , which reduced materials consumption to 11 @.@ 8 tonnes of steel per kilometre of power line . This type of tower also includes a variation with longer side crossbars , where all conductors are hung with a V @-@ shaped insulator and one with shorter side crossbar , where only the middle bundle hangs from the insulator and the side bundles are strung on vertical insulator strings . 
 During the construction of the James Bay transmission system , the cross @-@ rope suspension tower was invented . This type of tower features two guyed @-@ tower legs similar to the V @-@ guyed tower , but the two legs don 't converge at the tower base . In the case of the cross @-@ rope suspension tower , the tower legs are spread apart on two different foundations . In addition , the crossbar is replaced by a series of suspension cables with three vertical insulator strings to support the three bundles , which allows this design to consume only 6 @.@ 3 tonnes of steel per kilometre of line . The design is also known as the <unk> ( little necklace ) . 
 TransÉnergie uses two @-@ level pylons for angle towers or structures on 735 kV power lines to change the direction of the line or switch the position of the conductor bundles . Delta pylons and three @-@ leg guyed towers are also used as angle towers ; they are referred to as " penguins " by Hydro @-@ Québec linemen . 
 Pylons for other voltage levels 
 Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie uses a combination of double @-@ circuit three @-@ level pylons and single @-@ circuit delta pylons to suspend electrical conductors of other voltages , such as 315 kV . The ± 450 kV high @-@ voltage direct current line in Hydro @-@ Québec 's power grid uses a T @-@ shaped tower , lattice or pole , to support two bundles of three conductors on each side . The direct current power line sometimes uses two poles or a wider , pyramidal , self @-@ supporting lattice structure for angle towers . 
 Other pylons 
 Hydro @-@ Québec usually uses tall , large pylons to cross large bodies of water , like lakes and rivers . These towers are said to be prominent and the tallest pylon in Hydro @-@ Québec 's power grid is of this function . The tallest of these is located near the Tracy power station on the shore of the Saint Lawrence River , carrying a <unk> circuit between <unk> and Tracy . The pylon , the largest of its kind in Canada , is 174 @.@ 6 metres ( 572 @.@ 8 ft ) tall , the same height as the Montreal Olympic Stadium , and slightly larger than the Washington Monument in the United States ( 555 feet ( 169 @.@ 2 m ) ) . 
 Pylon strength 
 The pylons and conductors are designed to handle 45 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) of ice accumulation without failure , since Hydro @-@ Québec raised the standards in response to ice storms in Ottawa in December 1986 and Montreal in February 1961 , which left 30 to 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) of ice . This has led to the belief that Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie 's electrical pylons are " indestructible " . Despite being more than three times higher than the Canadian standard of only 13 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of ice tolerance , an ice storm in the late @-@ 1990s deposited up to 70 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 75 in ) of ice . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Across North America , electricity transmission systems are interconnected into wide area synchronous grids , or interconnections . Suppliers are legally required to follow reliability standards . In 2006 , Québec 's transmission system was recognized by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation ( <unk> ) as a full interconnection because it is asynchronous with neighboring systems . Québec will consequently be able to develop its own reliability standards , as needed , and these will apply in addition to the relevant North American standards . Besides the The Québec Interconnection , there are three other interconnections in North America : the Eastern Interconnection , the Western Interconnection , and the Electric Reliability Council of Texas . 
