 Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie has the following interconnections with systems in neighboring provinces and states : 
 New York : two connections . Capacity is 1 @,@ 100 MW import , 1 @,@ 999 MW export . 
 Ontario : eight connections . 1 @,@ 970 MW import , 2 @,@ 705 MW export . 
 New England : three connections . 2 @,@ 170 MW import , 2 @,@ 275 MW export . 
 New Brunswick : three connections . 785 MW import , 1 @,@ 029 MW export . 
 The maximum simultaneous delivery ( export ) for the interconnection common to New York and Ontario is 325 MW . 
 = = = High voltage direct current ( HVDC ) 450 kV = = = 
 In addition to the six 735 kV power lines that stem from the James Bay Project , a seventh power line was constructed as an 1 @,@ 100 kilometres ( 680 mi ) northward extension of an existing high @-@ voltage direct current ( HVDC ) line connecting Quebec and New England . This power line expansion was completed in 1990 . As a result , the direct current power line is unique because there are multiple static converter and inverter stations along the 1 @,@ 480 kilometres ( 920 mi ) long power line . It is also the first <unk> HVDC line in the world . The ± 450 kV power line can transmit about 2 @,@ 000 MW of hydroelectric power to Montreal and the Northeastern United States . 
 = = = = Route = = = = 
 Beginning in the converter station next to the Radisson substation , the HVDC line heads south and roughly parallels the six 735 kV power lines some distance to the west . It traverses the same type of terrain as the other six lines ; the land is replete with lakes , wetlands , and forested rolling hills . Gradually , the power line turns to the southeast , as it crosses under several 735 kV power lines . 
 After the six 735 kV wires split up into two groups of three power lines each , the HVDC line follows the eastern group , and the western set diverges away . The line remains overhead until it reaches the north shore of the Saint Lawrence River near <unk> , where the 450 kV HVDC line descends into an underwater tunnel traversing the river . The power line surfaces on the south shore near Lotbinière substation . After the river crossing , the line enters into the Nicolet terminal near Sainte @-@ Eulalie , northeast of Drummondville . South of the terminal , the line heads south and after a relatively short distance , it enters the Des Cantons close to Sherbrooke . 
 Leaving the Des Cantons station , the power line crosses the Canada – US border and passes through the hilly Appalachian Mountains in the U.S. state of Vermont , reaching an elevation of about 650 metres ( 2 @,@ 130 ft ) . The line then continues heading south @-@ southeast and enters the state of New Hampshire , where it reaches the <unk> terminal near Monroe . Continuing southward into Massachusetts , the line reaches the Sandy Pond terminal outside of Boston in Ayer . The terminal is the southernmost extent of the HVDC line . 
 In December 2008 , Hydro @-@ Québec , along with American utilities Northeast Utilities and NSTAR , created a joint venture to build a new HVDC line from Windsor , Quebec to Deerfield , New Hampshire . Hydro @-@ Québec will own the segment within Quebec , while the segment within the US will be owned by Northern Pass Transmission LLC , a partnership between Northeast Utilities ( 75 % ) and NSTAR ( 25 % ) . Estimated to cost US $ 1 @.@ 1 billion to build , it is projected that the line will either run in existing right @-@ of @-@ way adjacent to the HVDC line that runs through New Hampshire , or it will connect to a right @-@ of @-@ way in northern New Hampshire that will run through the White Mountains . This 180 @-@ to @-@ 190 @-@ mile ( 290 to 310 km ) line , projected to carry 1 @,@ 200 megawatts , will bring electricity to approximately one million homes . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 TransÉnergie uses series compensation to alter the way electricity behaves in power transmission lines , which improves the electricity transmission efficiency . This reduces the need to construct new power lines and increases the amount of electric power sent to population centres . Series compensation is based on capacitor technology . To maintain its transmission system performance , TransÉnergie sets aside funds for research and application of new technologies . In addition to power transmission technology , Hydro @-@ Québec plans to offer high @-@ speed internet over its transmission lines within a few years ; the utility started testing internet over its lines in January 2004 . 
 = = Major disruptions = = 
 In spite of the transmission system 's reputation and the fact Quebec escaped unscathed from the Northeast Blackout of 2003 , the system has experienced damage and service interruptions from severe storms in the past . Examples include the 1982 and 1988 Quebec blackouts prior to the large 1989 and 1998 power interruptions . 
 = = = 1989 <unk> storm = = = 
 At 2 : 44 am on March 13 , 1989 , a severe geomagnetic storm , due to a coronal mass ejection from the Sun , struck Earth . Fluctuations within the magnetic field of the storm caused <unk> induced currents ( GICs ) to flow through Quebec 's power lines , which are direct current , instead of the alternating current carried by the power lines . The insulating nature of the Canadian Shield igneous rock directed the GICs to the power lines . The conductors then forwarded this current to sensitive electrical transformers , which require a certain voltage amplitude and frequency to function properly . Although most GICs are relatively feeble , the nature of those currents destabilized the voltage of the power grid and current spikes erupted everywhere . 
 Accordingly , protective measures were taken in response . To save the transformers and other electrical equipment , the power grid was taken out of commission , as circuit breakers tripped all over Quebec and shut off the power . Within less than 90 seconds , this wave of breaking circuits left the entire transmission grid out of service . The collapsed power grid left six million people and the rest of Quebec without electricity for hours on a very cold night . Even though the blackout lasted around nine hours for most places , some locations were in the dark for days . This geomagnetic storm caused about C $ 10 million in damage to Hydro @-@ Québec and tens of millions to the customers of the utility . 
 = = = 1998 ice storm = = = 
 From January 4 / 5 to January 10 , 1998 , warm moist air from the south overriding cold air from the north produced an ice storm , leading to over 80 hours of freezing rain and drizzle . For days , a continuous shower of mostly freezing rain amounted to 70 – 110 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) of water equivalent of precipitation . Places like Montreal and the South Shore were especially hard hit , with 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of largely freezing rain falling . These heavy precipitation totals wreaked havoc on the regional power transmission system . 
 Physical damage 
 Five to six days of freezing rain and precipitation crippled the Hydro @-@ Québec power grid in the Montreal and South Shore regions . In an area 100 by 250 kilometres ( 60 by 150 mi ) , some 116 transmission lines were out of commission , including several major 735 kV power lines and the Quebec – New England HVDC ± 450 kV line . 
 Through successive waves of freezing precipitation , more than 75 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of radial ice accumulated on the electrical conductors and the pylons themselves . This ice coating adds an additional weight of 15 to 20 kilograms per metre of conductor ( 10 to 20 lb / ft ) . Even though the electrical wires can withstand this extra weight , when combined with the effects of wind and precipitation , these conductors may break and fall . The pylons , designed to withstand only 45 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) of ice accretion , buckled and collapsed into twisted heaps of mangled steel . Cascading failures occurred on several transmission lines , where the collapse of one or more towers left a row of fallen pylons . 
 Of all the pylons damaged , some 150 were pylons supporting 735 kV lines , and 200 towers carrying 315 kV , 230 kV , or 120 kV power lines collapsed as well . In a region bounded by Montreal between Saint @-@ Hyacinthe , Saint @-@ Jean @-@ sur @-@ Richelieu and Granby , dubbed the " triangle of darkness " , half of the overhead power grid was out of service . Quebec ordered myriad conductors , <unk> , and wire connections to repair the ones disabled by the storm in the electrical transmission and electric power distribution system . In all of Quebec , 24 @,@ 000 poles , 4 @,@ 000 transformers , and 1 @,@ 000 electrical pylons were damaged or destroyed , more than 3 @,@ 000 km ( 2 @,@ 000 mi ) of downed electrical wires ; this cost a total of C $ 800 million to repair . 
 Power outage 
 With over 100 transmission lines paralyzed by the ice , Quebec fell into a massive power outage in the cold Canadian winter . Even though power restoration initiated after the first blackouts , large numbers of Quebecers were in the dark . At the height of the blackout , some 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 5 million homes and customers , housing three to more than four million people , were in the dark . Private companies and other utilities from other parts of Canada and the United States were sent in to help Hydro @-@ Québec undertake this massive restoration task , but these efforts were complicated by the widespread damage of the power grid . Blackouts in some areas lasted for 33 days , and 90 % of those affected by the blackout had no power for more than seven days . Although power was fully restored to all locations in Quebec by February 8 , 1998 , it wasn 't until mid @-@ March that the power facilities were back in service . By then , much social and economic damage had occurred , such as ruined food and deaths resulting from lack of electric heating . 
 After the power outage was over , Hydro @-@ Québec made numerous upgrades to its system in order to improve the power grid . Examples include the strengthening of electrical pylons and power poles , and increasing the power supply . This was done to enable the utility to restore power more rapidly in the case of a massive ice striking Quebec again . Hydro @-@ Québec has stated that it is better @-@ prepared to handle an ice storm with the same magnitude as the one of 1998 . 
 = = = 2004 hydro tower bombing = = = 
 In 2004 , shortly before U.S. President George W. Bush 's visit to Canada , a tower along the Quebec – New England Transmission HVDC circuit in the Eastern Townships near the Canada – US border was damaged by explosive charges detonated at its base . The CBC reported that a message , purportedly from the Résistance <unk> and issued to the La Presse and Le Journal de Montréal newspapers and the <unk> radio station , stated that the attack had been carried out to " denounce the ' pillaging ' of Quebec 's resources by the United States . " 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The performance of Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie 's power grid during 1998 Ice Storm raised questions about the fundamental concept , vulnerability , and reliability of the grid . Critics noted that the power generation facilities were located approximately 1 @,@ 000 km ( 600 mi ) away from population centres and that there was a lack of local power stations around Montreal , which is served by only six 735 kV feeder lines . In addition , the 735 kV transmission system received scorn from the public and the media . The power transmission grid was said to concentrate power transmission on only a few 735 kV lines , such as those that run from James Bay to Montreal . Out of the six 735 feeder lines in Montreal , five of them form a loop called the " ring of power " around the city . When the ring failed on January 7 , 1998 , roughly 60 % of Greater Montreal 's power supply was offline . Hydro @-@ Québec 's large above @-@ ground transmission and distribution system was considered to be exposed to natural disasters , although the cost of undergrounding the grid was prohibitive . 
 The technology utilized on Hydro @-@ Québec TransÉnergie grid also came under fire from critics . It is claimed that this technology , used to improve performance , safety , and reliability , made people in Quebec over @-@ dependent on the power grid for their energy needs , since electricity , especially hydroelectric power , makes up over 40 % of Quebec 's energy supply . This dependence , evidenced by the fact Ontario farmers had more backup generators than farmers in Quebec , can increase the severity of the consequences when the grid fails , as it did in January 1998 . 
 = Cyclone Tam ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Cyclone Tam ( RSMC Nadi designation : 04F , JTWC designation : 06P ) was the first named storm of the 2005 – 06 South Pacific cyclone season . Forming out of a tropical depression on January 6 , the storm gradually intensified , becoming a tropical cyclone on January 12 and receiving the name Tam . Although it was traveling at a quick pace , the storm gained organization and reached its peak intensity with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) the following day . However , the increasing forward motion of the storm , combined with strengthening wind shear , caused Tam to rapidly weaken on January 14 . Around that time , it entered the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre in Wellington , New Zealand 's area of responsibility . Shortly thereafter , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and dissipated early the next day . Cyclone Tam produced heavy rainfall and strong winds over American Samoa upon being named . The precipitation caused several mudslides and flooding , which inflicted $ 26 @,@ 000 in damage . The storm also had minor effects on Niue , Tonga , and Futuna . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Cyclone Tam originated out of tropical depression while located about 370 km ( 230 mi ) to the north @-@ northeast of Fiji on January 6 . The system , designated 04F by the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji tracked slowly towards the west . Although the depression was located within an area of low wind shear , little intensification occurred , as a lack of low @-@ level moisture hindered the development of deep convection . By January 9 , shower and thunderstorm activity associated with the disturbance increased as it began to interact with the South Pacific Convergence Zone . Another tropical depression , 05F , also became increasingly organized and at one point was forecast to absorb 04F . Following the weakening of Tropical Depression 05F , 04F intensified . Around 2000 UTC on January 11 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as deep convection persisted around the center of circulation for several hours . 
 The following day , the RSMC Nadi upgraded Tropical Depression 04F to a tropical cyclone and gave it the name Tam , making it the first named storm of the 2005 – 06 season . Several hours later , the storm passed close to Niuafo 'ou with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . By 0000 UTC on January 13 , the JTWC classified Tam as Tropical Cyclone 06P . Although the storm was tracking towards an area with stronger winds aloft , it was forecast to intensify . Due to the relatively fast movement of the storm , the increasing winds aloft had little effect on the storm , allowing it to intensify and attain winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) around 0600 UTC . However , with both wind shear and the forward motion of the storm continuing to increase , convection rapidly became dislocated from the center . Around 0000 UTC on January 14 , Tam entered the area of responsibility of the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre in Wellington , New Zealand . With forward movement estimated at 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) almost due south , the cyclone reached an unusually high latitude as a tropical cyclone . Coinciding with the time when Tam reached 33 ° S , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants of the storm persisted for several hours before dissipating early on January 15 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Tam was developing , residents attempted to evacuate the island by plane , with the primary target of Fiji . Only a few flights took off before officials closed the airport , stranding numerous passengers . Late on January 11 , RSMC Nadi placed Tonga and Futuna under a tropical cyclone alert and also placed Tonga and Wallis under a strong wind warning . Early the next day RSMC Nadi placed northern Tonga under a tropical cyclone gale warning . Later that morning they canceled the tropical cyclone alert for Wallis and Futuna as Tam was not expected to directly affect Futuna anymore . During that afternoon RSMC Nadi placed Niue under a Tropical cyclone alert , as they predicted that Niue would be affected by Tam within 24 hours . Early on January 13 RSMC Nadi cancelled the tropical cyclone warnings and alerts for Tonga , whilst at the same time placing Niue under a tropical cyclone gale warning , however this gale warning was canceled later that day as Tam moved into the southern ocean . 
 On January 11 , Tropical Depression 04F produced a record 293 @.@ 2 mm ( 11 @.@ 5 in ) of rain in a 24 ‑ hour span on Rotuma . However , little damage resulted from the heavy precipitation . Cyclone Tam produced heavy rainfall in American Samoa which triggered damaging floods . Several buildings were flooded , and an estimated 70 % of the island 's crops were destroyed . Sustained winds of up to 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) , with gusts reaching 95 km / h ( 59 mph ) , tore a few roofs off unsecured homes . Scattered power outages were reported throughout the island . A few landslides were also reported as a result of the storm . Damage from the storm totaled $ 26 @,@ 000 on the island . Relatively little damage was recorded in Futuna ; there , the storm downed several trees and stranded a yacht on a reef . On Niuafo 'ou , a weather station recorded sustained winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) with gusts of up to 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) , along with a minimum pressure of 991 hPa ( mbar ) . Minor damage , consisting of fallen branches and isolated power outages also occurred on Niue . 
 = Alfred Lennon = 
 Alfred " Alf / Freddie " Lennon ( 14 December 1912 – 1 April 1976 ) was the father of English musician John Lennon . He spent many years in an orphanage — with his sister , Edith — after his father died . He was known as being very witty and musical throughout his life — he sang and played the banjo — but not as being very dependable . Although always known informally as Alf by his family , he later released a record as Freddie Lennon , and was referenced and quoted in newspapers and media under that name . 
 He married Julia Stanley in 1938 . John was their only child together , but as Alf was often away at sea during World War II , he did not see much of his child during his infancy . During this period , Julia became pregnant with another man 's child . He offered to look after his wife , their child and the expected baby , but Julia rejected the idea . He had very little contact with his son until Beatlemania , when they met again , but later had only intermittent contact with each other . He died in Brighton , where he had gone to live after marrying 19 @-@ year @-@ old Pauline Jones , with whom he had two further children . 
 = = The Lennon family = = 
 James Lennon ( b . 1829 ) and Jane McConville ( 1831 – 1869 ) , Alf 's grandparents , moved with their respective families to Liverpool in the 1840s . James and Jane were both from County Down , Ireland , and were married in St. Anthony 's Chapel , Scotland Road , Liverpool , on 29 April 1849 . James was a <unk> and a cooper at the time . They had seven children together : Elizabeth ( b . 1850 ) , James , John " Jack " , William George , Richard Francis , Joseph ( b . 1865 ) and Edward . Jack Lennon ( b . 1855 ) , a shipping clerk / bookkeeper , the father of Alf Lennon and grandfather to John Winston Lennon . 
 In 1888 , Jack married Margaret Cowley ( from Liverpool ) and they had two children : Mary Elizabeth Lennon , and Michael Lennon . Margaret died giving birth to Michael ( who also died 15 days later ) on 19 August 1892 . Shortly after , Jack began living with Mary " Polly " Maguire in a common @-@ law marriage . In total they had fifteen children , eight of whom died young . In 1901 , Jack , Polly and his daughter , Mary , were living at 3 Lockhart Street , Liverpool . They lived in the Toxteth Park area of Liverpool , and at least five of their children were born there : George Lennon ( 1905 , in Denton Street ) , Herbert Lennon ( 1908 ) , Sydney Lennon ( 1909 ) , Harold Lennon ( 1911 ) and Alfred Lennon ( 1912 ) were born at 27 Copperfield Street . 
 Jack eventually married Polly in 1915 , after they had moved to Elmore Street , Everton . One of the witnesses at the wedding was Polly 's sister , Catherine Seddon . Daughter Edith Lennon was born that year and then Charles ( 21 November 1918 – 26 May 2002 ) . The Lennons moved back to Toxteth Park , and Jack died in 1921 , at 57 Copperfield Street . He is buried in a common and unmarked grave ( along with five unknown adults and three children ) in the Anfield Cemetery , Liverpool . Polly could not read or write , but was reported to be very humorous and supposedly had psychic abilities . After Jack died , Polly did not have enough money to keep the whole Lennon family together , so she placed two of her children , Alf and Edith , in the Blue Coat School Orphanage . It was situated just around the corner from Newcastle Road ( where Julia Stanley lived ) . Polly died on 30 January 1949 . 
 = = = The urban legend = = = 
 It has often been claimed that his grandfather was a professional singer , a ship 's cook , and that he emigrated to the United States , and that his father , Jack Lennon , became a " refined " British minstrel , who toured America with ' Roberton 's Kentucky Minstrels ' Vaudeville troupe in the late 19th century . It is also claimed that Jack 's first wife was an American who died during childbirth after they had both moved back to Liverpool . This has been proven to be false by checking birth certificates and the 1861 , 1871 and 1901 censuses . 
 Alfred Lennon ( always called ' Alf ' by his family ) , was known as being happy @-@ go @-@ lucky , and " couldn 't resist having a good time " . He had rickets as a child and wore leg braces , which led to his growth being stunted at 5 ' 4 " . In 1927 , he auditioned for a children 's music hall act , Will Murray 's Gang , at the Empire Theatre in Liverpool . Having passed the audition he ran away from the orphanage and joined the show . He travelled with the troupe for a time before being discovered in Glasgow and returned to the orphanage , where he was severely punished . He was known as being always quick with a joke or a witty line , but never held a job for any length of time . When he was 15 years old he left the Bluecoat orphanage and found a job as an office @-@ boy , but preferred to visit Liverpool 's many vaudeville theatres and cinemas , where he knew the <unk> by name . His brother Sydney often lent money to him , after Sydney got a job in a tailor 's shop . 
 = = Julia Stanley = = 
 Alf first saw Julia Stanley at the ' Trocadero ' club , a converted cinema on Camden Road , Liverpool . Although he did not speak to her at the time , he later saw Julia again in Sefton Park , where he had gone with a friend to meet girls . Alf , who was dressed in a bowler hat and holding a cigarette holder , saw " this little waif " sitting on a wrought @-@ iron bench . The 14 @-@ year @-@ old Julia said that his hat looked " silly " , to which the 15 @-@ year @-@ old replied that Julia looked " lovely " , and sat down next to her . Julia asked him to take off his hat , so he promptly took it off and threw it straight into the lake . 
 Alf was a talented musician , and specialised in impersonating Louis Armstrong and Al Jolson . He played the banjo , as did Julia , though neither pursued music professionally ( Julia would later teach her son how to play the banjo ) . They spent their days together walking around Liverpool and dreaming of what they would do in the future — like opening a shop , a pub , a cafe , or a club . In March 1930 , he took a job as bellboy on board the Cunard passenger liner SS Montrose . He kept in touch with Julia , writing to her and meeting her whenever he docked in Liverpool . He was later offered a job on a whaling ship for two years — which could have earned him enough money to buy a house — but turned it down when he found out that Julia 's father had arranged the job , so as to keep him as far away from Julia as possible . 
 On 3 December 1938 , 11 years after they had first met , Julia married Alf after proposing to him . They were married in the Bolton Street Register Office , and Julia wrote ' cinema usherette ' on the marriage certificate as her occupation , even though she had never been one . None of Julia 's family were there , but Alf 's brother Sydney acted as a witness . They spent their honeymoon eating at ' Reece 's ' restaurant in Clayton Square ( which is where his son would later celebrate after his marriage to Cynthia Powell ) , and then went to a cinema . On their wedding night , Julia stayed at the Stanleys ' house and he went back to his rooming house . 
 Julia 's family did not like Alfred at all : Julia 's father said he was " certainly not middle class , " and Julia 's sister Mimi was particularly opposed to him . Julia 's father demanded that he present something concrete to show that he could financially support Julia , but his only idea was to sign on as a Merchant Navy bellboy on a ship bound for the Mediterranean . He later worked on ocean liners that travelled between the Greek islands , North Africa and the West Indies . He graduated from bellboy to steward during the months he was away , but when he arrived back in Liverpool he moved into the Stanley home in Newcastle Road . He auditioned for local theatre managers as a ' ship 's entertainer ' , but had no success , and went back to sea . 
 = = = John Lennon = = = 
 Julia found out that she was pregnant in January 1940 . John Winston Lennon was born on 9 October 1940 , on the second @-@ floor ward of the Oxford Street Maternity Hospital in Liverpool , supposedly during a German air raid in World War II , although it has been confirmed there was no air raid on this date . Alf first saw his son that November when he returned from working as a merchant seaman on troop transports during World War II . He sent regular pay cheques to Julia , who lived with her son at 9 Newcastle Road ( the Stanley family 's home ) . He occasionally went back to Liverpool , but did not stay long before he was sent off on another ship . The cheques to Julia stopped when he went absent without leave in 1943 . Neither Julia nor the Merchant Navy knew of his whereabouts . Julia only found out because she stopped receiving her allowance money , and the Navy wrote to her to inform her that they were looking for him . 
 Julia had started going out to dance halls in 1942 , and met a Welsh soldier named ' Taffy ' Williams who was stationed in the barracks at Mossley Hill . Alf blamed himself for this , as he had written letters telling Julia that because there was a war on , she should go out and enjoy herself . Julia took his advice , and often gave her young son a piece of chocolate or sugar pastry the next morning for breakfast that she had been given the night before . She became pregnant by Williams in late 1944 , though first claiming that she had been raped by an unknown soldier . 
 When Alf eventually returned to Liverpool on 13 January 1945 , he offered to look after Julia , their son and the expected baby , but Julia rejected the idea . Alf took John to his brother Sydney 's house , in the Liverpool suburb of <unk> , a few months before the birth . The baby girl , Victoria , was subsequently given up for adoption ( after intense pressure from Julia 's father and family ) to a Norwegian Salvation Army Captain . Julia later met Bobby Dykins and lived with him , but after considerable pressure from Mimi — who twice contacted Liverpool 's Social Services and complained about the infant sleeping in the same bed as Julia and Dykins — Julia reluctantly handed the care of her son over to Mimi . According to his brother Charlie , people used to visit the Lennon house in Copperfield Street while Alf was away at sea , offering large sums of money ( up to £ 300 ) if Alf would divorce Julia , but Charlie told them to " get lost " . 
 In June 1946 , Alf visited Mimi 's house at 251 Menlove Avenue and took his son to Blackpool for a long ' holiday ' — but secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him . Julia and Dykins found out and followed them to Blackpool , and after a heated argument Alf made the five @-@ year @-@ old boy choose between Julia or him . John chose Alf ( twice ) and then Julia walked away , but in the end John , crying , followed her . Alf lost contact with the family until Beatlemania , when he and John met again . In 1968 , John Lennon told Hunter Davies that he soon forgot his father , saying , " It was like he was dead . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Alf later told his version of what happened while he was AWOL in 1943 . He claimed that he had sailed from America to Bône , North Africa , but was arrested for stealing one bottle of beer from the ship , consequently serving nine days in a military prison . After his release he became involved in various " shady deals " , and was supposedly rescued from a criminal gang of Arabs . He eventually served on a troopship from North Africa to Italy before finally boarding a ship that was making its way to England , in 1944 . In 1949 , Alf 's career at sea ended when he was sentenced to six months ' imprisonment . He had been drinking when , late at night , he saw a mannequin in a wedding dress in a shop window . He broke the window , picked up the mannequin , and danced with it in the street until he was arrested . 
 In 1958 , when Alf was working with Charlie Lennon in the Barn Restaurant in Solihull , their brother Sydney sent a newspaper clipping from the Liverpool Echo reporting that Julia had died . A saddened Alf left Solihull for London , but kept in touch with Charlie by phone . 
 Alf made no real attempt to contact John again until the height of Beatlemania ( claiming he did not know who the Beatles were ) . He was working as a kitchen porter at the Greyhound Hotel in Hampton , South London , when someone pointed out a photograph of John Lennon in a newspaper and asked whether he was related to John . Alfred and Charlie visited one of the Beatles ' Christmas shows at the Finsbury Park Empire in London . When the Beatles were filming a scene for A Hard Day 's Night in the Scala Theatre in Soho in April 1964 , Alf walked into Brian Epstein 's NEMS office in Argyle Street with a journalist . " I 'm John Lennon 's father " , he explained to the receptionist . When Epstein was informed , he " went into a panic " , and immediately sent a car to bring John to NEMS office . Alf was shabbily dressed , with his unkempt , thinning grey hair greased back . He stuck out his hand , but John did not take it , saying " What do you want ? " . Alf placated John somewhat by saying , " You can 't turn your back on your family , no matter what they 've done . " Their conversation did not last long , as John soon ordered Alf and the journalist out of the NEMS office . The Beatles ' personal stories were kept out of the newspapers — by agreement with journalists who were offered exclusive stories in return — but one day John opened a copy of the Daily Express and saw a photo of his father . 
 A few weeks later , John 's wife Cynthia opened the door of Kenwood ( their home in Weybridge ) to see a man who " looked like a tramp " but , alarmingly , with John 's face . Cynthia invited Alf in , and gave him tea and cheese on toast until John came home , which he was expected to do in an hour or so . While waiting , Cynthia offered to cut Alf 's " long , stringy locks " of hair , which he allowed her to do . After waiting for a couple of hours , Alf left . John was annoyed when he came home , and told Cynthia ( for the first time ) about Alf 's visit to the NEMS office a few weeks earlier . Later he relented slightly and contacted Alf over the next few months , telling Cynthia " Alright , Cyn . He 's a bit ' wacky ' , like me . " After Christmas , in 1965 , John was embarrassed to hear that Alf had made a record : " That 's My Life ( My Love and My Home ) " , released on 31 December 1965 . John asked Epstein to do anything he could to stop it being released or becoming a hit . The record never made it into the charts . In 1966 " Freddie Lennon " ( the name under which Alf recorded ) tried again , and issued three singles with the group Loving Kind . These records did not sell well , either . Though the public at large quickly forgot these attempts to cash in on his son 's success with the Beatles , the records do command fairly high prices among collectors of rare records , with " That 's My Life " being worth over £ 50 . 
 = = = Pauline Jones = = = 
 Three years after meeting John in the NEMS office , Alf ( who was then 56 years old ) turned up at Kenwood again , with his fiancee Pauline Jones . Pauline had been an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Exeter University student and a Rolling Stones fan when she met the 54 @-@ year @-@ old Alf in 1966 . Alf and Pauline grew tired of trying to convince Pauline 's mother to allow them to marry , so they eloped and were married in Gretna Green , Scotland . In 1966 , Alf asked John if he could give Pauline a job , so she was hired to help , looking after Julian Lennon and also the piles of fan mail . Pauline spent a few months living at Kenwood in the attic bedroom . Alf and Pauline moved to a flat in Bourne Court , London Road , Patcham ( a suburb of Brighton ) before moving to Ladies Mile Road , Brighton , in November 1969 . Alf had two sons with Pauline : David Henry Lennon ( February 26 , 1969 ) and Robin Francis Lennon ( October 22 , 1973 ) . 
 = = Death = = 
 Late in his life , Alf wrote a manuscript detailing his life story which he bequeathed to John . It was Alf 's attempt to fill in the lost years when he had not been in contact with his son , and to explain that it was Julia , and not Alf , who had broken up their marriage . John later commented : " You know , all he wanted was for me to hear his side of the story , which I hadn 't heard . " By 1976 , Alfred was diagnosed with terminal stomach cancer and Pauline contacted John via Apple Corps to make sure that he was aware that his father was dying . John sent a large bouquet of flowers to the hospital and phoned Alf on his deathbed , apologising for his ( John 's ) past behaviour . In 1990 , Pauline published a book called Daddy , Come Home , detailing her life with Alf and his meetings with John . Pauline later remarried , and is now known as Pauline Stone . 
 = = Song sample = = 
 " In My Life " is John 's song about his youth in Liverpool . Alf replied to this song by releasing the single , " That 's My Life " , b / w “ The Next Time You Feel Important ” , in 1965 . 
 " That 's My Life " ( 1965 ) 
 " The Next Time You Feel Important " 
 = Music Box ( Mariah Carey album ) = 
 Music Box is the third studio album by American singer Mariah Carey . It was released by Columbia Records on August 31 , 1993 , in North America . The album comprises ballads primarily co @-@ written by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , with whom she had previously worked on Emotions ( 1991 ) , and a few urban dance tracks . During the course of the album 's development , Carey wanted to broaden her audience , choosing a more pop / R & B oriented sound . During this time frame , they experimented with different organs and other musical instruments , leading the album 's sound away from her more contemporary previous efforts . Two unused tracks from the album sessions were released as B @-@ sides : " Do You Think of Me " and " Everything Fades Away " . 
 In order to successfully take the album in a new direction , Carey and Afanasieff sought out new and innovative producers , as well as some from Carey 's previous releases . Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds first began working with Carey on Music Box , where he helped produce some of the album 's softer and more melodious tracks , as well as being part of the songwriting process . Additional writers and producers were Robert Clivillés and David Cole ( a pair also known as C + C Music Factory ) and Daryl Simmons . While the album featured a range of different talented music producers , the bulk of the songwriting was done by Carey and her writing partner , Walter Afanasieff . In future projects , they would continue writing material for Carey 's albums , until her 1999 release Rainbow , where he is absent from the writing credits . 
 Four singles were released from the album . The first three , " Dreamlover " , " Hero " and " Without You " , became worldwide chart @-@ topping singles , the latter becoming Carey 's highest charting international single of her career . " Without You " became Carey 's first number @-@ one single in most European markets and reached the top three in the United States . To promote Music Box , Carey embarked on the short but successful Music Box Tour which traveled to select cities in North America . Carey was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " Dreamlover " at the 1994 Grammy Awards and received the same nomination for " Hero " at the 1995 Grammy Awards . 
 After its release , Music Box received generally mixed reviews from music critics . The album faced criticism regarding Carey 's more mellow and lazy tone in comparison to her previous work . Despite some unfavorable reviews , the album became a commercial success , topping the Billboard 200 and becoming Carey 's first number @-@ one album in Australia , France , Germany , the Netherlands , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it diamond , for shipments of ten million copies across the United States . Music Box remains Carey 's highest seller with 32 million copies sold worldwide and is one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1988 , Carey was discovered by Tommy Mottola , CEO of Columbia Records , and was promptly signed to the label . Carey 's self @-@ titled debut studio album , released the following year , focused on re @-@ recording and mastering several songs she had already written in high school alongside classmate , Ben Margulies . Aside from the seven songs taken from Carey 's demo tape , four other tracks were written and produced by the former and an array of famed record producers . The album was complimented by critics , who called it a mature debut , full of various genre influences ranging from pop , R & B and soul . The album became a commercial success , selling fifteen million units globally . While making a strong impact on pop music , Carey became interested in altering her sound , and deviating from pop music for her second studio effort , Emotions ( 1991 ) . Following the success of her debut , Columbia allowed her to take more control over her musical departure , enabling her to change her genre infusions , melodies and production . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 With Carey in the captain 's chair , having more control than she had on any other album , she took the album in a new direction , alongside Afanasieff . For Carey 's third studio effort , she enrolled the help of a range of songwriters , as well as record producers . Aside from Afanasieff , Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , a man who would collaborate with Carey often in the near future , also took part in the project . Babyface , who helped produce much of the album , also co @-@ wrote a track with Carey titled " Never Forget You " , a song that was released as a B @-@ side to " Without You " exclusively in the United States . The album , which consisted mostly of slower ballads ( with the exception of " Dreamlover " , " Now That I Know " , and " I 've Been Thinking about You " ) , contained collaborations with some carry @-@ on producers and writers from Emotions . Of these were Clivillés & Cole ( of C + C Music Factory ) , who co @-@ wrote the track " Now That I Know " , a danceable pop ballad , which used similar formulas and synthesizers from tracks on Emotions . Another writer – producer that worked on the album was David Hall , who with Carey wrote the U.S. single " Dreamlover " . 
 During the album 's recording , Carey worked with several different musicians and producers , aside from Walter Afanasieff , the only hold over from her debut . On the album 's first track " Dreamlover " , Carey worked with Dave Hall throughout the song 's entire production . In order to help with some of the song 's arrangements , Mottola enrolled the help of Walter Afanasieff , who took on the completed track and transformed it into a more commercial hit . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Emotions contains influences from mostly 1950s , 1960s and 1970s balladry and gospel , as well as her continued work of R & B and soul . The album , while praised by some as more mature and raw , failed to reach the critical or commercial heights of her debut effort , while selling far less and failed to introduce Carey into a different market . Following these events , Columbia decided to try to market Carey in a similar fashion to her debut , only having her produce a more commercial and radio @-@ friendly album . Their plans were to tone down Carey 's vocals , and soften the album 's production , leaving a more contemporary pop / R & B record . Agreeing to the change , Carey and Afanasieff began writing and recording material for her third studio effort , Music Box . 
 One of the noticeable differences from Music Box and Carey 's previous albums is its sound . The album was described by Afanasieff as a softer and more pop @-@ oriented album , " filling the songs with air " , and allowing far more space in the overall sound . Another noticeable change is in the album 's production . When Mariah Carey was released , critics took notice of its " overly produced " and " studio perfect " quality , where in comparison , Emotions maintains a " raw , live sound . " Music Box however , falls in between the two , a decision made by Carey during the album 's production . She would layer each track with live backing vocals , so not to sound too overly produced , but still kept the inclusion of musical synthesizers . 
 According to Marc Shapiro , Music Box reflects signs of Carey 's vocal maturity , as well as representing an album she was truly proud of . The album 's first single " Dreamlover " was described as a " slight piece of pop fluff , " representing a more commercial side to Carey than the " more ambitious , " " Vision of Love " . Critics believed the song 's chart performance was due to its summer release , as people were still looking for a " not @-@ too @-@ heavy " and more diverse sound . The song 's composition was described as " mid tempo and mildly dance @-@ able , " with Carey 's voice being called " perpetually happy , " like a " little @-@ girl voice . " 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Hero " , the album 's second single , was one of Carey 's most inspirational ballads at the time . The song is described as " a lush ballad " , with Carey making use of her impressive , " lower alto register . " As one of the more emotional tracks on the album , " Hero " builds emotion , verse through verse , where the lyrics and melody finally " broke through . " " Anytime You Need a Friend " is another pop ballad in which Carey would , " let her voice roam free " , a feature critics felt lacked on the album . The song featured " rough and low vocals " , as well as some glimpses of Carey 's upper registers . As with most of the songs on Music Box , the lyrics boast a positive message , and it is the only song on the album to feature traces of gospel @-@ inspired vocals throughout the chorus . 
 The album 's title track , " Music Box " , is another ballad Carey wrote with Afanasieff . The song is described as one of Carey 's more difficult compositions , due to its " softness " . The song requires a great deal of legato to keep " the tunes softness and sweetness , without resorting to volume . " Carey 's vocals on the track are defined as " soft and controlled , " managing to maintain the delicate balance in a manner that seems effortless , floating easily over the keyboard and the shimmer of the guitar . Lyrically , due to the song 's message of " commitment and promise , " and the " tinkling music @-@ box line played on the synthesizer , " the track gives the sensation of a wedding vow recital . " Never Forget You " is a slow song , further connecting it to the song 's message of " lamenting the loss of love , in a very tender way . " The song contains keyboard notes that hover over the verses and allow Carey to indulge in her backing vocals . It was described by Nickson as a " stand out track , " one that could have easily become a hit single , " with an appeal that would have easily transcended generational barriers . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , the album received mixed reviews from critics . Ron Wynn from Allmusic gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , Roc Wynn of Allmusic said that Carey 's " octave @-@ leaping " voice was downplayed in favor of the demonstration of " her ability to sing softly and coolly . " Although favorably stating that Carey lowered the volume on her vocals , he said that the energy had declined , with the exception of personality @-@ injected songs like " Hero " and " Dreamlover . " Overall , however , he claimed the album 's " different " approach was wise . Ashley S. Battel from Billboard gave the album a positive review , writing , " While Carey tones down the predominance of her tremendous vocal range throughout much of this release , there is no question that she remains the driving force behind yet <unk> [ e ] r collection of heavy @-@ rotation Top @-@ 40 successes . " 
 David Browne from Entertainment Weekly gave the album a mixed review . He said that due to Carey 's lower energy level , her voice no longer soars above the backup chorus , instead it only " drip [ s ] over them like syrup instead of overpowering them ; she lets the melodies speak for themselves . " . Browne awarded the album an unenthusiastic score of C + . Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone complimented Carey 's vocals , but found her lyrics " made up entirely of pop and soul clichés " and stated " Music Box is so precisely calculated to be a blockbuster that its impact is ultimately a little unnerving " . However , in his review for The New York Times , Holden wrote that the album " takes aim at the commercial pop mainstream with an even sharper focus " than Carey 's previous albums , while noting " If huge ballads like ' Hero , ' ' Anytime You Need a Friend ' and a gospel @-@ flavored remake of Harry Nilsson 's 1971 hit , ' Without You , ' traffic in pop cliches , they are the top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line in generic 90 's pop " . In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " rating , indicating " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought " . In a retrospective review , The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) noted a " soft @-@ rock slump " and stated " While there 's nothing wrong with Carey singing relatively straight for 10 songs , there is a sore lack of power here : baleful soaring ballads , pop optimism along the lines of smiling through the tears and believing in yourself ( or him , or Him ) , and hardly a decent tune in the lot " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Music Box entered the US Billboard 200 at number two , with 174 @,@ 000 copies sold . In its fifteenth week after release , the album topped the chart and enjoyed its highest sales week in December , selling 295 @,@ 000 copies in its first week atop , 395 @,@ 000 the following week and peaking with 505 @,@ 000 copies sold in year 's final week . It stayed at the top for eight non @-@ consecutive weeks . It remained in the top ten for thirty @-@ one weeks and on the Billboard 200 for 128 weeks ( more than two years , longer than any other of her albums ) , re @-@ entering the chart three times . The album also reached number one on Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . Music Box was the second @-@ best selling album in the United States in 1994 , only behind Ace of Base 's The Sign . In the United States , Music Box became Carey 's best @-@ selling album at the time , being certified diamond by the RIAA , denoting shipments of ten million copies 
 The album became a success in Canada , peaking at number two on the charts and being certified seven @-@ times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . Music Box became Carey 's best @-@ seller in Europe , topping the charts in Australia , Germany , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . In Germany , it became her highest @-@ charting album , spending eighty weeks on the German Albums Chart , eleven of which were spent at number one . Germany 's sales of the album were also very impressive , with a certification of double @-@ platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , for shipments of one million copies . In Australia , the album was certified fourteen @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . The album finished at number one on the ( ARIA ) 1994 End of Year Chart . In the United Kingdom , Music Box remains Carey 's highest seller , topping the UK Albums Chart and being certified seven @-@ times platinum . It became a million @-@ selling album in France , receiving a diamond certification and topping the French Album Charts . Sales in France have been estimated at 1 @,@ 418 @,@ 100 . In Brazil , Music Box remains one of the best @-@ selling albums by an international artist , selling 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 copies . Music Box finished number twenty @-@ three on the all time album chart in the Netherlands , where it was certified six @-@ times platinum . 
 In Asia , Music Box became one of the best @-@ selling albums of 1994 , selling 2 @.@ 2 million copies in Japan alone . The album 's sales continued to skyrocket in Asia , topping sales of 600 @,@ 000 in South Korea and 150 @,@ 000 copies in Taiwan as of 1994 . In Singapore and Hong Kong , sales reached 110 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 copies respectively . Music Box has sold 32 million copies worldwide , and is one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Dreamlover " was released as the album 's first single on July 27 , 1993 . The single debuted at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 , and due to its massive airplay , the song reached the top of the Hot 100 , staying there for eight weeks . Dreamlover topped the charts in Canada , and reached the top @-@ ten in many other countries . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of one million copies , as well as receiving a gold certification in Australia and New Zealand . The music video for " Dreamlover " featured " summer scenery , " with scenes of Carey swimming in a pool by a waterfall , lying in a bed of sunflowers , as well as singing in front of hip @-@ hop dancers . The video tried to capture , a " home video " feel , adding to the song 's subtle and airy nature , something that only helped the song dominate the charts " Hero " served as the album 's second single , and was released on October 19 , 1993 . Music critics praised the song , calling it her most directly inspirational song since " Make It Happen " . The song topped the charts in the United States and the top @-@ five in many other major music markets . The music video for " Hero , " featured footage from Carey 's concert at Proctor 's Theatre , as was done for Carey 's following music video for " Without You . " 
 " Without You " , the album 's third single , became the biggest international hit of Carey 's career . " Without You " reached number three in the United States , but experienced its real success throughout Europe . The song became Carey 's first number one chart topper in France , Germany , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , propelling the sales of Music Box throughout the world . Carey brought the song renewed popularity , through her highly successful adaptation . It became one of the " fifty most @-@ played songs of the year " and even outsold Harry Nilsson 's version , receiving many awards and recognition . " Anytime You Need a Friend " , the album 's final single , experienced success on the charts , reaching the top @-@ ten in many countries , as well as peaking at number twelve in the United States . It became the second single in Music Box to perform better throughout Europe than in the U.S. 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album , Carey embarked on her first headlining concert tour , the Music Box Tour . Due to stage fright , Carey had not toured to promote her previous albums and did not originally plan a tour to support Music Box . However , after the continued success of the album and persuasion from Tommy Mottola , Carey agreed . Because Carey did not feel physically or emotionally ready for an extensive tour , six concerts were scheduled , each with many days in between , in order to give her voice time to rest . An extra performance at Proctor 's Theatre was planned ; there , Carey filmed the one @-@ hour special Here Is Mariah Carey for release during the Christmas season . 
 When tickets went on sale , the concerts did not sell out instantly but sold at a healthy pace . On the opening night , she sang at the Miami Arena . Approximately two @-@ thirds of the venue 's capacity was filled , which worried Carey 's management . However , Carey did not seem to mind and began the show with high spirits . The first show in Miami received scathing reviews ; subsequent shows sold out of tickets and attracted rave reviews . 
 Aside from touring for the first time in her career , Carey visited various American and European television programs , performing different singles from the album . In late 1993 , Carey appeared on The Arsenio Hall Show , performing both " Dreamlover " and " Hero . " Other 1993 performances included " Hero " on The Jay Leno Show and " Dreamlover " on her first visit to Top of the Pops . Carey continued promoting the album in 1994 , performing " Without You " on a second visit to Top of the Pops , as well as visiting France , Germany , Japan , Spain and Sweden . In the midst of the Music Box Tour , Carey had already begun working with Walter Afanasieff on her holiday album Merry Christmas , which was to be released during the Christmas season of 1994 . Additionally , Carey and <unk> reportedly began experimenting with ideas and music for Carey 's 1995 album Daydream . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 International edition 
 Latin American edition 
 = = Album credits = = 
 Credits adapted from Music Box album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = Wings ( 1927 film ) = 
 Wings is a 1927 American silent war film set during the First World War produced by Lucien Hubbard , directed by William A. Wellman and released by Paramount Pictures . It stars Clara Bow , Charles " Buddy " Rogers , and Richard Arlen , and Gary Cooper appears in a role which helped launch his career in Hollywood . 
 The film , a romantic action @-@ war picture , was rewritten by scriptwriters Hope Loring and Louis D. Lighton from a story by John Monk Saunders to accommodate Bow , Paramount 's biggest star at the time . Wellman was hired as he was the only director in Hollywood at the time who had World War I combat pilot experience , although Richard Arlen and John Monk Saunders had also served in the war as military aviators . The film was shot on location on a budget of $ 2 million at Kelly Field in San Antonio , Texas between September 7 , 1926 and April 7 , 1927 . Hundreds of extras and some 300 pilots were involved in the filming , including pilots and planes of the United States Army Air Corps which were brought in for the filming and to provide assistance and supervision . Wellman extensively rehearsed the scenes for the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel over ten days with some 3500 infantrymen on a battlefield made for the production on location . Although the cast and crew had much spare time during the filming because of weather delays , shooting conditions were intense , and Wellman frequently conflicted with the military officers brought in to supervise the picture . 
 Acclaimed for its technical prowess and realism upon release , the film became the yardstick against which future aviation films were measured , mainly because of its realistic air @-@ combat sequences . It went on to win the first Academy Award for Best Picture at the first annual Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences award ceremony in 1929 , the only fully silent film to do so . It also won the Academy Award for Best Engineering Effects ( Roy Pomeroy ) . Wings was one of the first to show two men kissing ( in a fraternal moment between Rogers and Arlen during the deathbed finale ) , and also one of the first widely released films to show nudity . In 1997 , Wings was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " , and the film was re @-@ released to Cinemark theaters to coincide with the 85th Anniversary for a limited run in May 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Powell and David Armstrong are rivals in the same small American town , both vying for the attentions of pretty Sylvia Lewis . Jack fails to realize that " the girl next door " , Mary Preston , is desperately in love with him . The two young men both enlist to become combat pilots in the Air Service . When they leave for training camp , Jack mistakenly believes Sylvia prefers him . She actually prefers David and lets him know about her feelings , but is too kindhearted to turn down Jack 's affection . 
 Jack and David are billeted together . Their tent mate is Cadet White , but their acquaintance is all too brief ; White is killed in an air crash the same day . Undaunted , the two men endure a rigorous training period , where they go from being enemies to best friends . Upon graduating , they are shipped off to France to fight the Germans . 
 Mary joins the war effort by becoming an ambulance driver . She later learns of Jack 's reputation as the ace known as " The Shooting Star " and encounters him while on leave in Paris . She finds him , but he is too drunk to recognize her . She puts him to bed , but when two military police barge in while she is innocently changing from a borrowed dress back into her uniform in the same room , she is forced to resign and return to America . 
 The climax of the story comes with the epic Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel . David is shot down and presumed dead . However , he survives the crash landing , steals a German biplane , and heads for the Allied lines . By a tragic stroke of bad luck , Jack spots the enemy aircraft and , bent on avenging his friend , begins an attack . He is successful in downing the aircraft and lands to retrieve a souvenir of his victory . The owner of the land where David 's aircraft crashed urges Jack to come to the dying man 's side . He agrees and becomes distraught when he realizes what he has done . David consoles him and before he dies , forgives his comrade . 
 At the war 's end , Jack returns home to a hero 's welcome . He visits David 's grieving parents to return his friend 's effects . During the visit he begs their forgiveness for causing David 's death . Mrs. Armstrong says it is not Jack who is responsible for her son 's death , but the war . Then , Jack is reunited with Mary and realizes he loves her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Clara Bow as Mary Preston 
 Charles " Buddy " Rogers as Jack Powell 
 Richard Arlen as David Armstrong 
 Gary Cooper as Cadet White 
 <unk> Ralston as Sylvia Lewis 
 El Brendel as Herman <unk> 
 Richard Tucker as Air Commander 
 Gunboat Smith as Sergeant 
 Roscoe Karns as Lieutenant Cameron 
 Henry B. Walthall as Mr. Armstrong 
 Julia Swayne Gordon as Mrs. Armstrong 
 Arlette Marchal as Celeste 
 Hedda Hopper as Mrs. Powell ( uncredited ) 
 George Irving as Mr. Powell ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script and experience = = = 
 The film was written by Byron Morgan ( original story , uncredited ) , Louis D. Lighton and Hope Loring ( screenplay ) , edited and produced by Lucien Hubbard , directed by William A. Wellman , with an original orchestral score by John Stepan <unk> , which was uncredited . It was rewritten to accommodate Clara Bow , as she was Paramount 's biggest star , but wasn 't happy about her part : " Wings is … a man 's picture and I 'm just the whipped cream on top of the pie " . 
 Producers Lucien Hubbard and Jesse L. Lasky hired director Wellman as he was the only director in Hollywood at the time who had World War I combat pilot experience . Actor Richard Arlen and writer John Monk Saunders had also served in World War I as military aviators . Arlen was able to do his own flying in the film and Rogers , a non @-@ pilot , underwent flight training during the course of the production , so that , like Arlen , Rogers could also be filmed in closeup in the air . Lucien Hubbard offered flying lessons to all , and despite the number of aircraft in the air , only two incidents occurred — one involved stunt pilot Dick Grace , while the other was the fatal crash of a United States Army Air Corps pilot . Wellman was able to attract War Department support and involvement in the project , and displayed considerable prowess and confidence in dealing with planes and pilots onscreen , knowing " exactly what he wanted " , bringing with it a " no @-@ nonsense attitude " according to military film historian Lawrence H. Suid . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 = = = = Aerial and battle sequences = = = = 
 Wings was shot and completed on a budget of $ 2 million at Kelly Field , San Antonio , Texas between September 7 , 1926 and April 7 , 1927 . Primary scout aircraft flown in the film were Thomas @-@ Morse MB @-@ 3s standing in for American @-@ flown <unk> and Curtiss P @-@ 1 Hawks painted in German livery . Developing the techniques needed for filming closeups of the pilots in the air and capturing the speed and motion of the planes onscreen took time , and little usable footage was produced in the first two months . Wellman soon realized that Kelly Field didn 't have adequate numbers of planes or skilled pilots which were needed to perform the aerial maneuvers and had to request technical assistance and a supply of planes and pilots from Washington . The Air Corps sent six planes and pilots from the 1st Pursuit Group stationed at Selfridge Field near Detroit , including 2d Lt. Clarence S. " Bill " Irvine who became Wellman 's adviser . Irvine was responsible for engineering an airborne camera system to provide close @-@ ups and for the planning of the dogfights , and when one of the pilots broke his neck , performed in one of the battle scenes himself . 
 Hundreds of extras were brought in to shoot the picture , and some 300 pilots were involved in the filming . Because the aerial battles required ideal weather to shoot , the production team had to wait on one occasion for 18 consecutive days for proper conditions in San Antonio . If possible , Wellman attempted to capture footage in the air in contrast to clouds in the background , above or in front of cloud banks to generate a sense of velocity and danger . Wellman later explained , " motion on the screen is a relative thing . A horse runs on the ground or leaps over fencers or streams . We know he is going rapidly because of his relation to the immobile ground " . Against the clouds , Wellman enabled the planes to " dart at each other " , and to " swoop down and disappear in the clouds " , and to give the audience the sense of the disabled planes plummeting . During the delay in the aerial shooting , Wellman extensively rehearsed the scenes for the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel over ten days with some 3500 infantrymen . A large battlefield with trenches and barbed wire was created on location for the filming . Wellman took responsibility for the meticulously @-@ planned explosions himself , detonating them at the right time from his control panel . According to Peter Hopkinson , at least 20 young men , including cameraman William Clothier , were given hand @-@ held cameras to film " anything and everything " during the filming . 
 Wellman frequently conflicted with the military officers brought in to supervise the picture , especially the infantry commander who he considered to have " two monumental hatreds : fliers and movie people " . After one argument Wellman retorted to the commander , " You 're just a goddamn fool because the government has told me you have to give me all your men and do just exactly what I want you to do . " Although Wellman paid much attention to technical details in shooting , he used cars and clothing of the year during the filming , forgetting to use those of World War I. He took six weeks to fully edit the film and prepare it for release . 
 = = = = Cast exploits = = = = 
 Whereas most Hollywood productions of the day took little more than a month to shoot , Wings took approximately nine months to complete in total . Although Wellman was generating spectacular aerial footage and making Hollywood film history , Paramount expressed concerns with the cost of production and expanding budget . They sent an executive to San Antonio to complain to Wellman who swiftly told him that he had two options , " a trip home or a trip to the hospital " . According to biographer Frank T. Thompson , Wellman approached producer David O. Selznick regarding a contract predicament asking him what he should do to which Selznick replied , " Just keep your mouth shut . You 've got ' em where it hurts . " The cast and crew had a lot of time on their hands between shooting sequences , and according to director Wellman , " San Antonio became the Armageddon of a magnificent sexual <unk> " . He recalled that they stayed at the Saint Anthony Hotel for nine months and by the time they left the elevator girls were all pregnant . He stated that Clara Bow openly flirted with the male cast members and several of the pilots which was reciprocated , despite having become engaged to Victor Fleming the day after arriving in San Antonio on September 16 , 1926 . Gary Cooper , appearing in a role which helped launch his career in Hollywood , began a tumultuous affair during the production with Bow . Cooper reportedly showed Howard Hughes the script to the film and he wasn 't impressed , considering the drama in it to be " sudsy " , although he informed Cooper that he looked forward to seeing how Wellman would accomplish the technical aerial sequences . Bow strongly detested the costumes which were made for the film by Paramount designer Travis Banton , and slit the necklines and cut off the sleeves of his clothing , much to the chagrin of Banton . 
 = = = = Memorable scenes = = = = 
 Wings was one of the first to show two men kissing : when several aviators are presented medals by a French general and are ceremonially pecked on their necks , and a fraternal moment between Rogers and Arlen during the deathbed finale . Marcel <unk> remarks that the Rogers @-@ Arlen kiss was " really not a romantic kiss , reverberating more with the desperate love between two dear friends who are about to be separated by death " , but speculates that the " lingering " aspect of the kiss may have " unconsciously started the process of opening up America 's rigid moral attitudes at the time . " 
 Wings is also one of the first widely released films to show nudity . In the enlistment office are nude men undergoing physical exams , who can be seen from behind through a door which is opened and closed . Bow 's breasts are revealed for a second during the Paris bedroom scene when military police barge in as she is changing her clothes . In the scene in which Rogers becomes drunk , the intoxication displayed on screen was genuine , as although 22 years of age , he had never tasted liquor before , and quickly became inebriated from drinking champagne . A boom was built with the camera mounted on an extension to shoot the Café de Paris scene . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Wellman dedicated the film " to those young warriors of the sky whose wings are folded about them forever " . A sneak preview was shown May 19 , 1927 , at the Texas Theater on Houston Street in San Antonio . The premiere was held at the Criterion Theater , in New York City , on August 12 , 1927 , and was screened for 63 weeks before being moved to second @-@ run theaters . The original Paramount release of Wings was color tinted and had some sequences in an early widescreen process known as <unk> , also used in the 1926 Paramount film Old Ironsides . The original release also had the aerial scenes use the Handschiegl color process for flames and explosions . Some prints had synchronized sound effects and music , using the General Electric <unk> ( later RCA Photophone ) sound @-@ on @-@ film process . 
 Wings was an immediate success upon release and became the yardstick for which aviation films were measured against , in terms of " authenticity of combat and scope of production " . One of the reasons for its resounding popularity was the public infatuation with aviation in the wake of Charles Lindbergh 's transatlantic flight . The Air Corps who had supervised production expressed satisfaction with the end product . The critical response was equally enthusiastic and the film was widely praised for its realism and technical prowess , despite a superficial plot , " an aviation picnic " as Gene Brown called it . The combat scenes of the film were so realistic that one writer studying the film in the early 1970s was wondering if Wellman had used actual imagery of planes crashing to earth during World War I. One critic observed : " The exceptional quality of Wings lies in its appeal as a spectacle and as a picture of at least some of the actualities of flying under wartime conditions . " Another wrote : " Nothing in the line of war pictures ever has packed a greater proportion of real thrills into an equal footage . As a spectacle , Wings is a technical triumph . It piles punch upon punch until the spectator is almost nervously exhausted " . Mordaunt Hall of The New York Times praised the cinematography of the flying scenes and the direction and acting of the entire cast in his review dated August 13 , 1927 . Hall notes only two criticisms , one slight on Richard Arlen 's performance and of the ending , which he described as " like so many screen stories , much too sentimental , and there is far more of it than one wants . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On May 16 , 1929 , the first Academy Award ceremony was held at the Hotel Roosevelt in Hollywood to honor outstanding film achievements of 1927 – 1928 . Wings was entered in a number of categories and was the first film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture ( then called " Best Picture , Production " ) and Best Engineering Effects for Roy Pomeroy for the year . Sunrise : A Song of Two Humans , which won Unique and Artistic Production , was considered an equal top winner of the night but the following year , the Academy dropped the Unique and Artistic Production award and decided retroactively that the award won by Wings was the highest honor that could be awarded . The statuette , not yet known as the " Oscar " , was presented by Douglas Fairbanks to Clara Bow on behalf of the producers , Adolph Zukor and B.P. Schulberg . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For many years , Wings was considered a lost film until a print was found in the Cinémathèque Française film archive in Paris and quickly copied from nitrate film to safety film stock . It was again shown in theaters , including some theaters where the film was accompanied by Wurlitzer pipe organs . 
 In retrospect , film scholar Scott Eyman in his 1997 book The Speed of Sound : Hollywood and the <unk> Revolution 1926 – 1930 says : " Ironically , a mass @-@ market silent spectacular like William Wellman 's Wings effortlessly showcases far more visual variety than mainstream American films have offered since : it displays shifts from brutal realism to <unk> techniques associated with Soviet avant @-@ garde or impressionistic French cinema - double exposures , subjective point @-@ of @-@ view shots , trick effects , symbolic illustrations on the titles , and so on . " In 1997 , Wings was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . In 2006 , director Wellman 's son , William Wellman Jr . , authored a book about the film and his father 's participation in the making of it , titled The Man and His Wings : William A. Wellman and the Making of the First Best Picture . 
 The film was the focus of an episode of the television series Petticoat Junction that originally aired November 9 , 1968 . Arlen and Rogers were scheduled to appear during the film 's opening at one of the local cinemas in 1928 . They opted , instead to attend the New York screening that was held the same night . Uncle Joe writes a letter chiding the pair for forsaking the town . To atone and generate publicity , they agreed to attend a second opening , 40 years later . Arlen and Rogers also appeared together as themselves on a December 18 , 1967 , episode of The Lucy Show titled " Lucy and Carol Burnett : Part 2 " . They are introduced as the stars of Wings at a ceremony to mark the graduation of Lucille Ball and Carol Burnett from stewardess training . They appear on stage beneath stills taken from the film and later in the ceremony , star in a musical with Ball and Burnett , as two World War I pilots . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 As the original negatives are lost , the closest to an original print is a spare negative stored in Paramount 's vaults . Suffering from decay and defects , the negative was fully restored with modern technology . For the restored version of Wings , the original music score was re @-@ orchestrated . The sound effects were recreated at Skywalker Sound using archived audio tracks . The scenes using the Handschiegl color process were also recreated for the restored version . 
 In 1996 , Paramount issued a VHS release . In 2012 , the company issued a " meticulously restored " version for DVD and Blu @-@ ray . The remastered version in high @-@ definition coincided with the centennial anniversary of Paramount . On May 2 and 16 , 2012 , a limited re @-@ release was seen exclusively in select Cinemark theaters twice daily to coincide with the 85th Anniversary . 
 = Cortinarius violaceus = 
 Cortinarius violaceus , commonly known as the violet webcap or violet cort , is a mushroom in the genus Cortinarius native across the Northern Hemisphere . The fruit bodies are dark purple with caps up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) in diameter , sporting gills with an adnate connection to the stem . The stem measures 6 to 12 centimetres ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 to 4 3 ⁄ 4 in ) by 1 to 2 centimetres ( 3 ⁄ 8 to 3 ⁄ 4 in ) , sometimes with a thicker base . The dark flesh has a smell reminiscent of cedar wood . Forming mycorrhizal relationships with various tree species , C. violaceus is found predominantly in conifer forests in North America and deciduous forests in Europe . 
 Though they are edible , the primary appeal of the fruit bodies to mushroom hunters are their appearance . The species was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 , and subsequently went through a number of name changes . It is the type species of the genus Cortinarius , but is readily distinguished from other species in the genus by its dark colouration and distinct cystidia . There are some populations that seem to prefer deciduous trees and others that prefer pines , but no genetic divergence between the two has been found . When identified as taxonomically separate from the deciduous @-@ preferring populations , the pine @-@ preferring populations have been referred to either as a separate species , C. hercynicus , or as a subspecies , C. violaceus ssp. hercynicus . Other populations once identified as C. violaceus or close to that species have now been described variously as C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. altissimus , C. <unk> and C. <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Agaricus violaceus was one of the few fungal species named by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 work Species Plantarum . The specific epithet violaceus refers to the deep violet colour of its cap . In English , it commonly known as the violet webcap , or violet cort . Subsequently , Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck viewed it as a variety ( violaceus ) of a variable species he described as Amanita <unk> in 1783 , and Christiaan Hendrik Persoon placed it in the Section <unk> of Agaricus in his 1801 work Synopsis Methodica Fungorum . Cortinarius was established as a genus by Samuel Frederick Gray in the first volume of his 1821 work A Natural Arrangement of British Plants , where the species was recorded as <unk> violacea , " the violet curtain @-@ stool " . The starting date of fungal taxonomy had been set as 1 January 1821 , to coincide with the date of the works of the " father of mycology " , the Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries , which meant the name required sanction by Fries ( indicated in the name by a colon ) to be considered valid . Thus the species was written as Cortinarius violaceus ( L. : Fr . ) Gray . A 1987 revision of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature set the starting date at 1 May 1753 , the date of publication of Linnaeus 's Species Plantarum . Hence , the name no longer requires the ratification of Fries 's authority , and is thus written as Cortinarius violaceus ( L. ) Gray . 
 Friedrich Otto Wünsche described the species as <unk> violaceum in 1877 . In 1891 , the German botanist Otto Kuntze published Revisio Generum Plantarum , his response to what he perceived as poor method in existing nomenclatural practice . He called the violet webcap <unk> violaceus in 1898 . However , Kuntze 's revisionary programme was not accepted by the majority of biologists . 
 Cortinarius violaceus was designated as the type species for the genus Cortinarius by Frederic Clements and Cornelius Lott Shear in their 1931 work The Genera of Fungi . David Arora considers this odd , due to the mushroom 's unusual colour and cystidia . However , if it were to be split from the genus , then , according to the rules of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature , it would retain the name Cortinarius , while the other species would have to be reclassified . The species was one of only two placed in the Cortinarius subgenus Cortinarius by the Austrian mycologist Meinhard Moser . Molecular investigation of <unk> worldwide has increased this number to at least twelve . 
 A 2015 genetic study by Emma Harrower and colleagues of C. violaceus and its closest relatives suggests that the group ( section Cortinarius ) originated in Australasia and began diverging around 12 million years ago in the Miocene , with C. violaceus itself diverging from its closest relative around 3 @.@ 9 million years ago . The fact that these species diverged relatively recently indicates that some form of dispersal must have taken place across large bodies of water . The original plant hosts were flowering plants ( angiosperms ) , and C. violaceus — or its direct ancestor — developed a symbiotic relationship with pines , as well as multiple flowering plants ; this may have facilitated its expansion across the Northern Hemisphere . 
 Some mycologists classify C. violaceus as two distinct species — Cortinarius violaceus and Cortinarius hercynicus , with hercynicus meaning " of the Hercynian Forest region " . These species are differentiated due to the latter population 's rounder spores . Persoon had described C. & nbps ; hercynicus as a separate species in 1794 , though Elias Magnus Fries regarded it as conspecific with C. & nbps ; violaceus . Moser separated them once again as species in 1967 , and Tor Erik <unk> classified C. & nbps ; hercynicus as a subspecies of C. & nbps ; violaceus in 1983 . However , Emma Harrower and colleagues , on limited molecular testing , found no genetic or ecological difference between the two taxa . 
 Some fungal populations around the world that have been classified as C. violaceus have been found to belong to separate lineages and hence reclassified as new species . Two separate lineages discovered in populations from Costa Rica have been renamed Cortinarius <unk> and C. <unk> , one from Guyana — described as sp. aff. violaceus — has become C. altissimus , and another from Western Australia and Tasmania described as both C. violaceus and sp. aff. violaceus has become C. <unk> . The poorly @-@ known species Cortinarius <unk> and Cortinarius <unk> from Borneo are almost indistinguishable from C. violaceus , though the former has smaller spores with a detached <unk> ( outer layer ) and the latter has smaller spores and mushrooms . Another population , this one known from Borneo , New Guinea and New Zealand , was described as C. violaceus by Moser . It was noted as very similar to the original species concept of C. violaceus , and awaits description as a new species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cortinarius violaceus has a convex ( becoming broadly convex , umbonate or flat ) cap of 3 @.@ 5 to 15 centimetres ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 to 6 in ) across with an incurved margin . In colour , it is a dark violet to blue @-@ black , and is covered in fine , downy scales . This layer on the cap is known as the pileipellis , which is either classified as a trichoderm — parallel hyphae running perpendicular to the surface and forming a layer 6 – 22 µm wide — or rarely an ixocutis , a layer of gelatinized hyphae 2 – 11 µm wide . The cap surface , unlike that of many other Cortinarius species , is neither sticky nor slimy , though it is occasionally greasy . The stipe is 6 to 12 centimetres ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 to 4 3 ⁄ 4 in ) tall , and 1 to 2 centimetres ( 3 ⁄ 8 to 3 ⁄ 4 in ) thick . Due to its swollen , bulbous nature , the base of the stipe can sometimes be as wide as 4 centimetres ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) . The stem is a similar colour to the cap , and covered in wool @-@ like fibrils , and purple mycelium can be present at the base . Younger specimens feature a veil , but this vanishes quickly . The flesh is violet , but darker below the pileipellis and in the stem . The flesh has a mild taste , indistinctly reminiscent of cedar wood , with a slight , pleasant smell , also reminiscent of cedar wood . The gills are dark violet , changing to a purplish @-@ brown with age . They have an adnate connection to the stem , and can be very dark in older specimens . The mushroom stains red when in contact with potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) . Fruit bodies of C. v. hercynicus are less robust than those of the nominate subspecies . 
 The spore print is rust @-@ coloured , while the spores themselves measure 12 to 15 µm by 7 to 8 @.@ 5 µm . They are rough , from elliptical to almond @-@ shaped , and covered in medium @-@ sized warts . The spores are wider in C. v. hercynicus . The species is the only one in the genus to have cystidia on both the faces and the edges of the gills . A large amount of cystidia are present , and , individually , they measure between 60 and 100 µm by between 12 and 25 µm . They are flask @-@ shaped , with somewhat purple contents . 
 Although there are many Cortinarius species with some degree of violet colour , C. violaceus is easily distinguished by its much darker purple colour . Cortinarius iodes of the southeastern United States has a slimy purple cap and paler violet stipe . The other species in the section Cortinarius are dark purple and superficially similar , but can be differentiated based on host and geography as they do not occur in the same locations as C. violaceus . Certain Leptonia species in northwestern North America , including L. <unk> and L. <unk> , have a similar color . The Leptonia species are easily differentiated due to their pink spore print . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Cortinarius violaceus is found across North America , Europe and Asia . Although widespread , it is not common anywhere in Europe , and it is listed as endangered in the British Isles . Cortinarius violaceus is a rare component of subarctic areas of western Greenland . 
 In Europe , it grows in deciduous woodland during autumn , especially among oak , birch and beech , but is also found on occasion with conifers . It is also occasionally known from treeless heathland , where it is associated with bracken . The species favours acidic soil . Cortinarius violaceus forms mycorrhizal associations with several species of tree . In Nordic countries , its hosts include white birch ( Betula pubescens ) , silver birch ( B. pendula ) , European aspen ( Populus <unk> ) and rarely European beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) . No records of association with oak ( Quercus ) are known from this region . <unk> reported that what he described as spp. hercynicus grew with Picea abies , generally in more alkaline soils and along with mosses of the genera <unk> and <unk> , and , in moister areas , big shaggy @-@ moss ( <unk> <unk> ) , as well as the buttercup @-@ like shrub Hepatica nobilis . It grows with Betula pubescens in Greenland . It is also associated with hazelnut ( Corylus <unk> ) in Central and Southern Europe . 
 In North America , it favours conifers , and , though rare over much of the continent , is relatively common in certain areas including Mount Rainier National Park and Olympic National Park . It is more common in old growth forest in the Pacific Northwest , though has sprung up in regrowth areas populated with fir , pine , aspen and alder in the Great Lakes region . Fruit bodies occur solitarily or in small groups , often near rotting wood , and can grow in fairy rings . Closely related species that look like C. violaceus can be found in Central and South America , Australia , New Zealand , Papua New Guinea , and Malaysia . 
 = = Edibility and biochemistry = = 
 Cortinarius violaceus mushrooms are considered edible , but they are not choice ; instead , the primary appeal of the species to mushroom hunters , according to Arora , is its beauty . Its similarity to some other ( inedible or toxic ) <unk> renders it risky to eat . The taste after cooking is reportedly bitter . 
 The colour of C. violaceus cannot be converted to a dye , unlike that of some other Cortinarius species , such as C. sanguineus and C. <unk> . The colour is caused by an elusive pigment that has been difficult to isolate ; its identity was not known until 1998 . It is an iron ( III ) complex of ( R ) -3 ′ , 4 ′ <unk> @-@ β @-@ phenylalanine [ ( R ) -β @-@ dopa ] . It dissolves in water , turning the liquid dark purple before fading to blackish @-@ grey . C. violaceus mushrooms contain around 100 times more iron than those of most other fungi . Cortinarius violaceus extract demonstrate an inhibitory activity against cysteine protease . 
 = 1982 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1982 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1982 and lasted until November 30 , 1982 , and was a below average season . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . Only six storms formed during this hurricane season : five named storms ( this was the record for the smallest number of named cyclones in the Atlantic basin since naming began in 1950 , until the following year ( 1983 ) when only 4 named storms formed ) and an unnamed subtropical storm ( no subtropical storms were named between 1974 and 2001 ) . The season only produced two hurricanes ( record low since 1944 ) one of which reached major hurricane status . The season started early with Hurricane Alberto forming on the first day of the season . Alberto threatened the Southwestern Florida coast as a tropical storm , causing twenty @-@ three fatalities in Cuba . The next storm , a subtropical storm , formed in June and affected the same area as Alberto , causing $ 10 million in damage . 
 Tropical Storm Beryl formed on August 28 , after a quiet July in the open Atlantic Ocean . Beryl grazed Cape Verde , killing 3 people . Tropical Depression Three formed just behind Beryl , tracking east and north of the Caribbean sea in early September . Soon after the dissipation of Beryl , Tropical Storm Chris formed in the Gulf of Mexico on September 9 . Chris stayed as a weak storm , making landfall near Sabine Pass , Texas and dissipated over land on September 13 . Hurricane Debby was the next storm and the strongest of the season . The formative stage of Debby produced rainfall in Puerto Rico and soon strengthened into a Category 4 Major Hurricane . Debby passed by Newfoundland on September 18 and merged with a non @-@ tropical low on September 20 . In mid @-@ September , Tropical Depression Six formed west of Africa , and tracked west @-@ northwest , dissipating before reaching the Leeward Islands on September 20 . Its remnant thunderstorm activity continued moving west @-@ northwest , forming Tropical Depression Seven which moved near Bermuda on September 25 before dissipating offshore Nova Scotia . The final storm of the season , Tropical Storm Ernesto , was the shortest lasting storm of the season and stayed out to sea , dissipating on October 2 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The season was very inactive because of strong vertical wind shear due to stronger than normal westerly winds aloft . The wind shear was contributed by a variety of factors including a strong El Niño . Vertical wind shear was strong enough to disrupt convection in areas of disturbed weather so they could not develop further . The El Niño which affected this hurricane season extended into the 1983 Atlantic hurricane season . Higher than average values of African mineral dust during the most active portion of the hurricane season could have also suppressed tropical cyclone activity . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 32 , which is classified as " below normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Alberto = = = 
 On June 1 , a tropical depression formed off western Cuba from an organized cloud system . It moved slowly northeastward through the Gulf of Mexico , and strengthened into Tropical Storm Alberto on June 3 . Alberto traveled generally northeast on an erratic course , and briefly intensified to a Category 1 hurricane , one of the earliest hurricanes of June , and the earliest date for a hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean since Hurricane Alma in May 1970 . Due to strengthening vertical wind shear , Alberto then quickly weakened into a tropical storm , doubled back to the west , and dissipated near the Florida Keys on June 6 . Alberto is an example of a storm to enter the Gulf of Mexico and dissipating while never make landfall , which is an unusual event . 
 Though the storm never made landfall , 23 deaths were reported in Cuba from significant flooding , the worst in 32 years . Southern Florida experienced moderate rainfall , with a peak of 16 @.@ 47 inches ( 418 mm ) occurring in Tavernier . 
 = = = Subtropical Storm One = = = 
 The first subtropical storm of the season formed in the east @-@ central Gulf of Mexico on June 18 , and moved northeast for its entire life cycle . It crossed the Florida peninsula that night , causing the issuance of numerous severe thunderstorm and tornado warnings . The cyclone also dropped heavy rainfall , peaking at 10 @.@ 72 inches ( 272 mm ) eight miles ( 13 km ) southwest of DeSoto City , Florida . The storm continued , crossing the Outer Banks of North Carolina , and retained its strength until June 20 when it became extratropical near Newfoundland . The cyclone caused three deaths in Florida , sank a fishing trawler off the coast of North Carolina , and caused $ 10 million in damage ( 1982 USD ) . This was the only subtropical or tropical cyclone to impact the Eastern seaboard this season . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beryl = = = 
 A well @-@ developed tropical wave exited Africa on August 27 . The next day , it developed into a tropical depression , and shortly thereafter it intensified into Tropical Storm Beryl . On August 29 , it passed just south of Cape Verde as it continued intensifying on its west @-@ northwest track . An eye feature appeared in the convection on August 31 , suggesting winds of near hurricane status ; since the feature was located on the western side of the deep convection and the storm was slightly asymmetric , the intensity was held just below hurricane status . Shortly after , strong wind shear caused the storm to deteriorate , leaving the low @-@ level circulation exposed on the western side . Beryl weakened to a tropical depression the next day due to the lack of convection , and it continued westward without redevelopment . On September 5 , a reconnaissance flight into the depression found winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) ; this was deemed unrepresentative of the actual intensity as it was recorded in a squall line . The depression became disorganized once more and by September 6 , it was no longer identifiable on satellites . 
 Early in its duration , Tropical Storm Beryl produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds on the Cape Verde island of Sal . The storm caused moderate damage across the archipelago , totaling $ 3 million ( 1982 USD ) . The passage of Beryl resulted in three casualties in Brava Island , as well as 122 injuries . In the period after the storm 's passage , the United States provided humanitarian aid and economic assistance to the country , helping the archipelago to reverse the effects of Beryl . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Three = = = 
 This system formed east of the Lesser Antilles on September 6 to the southeast of Tropical Storm Beryl in the tropical North Atlantic ocean . The depression moved northeast of the Leeward Islands during the afternoon of September 7 while experiencing southwest vertical wind shear , and moved into the southwest North Atlantic before dissipating east of the Bahamas on September 9 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chris = = = 
 A surface low pressure area developed on September 8 in the Gulf of Mexico . It drifted westward , and the next day it organized into a subtropical depression . Under the influence of a trough of low pressure , the depression turned northward , and after steadily becoming better organized it transitioned into Tropical Storm Chris by late on September 10 . The storm attained peak winds of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) before moving ashore near Sabine Pass in Texas . Chris continued inland until it dissipated over central Arkansas on September 13 . Prior to making landfall , as many as 6 @,@ 500 people evacuated from southern Louisiana , while offshore many oil workers were evacuated inland . 
 Chris produced moderate rainfall along its path , peaking at 16 inches ( 410 mm ) in Delhi , Louisiana , with totals of over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in Mississippi and Tennessee . The rainfall caused locally severe flooding as far inland as Tennessee and Kentucky , with flooding of some rivers reported . The storm spawned nine tornadoes , of which four were F2 or stronger on the Fujita scale . Upon moving ashore , the hurricane produced a 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) storm tide , resulting in severe damage to several boats in the Gulf of Mexico . Throughout its path , damage totaled $ 2 million ( 1982 USD ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Debby = = = 
 A tropical wave moved westward offshore the coast of Africa . The wave traveled across the Atlantic , and organized into a tropical depression off the northern coast of Haiti on September 13 . The depression turned north and strengthened into a tropical storm and then a hurricane . Hurricane Debby moved north @-@ northeast , brushing Bermuda with tropical storm @-@ force winds . It continued strengthening as it moved north , peaking at 130 miles per hour ( 210 km / h ) . Hurricane Debby was the only known hurricane on record to reach category 4 north of 38 ° N latitude , at 38 ° 8 North . Debby was also the second northernmost known category 4 hurricane Atlantic hurricane , behind Hurricane Ella of 1978 . Tropical storm @-@ force winds were also recorded at Cape Race in Newfoundland when Debby passed on September 18 . The storm accelerated and began weakening over the colder waters of the north Atlantic . Debby merged with a strong non @-@ tropical system over the British Isles on September 20 . 
 The precursor disturbance to Debby dropped heavy rainfall across Puerto Rico , peaking at 12 @.@ 86 inches ( 327 mm ) in the southwestern portion of the island . Debby had little effect on Atlantic Canada , outside of heavy rainfall . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six = = = 
 This tropical depression formed 900 miles ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) west of the Cape Verde Islands on September 16 , and moved west @-@ northwest across the tropical Atlantic ocean . The system moved within 750 miles ( 1 @,@ 210 km ) east of the Leeward Islands before dissipating on September 20 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seven = = = 
 The remnant area of disturbed weather from Tropical Depression Six continued moving west @-@ northwest into the southwest north Atlantic . A tropical depression formed from this area 275 miles ( 443 km ) west of Bermuda on September 25 . The system recurved off the north and northeast , dissipating in north Atlantic shipping lanes southeast of Nova Scotia on September 27 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ernesto = = = 
 A tropical wave formed off the coast of Africa on September 23 . The west side of the wave expanded and was declared as Tropical Depression Six on September 30 . The depression intensified , making a sharp turn on October 1 . An Air Force plane found 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) winds with a pressure of 1 @,@ 003 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) and the depression was given the name Ernesto . A second Air Force plane on October 2 found 71 miles per hour ( 114 km / h ) winds with a pressure of 997 millibars ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . By October 3 , Ernesto was not identifiable after merging with an extratropical low . Ernesto never approached land and caused no reported damage . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1982 . These names were used again in the 1988 season . This is the first time this name set was used since the post @-@ 1978 naming change , except for Florence and Helene which had been previously used in 1954 , 1958 , 1960 , and 1964 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired no names used in the 1982 season . 
 = Stereolab = 
 Stereolab are a music band formed in 1990 in London , England . The band originally comprised songwriting team Tim Gane ( guitar / keyboards ) and Lætitia Sadier ( vocals / keyboards / guitar ) , both of whom remained at the helm across many lineup changes . Other long @-@ time members include Mary Hansen ( backing vocals / keyboards / guitar ) , who played with the group from 1992 until her accidental death in 2002 , and Andy Ramsay ( drums ) , who joined in 1993 , and who is still in the official line @-@ up . 
 Called " one of the most fiercely independent and original groups of the Nineties , " Stereolab were one of the first bands to be termed " post @-@ rock " . Their primary musical influence was 1970s krautrock , which they combined with lounge , 1960s pop , and experimental pop music . They were noted for their heavy use of vintage electronic keyboards , and their sound often overlays a repetitive " motorik " beat with female vocals sung in English or French . Stereolab often incorporates socio @-@ political themes into their lyrics . Some critics say the group 's lyrics carry a strong Marxist message , and both Gane and Sadier admit to being influenced by the Surrealist and Situationist cultural and political movements . Gane is skeptical of labels such as " Marxist pop " , and defends the band against accusations of " sloganeering " . 
 Although many of the band 's albums have been underground hits , they never found larger commercial success . The band were released from their recording contract with Warner Bros. Records when Warner 's imprint Elektra Records folded . The release was reportedly due to poor record sales , and since then Stereolab 's self @-@ owned label , Duophonic Records , has signed a distribution deal with Too Pure . Duophonic holds the copyrights to the band 's recordings , and on this label the band has released many limited @-@ edition records . In 2009 , Stereolab announced via their website that they were going on indefinite hiatus . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1990 – 1993 = = = 
 In 1985 , Tim Gane formed McCarthy , a band from Essex , England known for their left @-@ wing politics . Gane met the French @-@ born Lætitia Sadier at a McCarthy concert in Paris and the two quickly fell in love . The musically @-@ inclined Sadier was disillusioned with the rock scene in France and soon moved to London to be with Gane and pursue her career . In 1990 , after three albums , McCarthy broke up and Gane immediately formed Stereolab with Sadier ( who had also contributed vocals to McCarthy 's final album ) and ex @-@ Chills bassist Martin Kean . The group 's name was taken from a division of Vanguard Records demonstrating hi @-@ fi effects . 
 Gane and Sadier , along with future Stereolab manager Martin Pike , created a record label called Duophonic Super 45s which , along with later offshoot Duophonic Ultra High Frequency Disks , would become commonly known as " Duophonic " . The 10 inch vinyl EP Super 45 was the first release for both band and label , and was sold through mail order and the Rough Trade Shop in London . Super 45 's band @-@ designed album art and packaging was the first of many customized and limited @-@ edition Duophonic records . In a 1996 interview in The Wire Gane calls the " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " aesthetic behind Duophonic " empowering " , and says that by releasing one 's own music " you learn ; it creates more music , more ideas " . Other independent bands such as Tortoise , Broadcast , and <unk> would also release material on Duophonic . 
 Stereolab followed up with another EP , Super @-@ Electric , and a single , " Stunning Debut Album " ( which was neither debut nor album ) . The band 's early material was rock and guitar @-@ oriented ; of Super @-@ Electric , Jason Ankeny wrote in AllMusic that " <unk> guitars , skeletal rhythms , and pop hooks — not vintage synths and pointillist melodies — were their calling cards ... " In 1992 , Stereolab 's first full @-@ length album , Peng ! , and first compilation , Switched On , were released on independent label Too Pure . Around this time , the lineup consisted of Gane and Sadier plus vocalist Mary Hansen , drummer Andy Ramsay , bassist Duncan Brown , keyboardist Katharine Gifford , and guitarist Sean O 'Hagan of the 1980s famed <unk> duo . Hansen , an Australian , had been in touch with Gane since his McCarthy days . After joining , she and Sadier developed a style of vocal counterpoint that distinguished Stereolab 's sound until Hansen 's death ten years later in 2002 . O 'Hagan would later leave to form The High Llamas , but would frequently return to contribute to Stereolab 's records . 
 Beginning with their 1993 EP Space Age Bachelor Pad Music , the band began to incorporate easy @-@ listening elements into their sound . This release raised Stereolab 's profile and landed them a major @-@ label American record deal with Elektra Records . Their next album , 1993 's Transient Random @-@ Noise Bursts with Announcements , was their first American release under Elektra , and became an underground hit in both the U.S. and the U.K. Mark Jenkins commented in The Washington Post that with this album , Stereolab " continues the glorious drones of [ their ] indie work , giving celestial sweep to [ their ] garage @-@ rock organ pumping and rhythm @-@ guitar strumming " . In the U.K. it was released on Duophonic Ultra High Frequency Disks , which is responsible for domestic releases of Stereolab 's major albums . The year would also see a collaboration with industrial stalwarts Nurse With Wound , in the form of the Crumb Duck EP . 
 = = = 1994 – 2001 = = = 
 On 8 January 1994 , Stereolab achieved their first chart entry when 1993 EP Jenny <unk> entered at number 75 on the UK Singles Chart . ( Over the next three years , four more releases by the band would appear on this chart , ending with the EP Miss Modular in 1997 . ) With their 1994 album , Mars Audiac Quintet , Stereolab focused more on pop and less on rock , resulting in what AllMusic described as " what may be the group 's most accessible , tightly @-@ written album " . Mars Audiac Quintet makes heavy use of vintage electronic instruments , and also contains the single " Ping Pong " , which gained press coverage for its allegedly explicitly Marxist lyrics . After releasing a 1995 collection of singles and B @-@ sides called <unk> <unk> : Switched On , Vol . 2 , Stereolab followed with an EP titled Music for the Amorphous Body Study Center . This EP was their musical contribution to an interactive art exhibit put on in collaboration with New York City artist Charles Long . 
 Stereolab 's 1996 album , Emperor Tomato Ketchup , was a critical success and was played heavily on college radio . A record that " captivated alternative rock " , it represented Stereolab 's " high @-@ water mark " according to music journalists Tom Moon and Joshua Klein , respectively . Krautrock techniques were still present , but the band stirred the pot with hip @-@ hop sounds and complex instrumental arrangements . Stephan <unk> of French newspaper Le Monde claimed to see musical influences as diverse as The Velvet Underground , Burt Bacharach , and Françoise Hardy on the album . John McEntire of the band Tortoise assisted with production and played on Emperor Tomato Ketchup . Katharine Gifford was replaced by <unk> Lhote before recording , and bassist Duncan Brown by Richard Harrison after . 
 Also in 1996 , Stereolab collaborated with Herbie Mann on the song " One Note Samba / Surfboard " for the AIDS @-@ Benefit album Red Hot + Rio produced by the Red Hot Organization . 
 Dots and Loops was released in 1997 , and was Stereolab 's first album to enter the Billboard 200 charts , peaking at number 111 . Barney Hoskyns wrote in Rolling Stone that with it the group moved " ever further away from the one @-@ chord <unk> drone @-@ mesh of its early days " toward easy listening and Europop . A review in German newspaper Die Zeit echoed this observation , claiming that in Dots and Loops Stereolab transformed the harder Velvet Underground @-@ like riffs of previous releases into " softer sounds and noisy playfulness " . Contributors to the album once again included John McEntire , along with Sean O 'Hagan of The High Llamas and Jan St. Werner of German electropop duo Mouse on Mars . A second Nurse With Wound collaboration , Simple Headphone Mind , appeared in 1997 , and the third installment of the " Switched On " series , Aluminum Tunes , followed in 1998 . In 1998 , Stereolab collaborated with French avant @-@ garde singer and poet Brigitte Fontaine in single " <unk> " . 
 The band took a break from touring while Gane and Sadier had a child . In 1999 , Stereolab 's next album appeared , titled Cobra and Phases Group Play Voltage in the Milky Night . Co @-@ produced by McEntire and American producer Jim O 'Rourke , the album earned mixed reviews for its lighter sound , and peaked at number 154 on the Billboard 200 . An unsigned NME review said that " this record has far more in common with bad jazz and progressive rock than any experimental art @-@ rock tradition . " In a 1999 The Washington Post article , Mark Jenkins asked Gane about the album 's apparent lack of guitars ; Gane responded , " There 's a lot less upfront , distorted guitar ... But it 's still quite guitar @-@ based music . Every single track has a guitar on it . " Stereolab added a new bassist , Simon Johns , for the Cobra and Phases Group ... tour . 
 The album Sound @-@ Dust followed in 2001 , and rose to number 178 on the Billboard 200 . Again featuring producers McEntire and O 'Rourke , it was more warmly received than Cobra and Phases Group .... Critic Joshua Klein said that " the emphasis this time sounds less on unfocused experimentation and more on melody ... a breezy and welcome return to form for the British band . " Klein also commented that " never has it been harder to discern just what [ Sadier ] is singing , but rarely has her gibberish sounded so pleasant . " 
 = = = 2002 – 2008 = = = 
 In 2002 , as they were planning their next album , the band started building a studio north of Bordeaux , France . October saw the release of ABC Music : The Radio 1 Sessions ; a compilation of BBC Radio 1 sessions . That year also marked an end to Gane and Sadier 's romantic relationship . As the year was coming to a close , tragedy struck . 
 On 9 December , longstanding band member Mary Hansen was killed when hit by a truck while riding her bicycle . Born in Maryborough , Queensland , Australia , Hansen earned the most attention for her vocal work with Stereolab , although she also played the guitar and keyboards . The music journalist Pierre <unk> said that Hansen 's " playful nature and mischievous sense of humour came through in the way she approached the backing vocals she contributed to Stereolab and the distinctive harmonies she created with Sadier . " For the next few months , Stereolab lay dormant as the members grieved . They eventually decided to continue ; as Sadier explained in a 2004 interview : " Losing Mary is still incredibly painful ... But it 's also an opportunity to transform and move on . It 's a new version . We 've always had new versions , people coming in and out . That 's life . " ( Future album and concert reviews would mention the effects of Hansen 's absence . ) In a 2004 interview , Sadier said that " Our dedication to her on the album [ 2004 's Margerine Eclipse ] says , ' We will love you till the end ' , meaning of our lives . I 'm not religious , but I feel Mary 's energy is still around somewhere . It didn 't just disappear . " 
 The 2003 EP Instant 0 in the Universe was recorded in France , and was Stereolab 's first release following Hansen 's death . According to music journalist Jim DeRogatis , the EP marked a return to their earlier , harder sound — " free from the pseudo @-@ funk moves and avant @-@ garde tinkering that had been inspired by Chicago producer Jim O 'Rourke " . That year , Sadier 's side @-@ project , Monade , released its debut album Socialisme Ou Barbarie : The Bedroom Recordings . Both the name of the group and the title of the album are references to the work of Greek @-@ French intellectual Cornelius Castoriadis . 
 The album Margerine Eclipse followed in 2004 with generally positive reviews , and peaked at number 174 on the US Billboard 200 . The track " Feel and Triple " was written in tribute to Hansen ; according to Sadier " I was reflecting on my years with her ... reflecting on how we sometimes found it hard to express the love we had for one another . " The Observer 's Molloy Woodcraft awarded the album four out of five stars , and described Sadier 's vocal performance as " life- and love @-@ affirming " , and the record as a whole as " Complex and catchy , bold and beatific . " Kelefa Sanneh argued in Rolling Stone that Margerine Eclipse was " full of familiar noises and aimless melodies " . Margerine Eclipse was Stereolab 's last record to be released on American label Elektra Records , which shut down that same year . Future material would be released on Too Pure , the same label which had released some of the band 's earliest material . 
 Margerine Eclipse was followed by <unk> from the Anti @-@ Sun ; a 2005 three @-@ CD and one @-@ DVD retrospective of the group 's rarer material . Monade 's second album , A Few Steps More , also appeared that year . In 2005 and 2006 , Stereolab released six limited @-@ edition singles which were later released as a collection in Fab Four Suture , and contained material which Mark Jenkins thought continued the brisker sound of the band 's post @-@ Hansen work . Serene Velocity , a " best @-@ of " compilation focusing on the band 's Elektra years , was released in late 2006 . By June 2007 , Stereolab 's lineup comprised Tim Gane , Lætitia Sadier , Andy Ramsay , Simon Johns , Dominic Jeffrey , Joseph Watson , and Joseph Walters . The band had finished the production of their next album , entitled Chemical Chords , which was released in August 2008 on the 4AD label . The release of the album was followed by an autumn tour of Europe and the United States . 
 = = = 2009 – present = = = 
 They toured Australia in February 2009 as part of the St Jerome 's Laneway Festival . In April the same year , manager Martin Pike announced a pause in the band 's career together for the time being . After 19 years , he said that they felt it was time to take a rest and move on to new projects . 
 In November 2010 , the band released Not Music , a collection of unreleased material recorded at the same time as Chemical Chords . 
 At a performance on 21 June 2013 at the All Tomorrow 's Parties festival held at Pontins in Camber Sands , Cavern Of Anti @-@ Matter ( a trio featuring former Stereolab members Tim Gane and Joe Dilworth ) were joined onstage by Lætitia Sadier for a performance of " Blue Milk " ( from Cobra and Phases Group Play Voltage in the Milky Night ) , thus effecting a partial Stereolab reunion . The song is mentioned repeatedly in the festival programme as being highly influential on the work of festival curators Deerhunter , and band member Bradford Cox also joined the group onstage for this performance . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Stereolab 's music combines a droning rock sound with lounge instrumentals , overlaid with sing @-@ song female vocals and pop melodies . Their records are heavily influenced by the " motorik " technique of 1970s krautrock groups such as Neu ! and Faust . Tim Gane has supported the comparison : " Neu ! did minimalism and drones , but in a very pop way . " Stereolab 's style also incorporates easy @-@ listening music of the 1950s and ' 60s . Said Joshua Klein in The Washington Post , " Years before everyone else caught on , Stereolab was referencing the 1970s German bands Can and Neu ! , the Mexican lounge music master Esquivel and the decidedly <unk> Burt Bacharach . " The band 's music is also associated with genres such as art pop , indie pop , indie rock , post @-@ rock and experimental rock . 
 The band make use of vintage analog electronic instruments such as the Farfisa and Vox organs , and the Moog synthesizer , which was featured prominently on 1994 's Mars Audiac Quintet . Gane has praised these older instruments for their superior controllability : " We use the older effects because they 're more direct , more extreme , and they 're more like plasticine : you can shape them into loads of things . " Funk , jazz , and Brazilian music were inspirations , and the sounds of minimalist composers Philip Glass and Steve Reich can be found on 1999 's Cobra and Phases Group .... Several critics have commented that the band 's later work , like Instant 0 in the Universe ( 2003 ) and Margerine Eclipse ( 2004 ) , sound similar to their guitar @-@ driven earlier style . 
 Lætitia Sadier 's French and English vocals have been a part of Stereolab 's sound since the beginning . She writes the group 's lyrics , which tend to lean towards Marxist social commentary rather than " affairs of the heart " ( in the opinion of music journalist Simon Reynolds ) . In reference to Sadier 's laid @-@ back delivery , Peter Shapiro wrote facetiously in The Wire that she " display [ ed ] all the emotional histrionics of Nico " . Sometimes Sadier will just sing wordlessly along with the music . Before Mary Hansen 's death in 2002 , she and Sadier would often trade vocals back @-@ and @-@ forth in a singsong manner that has been described as " eerie " and " hypnotic " . Critic Jim Harrington commented that Hansen 's absence is noticeable on live performances of Stereolab 's older tracks , and that their newer songs could have benefited from her backing vocals . 
 In interviews , Gane and Sadier have discussed their musical philosophy . According to Gane " to be unique was more important than to be good . " On the subject of being too obscure , he said in a 1996 interview that " maybe the area where we 're on dodgy ground , is this idea that you need great knowledge [ of ] esoteric music to understand what we 're doing . " Sadier responded to Gane , saying that she " think [ s ] we have achieved a music that will make sense to a lot of people whether they know about Steve Reich or not . " The duo were up @-@ front about their desire to grow the group 's sound : for Gane , " otherwise it just sounds like what other people are doing , " and for Sadier , " you trust that there is more and that it can be done more interesting . " 
 = = = On stage = = = 
 Stereolab toured regularly to support their album releases . In a 1996 The Washington Post gig review , Mark Jenkins wrote that Stereolab started out favoring an " easy @-@ listening syncopation " , but eventually reverted to a " messier , more urgent sound " characteristic of their earlier performances . In another review Jenkins said that the band 's live songs " frequently veer [ ed ] into more cacophonous , guitar @-@ dominated territory " , in contrast to lighter albums like Cobra and Phases Group .... In the Minneapolis Star Tribune Jon Bream compared the band 's live sound to feedback @-@ driven rock bands like The Velvet Underground , Sonic Youth and My Bloody Valentine . Several critics have said that Stereolab lacked stage presence , arguing that Sadier 's vocal delivery was too subdued and that the band tended to play instead of perform its music . Regarding being onstage , Gane has said that " I don 't like to be the center of attention ... I just get into the music and am not really aware of the people there . That 's my way of getting through it . " 
 = = Lyrics and titles = = 
 Stereolab 's music is politically and philosophically charged . Lætitia Sadier , who writes the group 's lyrics , has reportedly been inspired by her anger at the Iraq War . The Surrealist and Situationist cultural and political movements were also influences , as noted by Sadier and Gane in a 1999 Salon.com interview . Stewart Mason commented in an AllMusic review that the lyrics from the 1997 song " Miss Modular " " sound influenced by the Situationist theory of the ' spectacle ' . " When asked to explain her intentions in a 1991 Melody Maker interview , Sadier responded that " Basically I want to change the world . I want to make people think about how they live every day , shake them a bit . " 
 Critics have seen Marxist allusions in the band 's lyrics , and several have gone so far as to call the band members themselves Marxist . " Ping Pong " , a single included on Mars Audiac Quintet ( 1994 ) , has been put forward as evidence . In the song , Sadier sings " about capitalism 's cruel cycles of slump and recovery " with lyrics that constitute " a plainspoken explanation of one of the central tenets of Marxian economic analysis " ( said critics Simon Reynolds and Stewart Mason , respectively ) . The song opens with the lines : 
 It 's alright ' cause the historical pattern has shown , 
 How the economical cycle tends to revolve , 
 In a round of decades three stages stand out in a loop , 
 A slump and war then peel back to square one and back for more . 
 Band members have resisted attempts to link the group and its music to Marxism . In a 1999 interview , Gane stated that " none of us are Marxists ... I 've never even read Marx . " Although Gane admitted that his partner 's lyrics touch on political topics , he argued that they do not cross the line into " sloganeering " . Sadier herself has mentioned that she has read very little Marx . In contrast , Cornelius Castoriadis , a radical political philosopher but strong critic of Marxism , has been mentioned as a marking influence in her thinking . Her side project 's name ( Monade ) and its first album 's title ( Socialisme ou Barbarie ) are also references to the work of Castoriadis . 
 Stereolab 's album and song titles occasionally reference avant @-@ garde political groups and artists . Gane said that the title of their 1999 album Cobra and Phases Group Play Voltage in the Milky Night contains the names of two Surrealist organizations , " <unk> " and " Phases Group " . The title of the first song on Dots and Loops , " Brakhage " , is a nod to experimental filmmaker Stan Brakhage . Other examples are the 1992 compilation Switched On , named after a 1969 Wendy Carlos album , and the 1992 single " John Cage Bubblegum " , named after experimental composer John Cage . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stereolab have been called " one of the most influential alternative bands of the ' 90s " , and one of " the decade 's most innovative British bands . " Simon Reynolds commented in Rolling Stone that the group 's earlier records form " an endlessly seductive body of work that sounds always the same , always different . " In The Wire , Peter Shapiro compared the band favorably to Britpop bands Oasis and Blur , and defended their music against the charge that it is " nothing but the sum total of its arcane reference points . " Stereolab were one of the first groups to be called post @-@ rock — in a 1996 article , journalist Angela Lewis applied the " new term " to Stereolab and three other bands who have connections to the group . The band 's 1996 album Emperor Tomato Ketchup , their " high @-@ water mark " according to critic Joshua Klein , was a critical success and underground hit . Stereolab have also received negative press . Barney Hoskyns questioned the longevity of their music in a 1996 Mojo review , saying that their records " sound more like arid experiments than music born of emotional need . " In The Guardian , Dave Simpson stated : " With their borrowings from early , obscure Kraftwerk and hip obtuse sources , [ Stereolab ] sound like a band of rock critics rather than musicians . " Lætitia Sadier 's vocals were cited by author Stuart Shea as often being " indecipherable . " 
 A variety of artists , musical and otherwise , have collaborated with Stereolab . In 1995 the group teamed up with sculptor Charles Long for an interactive art show in New York City , for which Long provided the exhibits and Stereolab the music . They have released tracks by and toured with post @-@ rock band Tortoise , while John McEntire of Tortoise has in turn worked on several Stereolab albums . In the 1990s Stereolab and veteran industrial band Nurse With Wound released two limited @-@ edition records together ; both contained Nurse With Wound remixes of original tracks provided by Stereolab . 
 Stylistically , music journalist J. D. Considine credits the band for anticipating and driving the late 1990s revival of vintage analog instruments among indie rock bands . Indie rock band Pavement ( who also toured with Stereolab ) acknowledged the group 's sound on their song " Half A Canyon . " Stereolab alumni have also founded bands of their own . Guitarist Sean O 'Hagan went on to form The High Llamas , while keyboardist Katharine Gifford created Snowpony with a former member of My Bloody Valentine . Sadier herself has released three albums with her four @-@ piece side @-@ project Monade , whose sound Mark Jenkins called a " little more Parisian " than Stereolab 's . Australian band <unk> sampled " <unk> 26 " from Emperor Tomato Ketchup on their debut album and going as far as using Andy Ramsay to mix and master their reunion album " Time equals Function " . 
 Despite earning critical acclaim and a sizable fanbase , commercial success eluded the group . Early in their career , their 1993 EP Jenny <unk> entered the UK Singles Chart , but financial issues prevented the band from printing enough records to satisfy demand . When Elektra Records was closed down by Warner Bros. Records in 2004 , Stereolab was dropped along with many other artists , reportedly because of poor sales . Since then , Stereolab 's self @-@ owned label Duophonic has inked a worldwide distribution deal with independent label Too Pure . Through Duophonic the band both licenses their music and releases it directly ( depending on geographic market ) . According to Tim Gane , " ... we license our recordings and just give them to people , then we don 't have to ask for permission if we want to use it . We just want to be in control of our own music . " 
 Members of US band ! ! ! have formed <unk> , their tribute to the group . <unk> are supporting ! ! ! on their current European tour ( February 2016 ) . 
 Artists covering Stereolab 's songs have included Iron & Wine ( " Peng ! 33 " ) , Editors ( " French Disko " ) , The <unk> ( " French Disko " ) , and The Flowers of Hell ( " Super @-@ Electric " ) 
 = = Selected discography = = 
 Stereolab released dozens of studio albums , EPs , and singles over the years . They made it a practice to make almost all of their more obscure material widely available through compilations . 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Peng ! ( 1992 ) , Too Pure / American 
 Transient Random @-@ Noise Bursts with Announcements ( 1993 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Mars Audiac Quintet ( 1994 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Emperor Tomato Ketchup ( 1996 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Dots and Loops ( 1997 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Cobra and Phases Group Play Voltage in the Milky Night ( 1999 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Sound @-@ Dust ( 2001 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Margerine Eclipse ( 2004 ) , Duophonic / Elektra 
 Chemical Chords ( 2008 ) , Duophonic / 4AD 
 Not Music ( 2010 ) , Duophonic / Drag City 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 Switched On ( 1992 ) , Too Pure / Slumberland 
 <unk> <unk> : Switched On , Vol . 2 ( 1995 ) , Duophonic / Drag City 
 Aluminum Tunes : Switched On , Vol . 3 ( 1998 ) , Duophonic / Drag City 
 ABC Music : The Radio 1 Sessions ( 2002 ) , Strange Fruit / Koch 
 <unk> from the Anti @-@ Sun ( 2005 ) , Duophonic / Too Pure 
 Fab Four Suture ( 2006 ) , Duophonic / Too Pure 
 Serene Velocity : A Stereolab Anthology ( 2006 ) , Duophonic / Elektra / Rhino 
 = Alien Rage = 
 Alien Rage is a science fiction first @-@ person shooter video game for Microsoft Windows , Xbox 360 ( through Xbox Live Arcade ) , and PlayStation 3 ( through PlayStation Network ) . Alien Rage was developed by the Bydgoszcz studio of Polish developer CI Games , then known as City Interactive , using Unreal Engine 3 . The game has single player and competitive multiplayer modes . In its single player campaign , players are put in control of an elite soldier named Jack . Jack is sent to destroy a mining facility and the aliens within it after the aliens turned against and killed the humans that they had shared the facility with . 
 Announced as Alien Fear in April 2012 , the game was renamed to Alien Rage in May of the following year . The game was released on 24 September 2013 for Windows , 18 October 2013 for the Xbox 360 , and 21 October 2013 for the PlayStation 3 . Alien Rage was met with mixed to negative reviews upon release , with critics viewing the game as generic and prone to major glitches . 
 = = Development = = 
 Alien Rage was first announced in early April 2012 , under the name Alien Fear . The game was to be developed using Unreal Engine 3 by City Interactive 's Bydgoszcz Studio , and would have a cooperative gameplay ( co @-@ op ) mode . The first screenshots from the game were released two months later , in June 2012 . In May 2013 the game 's name was changed to Alien Rage , and two months later it was announced that the game would be released on the personal computer , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 on 24 September 2013 . The game was eventually released on 24 September 2013 for Windows , 18 October 2013 for the Xbox 360 , and 21 October 2013 for the PlayStation 3 , with and ESRB rating of Mature . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Alien Rage is a first @-@ person shooter , in which players fight through several linear levels , killing a variety of aliens . At the end of every few levels , players fight a larger alien in a boss fight . Players score points by killing a large number of aliens in a short period of time , or by killing them in special ways , such as by using explosions or shooting them in the head . These points can be used to upgrade the player character , for example by boosting his resistance to damage or by increasing the amount of ammunition that he is able to carry . Players are able to carry two weapons at a time , and also have a pistol with unlimited ammunition . The player character can use both human- and alien @-@ manufactured weapons in the game , and alien weapons use a cool @-@ down period instead of having to reload . Weapons in the game include assault rifles , sniper rifles , shotguns , rocket launchers , and miniguns . The game is intentionally difficult ; its easiest difficulty level is called " challenging " , and the next easiest difficulty level is called " hard " . 
 The game also offers competitive multiplayer . There are two modes – deathmatch and team deathmatch – and a small number of maps . Cooperative gameplay , which was mentioned in the game 's initial announcement , did not make it into the final game . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Alien Rage takes place on an asteroid which humans and an alien species known as <unk> were jointly mining for Promethium , a highly efficient source of energy . After the <unk> turn on the humans and wipe the miners out , Jack , the player character , is sent to the mining facility to kill the aliens and destroy the facility . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Alien Rage received average to poor reviews upon release . At Metacritic , a video game review aggregator , the Windows version of the game received an average score of 52 out of 100 , based on 27 reviews , while the Xbox 360 version revived a score of 46 , based on 10 reviews . 
 The game was heavily criticized for its lack of originality . Daniel Shannon of GameSpot remarked that " If you have played a first @-@ person shooter made in the last 10 years , then you have already experienced most of what Alien Rage has to offer . " , and continued that " You 've seen these weapons before , and you 've shot these enemies before " . Reviewers especially took issue with the lack of creativity in level design , which Destructoid 's Jim Sterling called " tedious corridors full of identical , monotonous , brainless combat encounters " . Hardcore Gamer 's Nikola <unk> commented that several of the levels he played through were visually indistinct from one another , before saying that " level after level of redundant action and repetitive encounters ultimately drag the game down " . Critics also noted that the game had a number of technical issues . Jim Sterling of Destructoid ran into two situations where glitches would not allow him to progress without restarting the level , while Sam Turner of The Digital Fix experienced dramatic drops in frame rate during gameplay , and crashed to desktop several times . 
 The game 's multiplayer experience was received better than its single player campaign . Writing for Gaming Nexus , Jeff Kintner said that the " multiplayer is fun , if a bit repetitive " . While Kintner expressed a desire for additional , objective @-@ based , types of multiplayer , he praised the team deathmatch mode 's intensity . GameSpot 's Daniel Shannon also commented on the limited number of multiplayer options , but went on to say that " For what it 's worth , the action is fast @-@ paced , and the maps are well designed for a balanced multiplayer experience . " 
 = Immune system = 
 The immune system is a host defense system comprising many biological structures and processes within an organism that protects against disease . To function properly , an immune system must detect a wide variety of agents , known as pathogens , from viruses to parasitic worms , and distinguish them from the organism 's own healthy tissue . In many species , the immune system can be classified into subsystems , such as the innate immune system versus the adaptive immune system , or humoral immunity versus cell @-@ mediated immunity . In humans , the blood – brain barrier , blood – cerebrospinal fluid barrier , and similar fluid – brain barriers separate the peripheral immune system from the <unk> system which protects the brain . 
 Pathogens can rapidly evolve and adapt , and thereby avoid detection and neutralization by the immune system ; however , multiple defense mechanisms have also evolved to recognize and neutralize pathogens . Even simple unicellular organisms such as bacteria possess a rudimentary immune system , in the form of enzymes that protect against bacteriophage infections . Other basic immune mechanisms evolved in ancient eukaryotes and remain in their modern descendants , such as plants and invertebrates . These mechanisms include phagocytosis , antimicrobial peptides called defensins , and the complement system . Jawed vertebrates , including humans , have even more sophisticated defense mechanisms , including the ability to adapt over time to recognize specific pathogens more efficiently . Adaptive ( or acquired ) immunity creates immunological memory after an initial response to a specific pathogen , leading to an enhanced response to subsequent encounters with that same pathogen . This process of acquired immunity is the basis of vaccination . 
 Disorders of the immune system can result in autoimmune diseases , inflammatory diseases and cancer . Immunodeficiency occurs when the immune system is less active than normal , resulting in recurring and life @-@ threatening infections . In humans , immunodeficiency can either be the result of a genetic disease such as severe combined immunodeficiency , acquired conditions such as HIV / AIDS , or the use of immunosuppressive medication . In contrast , autoimmunity results from a hyperactive immune system attacking normal tissues as if they were foreign organisms . Common autoimmune diseases include Hashimoto 's thyroiditis , rheumatoid arthritis , diabetes mellitus type 1 , and systemic lupus erythematosus . Immunology covers the study of all aspects of the immune system . 
 = = History of immunology = = 
 Immunology is a science that examines the structure and function of the immune system . It originates from medicine and early studies on the causes of immunity to disease . The earliest known reference to immunity was during the plague of Athens in 430 BC . Thucydides noted that people who had recovered from a previous bout of the disease could nurse the sick without contracting the illness a second time . In the 18th century , Pierre @-@ Louis Moreau de Maupertuis made experiments with scorpion venom and observed that certain dogs and mice were immune to this venom . This and other observations of acquired immunity were later exploited by Louis Pasteur in his development of vaccination and his proposed germ theory of disease . Pasteur 's theory was in direct opposition to contemporary theories of disease , such as the miasma theory . It was not until Robert Koch 's 1891 proofs , for which he was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1905 , that microorganisms were confirmed as the cause of infectious disease . Viruses were confirmed as human pathogens in 1901 , with the discovery of the yellow fever virus by Walter Reed . 
 Immunology made a great advance towards the end of the 19th century , through rapid developments , in the study of humoral immunity and cellular immunity . Particularly important was the work of Paul Ehrlich , who proposed the side @-@ chain theory to explain the specificity of the antigen @-@ antibody reaction ; his contributions to the understanding of humoral immunity were recognized by the award of a Nobel Prize in 1908 , which was jointly awarded to the founder of cellular immunology , Elie Metchnikoff . 
 = = Layered defense = = 
 The immune system protects organisms from infection with layered defenses of increasing specificity . In simple terms , physical barriers prevent pathogens such as bacteria and viruses from entering the organism . If a pathogen breaches these barriers , the innate immune system provides an immediate , but non @-@ specific response . Innate immune systems are found in all plants and animals . If pathogens successfully evade the innate response , vertebrates possess a second layer of protection , the adaptive immune system , which is activated by the innate response . Here , the immune system adapts its response during an infection to improve its recognition of the pathogen . This improved response is then retained after the pathogen has been eliminated , in the form of an immunological memory , and allows the adaptive immune system to mount faster and stronger attacks each time this pathogen is encountered . 
 Both innate and adaptive immunity depend on the ability of the immune system to distinguish between self and non @-@ self molecules . In immunology , self molecules are those components of an organism 's body that can be distinguished from foreign substances by the immune system . Conversely , non @-@ self molecules are those recognized as foreign molecules . One class of non @-@ self molecules are called antigens ( short for antibody generators ) and are defined as substances that bind to specific immune receptors and elicit an immune response . 
 = = Innate immune system = = 
 Microorganisms or toxins that successfully enter an organism encounter the cells and mechanisms of the innate immune system . The innate response is usually triggered when microbes are identified by pattern recognition receptors , which recognize components that are conserved among broad groups of microorganisms , or when damaged , injured or stressed cells send out alarm signals , many of which ( but not all ) are recognized by the same receptors as those that recognize pathogens . Innate immune defenses are non @-@ specific , meaning these systems respond to pathogens in a generic way . This system does not confer long @-@ lasting immunity against a pathogen . The innate immune system is the dominant system of host defense in most organisms . 
 = = = Surface barriers = = = 
 Several barriers protect organisms from infection , including mechanical , chemical , and biological barriers . The waxy cuticle of many leaves , the exoskeleton of insects , the shells and membranes of externally deposited eggs , and skin are examples of mechanical barriers that are the first line of defense against infection . However , as organisms cannot be completely sealed from their environments , other systems act to protect body openings such as the lungs , intestines , and the genitourinary tract . In the lungs , coughing and sneezing mechanically eject pathogens and other irritants from the respiratory tract . The flushing action of tears and urine also mechanically expels pathogens , while mucus secreted by the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract serves to trap and entangle microorganisms . 
 Chemical barriers also protect against infection . The skin and respiratory tract secrete antimicrobial peptides such as the β @-@ defensins . Enzymes such as lysozyme and phospholipase A2 in saliva , tears , and breast milk are also antibacterials . Vaginal secretions serve as a chemical barrier following menarche , when they become slightly acidic , while semen contains defensins and zinc to kill pathogens . In the stomach , gastric acid and proteases serve as powerful chemical defenses against ingested pathogens . 
 Within the genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts , commensal flora serve as biological barriers by competing with pathogenic bacteria for food and space and , in some cases , by changing the conditions in their environment , such as pH or available iron . This reduces the probability that pathogens will reach sufficient numbers to cause illness . However , since most antibiotics non @-@ specifically target bacteria and do not affect fungi , oral antibiotics can lead to an " overgrowth " of fungi and cause conditions such as a vaginal candidiasis ( a yeast infection ) . There is good evidence that re @-@ introduction of probiotic flora , such as pure cultures of the <unk> normally found in unpasteurized yogurt , helps restore a healthy balance of microbial populations in intestinal infections in children and encouraging preliminary data in studies on bacterial gastroenteritis , inflammatory bowel diseases , urinary tract infection and post @-@ surgical infections . 
 = = = Inflammation = = = 
 Inflammation is one of the first responses of the immune system to infection . The symptoms of inflammation are redness , swelling , heat , and pain , which are caused by increased blood flow into tissue . Inflammation is produced by eicosanoids and cytokines , which are released by injured or infected cells . <unk> include prostaglandins that produce fever and the dilation of blood vessels associated with inflammation , and leukotrienes that attract certain white blood cells ( leukocytes ) . Common cytokines include interleukins that are responsible for communication between white blood cells ; chemokines that promote chemotaxis ; and interferons that have anti @-@ viral effects , such as shutting down protein synthesis in the host cell . Growth factors and cytotoxic factors may also be released . These cytokines and other chemicals recruit immune cells to the site of infection and promote healing of any damaged tissue following the removal of pathogens . 
 = = = Complement system = = = 
 The complement system is a biochemical cascade that attacks the surfaces of foreign cells . It contains over 20 different proteins and is named for its ability to " complement " the killing of pathogens by antibodies . Complement is the major humoral component of the innate immune response . Many species have complement systems , including non @-@ mammals like plants , fish , and some invertebrates . 
 In humans , this response is activated by complement binding to antibodies that have attached to these microbes or the binding of complement proteins to carbohydrates on the surfaces of microbes . This recognition signal triggers a rapid killing response . The speed of the response is a result of signal amplification that occurs following sequential proteolytic activation of complement molecules , which are also proteases . After complement proteins initially bind to the microbe , they activate their protease activity , which in turn activates other complement proteases , and so on . This produces a catalytic cascade that amplifies the initial signal by controlled positive feedback . The cascade results in the production of peptides that attract immune cells , increase vascular permeability , and <unk> ( coat ) the surface of a pathogen , marking it for destruction . This deposition of complement can also kill cells directly by disrupting their plasma membrane . 
 = = = Cellular barriers = = = 
 <unk> ( white blood cells ) act like independent , single @-@ celled organisms and are the second arm of the innate immune system . The innate leukocytes include the phagocytes ( macrophages , neutrophils , and dendritic cells ) , innate lymphoid cells , mast cells , eosinophils , basophils , and natural killer cells . These cells identify and eliminate pathogens , either by attacking larger pathogens through contact or by engulfing and then killing microorganisms . Innate cells are also important mediators in lymphoid organ development and the activation of the adaptive immune system . 
 Phagocytosis is an important feature of cellular innate immunity performed by cells called ' phagocytes ' that engulf , or eat , pathogens or particles . Phagocytes generally patrol the body searching for pathogens , but can be called to specific locations by cytokines . Once a pathogen has been engulfed by a phagocyte , it becomes trapped in an intracellular vesicle called a phagosome , which subsequently fuses with another vesicle called a lysosome to form a phagolysosome . The pathogen is killed by the activity of digestive enzymes or following a respiratory burst that releases free radicals into the phagolysosome . Phagocytosis evolved as a means of acquiring nutrients , but this role was extended in phagocytes to include engulfment of pathogens as a defense mechanism . Phagocytosis probably represents the oldest form of host defense , as phagocytes have been identified in both vertebrate and invertebrate animals . 
 Neutrophils and macrophages are phagocytes that travel throughout the body in pursuit of invading pathogens . Neutrophils are normally found in the bloodstream and are the most abundant type of phagocyte , normally representing 50 % to 60 % of the total circulating leukocytes . During the acute phase of inflammation , particularly as a result of bacterial infection , neutrophils migrate toward the site of inflammation in a process called chemotaxis , and are usually the first cells to arrive at the scene of infection . Macrophages are versatile cells that reside within tissues and : ( i ) produce a wide array of chemicals including enzymes , complement proteins , and cytokines , while they can also ( ii ) act as scavengers that rid the body of worn @-@ out cells and other debris , and as antigen @-@ presenting cells that activate the adaptive immune system . 
 Dendritic cells ( DC ) are phagocytes in tissues that are in contact with the external environment ; therefore , they are located mainly in the skin , nose , lungs , stomach , and intestines . They are named for their resemblance to neuronal dendrites , as both have many spine @-@ like projections , but dendritic cells are in no way connected to the nervous system . Dendritic cells serve as a link between the bodily tissues and the innate and adaptive immune systems , as they present antigens to T cells , one of the key cell types of the adaptive immune system . 
 Mast cells reside in connective tissues and mucous membranes , and regulate the inflammatory response . They are most often associated with allergy and anaphylaxis . <unk> and eosinophils are related to neutrophils . They secrete chemical mediators that are involved in defending against parasites and play a role in allergic reactions , such as asthma . Natural killer ( NK cells ) cells are leukocytes that attack and destroy tumor cells , or cells that have been infected by viruses . 
 = = = Natural killer cells = = = 
 Natural killer cells , or NK cells , are a component of the innate immune system which does not directly attack invading microbes . Rather , NK cells destroy compromised host cells , such as tumor cells or virus @-@ infected cells , recognizing such cells by a condition known as " missing self . " This term describes cells with low levels of a cell @-@ surface marker called MHC I ( major histocompatibility complex ) – a situation that can arise in viral infections of host cells . They were named " natural killer " because of the initial notion that they do not require activation in order to kill cells that are " missing self . " For many years it was unclear how NK cells recognize tumor cells and infected cells . It is now known that the MHC makeup on the surface of those cells is altered and the NK cells become activated through recognition of " missing self " . Normal body cells are not recognized and attacked by NK cells because they express intact self MHC antigens . Those MHC antigens are recognized by killer cell immunoglobulin receptors ( <unk> ) which essentially put the brakes on NK cells . 
 = = Adaptive immune system = = 
 The adaptive immune system evolved in early vertebrates and allows for a stronger immune response as well as immunological memory , where each pathogen is " remembered " by a signature antigen . The adaptive immune response is antigen @-@ specific and requires the recognition of specific " non @-@ self " antigens during a process called antigen presentation . Antigen specificity allows for the generation of responses that are tailored to specific pathogens or pathogen @-@ infected cells . The ability to mount these tailored responses is maintained in the body by " memory cells " . Should a pathogen infect the body more than once , these specific memory cells are used to quickly eliminate it . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The cells of the adaptive immune system are special types of leukocytes , called lymphocytes . B cells and T cells are the major types of lymphocytes and are derived from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow . B cells are involved in the humoral immune response , whereas T cells are involved in cell @-@ mediated immune response . 
 Both B cells and T cells carry receptor molecules that recognize specific targets . T cells recognize a " non @-@ self " target , such as a pathogen , only after antigens ( small fragments of the pathogen ) have been processed and presented in combination with a " self " receptor called a major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) molecule . There are two major subtypes of T cells : the killer T cell and the helper T cell . In addition there are regulatory T cells which have a role in modulating immune response . Killer T cells only recognize antigens coupled to Class I MHC molecules , while helper T cells and regulatory T cells only recognize antigens coupled to Class II MHC molecules . These two mechanisms of antigen presentation reflect the different roles of the two types of T cell . A third , minor subtype are the γδ T cells that recognize intact antigens that are not bound to MHC receptors . 
 In contrast , the B cell antigen @-@ specific receptor is an antibody molecule on the B cell surface , and recognizes whole pathogens without any need for antigen processing . Each lineage of B cell expresses a different antibody , so the complete set of B cell antigen receptors represent all the antibodies that the body can manufacture . 
 = = = = Killer T cells = = = = 
 Killer T cells are a sub @-@ group of T cells that kill cells that are infected with viruses ( and other pathogens ) , or are otherwise damaged or dysfunctional . As with B cells , each type of T cell recognizes a different antigen . Killer T cells are activated when their T cell receptor ( TCR ) binds to this specific antigen in a complex with the MHC Class I receptor of another cell . Recognition of this MHC : antigen complex is aided by a co @-@ receptor on the T cell , called CD8 . The T cell then travels throughout the body in search of cells where the MHC I receptors bear this antigen . When an activated T cell contacts such cells , it releases <unk> , such as <unk> , which form pores in the target cell 's plasma membrane , allowing ions , water and toxins to enter . The entry of another toxin called <unk> ( a protease ) induces the target cell to undergo apoptosis . T cell killing of host cells is particularly important in preventing the replication of viruses . T cell activation is tightly controlled and generally requires a very strong MHC / antigen activation signal , or additional activation signals provided by " helper " T cells ( see below ) . 
 = = = = Helper T cells = = = = 
 Helper T cells regulate both the innate and adaptive immune responses and help determine which immune responses the body makes to a particular pathogen . These cells have no cytotoxic activity and do not kill infected cells or clear pathogens directly . They instead control the immune response by directing other cells to perform these tasks . 
 Helper T cells express T cell receptors ( TCR ) that recognize antigen bound to Class II MHC molecules . The MHC : antigen complex is also recognized by the helper cell 's CD4 co @-@ receptor , which recruits molecules inside the T cell ( e.g. , <unk> ) that are responsible for the T cell 's activation . Helper T cells have a weaker association with the MHC : antigen complex than observed for killer T cells , meaning many receptors ( around 200 – 300 ) on the helper T cell must be bound by an MHC : antigen in order to activate the helper cell , while killer T cells can be activated by engagement of a single MHC : antigen molecule . Helper T cell activation also requires longer duration of engagement with an antigen @-@ presenting cell . The activation of a resting helper T cell causes it to release cytokines that influence the activity of many cell types . Cytokine signals produced by helper T cells enhance the microbicidal function of macrophages and the activity of killer T cells . In addition , helper T cell activation causes an upregulation of molecules expressed on the T cell 's surface , such as CD40 ligand ( also called <unk> ) , which provide extra stimulatory signals typically required to activate antibody @-@ producing B cells . 
 = = = = Gamma delta T cells = = = = 
 Gamma delta T cells ( γδ T cells ) possess an alternative T cell receptor ( TCR ) as opposed to CD4 + and CD8 + ( <unk> ) T cells and share the characteristics of helper T cells , cytotoxic T cells and NK cells . The conditions that produce responses from γδ T cells are not fully understood . Like other ' unconventional ' T cell subsets bearing invariant <unk> , such as <unk> @-@ restricted Natural Killer T cells , γδ T cells straddle the border between innate and adaptive immunity . On one hand , γδ T cells are a component of adaptive immunity as they rearrange TCR genes to produce receptor diversity and can also develop a memory phenotype . On the other hand , the various subsets are also part of the innate immune system , as restricted TCR or NK receptors may be used as pattern recognition receptors . For example , large numbers of human <unk> / <unk> T cells respond within hours to common molecules produced by microbes , and highly restricted <unk> + T cells in epithelia respond to stressed epithelial cells . 
 = = = = B lymphocytes and antibodies = = = = 
 A B cell identifies pathogens when antibodies on its surface bind to a specific foreign antigen . This antigen / antibody complex is taken up by the B cell and processed by proteolysis into peptides . The B cell then displays these antigenic peptides on its surface MHC class II molecules . This combination of MHC and antigen attracts a matching helper T cell , which releases <unk> and activates the B cell . As the activated B cell then begins to divide , its offspring ( plasma cells ) secrete millions of copies of the antibody that recognizes this antigen . These antibodies circulate in blood plasma and lymph , bind to pathogens expressing the antigen and mark them for destruction by complement activation or for uptake and destruction by phagocytes . Antibodies can also neutralize challenges directly , by binding to bacterial toxins or by interfering with the receptors that viruses and bacteria use to infect cells . 
 = = = = Alternative adaptive immune system = = = = 
 Evolution of the adaptive immune system occurred in an ancestor of the jawed vertebrates . Many of the classical molecules of the adaptive immune system ( e.g. , immunoglobulins and T cell receptors ) exist only in jawed vertebrates . However , a distinct lymphocyte @-@ derived molecule has been discovered in primitive jawless vertebrates , such as the lamprey and hagfish . These animals possess a large array of molecules called Variable lymphocyte receptors ( <unk> ) that , like the antigen receptors of jawed vertebrates , are produced from only a small number ( one or two ) of genes . These molecules are believed to bind pathogenic antigens in a similar way to antibodies , and with the same degree of specificity . 
 = = = Immunological memory = = = 
 When B cells and T cells are activated and begin to replicate , some of their offspring become long @-@ lived memory cells . Throughout the lifetime of an animal , these memory cells remember each specific pathogen encountered and can mount a strong response if the pathogen is detected again . This is " adaptive " because it occurs during the lifetime of an individual as an adaptation to infection with that pathogen and prepares the immune system for future challenges . Immunological memory can be in the form of either passive short @-@ term memory or active long @-@ term memory . 
 = = = = Passive memory = = = = 
 Newborn infants have no prior exposure to microbes and are particularly vulnerable to infection . Several layers of passive protection are provided by the mother . During pregnancy , a particular type of antibody , called IgG , is transported from mother to baby directly across the placenta , so human babies have high levels of antibodies even at birth , with the same range of antigen specificities as their mother . Breast milk or colostrum also contains antibodies that are transferred to the gut of the infant and protect against bacterial infections until the newborn can synthesize its own antibodies . This is passive immunity because the fetus does not actually make any memory cells or antibodies — it only borrows them . This passive immunity is usually short @-@ term , lasting from a few days up to several months . In medicine , protective passive immunity can also be transferred artificially from one individual to another via antibody @-@ rich serum . 
 = = = = Active memory and immunization = = = = 
 Long @-@ term active memory is acquired following infection by activation of B and T cells . Active immunity can also be generated artificially , through vaccination . The principle behind vaccination ( also called immunization ) is to introduce an antigen from a pathogen in order to stimulate the immune system and develop specific immunity against that particular pathogen without causing disease associated with that organism . This deliberate induction of an immune response is successful because it exploits the natural specificity of the immune system , as well as its <unk> . With infectious disease remaining one of the leading causes of death in the human population , vaccination represents the most effective manipulation of the immune system mankind has developed . 
 Most viral vaccines are based on live attenuated viruses , while many bacterial vaccines are based on acellular components of micro @-@ organisms , including harmless toxin components . Since many antigens derived from acellular vaccines do not strongly induce the adaptive response , most bacterial vaccines are provided with additional adjuvants that activate the antigen @-@ presenting cells of the innate immune system and maximize immunogenicity . 
 = = Disorders of human immunity = = 
 The immune system is a remarkably effective structure that incorporates specificity , <unk> and adaptation . Failures of host defense do occur , however , and fall into three broad categories : immunodeficiencies , autoimmunity , and <unk> . 
 = = = Immunodeficiencies = = = 
 Immunodeficiencies occur when one or more of the components of the immune system are inactive . The ability of the immune system to respond to pathogens is diminished in both the young and the elderly , with immune responses beginning to decline at around 50 years of age due to <unk> . In developed countries , obesity , alcoholism , and drug use are common causes of poor immune function . However , malnutrition is the most common cause of immunodeficiency in developing countries . Diets lacking sufficient protein are associated with impaired cell @-@ mediated immunity , complement activity , phagocyte function , IgA antibody concentrations , and cytokine production . Additionally , the loss of the thymus at an early age through genetic mutation or surgical removal results in severe immunodeficiency and a high susceptibility to infection . 
 Immunodeficiencies can also be inherited or ' acquired ' . Chronic granulomatous disease , where phagocytes have a reduced ability to destroy pathogens , is an example of an inherited , or congenital , immunodeficiency . AIDS and some types of cancer cause acquired immunodeficiency . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> immune responses comprise the other end of immune dysfunction , particularly the autoimmune disorders . Here , the immune system fails to properly distinguish between self and non @-@ self , and attacks part of the body . Under normal circumstances , many T cells and antibodies react with " self " peptides . One of the functions of specialized cells ( located in the thymus and bone marrow ) is to present young lymphocytes with self antigens produced throughout the body and to eliminate those cells that recognize self @-@ antigens , preventing autoimmunity . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is an immune response that damages the body 's own tissues . They are divided into four classes ( Type I – IV ) based on the mechanisms involved and the time course of the hypersensitive reaction . Type I hypersensitivity is an immediate or anaphylactic reaction , often associated with allergy . Symptoms can range from mild discomfort to death . Type I hypersensitivity is mediated by IgE , which triggers degranulation of mast cells and basophils when cross @-@ linked by antigen . Type II hypersensitivity occurs when antibodies bind to antigens on the patient 's own cells , marking them for destruction . This is also called antibody @-@ dependent ( or cytotoxic ) hypersensitivity , and is mediated by IgG and IgM antibodies . Immune complexes ( aggregations of antigens , complement proteins , and IgG and IgM antibodies ) deposited in various tissues trigger Type III hypersensitivity reactions . Type IV hypersensitivity ( also known as cell @-@ mediated or delayed type hypersensitivity ) usually takes between two and three days to develop . Type IV reactions are involved in many autoimmune and infectious diseases , but may also involve contact dermatitis ( poison ivy ) . These reactions are mediated by T cells , monocytes , and macrophages . 
 = = Other mechanisms and evolution = = 
 It is likely that a multicomponent , adaptive immune system arose with the first vertebrates , as invertebrates do not generate lymphocytes or an antibody @-@ based humoral response . Many species , however , utilize mechanisms that appear to be precursors of these aspects of vertebrate immunity . Immune systems appear even in the structurally most simple forms of life , with bacteria using a unique defense mechanism , called the restriction modification system to protect themselves from viral pathogens , called bacteriophages . Prokaryotes also possess acquired immunity , through a system that uses CRISPR sequences to retain fragments of the genomes of phage that they have come into contact with in the past , which allows them to block virus replication through a form of RNA interference . Offensive elements of the immune systems are also present in unicellular eukaryotes , but studies of their roles in defense are few . 
 Pattern recognition receptors are proteins used by nearly all organisms to identify molecules associated with pathogens . Antimicrobial peptides called defensins are an evolutionarily conserved component of the innate immune response found in all animals and plants , and represent the main form of invertebrate systemic immunity . The complement system and phagocytic cells are also used by most forms of invertebrate life . <unk> and the RNA interference pathway are conserved across all eukaryotes , and are thought to play a role in the immune response to viruses . 
 Unlike animals , plants lack phagocytic cells , but many plant immune responses involve systemic chemical signals that are sent through a plant . Individual plant cells respond to molecules associated with pathogens known as <unk> @-@ associated molecular patterns or <unk> . When a part of a plant becomes infected , the plant produces a localized hypersensitive response , whereby cells at the site of infection undergo rapid apoptosis to prevent the spread of the disease to other parts of the plant . Systemic acquired resistance ( SAR ) is a type of defensive response used by plants that renders the entire plant resistant to a particular infectious agent . RNA silencing mechanisms are particularly important in this systemic response as they can block virus replication . 
 = = Tumor immunology = = 
 Another important role of the immune system is to identify and eliminate tumors . This is called immune surveillance . The transformed cells of tumors express antigens that are not found on normal cells . To the immune system , these antigens appear foreign , and their presence causes immune cells to attack the transformed tumor cells . The antigens expressed by tumors have several sources ; some are derived from oncogenic viruses like human papillomavirus , which causes cervical cancer , while others are the organism 's own proteins that occur at low levels in normal cells but reach high levels in tumor cells . One example is an enzyme called tyrosinase that , when expressed at high levels , transforms certain skin cells ( e.g. melanocytes ) into tumors called <unk> . A third possible source of tumor antigens are proteins normally important for regulating cell growth and survival , that commonly mutate into cancer inducing molecules called oncogenes . 
 The main response of the immune system to tumors is to destroy the abnormal cells using killer T cells , sometimes with the assistance of helper T cells . Tumor antigens are presented on MHC class I molecules in a similar way to viral antigens . This allows killer T cells to recognize the tumor cell as abnormal . NK cells also kill tumorous cells in a similar way , especially if the tumor cells have fewer MHC class I molecules on their surface than normal ; this is a common phenomenon with tumors . Sometimes antibodies are generated against tumor cells allowing for their destruction by the complement system . 
 Clearly , some tumors evade the immune system and go on to become cancers . Tumor cells often have a reduced number of MHC class I molecules on their surface , thus avoiding detection by killer T cells . Some tumor cells also release products that inhibit the immune response ; for example by secreting the cytokine TGF @-@ β , which suppresses the activity of macrophages and lymphocytes . In addition , immunological tolerance may develop against tumor antigens , so the immune system no longer attacks the tumor cells . 
 Paradoxically , macrophages can promote tumor growth when tumor cells send out cytokines that attract macrophages , which then generate cytokines and growth factors that nurture tumor development . In addition , a combination of hypoxia in the tumor and a cytokine produced by macrophages induces tumor cells to decrease production of a protein that blocks metastasis and thereby assists spread of cancer cells . 
 = = Physiological regulation = = 
 Hormones can act as immunomodulators , altering the sensitivity of the immune system . For example , female sex hormones are known <unk> of both adaptive and innate immune responses . Some autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematosus strike women preferentially , and their onset often coincides with puberty . By contrast , male sex hormones such as testosterone seem to be immunosuppressive . Other hormones appear to regulate the immune system as well , most notably prolactin , growth hormone and vitamin D. 
 When a T @-@ cell encounters a foreign pathogen , it extends a vitamin D receptor . This is essentially a signaling device that allows the T @-@ cell to bind to the active form of vitamin D , the steroid hormone calcitriol . T @-@ cells have a symbiotic relationship with vitamin D. Not only does the T @-@ cell extend a vitamin D receptor , in essence asking to bind to the steroid hormone version of vitamin D , calcitriol , but the T @-@ cell expresses the gene <unk> , which is the gene responsible for converting the pre @-@ hormone version of vitamin D , <unk> into the steroid hormone version , calcitriol . Only after binding to calcitriol can T @-@ cells perform their intended function . Other immune system cells that are known to express <unk> and thus activate vitamin D <unk> , are dendritic cells , keratinocytes and macrophages . 
 It is conjectured that a progressive decline in hormone levels with age is partially responsible for weakened immune responses in aging individuals . Conversely , some hormones are regulated by the immune system , notably thyroid hormone activity . The age @-@ related decline in immune function is also related to decreasing vitamin D levels in the elderly . As people age , two things happen that negatively affect their vitamin D levels . First , they stay indoors more due to decreased activity levels . This means that they get less sun and therefore produce less <unk> via UVB radiation . Second , as a person ages the skin becomes less adept at producing vitamin D. 
 = = = Sleep and rest = = = 
 The immune system is affected by sleep and rest , and sleep deprivation is detrimental to immune function . Complex feedback loops involving cytokines , such as interleukin @-@ 1 and tumor necrosis factor @-@ α produced in response to infection , appear to also play a role in the regulation of non @-@ rapid eye movement ( REM ) sleep . Thus the immune response to infection may result in changes to the sleep cycle , including an increase in slow @-@ wave sleep relative to REM sleep . 
 When suffering from sleep deprivation , active immunizations may have a diminished effect and may result in lower antibody production , and a lower immune response , than would be noted in a well @-@ rested individual . Additionally , proteins such as <unk> , which have been shown to be closely intertwined with both T @-@ cell differentiation and our circadian rhythms , can be affected through the disturbance of natural light and dark cycles through instances of sleep deprivation , shift work , etc . As a result , these disruptions can lead to an increase in chronic conditions such as heart disease , chronic pain , and asthma . 
 In addition to the negative consequences of sleep deprivation , sleep and the intertwined circadian system have been shown to have strong regulatory effects on immunological functions affecting both the innate and the adaptive immunity . First , during the early slow @-@ wave @-@ sleep stage , a sudden drop in blood levels of cortisol , epinephrine , and norepinephrine induce increased blood levels of the hormones leptin , pituitary growth hormone , and prolactin . These signals induce a pro @-@ inflammatory state through the production of the pro @-@ inflammatory cytokines interleukin @-@ 1 , interleukin @-@ 12 , TNF @-@ alpha and IFN @-@ gamma . These cytokines then stimulate immune functions such as immune cells activation , proliferation , and differentiation . It is during this time that undifferentiated , or less differentiated , like naïve and central memory T cells , peak ( i.e. during a time of a slowly evolving adaptive immune response ) . In addition to these effects , the milieu of hormones produced at this time ( leptin , pituitary growth hormone , and prolactin ) support the interactions between APCs and T @-@ cells , a shift of the Th1 / Th2 cytokine balance towards one that supports Th1 , an increase in overall Th cell proliferation , and naïve T cell migration to lymph nodes . This milieu is also thought to support the formation of long @-@ lasting immune memory through the initiation of Th1 immune responses . 
 In contrast , during wake periods differentiated effector cells , such as cytotoxic natural killer cells and CTLs ( cytotoxic T lymphocytes ) , peak in order to elicit an effective response against any intruding pathogens . As well during awake active times , anti @-@ inflammatory molecules , such as cortisol and catecholamines , peak . There are two theories as to why the pro @-@ inflammatory state is reserved for sleep time . First , inflammation would cause serious cognitive and physical impairments if it were to occur during wake times . Second , inflammation may occur during sleep times due to the presence of melatonin . Inflammation causes a great deal of oxidative stress and the presence of melatonin during sleep times could actively counteract free radical production during this time . 
 = = = Nutrition and diet = = = 
 <unk> is associated with diseases such as diabetes and obesity , which are known to affect immune function . More moderate malnutrition , as well as certain specific trace mineral and nutrient deficiencies , can also compromise the immune response . 
 Foods rich in certain fatty acids may foster a healthy immune system . Likewise , fetal undernourishment can cause a lifelong impairment of the immune system . 
 = = Manipulation in medicine = = 
 The immune response can be manipulated to suppress unwanted responses resulting from autoimmunity , allergy , and transplant rejection , and to stimulate protective responses against pathogens that largely elude the immune system ( see immunization ) or cancer . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Immunosuppressive drugs are used to control autoimmune disorders or inflammation when excessive tissue damage occurs , and to prevent transplant rejection after an organ transplant . 
 Anti @-@ inflammatory drugs are often used to control the effects of inflammation . Glucocorticoids are the most powerful of these drugs ; however , these drugs can have many undesirable side effects , such as central obesity , hyperglycemia , osteoporosis , and their use must be tightly controlled . Lower doses of anti @-@ inflammatory drugs are often used in conjunction with cytotoxic or immunosuppressive drugs such as methotrexate or azathioprine . <unk> drugs inhibit the immune response by killing dividing cells such as activated T cells . However , the killing is indiscriminate and other constantly dividing cells and their organs are affected , which causes toxic side effects . Immunosuppressive drugs such as <unk> prevent T cells from responding to signals correctly by inhibiting signal transduction pathways . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Cancer immunotherapy covers the medical ways to stimulate the immune system to attack cancer tumours . 
 = = Theoretical approaches to the immune system = = 
 Immunology is strongly experimental in everyday practice but is also characterized by an ongoing theoretical attitude . Many theories have been suggested in immunology from the end of the nineteenth century up to the present time . The end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century saw a battle between " cellular " and " humoral " theories of immunity . According to the cellular theory of immunity , represented in particular by Elie Metchnikoff , it was cells – more precisely , phagocytes – that were responsible for immune responses . In contrast , the humoral theory of immunity , held , among others , by Robert Koch and Emil von Behring , stated that the active immune agents were soluble components ( molecules ) found in the organism ’ s “ humors ” rather than its cells . 
 In the mid @-@ 1950s , Frank Burnet , inspired by a suggestion made by Niels Jerne , formulated the clonal selection theory ( CST ) of immunity . On the basis of CST , Burnet developed a theory of how an immune response is triggered according to the self / nonself distinction : " self " constituents ( constituents of the body ) do not trigger destructive immune responses , while " nonself " entities ( pathogens , an allograft ) trigger a destructive immune response . The theory was later modified to reflect new discoveries regarding histocompatibility or the complex " two @-@ signal " activation of T cells . The self / nonself theory of immunity and the self / nonself vocabulary have been criticized , but remain very influential . 
 More recently , several theoretical frameworks have been suggested in immunology , including " <unk> " views , " cognitive immune " views , the " danger model " ( or " danger theory " , and the " discontinuity " theory . The danger model , suggested by Polly <unk> and colleagues , has been very influential , arousing many comments and discussions . 
 = = Predicting immunogenicity = = 
 Larger drugs ( > 500 Da ) can provoke a neutralizing immune response , particularly if the drugs are administered repeatedly , or in larger doses . This limits the effectiveness of drugs based on larger peptides and proteins ( which are typically larger than 6000 Da ) . In some cases , the drug itself is not immunogenic , but may be co @-@ administered with an immunogenic compound , as is sometimes the case for Taxol . Computational methods have been developed to predict the immunogenicity of peptides and proteins , which are particularly useful in designing therapeutic antibodies , assessing likely virulence of mutations in viral coat particles , and validation of proposed peptide @-@ based drug treatments . Early techniques relied mainly on the observation that hydrophilic amino acids are overrepresented in epitope regions than hydrophobic amino acids ; however , more recent developments rely on machine learning techniques using databases of existing known epitopes , usually on well @-@ studied virus proteins , as a training set . A publicly accessible database has been established for the cataloguing of epitopes from pathogens known to be recognizable by B cells . The emerging field of bioinformatics @-@ based studies of immunogenicity is referred to as <unk> . <unk> is the study of large sets of proteins ( proteomics ) involved in the immune response . 
 = = Manipulation by pathogens = = 
 The success of any pathogen depends on its ability to elude host immune responses . Therefore , pathogens evolved several methods that allow them to successfully infect a host , while evading detection or destruction by the immune system . Bacteria often overcome physical barriers by secreting enzymes that digest the barrier , for example , by using a type II secretion system . Alternatively , using a type III secretion system , they may insert a hollow tube into the host cell , providing a direct route for proteins to move from the pathogen to the host . These proteins are often used to shut down host defenses . 
 An evasion strategy used by several pathogens to avoid the innate immune system is to hide within the cells of their host ( also called intracellular pathogenesis ) . Here , a pathogen spends most of its life @-@ cycle inside host cells , where it is shielded from direct contact with immune cells , antibodies and complement . Some examples of intracellular pathogens include viruses , the food poisoning bacterium Salmonella and the eukaryotic parasites that cause malaria ( Plasmodium falciparum ) and leishmaniasis ( Leishmania spp . ) . Other bacteria , such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis , live inside a protective capsule that prevents lysis by complement . Many pathogens secrete compounds that diminish or misdirect the host 's immune response . Some bacteria form biofilms to protect themselves from the cells and proteins of the immune system . Such biofilms are present in many successful infections , e.g. , the chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia <unk> infections characteristic of cystic fibrosis . Other bacteria generate surface proteins that bind to antibodies , rendering them ineffective ; examples include Streptococcus ( protein G ) , Staphylococcus aureus ( protein A ) , and <unk> magnus ( protein L ) . 
 The mechanisms used to evade the adaptive immune system are more complicated . The simplest approach is to rapidly change non @-@ essential epitopes ( amino acids and / or sugars ) on the surface of the pathogen , while keeping essential epitopes concealed . This is called antigenic variation . An example is HIV , which mutates rapidly , so the proteins on its viral envelope that are essential for entry into its host target cell are constantly changing . These frequent changes in antigens may explain the failures of vaccines directed at this virus . The parasite Trypanosoma <unk> uses a similar strategy , constantly switching one type of surface protein for another , allowing it to stay one step ahead of the antibody response . Masking antigens with host molecules is another common strategy for avoiding detection by the immune system . In HIV , the envelope that covers the virion is formed from the outermost membrane of the host cell ; such " self @-@ cloaked " viruses make it difficult for the immune system to identify them as " non @-@ self " structures . 
 = Death of Jairo Mora Sandoval = 
 Jairo Mora Sandoval ( March 22 , 1987 – May 31 , 2013 ) was a Costa Rican environmentalist who was murdered while attempting to protect leatherback turtle nests . Just before midnight on May 30 , 2013 , Mora and four female volunteers were abducted by a group of masked men . The women eventually escaped and informed the police . Mora 's bound and beaten body was found on the beach the next morning . An autopsy determined he died by asphyxiation after suffering a blow to the head . 
 Sea turtles are protected by law in Costa Rica , but poaching remains common . Locals take eggs , which are believed to be an aphrodisiac , and sell them on the black market . The egg trade has been linked to drug trafficking and organized crime . Environmentalists working in Limón say they are often threatened for trying to protect turtle eggs . Jairo Mora was one such environmentalist working in the area . 
 In the wake of Mora 's death , the organization he worked with cancelled beach patrol efforts in Costa Rica . His death attracted international attention , including a statement from the United Nations and multiple rewards for information on the case . In Costa Rica , his death led to calls for reform of environmental policy . On June 4 , the government met with environmentalists to discuss potential changes to policy . A plan submitted by environmentalists and endorsed by Environment Minister René Castro would set up a new protected area and grant park rangers more authority to stop poachers , among other changes . On June 5 , vigils were held across Costa Rica in honor of Mora . On June 18 , the government announced the allocation of ₡ 20 million ( US $ 40 @,@ 000 ) , which was later upped to ₡ 30 million ( US $ 60 @,@ 000 ) , to memorialize Mora . 
 = = Background = = 
 Costa Rica has a good reputation for wildlife conservation in general , and sea turtles have been protected by national legislation in Costa Rica since 1966 . The country prides itself on its natural beauty and the nation 's economy depends heavily on ecotourism . Tens of thousands of people visit the country every year to observe its sea turtles . The turtles of Costa Rica include the leatherback turtle , a critically endangered species . 
 The Marine Turtle Population Law of 2002 assigns a three @-@ year prison sentence to anyone who " kills , hunts , captures , decapitates , or disturbs marine turtles " . Even so , it is common for locals to harvest eggs for personal use or for sale in local bars due to supposed aphrodisiac qualities . A poacher can make up to $ 300 in one night , selling eggs for about $ 1 each on the black market . Eggs obtained from poaching are often sold to drug dealers or traded for drugs . Poachers are often armed , usually with knives , but sometimes with assault rifles . In the impoverished Limón area , locals claim that police are either colluding with , or afraid of , drug traffickers and poachers . Poaching has been cited as a major reason for declining sea turtle populations around the world . 
 Although poaching is not new , conservationists report that it is on the rise in Costa Rica . In the period leading up to Mora 's death , poaching became an attractive side income for with drug traffickers . In 2012 , a group of six men used assault rifles and hand guns to break into a protected nursery run by the nonprofit environmentalist group Wider Caribbean Sea Turtle Conservation Network ( WIDECAST ) . The men tied up and gagged the volunteers , then smashed or stole a total 1520 sea turtle eggs . After the incident , police began accompanying environmentalists on their nightly beach walks . It was later revealed that the incident was intended as a warning for environmentalists to stay off the beaches , according to WIDECAST 's Latin American director <unk> Chacón . According to Limón police chief Erick Calderón , 21 people were arrested in 2012 on charges related to turtle poaching . 
 = = Life and career of Jairo Mora = = 
 Jairo Mora was a research assistant who worked for <unk> Eco @-@ Tour , a state @-@ sponsored animal rescue group run by Vanessa Lizano . He was born in Limón on March 22 , 1987 , to a Nicaraguan father and a Costa Rican mother . From an early age , he was involved in volunteer work . 
 Mora regularly volunteered with WIDECAST , which coordinates efforts to protect turtle eggs across Central America . Mora and other WIDECAST volunteers walked Costa Rican beaches nightly to ward off egg thieves . In 2011 , the group protected about 3 % of all turtle nests in Costa Rica ; in 2012 , it increased to 30 % . Conservation efforts on Moín Beach , which Mora headed , collected 1 @,@ 500 leatherback turtle nests , the most from any beach in Costa Rica . 
 According to Lizano , her organization often receives threats from poachers because of its conservation efforts . In 2012 , Mora was personally threatened at gunpoint " to back off and stop the walks " . He and Lizano were also subject to intimidation efforts throughout the 2012 nesting season . " Both Jairo and I were being followed by motorbikes with guys carrying AK @-@ 47s , " Lizano recalled . After a threat against her family , Lizano relocated from Limón to San José . 
 At the start of the 2013 leatherback turtle nesting season in April , police decreased their involvement with conservation efforts . Guards were on duty four days a week , but no longer personally escorted volunteers . On April 23 , 2013 , Mora asked supporters on Facebook to petition the police for more help . " Send messages to the police so they come to Moín Beach " , he wrote . " Tell them not to be afraid but to come armed ... we need help and fast . " On April 28 , Mora told La Nación that environmentalists were being threatened " by a mafia that was looting the nests for eggs " . According to friends , Mora received frequent death threats , including an incident just weeks before his death where he was threatened at gunpoint . 
 On May 5 , La Nación accompanied Mora and Lizano on a typical night 's work . Mora spoke about feeling alone and unprotected in his struggle to save the turtles . Denying reports that police had stepped up their efforts he said : " If a guard or policeman says he supports us , he is lying . " La Nación confirmed that no police were assigned to patrol the beach that evening . When asked if he was afraid , Mora said " Yes , it 's scary , the worst could happen at any time . " After a May 6 incident where poachers stole a large number of nests , Limón police and the Coast Guard began patrolling Moín Beach more thoroughly . 
 = = Death = = 
 On the evening of May 30 , 2013 , Mora and four female volunteers – three from the United States and one from Spain – were patrolling Moín Beach in Limón province , Costa Rica . At approximately 11 : 30 pm Mora stepped out of his jeep to move a tree trunk and was ambushed by at least five masked men carrying guns . The men drove the car with the four women to a nearby abandoned house and took their phones , money , and other belongings . Three of the men drove off with Mora . The women were tied up and left in an abandoned house ; they eventually freed themselves and went to the police . 
 Five police officers were on duty the night of Mora 's murder , and they had been in radio contact with him about an hour before his death . However , according to Calderón , the police were present to increase " the number of eyes and ears on the beach " , not to protect the conservationists . He also noted that the beach is too large to constantly monitor all of it in the dark . 
 Mora 's naked body was found on the beach the next morning . His body was found beaten and with his hands tied behind his back . Autopsy results revealed that he had died from asphyxiation after being struck in the back of the head , likely with an object found at the site of his murder . Earlier reports incorrectly stated he had been shot . Mora was 26 at the time of his death . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Judicial Investigation Police were unable to immediately determine a motive for Mora 's death . Lizano suspects poachers were involved , saying Mora was targeted for protecting the turtle nests . Chacón said drug traffickers , who often are also poachers , were likely behind the killing . Given Mora 's recent calls for police help , " it seems like it was an act of revenge " , he said . 
 Chacón said he was " very hurt " by Mora 's death . " It 's not possible that citizens who protect nature have to suffer from this type of attacks " , he said . President Laura Chinchilla called on police and the judicial system to solve what she described as the " despicable murder " of Mora . A statement from the United States Embassy in Costa Rica remembered Mora as " a committed Costa Rican environmentalist " and called his death " senseless " . The United Nations released a statement sending condolences and recognizing Mora 's " noble work " to protect " an essential part of Costa Rica 's and the world 's biodiversity . " 
 Todd Steiner , executive director of the Turtle Island Restoration Network raised money for a $ 10 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the arrest of those responsible . " Jairo ’ s murderers must be brought to justice so that [ people ] know that this will never be tolerated , " said Steiner in a statement . " The whole world is watching to make sure the Costa Rican government brings these thugs to justice and makes sea turtle nesting beaches safe for conservationists to do their work . " A petition started by the Sea Turtle Restoration Project calling for swift justice generated more than 10 @,@ 000 signatures within two weeks . 
 Mora death raised fears that the country 's economy would be hurt by reduced tourism , leading Univision to describe the situation as " an internal crisis " . Commentary published by the Costa Rican Times alleged that the true culprits would never be found , saying whoever was blamed would be a scapegoat offered up by the drug traffickers . The government " is happy letting the Caribbean side of Costa Rica lose all tourism " continued the commentary by Dan Stevens . " Maybe the group Sea Turtle Conservation with Guns should be formed to fight back . " An editorial published by the Tico Times asked why it took a murder to get the government to act . " Mora reached out for help before he was killed , and no one came to the rescue , no matter what political spin is put on it " , said the author . Mora 's death , suggested the author , shows that " the drug traffickers are winning " , that crime is out of control in Limón , and that " the bad guys operate with near impunity . " The editorial concluded by imploring Costa Ricans to re @-@ evaluate their personal environmental habits and support environmental groups that keep fighting . The <unk> <unk> , an arts festival held each year during early June , was also dedicated to Mora . 
 On June 3 , Vice President <unk> Piva described Mora 's death as an " accident " due to Limón ’ s high crime rate on live TV . He quickly retracted the statement , saying his words had been misunderstood . " I only meant to recognize that the area where this happened unfortunately has a high murder rate and that there is high risk when working in an area where there is drug trafficking " , he explained . Unsatisfied by the explanation , environmental groups called for a public apology . On June 4 , members of the Legislative Assembly said that Piva 's comments had " dishonored the entire country " . Led by José María Villalta and Juan Carlos Mendoza , opposition party members called for Piva 's resignation . " We are really full of anger and annoyance . We are embarrassed as a nation " , said Mendoza . 
 On June 5 , vigils in honor of Mora were held in at least six Costa Rica cities to coincide with World Environment Day . Ecologist Federation president Mauricio Álvarez , who helped organize the vigils , said " We are asking for justice for Jairo ’ s murder and ... demand a halt to the impunity that has reigned over too many threats to ecologists , farmers and indigenous groups . " Despite rainy weather , hundred of people showed up to carry signs , light candles , and place stuffed turtles on the beach . Leaflets blamed police and the government for Mora 's death and demanded swift justice . Among those in attendance were Roberto Molina , secretary general of the Environmental Ministry 's labor union , and José Lino Chavez , Vice Minister of Waters and Oceans . 
 On June 6 , Sea Shepherd Conservation Society founder Paul Watson offered an additional $ 30 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the capture of Mora 's murderer . He said the money would come from his personal wealth , not from Sea Shepherd , and that he had sold a vehicle to fund the reward . Watson 's pledge , together with additional funds raised by Steiner , brought the total reward to $ 56 @,@ 000 . A separate memorial fund to assist Mora 's family and continue conservation efforts in his name raised $ 7 @,@ 000 . In early July , Costa Rican businessman Roy Rivera said he was working to raise funds to increase the information reward . 
 Watson , who is wanted by Costa Rica for skipping bail on charges related to a 2002 incident , said Mora 's death proves that his own life would be in " great danger " if he ever returned to Costa Rica . " The authorities were very quick to respond to Japan and issued an arrest warrant for the protection of sharks ... however , when it comes to a horrible murder of a compassionate conservationist , the government does nothing . " Later in June , Watson announced that his organization 's next boat would be named the S.S. Jairo Mora Sandoval . " We do not want the name of this courageous and passionate young man to be forgotten " , he said on Facebook . 
 On June 12 , the Ocean Futures Society joined the chorus of international voices calling for swift justice . " This crime , in the Limón province , has shaken the consciousnesses of many internationally , " wrote Ruben <unk> , the society ’ s Latin American director . <unk> said that Costa Rica should make the case a national priority . On June 18 , Costa Rican rapper Yaco released a song entitled " Playa Roja " ( Red Beach ) about Mora . Yaco , who is known for using his songs as social commentary , released the song via social media , saying it was " not a commercial release " . 
 At the June 26 – 28 Inter @-@ American Convention on the Protection and Conservation of Sea Turtles ( IAC ) , Mora 's death was a popular subject . A declaration from the Mexican delegation read , " As sea turtles are a shared resource , criminal activity that prevents [ on @-@ site ] protection efforts from taking place in one country presents an urgent concern to all range states . " A convention floor speech and a second written declaration also discussed Mora 's death . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Mora 's death , WIDECAST suspended beach patrol operations . " We can ’ t risk human lives for this project , " Chacón said . " But this is probably the exact result that the killers were hoping for . " Many volunteers quit the project after Mora 's death , leaving the organization 200 people short staffed . Organizations such as WIDECAST depend heavily on foreign volunteers . According to Chacón , the future of his organization will be in jeopardy if the situation continues . Aimee Leslie , who oversees sea turtle efforts for the World Wildlife Foundation called the situation " a critical point for conservation " in Costa Rica and " a national security issue . She said that conservation efforts were already difficult without being scared for one 's life . Lizano said she was in negotiations with the police for armed escorts on future patrols , but vowed to continue to work even if they refused . " If we forget about this beach , then Jairo died for nothing , " she said . 
 On June 3 , Calderón remarked that police would continue to support environmentalists and increase their presence on Moín Beach . The next day police arrested two armed men who were allegedly trying to steal turtle eggs from the same beach where Mora was killed . Also on June 4 , a group of three men and a minor was arrested on similar charges . Subsequently , Limón began to dispatch twenty police officers nightly to escort conservationists and patrol the beaches . In spite of increased police presence Lizano remarked , on June 11 , " Every night all of the [ turtle ] nests are raided . It is still pretty much the same even though we walk with police . " 
 Prompted by the death of Mora , dozens of environmentalists met with the Ministry of Environment , Energy and Telecommunications ( MINAE ) , headed by René Castro , to discuss their dissatisfaction with current conservation efforts on June 4 . Their requests included punishing those responsible for Mora 's death , greater criminal penalties for poaching , and more efforts by MINAE to fight egg poachers . Castro suggested implementing a plan submitted by WIDECAST . The plan would give park rangers jurisdiction to arrest poachers on Moín Beach and create a code of conduct for beach visitors nationwide . It would also increase penalties for poaching , name a new protected area after Mora , and set up a memorial fund in his name . The proposal was initially met with enthusiasm , but it later gave way to complaints about lax environmental enforcement nationwide . " This isn ’ t only happening in Moín and this not only happening with turtle conservation , " remarked Molina . Deputy Minister of Security Celso Gamboa , who was also in attendance , promised to increase security forces in Limón . 
 On June 6 , the Legislative Assembly unanimously passed a motion to form a special committee investigating Mora 's death . " It is important to acknowledge that the death of Jairo is not only the fault of these bands of criminals , but also the fault of the state , " remarked the motion 's sponsor José María Villalta On June 19 , Castro , Chávez , the heads of several environmental groups , and members of Mora 's family , met to work out the details of the earlier proposals . After the meeting , Castro announced that ₡ 20 million ( approximately US $ 40 @,@ 000 ) would be allocated for a monument in Mora 's honor in the form of either a new turtle observation area or an online tribute with video of nesting sea turtles . Castro also confirmed that the government had plans to turn Moín Beach into a protected park . However , the plan to name the park after Mora was abandoned at the request of his family . MINAE also plans to allocate " specialized units " armed with equipment to protect Costa Rica 's coasts from environmental threats . 
 Tourism to Costa Rica was down sharply during the first half of June 2013 . Jorge Molina , president of The Southern Caribbean Tourism Chamber , said Mora 's death was affecting reservations and would likely continue to do so for several months . Aurora <unk> , who owns an Manzanillo Beach hotel , said her occupancy rate normally runs at 50 % in June , but was at just 10 % in the weeks after Mora 's death . She said she had received cancellations that specifically cited Mora 's death as a factor . <unk> hotel owner Eddie Ryan echoed <unk> , saying he had two patrons cite Mora 's death when cancelling . Restaurants , bars , tour guides , and transportation companies were also affected . Some entrepreneurs blamed WIDECAST for the lost business saying the organization was aware of the risks but continued to patrol anyway . 
 On June 25 , a nationwide protest was held to draw attention to a wide variety of issues . Environmental groups joined the protests , again calling for justice to be served to Mora 's murderers . 
 On July 2 , MINAE again met with more than 30 environmental groups to discuss the situation . Castro said that plans to make Moín Beach a protected area were moving forward . However , he said , making the area a national park was not feasible because of the number of people living on the beach . " A national park is too closed off for this particular beach " , he explained . Environmentalists requested that the <unk> @-@ Manzanillo Wildlife Refuge , one of Mora 's favorite places , be renamed in honor of him . The plan was endorsed by his family . They also requested the formation of a " truth commission " to investigate Mora 's murder and eight other deaths from the past 20 years . Government officials said they were in the process of installing radar systems across Costa Rica to detect drug trafficking and illegal fishing , and that they would launch a plan to patrol Moín beach with the assistance of the Costa Rican Petroleum Refinery ( <unk> ) . MINAE said that ₡ 30 million ( US $ 60 @,@ 000 ) had been allocated for Mora 's memorial and environmental education done in his name . 
 As of July 4 , no arrests had been made in relation to the murder of Mora . Ministries of Public Safety Vice Minister Celso Gamboa called the investigation ongoing . In mid @-@ June , Castro had said the investigation was proceeding well and he had " every reason to be optimistic that we will solve this crime . " On July 10 , the prosecutor 's office said two suspects had been identified and that the case would " advance significantly " over the coming week . 
 On July 31 , Costa Rican police raided several locations near Moín and the city of Limón , and arrested several suspects believed to be involved in Mora 's murder , as well as other crimes , including robbery and turtle egg poaching . Police said that more arrests are expected . 
 The first trial of the alleged perpetrators ended in a mistrial and a second trial was held in 2015 . In January 2016 , a court found seven men accused of Mora 's murder not guilty based on reasonable doubt . Four of the men were , however , sentenced to lengthy prison terms assault , kidnapping and aggravated robbery for a crime that occurred on the same beach shortly before Mora 's murder . ( Donald <unk> : 27 years in prison for aggravated robbery , rape and kidnapping ; Héctor Cash : 23 years for aggravated robbery , kidnapping and sexual abuse ; José Bryan Delgado : 17 years for aggravated robbery and kidnapping ; Ernesto Centeno : 17 years for aggravated robbery and kidnapping . ) Subsequently , the not guilty verdict was overturned on appeal and the four men were convicted of <unk> 's murder . 
 = Gesche Schünemann = 
 Gesche Schünemann ( born 18 November 1982 ) is a German wheelchair basketball player and Paralympian who was part of the team that took the silver medal in the women 's wheelchair basketball at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , and the gold medal winning team in wheelchair basketball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . 
 After a promising basketball career was cut short by an Anterior cruciate ligament injury when she was a teenager , Schünemann took up wheelchair basketball , playing her first game in 2000 . She went on to win five national championships with RSV Lahn @-@ Dill . She began training with the national team in November 2005 , and made her international debut at the European championships in 2007 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Gesche Schünemann was born in Gießen on 18 November 1982 . She was a swimmer and basketball player . Playing in a seconds game against TSV Grünberg , she was knocked down by Magdalena von Geyr , resulting in a torn anterior cruciate ligament and cartilage damage . Several operations failed to restore her knee to a state where she could play professional basketball , although she is still able to walk . 
 This ended Schünemann 's basketball career for a time . She moved to Tübingen , where she studied sports management with a focus on sports marketing at the University of Tübingen . In 2012 , she worked full @-@ time as a marketing consultant for an energy company . Schünemann did some coaching and played for the regional league , but her knee still bothered her and national league offers were cancelled . 
 Andreas <unk> , who later became the manager of RSV Lahn @-@ Dill persuaded Schünemann to try wheelchair basketball . She began playing for the seconds on her 18th birthday . RSV Lahn @-@ Dill went on to win the national championship in 2008 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 , with Schünemann playing forward . In 2013 , Schünemann moved to Hamburg , where her boyfriend Christian lives , and now plays forward @-@ center for BG Baskets Hamburg , a mixed gender team . In April 2014 , she was part of the BG Baskets Hamburg team that won the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation Euro League Challenge Cup , its first International title . 
 In November 2005 , Schünemann began training with the national team . She made her international debut at the European championships in 2007 . The German national team won gold at the European championships , and went on to win it again in 2009 and 2011 before losing to the Netherlands in 2013 . In September 2008 , she participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , but Germany was beaten in the gold medal game by the United States team , taking home Paralympic silver medals instead . After the Paralympics , the team 's performance was considered impressive enough for it to be named the national " Team of the Year " , and it received the Silver Laurel Leaf , Germany 's highest sporting honour , from German President Horst Köhler . 
 The German team hoped for a rematch against the United States at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , but instead faced the team that had beaten the Americans , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team . They defeated the Australians in front of a crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 to win the gold medal , Gesche Schünemann the first time that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball at the Paralympics since 1984 . They were awarded a second Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were again named Team of the Year for 2012 . 
 After the Paralympics , Schünemann was required to rest for three months after surgery to repair the damaged tendons of the little right finger , but returned for the European Championships in 2013 , which Germany lost to the Netherlands . In 2014 , she won silver at the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Toronto , where the German team was defeated by Canada in the final . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2007 : Gold European Championships ( Wetzlar , Germany ) 
 2008 : Silver Paralympic Games ( Beijing , China ) 
 2009 : Gold European Championships ( Stoke Mandeville , England ) 
 2010 : Silver World Championships ( Birmingham , England ) 
 2011 : Gold European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 2015 : Gold at the European Championships ( Worcester , England ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2008 : Team of the Year 
 2008 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 = Scimitar oryx = 
 The scimitar oryx or scimitar @-@ horned oryx ( Oryx dammah ) , also known as the Sahara oryx , is a species of Oryx extinct in the wild since 2000 . It formerly inhabited all of North Africa . It has a long taxonomic history since its discovery in 1816 by Lorenz Oken , who named it the Oryx algazel . This spiral @-@ horned antelope stands a little more than 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) at the shoulder . The males weigh 140 – 210 kg ( 310 – 460 lb ) and the females weigh 91 – 140 kg ( 201 – 309 lb ) . The coat is white with a red @-@ brown chest and black markings on the forehead and down the length of the nose . The calves are born with a yellow coat , and the distinguishing marks are initially absent . The coats change to adult coloration at 3 – 12 months old . 
 The scimitar oryx formed herds of mixed sexes of up to 70 members , usually guided by the bulls . They inhabited semideserts and deserts and were adapted to live in the extreme heat , with their efficient cooling mechanism and very low requirement of water . Scimitar oryx feed on foliage , grasses , succulent plants and plant parts during the night or early morning . Births peak between March and October . After a gestation of eight to nine months , one calf is born . Soon after , the female has a postpartum estrus . 
 The scimitar oryx was once widespread in northern Africa . Its decline began as a result of climate change , and later it was hunted extensively for its horns . Today , it is bred in captivity in special reserves in Tunisia , Morocco and Senegal . The scimitar oryx was domesticated in Ancient Egypt and is believed to have been used as food and sacrificed as offerings to gods . Wealthy people in Ancient Rome also bred them . The use of their valuable hides began in the Middle Ages . The unicorn myth may have originated from sightings of a scimitar oryx with a broken horn . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The scimitar oryx is a member of the genus Oryx and family Bovidae . The German naturalist Lorenz Oken first described it in 1816 , naming it Oryx algazel . The nomenclature has undergone various changes since then , with the introduction of names like Oryx tao , O. leucoryx , O. <unk> , O. dammah , O. <unk> and O. <unk> . In 1826 , Philipp Jakob <unk> used the name Oryx <unk> for the species . A year later , the name <unk> leucoryx came into use , but as this was a synonym of the Arabian oryx ( then called Oryx <unk> ) , it was abandoned , and Oryx algazel was accepted once more . Over a hundred years later , in 1951 , Sir John Ellerman and Terence Morrison @-@ Scott realized the invalidity of the name Oryx algazel . Finally , in January 1956 , the International Trust for Zoological Nomenclature accepted Oryx dammah as the scientific name . There have been no more changes since then , though many papers published after 1956 created confusion by using names like O. gazella tao . 
 Its scientific name , Oryx dammah , is derived from : Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning a gazelle or antelope ( originally a pickaxe ) ; Latin <unk> ( fallow deer or antelope ) ; and Arabic <unk> ( sheep ) . The scimitar oryx is named for its horns , which resemble scimitars . Its common name in English is " scimitar @-@ horned oryx " , or simply " scimitar oryx " . 
 = = Genetics and evolution = = 
 The scimitar oryx has 58 chromosomes . It has one pair of large submetacentric autosomes and 27 acrocentric autosomal pairs . The X and Y chromosomes are the largest and smallest acrocentrics . The first molecular study of this species ( published in 2007 ) observed genetic diversity among European , North American and some other captive groups . Divergence was found within the mitochondrial DNA haplotypes , and was estimated to have taken place between 2 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 7 million years ago . Population increases occurred approximately 1 @.@ 2 and 0 @.@ 5 million years ago . 
 In another study , intended to note genetic differences between Oryx species , karyotypes of Oryx species and subspecies – namely O. gazella , O. b. <unk> , O. b. <unk> , O. dammah and O. leucoryx – were compared with the standard karyotype of Bos taurus . The number of autosomes in all karyotypes was 58 . The X and Y chromosomes were conserved in all five species . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The scimitar oryx is a straight @-@ horned antelope that stands just over 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) at the shoulder . The males weigh 140 – 210 kg ( 310 – 460 lb ) and the females 91 – 140 kg ( 201 – 309 lb ) . The body measures 140 – 240 cm ( 55 – 94 in ) from the head to the base of the tail . The tail is 45 – 60 cm ( 18 – 24 in ) long and ends with a tuft . They are sexually dimorphic with males being larger than females . 
 Its coat is white with a red @-@ brown chest and black markings on the forehead and down the length of the nose . The coat reflects the sun 's rays , while the black portions and the tip of the tongue provide protection against sunburn . The white coat helps to reflect the heat of the desert . Calves are born with yellow coats and lack distinguishing marks , which appear later in life . Their pelage changes to adult coloration at 3 – 12 months old . 
 Both sexes have horns , but those of the females are more slender . The horns are long , thin , and symmetrical ; they curve backwards ( a distinctive feature of this species ) and can reach 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 3 in to 3 ft 11 in ) on both the males and the females . The horns are so thin that they can break easily . The female has four nipples . The large , spreading hooves are well adapted to allow these antelopes to walk on the sand of their dry habitats . A scimitar oryx can live as long as 20 years . At Smithsonian National Zoo , a female oryx died at 21 , an exceptional age since females generally have a lifespan of about 15 years . 
 = = Diseases and parasites = = 
 The scimitar oryx can be infected with <unk> , a parasitic disease caused by protozoan parasites of genus Cryptosporidium in the phylum Apicomplexa . A study in 2004 revealed that C. parvum or similar organisms infected 155 mammal species , including the scimitar oryx . An analysis in 2005 found Cryptosporidium parasites in stool samples from 100 mammals , including the scimitar oryx . <unk> of a new parasite , Eimeria <unk> , have been discovered in the feces of a scimitar oryx from Zoo Garden in Riyadh . In France , Streptococcus uberis was isolated for the first time in an oryx . It had caused vegetative endocarditis in the animal , leading to fatal congestive heart failure . 
 A 1983 study examined the blood serum chemistry of blood samples taken from the jugular veins of fifty scimitar oryx ranging from neonates to adults over 13 years old . The study concluded that the higher eosinophil counts of the juveniles and adults might reflect larger internal parasite burdens in them as compared with the neonates . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The scimitar oryx was a very sociable animal and traveled in herds of between two and forty individuals , generally , led by a dominant bull . This species once gathered in groups of several thousand for migration . During the wet season , they migrated north into the Sahara . Scimitar oryx are diurnal . In the cool early mornings and evenings , they rest under trees and shrubs , or if neither are available , they dig depressions in the soil with their hooves and rest there . Males fight often , but not for long and not violently . Predators , such as lions , leopards , hyenas , cheetahs , golden jackals , vultures and Cape hunting dogs , mostly kill weak and young oryx . 
 The play activity of eight calves in captivity was observed in a 1983 study . Male calves played for longer than females calves did . Mixed sex play was usual ; selection of partners depended on age , but not on sex or genetic relatedness . Results suggested that size dimorphism was an important factor responsible for sex differences in play . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 With a metabolism that functions at the high temperatures prevalent in their habitats , scimitar oryx need less water for evaporation to help conduct heat away from the body , enabling them to go for long periods without water . They can allow their body temperature to rise to almost 46 @.@ 5 ° C ( 115 @.@ 7 ° F ) before beginning to perspire . In times of ample supply , oryx can use fluid loss through urination and feces to lower their body temperature to below 97 ° F ( 36 ° C ) at night , giving more time before reaching maximum body temperature the following day . They can tolerate high temperatures that would be lethal to most mammals . They have a network of fine blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the brain , passing close to the nasal passage and thus allowing the blood to cool by up to 5 ° F ( 3 ° C ) before reaching the brain , which is one of the most heat @-@ sensitive organs of the body . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The habitat of scimitar oryx in the wild was steppe and desert , where they ate foliage , grass , herbs , shrubs , succulent plants , legumes , juicy roots , buds , and fruit . They can survive without water for nine to ten months because their kidneys prevent water loss from urination – an adaptation to desert habitats . They can get water from water @-@ rich plants such as the wild melon ( Citrullus <unk> ) and Indigofera oblongifolia and from the leafless twigs of Capparis <unk> . In the night or early morning , they often search for plants such as Indigofera viscosa , which produce a hygroscopic secretion that fulfils water requirements . They eat tuft grasses such as Cymbopogon <unk> after it has rained , but they normally prefer more palatable grasses , such as Cenchrus biflora , Panicum <unk> and <unk> <unk> . When the dry season begins , they feed on the seedpods of Acacia <unk> , and during the dry season , they rely on perennial grasses of genera such as Panicum ( especially Panicum <unk> ) and Aristida , and browse plants such as <unk> species , Cassia <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both males and females reach sexual maturity at 1 @.@ 5 to 2 years of age . Births peak between March and October . Mating frequency is greater when environmental conditions are favorable . In zoos , males are sexually most active in autumn . The estrous cycle lasts roughly 24 days , and females experience an anovulatory period in spring . Periods between births are less than 332 days , showing that the scimitar oryx is polyestrous . 
 Courting is done by means of a mating circle : the male and female stand parallel to one another , facing in opposite directions , and then circle around each other until the female allows the male to mount from behind . If the female is not ready to mate , she runs away and circles in the reverse direction . Pregnant females leave the herd for a week , give birth to the calf and conceive again during their postpartum estrus ; thus they can produce a calf a year . Gestation lasts about nine months , after which a single calf is born , weighing 20 to 33 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 0 kg ) . Twin births are very rare - only 0 @.@ 7 % of the births observed in one study . Both mother and calf return to the main herd within hours of the birth . The female separates herself from the herd for a few hours while she nurses the calf . Weaning starts at 3 @.@ 5 months , and the young become fully independent at around 14 weeks old . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The scimitar oryx once inhabited grassy steppes , semideserts and deserts in a narrow strip of central north Africa ( Niger and Chad ) . It was widespread on the fringes of the Sahara , mainly in <unk> steppe , the grassy zone between the real desert and the Sahel , an area characterized by an annual rainfall of 75 – 150 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) . In 1936 , a single herd of 10 @,@ 000 oryx was seen in the steppe area of Chad . By the mid @-@ 1970s , Chad was home to more than 95 % of the world population of this species . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The scimitar oryx was hunted almost to extinction for its horns . Its population decline began as a result of major climatic changes that caused the Sahara to become dry . The northern population was already almost lost before the 20th century . The decline of the southern population accelerated as Europeans began to settle the area and hunt them for meat , hides and horn trophies . World War II and the Civil War in Chad that started in the 1960s are thought to have caused heavy decreases of the species through an increase in hunting for food . Roadkill , nomadic settlements near waterholes ( their dry @-@ season feeding places ) and firearms for easy hunting have also reduced numbers . 
 The IUCN lists the scimitar oryx as regionally extinct in Algeria , Burkina Faso , Chad , Egypt , Libya , Mali , Mauritania , Morocco , Niger , Nigeria , Senegal , Sudan , Tunisia and Western Sahara , and has assessed it as extinct in the wild since 2000 . Reports of sightings in Chad and Niger remain unsubstantiated , despite extensive surveys carried out throughout Chad and Niger from 2001 to 2004 in an effort to detect antelopes in the Sahel and the Sahara . At least until 1985 , 500 oryx were estimated to be surviving in Chad and Niger , but by 1988 , only a few individuals survived in the wild . 
 There is now a global captive breeding program for the scimitar oryx . In 2005 , at least 1 @,@ 550 captives were managed as part of breeding programs , and in 2008 , more than 4 @,@ 000 were believed to be held in private collections in the United Arab Emirates . Reintroduction plans involve fenced @-@ in herds in Bou <unk> National Park ( 1985 ) , Sidi <unk> National Park ( 1999 ) and Oued <unk> National Park ( 1999 ) in Tunisia ; Souss @-@ Massa National Park ( 1995 ) in Morocco ; and Ferlo Faunal Reserve ( 1998 ) and <unk> Wildlife Reserve ( 1999 ) in Senegal . Chad is currently leading a project to reintroduce the species in Ouadi <unk> Ouadi Achim Game Reserve , with the support of the Saharan Conservation Fund and the Environment Agency of Abu Dhabi . The first group has been released at the beginning of 2016 in an acclimation enclosure and should be fully released in the wild in the rainy season . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = Ancient times = = = 
 In ancient Egypt scimitar oryx were domesticated and tamed , possibly to be used as offerings for religious ceremonies or as food . They were called ran and bred in captivity . In ancient Rome they were kept in paddocks and used for coursing , and wealthy Romans ate them . The scimitar oryx was the preferred quarry of Sahelo @-@ Saharan hunters . Its hide is of superior quality , and the king of Rio de Oro sent 1000 shields made of it to a contemporary in the Middle Ages . Since then , it has been used to make ropes , harnesses and saddlery . 
 = = = Unicorn myth = = = 
 The myth of the one @-@ horned unicorn may have originated from sightings of injured scimitar oryx ; Aristotle and Pliny the Elder held that the oryx was the unicorn 's " prototype " . From certain angles , the oryx may seem to have one horn rather than two , and given that its horns are made from hollow bone that cannot be regrown , if an oryx were to lose one of its horns , for the rest of its life it would have only one . 
 = Hurricane Marie ( 2014 ) = 
 Hurricane Marie is tied as the seventh @-@ most intense Pacific hurricane on record , attaining a barometric pressure of 918 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 11 inHg ) in August 2014 . On August 10 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa over the Atlantic Ocean . Some organization of shower and thunderstorm activity initially took place , but dry air soon impinged upon the system and imparted weakening . The wave trekked westward across the Atlantic and Caribbean for several days . On August 19 , an area of low pressure consolidated within the wave west of Central America . With favorable atmospheric conditions , convective activity and banding features increased around the system and by August 22 , the system acquired enough organization to be classified as Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E while situated about 370 mi ( 595 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . Development was initially fast @-@ paced , as the depression acquired tropical storm @-@ force winds within six hours of formation and hurricane @-@ force by August 23 . However , due to some vertical wind shear its intensification rate stalled , and for a time it remained a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . 
 On August 24 , Marie developed an eye and rapidly intensified to a Category 5 hurricane with winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . At its peak , the hurricane 's gale @-@ force winds spanned an area 575 mi ( 925 km ) across . Marie subsequently underwent an eyewall replacement cycle on August 25 which prompted steady weakening . Over the next several days , Marie progressively degraded to below hurricane strength as it moved into an increasingly hostile environment with cooler waters and a more stable atmosphere . On August 29 , after having lost all signs of organized deep convection , Marie degenerated into a remnant low . The large system gradually wound down over the following several days , with winds subsiding below gale @-@ force on August 30 . The remnant cyclone eventually lost a well defined center and dissipated on September 2 about 1 @,@ 200 mi ( 1 @,@ 950 km ) northeast of Hawaii . 
 Although Hurricane Marie 's center remained well away from land throughout its entire existence , its large size brought increased surf to areas from Southwestern Mexico northward to southern California . Off the coast of Los Cabos , three people drowned after their boat capsized in rough seas . In Colima and Oaxaca , heavy rains from outer bands caused flooding , resulting in two fatalities . Similar effects were felt across Baja California Sur . Toward the end of August , Marie brought one of the largest hurricane @-@ related surf events to southern California in decades . Swells of 10 to 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) battered coastal areas , with structural damage occurring on Santa Catalina Island and in the Greater Los Angeles Area . A breakwater near Long Beach sustained $ 10 million worth of damage , with portions gouged out . One person drowned in the surf near Malibu . Hundreds of ocean rescues , including over 100 in Malibu alone , were attributed to the storm , and overall losses reached $ 20 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 10 , 2014 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring a westward moving tropical wave emerging off the west coast of Africa , centered along 16 ° W. Accompanied by disorganized convective activity , development , if any , was expected to be slow . A broad area of low pressure subsequently formed within the wave about halfway between Africa and the Cape Verde Islands . Embedded within an elongated trough , the weak system struggled to organize and convection soon diminished . Interaction with a monsoon trough reinvigorated shower and thunderstorm activity on August 11 across a large area southwest of the Cape Verde Islands , but the surface low had dissipated by this time . Development was no longer expected over the following days as dry air created a hostile area for storm organization . The wave continued westward across the Atlantic and entered the Caribbean Sea on August 16 . Subsequent interactions with South America and an upper @-@ level trough inhibited improvement of the system . 
 Beginning on August 17 , the NHC anticipated that a low pressure area would form within five days to the south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec in the East Pacific , with a 30 % chance of tropical cyclogenesis . By the next day , the wave was located over Panama , and the NHC upgraded the potential for development to 60 % . The wave crossed into the eastern Pacific with accompanying convection , developing a low pressure area on August 19 . Conditions were favorable for further development , and the thunderstorms increased and became better organized on August 20 . After an increase in rainbands and outflow around the well @-@ defined center , the NHC classified the system as Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E early on August 22 about 370 mi ( 595 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . A strong ridge over the southern United States , later expanding into northern Mexico , steered the system on a west @-@ northwest course throughout its existence as a tropical cyclone . 
 Conditions were favorable for the nascent depression to strengthen . The Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme model predicted the system would become a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale when the system was only a tropical depression . Only six hours after the NHC issued its first advisory the agency upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Marie , the thirteenth named storm of the 2014 season . The storm very quickly organized , developing a central dense overcast consisting of intense convection ; this was aided by warm water temperatures and low wind shear . On August 23 , the NHC upgraded Marie to hurricane status , and an eye began forming later that day . On the next day , as the storm rapidly intensified , the eye became much more distinct and was surrounded by a powerful eyewall . During this phase the storm wobbled , shifting due west before resuming its previous motion . At 18 : 00 UTC on August 24 , Marie attained Category 5 status on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , the first such Pacific hurricane since Celia in 2010 . The NHC estimated peak sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , based on a Dvorak rating of 7 @.@ 0 provided by TAFB and SAB . They also estimated Marie 's minimum barometric pressure at 918 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 11 inHg ) , ranking as the seventh @-@ strongest in the Pacific east of the International Dateline since records began in 1949 . Coincidentally , Hurricane Odile attained the same pressure just three weeks later . At its peak , Marie was a large hurricane with tropical storm @-@ force winds covering an area 575 mi ( 925 km ) across . 
 Shortly after Marie attained peak intensity , the convection weakened due to an eyewall replacement cycle , in which an outer eye formed . The storm also weakened due to gradually decreasing water temperatures . By early on August 26 , the eye became much less defined . The double eye feature persisted through that day , although the outer eyewall opened up as thunderstorms weakened further . Late on August 27 , Marie weakened to tropical storm status , by which time the circulation became exposed from the convection . A strengthening ridge near California caused the storm to accelerate more to the west @-@ northwest , into an area of cooler waters and dry air . Failing to produce any additional convection , Marie degenerated into a remnant low late on August 28 . The residual circulation gradually wound down as it continued northwest . Through August 29 , the system continued to produce gale @-@ force winds . Turning west and later west @-@ southwest within a weak easterly flow , Marie slowly moved across the open Pacific while remaining a broad , weak cyclone . The former cyclone eventually lost a well @-@ defined center and dissipated on September 2 , about 1 @,@ 200 mi ( 1 @,@ 950 km ) northeast of Hawaii . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Although the core of Hurricane Marie remained well offshore , a " green " alert was issued for Guerrero and Oaxaca and a " blue " ( minimal ) alert was issued for Jalisco , Colima , Michoacán , and Chiapas . Heavy rains in Oaxaca triggered flooding and landslides , with the districts of <unk> and Pochutla being most affected . Five people were swept away by a swollen river ; all were wounded but later rescued . A portion of Federal Highway 200 and a bridge were closed . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 people were in need of assistance and a disaster declaration was requested for the state of Oaxaca . Storm surge in Colima destroyed four buildings and damaged ten more . Flooding along the <unk> and San Nicolás rivers resulted in two fatalities . Minor flooding also occurred near Acapulco and in Colima where 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) waves pounded the coast . In Guadalajara , numerous trees were downed and 12 shops were closed . 
 Off the coast of Los Cabos in Baja California Sur , large swells capsized a fishing boat with seven people aboard on August 25 . Four were able to swim back to shore while the other three remained missing and were later presumed dead . Strong rain bands along the outer fringes of Hurricane Marie brought heavy rain to parts of the state . Landslides blocked several roads near Los Cabos while gusty winds downed trees and power lines . Owing to the dangerous conditions , all schools Los Cabos were closed on August 25 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Owing to the size of Marie , increased surf was anticipated well north of the hurricane . High surf advisories were issued in California for the Greater Los Angeles Area . Forecasters at the local National Weather Service office warned residents in Los Angeles and Ventura counties could " potentially see the largest surf in recent years generated by a hurricane . " Swells of 10 to 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) were anticipated with the risk of coastal flooding and structural damage . Advisories were also issued for Orange and Santa Barbara counties . Surf in the region ultimately reached 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) along south @-@ facing shores while west @-@ facing beaches only saw waves up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The combination of large swells , high tide , and powerful south @-@ to @-@ north longshore currents impeded by the bight formed by the Palos Verdes Peninsula resulted in significant coastal flooding in Seal Beach . A four @-@ block area of oceanfront property was affected ; several apartments were left with inches of water on the ground floor . Severe beach erosion resulted in the loss of 10 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 <unk> ( 7 @,@ 600 – 15 @,@ 200 m3 ) of sand ; a state of emergency was declared to assist with restoration efforts . Near Malibu Pier , several surfers were caught in the rough swells and knocked into each other ; one struck a rock , was knocked unconscious , and drowned . Malibu Pier itself sustained some damage and a lifeguard house built in the 1950s was destroyed . North of Malibu , one structure fell into the ocean . The Los Angeles County Fire Department assisted with over 115 ocean rescues on August 26 . More than 170 rescues were made the following day , including 73 at the famous surfing spot " The Wedge " in Newport Beach . 
 Significant flooding also occurred in and around the Port of Long Beach . The Army Corps of Engineers was sent out to inspect significant damage to the middle breakwater at Long Beach . Eleven sections of the breakwater sustained major damage , including three areas which were completely gouged out . Along the 18 @,@ 500 ft ( 5 @,@ 600 m ) breakwater , 1 @,@ 550 ft ( 470 m ) of it sustained major damage , 850 ft ( 260 m ) saw significant damage , and a further 1 @,@ 725 ft ( 526 m ) experienced moderate damage . Several hundred tons of rock were estimated to have been dislodged by the storm . The nearby San Pedro and Long Beach breakwaters saw substantial damage as well , though not as severe as the middle breakwater . Debris from the Navy Mole breakwater damaged a roadway near the Sea Launch Commander , within Long Beach . The breach resulted in roughly $ 3 million in damage to nearby terminals . Two barges and a pleasure craft were loosed from their anchors by the surging waves and had to be towed back . Two terminals had to close due to dangerous conditions for workers . Less than two weeks after Marie , Hurricane Norbert threatened to bring further increased surf to the area . With the breakwater yet to be repaired , a large sand berm was reinforced along beaches and residents were supplied with sandbags . 
 The Army Corps estimated that it would take more than $ 20 million to repair just the major breaches along the middle breakwater . On September 18 Connolly @-@ Pacific Co. was contracted for $ 5m to repair the twelve worst affected areas of the breakwaters and construction began on October 8 . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 tons of rock would be used in the project . A $ 200 @,@ 000 repair budget was initially allocated for areas around Navy Mole , including Pier F , J South , and Navy Mole Road ; this was later increased to $ 4 million by the Long Beach Board of Harbor Commissioners in January 2015 . 
 On Santa Catalina Island , boulders estimated to weigh 3 @,@ 000 lb ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) were tossed inland by the surf . Substantial damage took place at the Avalon Harbor where many dry @-@ docked boats were knocked off their stands . The harbor was littered with debris for several days , mainly pieces of lumber . A pier at White 's Landing was also partially destroyed . A 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) boat was tossed onshore at <unk> Beach into Catalina Laundry , the only laundry business on the island . The building and a nearby boatyard were deemed total losses . Damage at the beach was deemed the worst since September 1997 when Hurricane Linda brought large swells to the region . The Catalina Express ferry halted service on August 27 due to the rough seas . Damage across Catalina Island was estimated to be $ 3 – 5 million . Total losses in California amounted to nearly $ 20 million . 
 = M @-@ 93 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 93 is the designation of a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It links both Camp Grayling and Hartwick Pines State Park with Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) . Both termini of M @-@ 93 end at locations , rather than junctions with another road . The western end of M @-@ 93 ends in a traffic circle before it turns into Howe Road as it travels through Camp Grayling . The highway dates back to 1919 as a connection with the predecessor to Camp Grayling . Since that time , it has been extended through Grayling along first US Highway 27 ( US 27 ) and now Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL 75 ) to connect with the state park . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 93 starts at the main gate of Camp Grayling . From there it runs north and east along Sharon Road parallel to the shore of Lake Margarethe through the edge of the base complex . The highway continues through forested terrain to a junction with M @-@ 72 west of the city of Grayling . M @-@ 93 turns east , running concurrently along M @-@ 72 into town . As the highway approaches downtown , the landscape becomes more urbanized after crossing the Au Sable River . In Grayling , M @-@ 93 turns north along the former route of US 27 , which is now BL I @-@ 75 . M @-@ 72 turns south with BL I @-@ 75 along James Street , ending the M @-@ 72 / M @-@ 93 concurrency . 
 The roadway runs north through town passing the Grayling Army Airfield , and BL I @-@ 75 / M @-@ 93 becomes Grayling Highway . Together they make a right turn onto Hartwick Pines Road when they intersect Old 27 Road , turning back towards I @-@ 75 ; this area is part of the Grayling State Forest . The BL I @-@ 75 designation ends at I @-@ 75 while M @-@ 93 continues along Hartwick Pines Road . The M @-@ 93 designation ends at the park 's former main gate . The roadway continues further into Hartwick Pines State Park as White Road , a rural road that intersects unsigned route County Road 612 north of the park boundaries . 
 = = History = = 
 On July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 93 was a spur routing from M @-@ 18 to the " State Military Camp " , what is now Camp Grayling . The designation was extended in 1929 along North Down River Road , and several back roads to Bob Cat Trail and Hartwick Pines State Park . A new routing was completed in 1932 north of downtown Grayling to the park . The highway extended north of the park to County Road 612 east of Frederick at this time as well . When I @-@ 75 was completed in the area in 1963 , the US 27 designation was dropped , and BL I @-@ 75 was designated through town in its place . The northern end was truncated to the state park in 1968 . When the park 's entrance was moved in the early 1990s , the highway designation was not truncated again , and MDOT still maintains M @-@ 93 to the former park entrance at Bob Cat Trail . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Crawford County . 
 = History of tropical cyclone naming = 
 The practice of using names to identify tropical cyclones goes back several centuries , with storms named after places , saints or things they hit before the formal start of naming in each basin . Examples of such names are the 1911 Ship Cyclone , the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane and the 1938 New England hurricane . The system currently in place provides identification of tropical cyclones in a brief form that is easily understood and recognized by the public . The credit for the first usage of personal names for weather systems is given to the Queensland Government Meteorologist Clement Wragge , who named tropical cyclones and anticyclones between 1887 and 1907 . This system of naming fell into disuse for several years after Wragge retired , until it was revived in the latter part of World War II for the Western Pacific . Over the following decades formal naming schemes were introduced for several tropical cyclone basins , including the North and South Atlantic , Eastern , Central , Western and Southern Pacific basins as well as the Australian region and Indian Ocean . 
 However , there has been controversy over the names used at various times , with names being dropped for religious and political reasons . Female names were exclusively used in the basins at various times between 1945 and 2000 , and were the subject of several protests . At present tropical cyclones are officially named by one of eleven meteorological services and retain their names throughout their lifetimes . Due to the potential for longevity and multiple concurrent storms , the names reduce the confusion about what storm is being described in forecasts , watches and warnings . Names are assigned in order from predetermined lists once storms have one , three , or ten @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of more than 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , depending on which basin it originates in . Standards vary from basin to basin , with some tropical depressions named in the Western Pacific , while a significant amount of gale @-@ force winds are required in the Southern Hemisphere . The names of significant tropical cyclones in the North Atlantic Ocean , Pacific Ocean and Australian region are retired from the naming lists and replaced with another name , at meetings of the World Meteorological Organization 's various tropical cyclone committees . 
 = = Formal start of naming = = 
 The practice of using names to identify tropical cyclones goes back several centuries , with systems named after places , saints or things they hit before the formal start of naming in each basin . Examples include the 1526 San Francisco hurricane , the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane and the 1938 New England hurricane . Credit for the first usage of personal names for weather is generally given to the Queensland Government Meteorologist Clement Wragge , who named named tropical cyclones and anticyclones between 1887 – 1907 . Wragge used names drawn from the letters of the Greek alphabet , Greek and Roman mythology and female names , to describe weather systems over Australia , New Zealand and the Antarctic . After the new Australian government had failed to create a federal weather bureau and appoint him director , Wragge started naming cyclones after political figures . This system of naming weather systems subsequently fell into disuse for several years after Wragge retired , until it was revived in the latter part of the Second World War . Despite falling into disuse the naming scheme was occasionally mentioned in the press , with an editorial published in the Launceston Examiner newspaper on October 5 , 1935 that called for the return of the naming scheme . Wragge 's naming was also mentioned within Sir Napier Shaw ’ s “ Manual of Meteorology ” which likened it to a " child naming waves " . 
 After reading about Clement Wragge , George Stewart was inspired to write a novel , " Storm " , about a storm affecting California which was named Maria . The book was widely read after it was published in 1941 by Random House , especially by United States Army Air Corps and United States Navy ( USN ) meteorologists during World War II . During 1944 , United States Army Air Forces forecasters ( USAAF ) at the newly established Saipan weather center , started to informally name typhoons after their wives and girlfriends . This practise became popular amongst meteorologists from the United States Airforce and Navy who found that it reduced confusion during map discussions , and in 1945 the United States Armed Services publicly adopted a list of women 's names for typhoons of the Pacific . However , they were not able to persuade the United States Weather Bureau ( USWB ) to start naming Atlantic hurricanes , as the Weather Bureau wanted to be seen as a serious enterprise , and thus felt that it was " not appropriate " to name tropical cyclones while warning the United States public . They also felt that using women 's names was frivolous and that using the names in official communications would have made them look silly . During 1947 the Air Force Hurricane Office in Miami started using the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet to name significant tropical cyclones in the North Atlantic Ocean . These names were used over the next few years in private / internal communications between weather centres and aircraft , and were not included in public bulletins . 
 During August and September 1950 , three tropical cyclones ( Hurricanes Baker , Dog and Easy ) occurred simultaneously and impacted the United States during August and September 1950 , which led to confusion within the media and the public . As a result , during the next tropical cyclone ( Fox ) , Grady Norton decided to start using the names in public statements and in the seasonal summary . This practice continued throughout the season , until the system was made official before the start of the next season . During 1952 , a new International Phonetic Alphabet was introduced , as the old phonetic alphabet was seen as too Anglocentric . This led to some confusion with what names were being used , as some observers referred to Hurricane Charlie as " Cocoa . " Ahead of the following season no agreement could be reached over which phonetic alphabet to use , before it was decided to start using a list of female names to name tropical cyclones . During the season the names were used in the press with only a few objections recorded , and as a result public reception to the idea seemed favourable . The same names were reused during 1954 with only one change : Gilda for Gail . However , as Hurricanes Carol , Edna , and Hazel affected the populated Northeastern United States , controversy raged with several protests over the use of women ’ s names as it was felt to be <unk> and or insulting to <unk> . Letters were subsequently received that overwhelmingly supported the practise , with forecasters claiming that 99 % of correspondence received in the Miami Weather Bureau supported the use of women ’ s names for hurricanes . 
 Forecasters subsequently decided to continue with the current practice of naming hurricanes after women , but developed a new set of names ahead of the 1955 season with the names Carol , Edna and Hazel retired for the next ten years . However , before the names could be written , a tropical storm was discovered on January 2 , 1955 and named Alice . The Representative T. James Tumulty subsequently announced that he intended to introduce legislation that would call on the USWB to abandon its practice of naming hurricanes after women , and suggested that they be named using descriptive terms instead . Until 1960 , forecasters decided to develop a new set of names each year . By 1958 , the Guam Weather Center had become the Fleet Weather Central / Typhoon Tracking Center on Guam , and had started to name systems as they became tropical storms rather than typhoons . Later that year during the 1958 – 59 cyclone season , the New Caledonia Meteorological Office started to name tropical cyclones within the Southern Pacific . During 1959 the US Pacific Command Commander in Chief and the Joint Chiefs of Staff decided that the various US Navy and Air Force weather units would become one unit based on Guam entitled the Fleet Weather Central / Joint Typhoon Warning Center , which continued naming the systems for the Pacific basin . 
 = = 1960 – 1990s = = 
 In January 1960 , a formal naming scheme was introduced for the South @-@ West Indian Ocean by the Mauritius and Madagascan Weather <unk> with the first cyclone being named Alix . Later that year , as meteorology entered a new era with the launching of the world 's first meteorological satellite TIROS @-@ 1 , eight lists of tropical cyclone names were prepared for use in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific basins . In the Atlantic it was decided to rotate these lists every four years , while in the Eastern Pacific the names were designed to be used consecutively before being repeated . During 1963 , the Philippine Weather Bureau adopted four sets of female Filipino nicknames ending in " ng " from A to Y for use in its self @-@ defined area of responsibility . Following the international practise of naming tropical cyclones , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology decided at a conference in October 1963 that they would start naming tropical cyclones after women at the start of the 1963 – 64 cyclone season . The first Western Australian cyclone was subsequently named Bessie on January 6 , 1964 . In 1965 , after two of the Eastern Pacific lists of names had been used , it was decided to start recycling the sets of names on an annual basis like in the Atlantic . 
 At its 1969 national conference , the National Organization for Women passed a motion that called for the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) not to name tropical cyclones using only female names . Later that year , during the 1969 – 70 cyclone season , the New Zealand Meteorological Service ( NZMS ) office in Fiji started to name tropical cyclones that developed within the South Pacific basin , with the first named Alice on January 4 , 1970 . Within the Atlantic basin the four lists of names were used until 1971 , when the newly established United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration decided to inaugurate a ten @-@ year list of names for the basin . <unk> Bolton subsequently petitioned the 1971 , 1972 and 1973 interdepartmental hurricane conferences to stop the female naming ; however , the National Hurricane Center responded by stating that there was a 20 : 1 positive response to the usage of female names . In February 1975 , the NZMS decided to incorporate male names into the naming lists for the South Pacific , from the following season after a request from the Fiji National Council of Women who considered the practice discriminatory . At around the same time the Australian Science Minister ordered that tropical cyclones within the Australian region should carry both men 's and women 's names , as the minister thought " that both sexes should bear the odium of the devastation caused by cyclones . " Male names were subsequently added to the lists for the Southern Pacific and each of the three Australian tropical cyclone warning centres ahead of the 1975 – 76 season . 
 During 1977 the World Meteorological Organization decided to form a hurricane committee , which held its first meeting during May 1978 and took control of the Atlantic hurricane naming lists . During 1978 the Secretary of Commerce Juanita Kreps ordered NOAA administrator Robert White to cease the sole usage of female names for hurricanes . Robert White subsequently passed the order on to the Director of NHC Neil Frank , who attended the first meeting of the hurricane committee and requested that both men ’ s and women ’ s names be used for the Atlantic . The committee subsequently decided to accept the proposal and adopted five new lists of male and female names to be used the following year . The lists also contained several Spanish and French names , so that they could reflect the cultures and languages used within the Atlantic Ocean . After an agreement was reached between Mexico and the United States , six new sets of male / female names were implemented for the Eastern Pacific basin during 1978 . A new list was also drawn up during the year for the Western Pacific and was implemented after Typhoon Bess and the 1979 tropical cyclone conference . 
 As the dual sex naming of tropical cyclones started in the Northern Hemisphere , the NZMS considered adding ethnic Pacific names to the naming lists rather than the European names that were currently used . As a result of the many languages and cultures in the Pacific there was a lot of discussion surrounding this matter , with one name , " Oni , " being dropped as it meant " the end of the world " in one language . One proposal suggested that cyclones be named from the country nearest to which they formed ; however , this was dropped when it was realized that a cyclone might be less destructive in its formative stage than later in its development . Eventually it was decided to combine names from all over the South Pacific into a single list at a training course , where each course member provided a list of names that were short , easily pronounced , culturally acceptable throughout the Pacific and did not contain any idiosyncrasies . These names were then collated , edited for suitability , and cross @-@ checked with the group for acceptability . It was intended that the four lists of names should be alphabetical with alternating male and female names while using only ethnic names . However , it was not possible to complete the lists using only ethnic names . As a result , there was a scattering of European names in the final lists , which have been used by the Fiji Meteorological Service and NZMS since the 1980 – 81 season . During October 1985 the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center had to request an additional list , after the names preselected for that season was used up . As a result , the names Xina , York , Zelda , Xavier , Yolanda , Zeke were subsequently added to the naming lists , while a contingency plan of using the Greek alphabet if all of the names were used up was introduced . 
 = = New millennium = = 
 During the 30th session of the ESCAP / WMO Typhoon Committee in November 1997 , a proposal was put forward by Hong Kong to give Asian typhoons local names and to stop using the European and American names that had been used since 1945 . The committee 's Training and Research Coordination Group was subsequently tasked to consult with members and work out the details of the scheme in order to present a list of names for approval at the 31st session . During August 1998 , the group met and decided that each member of the committee would be invited to contribute ten names to the list and that five principles would be followed for the selection of names . It was also agreed that each name would have to be approved by each member and that a single objection would be enough to veto a name . A list of 140 names was subsequently drawn up and submitted to the Typhoon Committee 's 32nd session , who after a lengthy discussion approved the list and decided to implement it on January 1 , 2000 . It was also decided that the Japan Meteorological Agency would name the systems rather than the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 During its annual session in 2000 , the WMO / ESCAP Panel on North Indian Tropical Cyclones agreed in principle to start assigning names to cyclonic storms that developed within the North Indian Ocean . As a result of this , the panel requested that each member country submit a list of ten names to a rapporteur by the end of 2000 . At the 2001 session , the rapporteur reported that of the eight countries involved , only India had refused to submit a list of names , as it had some reservations about assigning names to tropical cyclones . The panel then studied the names and felt that some of the names would not be appealing to the public or the media and thus requested that members submit new lists of names . During 2002 the rapporteur reported that there had been a poor response by member countries in <unk> their lists of names . Over the next year , each country except India submitted a fresh list . By the 2004 session , India had still not submitted its list despite promising to do so . However , the rapporteur presented the lists of names that would be used with a gap left for India 's names . The rapporteur also recommended that the naming lists be used on an experimental basis during the season , starting in May or June 2004 . The naming lists were then completed in May 2004 , after India submitted their names . However , the lists were not used until September 2004 , when the first tropical cyclone was named Onil by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) . 
 At the 22nd hurricane committee in 2000 it was decided that tropical cyclones that moved from the Atlantic to the Eastern Pacific basin and vice versa would no longer be renamed . Ahead of the 2000 – 01 season it was decided to start using male names , as well as female names for tropical cyclones developing in the South @-@ West Indian Ocean . RSMC La Reunion subsequently proposed to the fifteenth session of the RA I Tropical Cyclone Committee for the South @-@ West Indian Ocean during September 2001 , that the basin adopt a single circular list of names . Along with the RA V Tropical Cyclone Committee , RSMC La Reunion also proposed to the session that a tropical cyclone have only one name during its lifetime . However , both of these proposals were rejected in favour of continuing an annual list of names and to rename systems when they moved across 90 ° E into the South @-@ West Indian Ocean . During the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season the naming of subtropical cyclones restarted , with names assigned to systems from the main list of names drawn up for that year . 
 During March 2004 , a rare tropical cyclone developed within the Southern Atlantic , about 1 @,@ 010 km ( 630 mi ) to the east @-@ southeast of Florianópolis in southern Brazil . As the system was threatening the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina , a newspaper used the headline " Furacão Catarina , " which was presumed to mean " <unk> ( hurricane ) threatening ( Santa ) Catarina ( the state ) " . However , when the international press started monitoring the system , it was assumed that " Furacão Catarina " meant " Cyclone Catarina " and that it had been formally named in the usual way . During the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season the names pre @-@ assigned for the North Atlantic basin were exhausted and as a result names from the Greek alphabet were used . There were subsequently a couple of attempts to get rid of the Greek names , as they are seen to be inconsistent with the standard naming convention used for tropical cyclones , and are generally unknown and confusing to the public . However , none of the attempts have succeeded and thus the Greek alphabet will be used should the lists ever be used up again . Ahead of the 2007 hurricane season , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) and the Hawaii State Civil Defense requested that the hurricane committee retire eleven names from the Eastern Pacific naming lists . However , the committee declined the request and noted that its criteria for the retirement of names was " well defined and very strict . " It was felt that while the systems may have had a significant impact on the Hawaiian Islands , none of the impacts were major enough to warrant the retirement of the names . It was also noted that the committee had previously not retired names for systems that had a greater impact than those that had been submitted . The CPHC also introduced a revised set of Hawaiian names for the Central Pacific , after they had worked with the University of Hawaii Hawaiian Studies Department to ensure the correct meaning and appropriate historical and cultural use of the names . 
 On April 22 , 2008 the newly established tropical cyclone warning centre in Jakarta , Indonesia named its first system : Durga , before two sets of Indonesian names were established for their area of responsibility ahead of the 2008 – 09 season . At the same time the Australian Bureau of Meteorology , merged their three lists into one national list of names . The issue of tropical cyclones being renamed when they moved across 90 ° E into the South @-@ West Indian Ocean , was subsequently brought up during October 2008 at the 18th session of the RA I Tropical Cyclone Committee . However , it was decided to postpone the matter until the following committee meeting so that various consultations could take place . During the 2009 Tropical Cyclone RSMCs / TCWCs Technical Coordination Meeting , it was reaffirmed that a tropical cyclone name should be retained throughout a system 's lifetime , including when moving from one basin to another , to avoid confusion . As a result , it was proposed at the following year 's RA I tropical cyclone committee , that systems stopped being renamed when they moved into the South @-@ West Indian Ocean from the Australian region . It was subsequently agreed that during an interim period , cyclones that moved into the basin would have a name attached to their existing name , before it was stopped at the start of the 2012 – 13 season . Tropical Cyclone Bruce was subsequently the first tropical cyclone not to be renamed , when it moved into the South @-@ West Indian Ocean during 2013 @-@ 14 . During March 12 , 2010 , public and private weather services in Southern Brazil , decided to name a tropical storm Anita in order to avoid confusion in future references . A naming list was subsequently set up by the Brazilian Navy Hydrographic Center with the names Arani , <unk> and Cari subsequently taken from that list during 2011 and 2015 . 
 At its twenty @-@ first session in 2015 , the RA I Tropical Cyclone Committee reviewed the arrangements for naming tropical storms and decided that the procedure was in need of a " very urgent change " . In particular it was noted that the procedure did not take into account , any of the significant improvements in the science surrounding tropical cyclones and that it was biased due to inappropriate links with some national warning systems . As a result the committee decided to keep the current naming procedure , for the next few years and form a task force , in order to develop an alternative cyclone naming procedure . 
 = = Modern day = = 
 At present tropical cyclones are officially named by one of eleven warning centres and retain their names throughout their lifetimes to provide ease of communication between forecasters and the general public regarding forecasts , watches , and warnings . Due to the potential for longevity and multiple concurrent storms , the names are thought to reduce the confusion about what storm is being described . Names are assigned in order from predetermined lists once storms have one , three , or ten @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of more than 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) depending on which basin it originates in . However , standards vary from basin to basin , with some tropical depressions named in the Western Pacific , while tropical cyclones have to gale @-@ force winds occurring near the center before they are named within the Southern Hemisphere . 
 Any member of the World Meteorological Organisation 's hurricane , typhoon and tropical cyclone committees can request that the name of a tropical cyclone be retired or withdrawn from the various tropical cyclone naming lists . A name is retired or withdrawn if a consensus or majority of members agree that the tropical cyclone has acquired a special notoriety , such as causing a large amount of deaths , damages , impacts or for other special reasons . Any tropical cyclone names assigned by the Papua New Guinea National weather Service are automatically retired regardless of any damage caused . A replacement name is then submitted to the committee concerned and voted upon , but these names can be rejected and replaced for various reasons . These reasons include the spelling and pronunciation of the name , its similarity to the name of a recent tropical cyclone or on another list of names , and the length of the name for modern communication channels such as social media . PAGASA also retires the names of significant tropical cyclones , when they have caused at least ₱ 1 billion in damage and / or have caused at least 300 deaths . There are no names retired within the South @-@ West Indian Ocean , as names that are used are automatically removed from the three naming lists used in that basin . 
 = 1868 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1868 Atlantic hurricane season was among the quietest on record , with only four tropical cyclones recorded . Only three seasons had fewer storms than in 1868 , and seven had the same number of storms . Initially , there were no known storms during the season , although a re @-@ analysis confirmed the activity . All tropical activity occurred within a 45 day span . There may have been other unconfirmed tropical cyclones during the season . Meteorologist Christopher Landsea estimates up to six storms were missed from the official database , due to small tropical cyclone size , sparse ship reports , and relatively unpopulated coastlines . 
 Only one of the storms , the second , made landfall , doing so near Apalachicola , Florida . It produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds across the southeastern United States , although there was no severe damage associated with the storm . The first hurricane killed two people when a ship passed through its winds for 14 hours . The third hurricane , located in the western Caribbean Sea , did not affect land , although two ships experienced its strong winds . The final hurricane lasted three days across the western Atlantic , forcing one ship to halt its voyage due to storm damage . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 The first known tropical cyclone of the season was observed on September 3 , about halfway between the Bahamas and Bermuda . A nearby ship estimated winds of 80 mph ( 130 km ) , indicating the presence of the hurricane . It moved northward initially , passing about 220 mi ( 355 km ) west of Bermuda on September 4 . Thereafter , the hurricane turned toward the northeast , and the ship " John Richardson " encountered gale force winds on September 5 , resulting in a wreck of its cargo . On September 6 , it was estimated to have reached peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , based on observations from the ship with the call sign " Greenock " . The hurricane lashed the ship with strong winds for 14 hours , killing the captain and one crewman . At the time , it was about 400 mi ( 640 km ) southeast of Halifax , Nova Scotia . Turning to the northeast , the hurricane passed south of Newfoundland before last being observed on September 7 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 A ship sunk in the western Gulf of Mexico on October 1 , which was the first indication of the second tropical cyclone of the season . The storm moved slowly northeastward toward the southeastern Louisiana coastline , intensifying to its estimated peak winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . On October 4 , it passed near or over southeastern Louisiana , producing heavy rain and gusty winds in New Orleans . Flooding was observed in portions of the city , and the West Rigolets Lighthouse on Lake Pontchartrain suffered $ 5 @,@ 000 in damage due to the storm ( 1868 USD , $ 81 @,@ 000 2010 USD ) . The storm accelerated northeastward and struck near Apalachicola , Florida late on October 4 . 
 As the storm crossed over the Florida panhandle and southeastern Georgia , the winds weakened to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , although it still produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds in Savannah , Georgia . No severe damage was reported in the city . The tropical storm continued northeastward , emerging into the western Atlantic and paralleling the coastlines of the Carolinas just offshore . Several ships reported strong winds and rough seas . On October 6 , the storm restrengthened to its peak intensity before becoming an extratropical cyclone about 200 mi ( 320 km ) southeast of Cape Cod ; however , one meteorologist assessed it as acquiring extratropical characteristics after it exited Georgia into the western Atlantic . As an extratropical storm , it reached winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , based on a ship report south of Atlantic Canada . Late on October 7 , the storm was last observed to the south of Newfoundland . The storm was the only one in the season not to attain hurricane status . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 As the previous storm was moving along the coastline of the southeastern United States , a new hurricane was observed in the western Caribbean Sea , about halfway between Honduras and Jamaica . Its intensity , based on a ship report , was estimated at 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . The hurricane moved slowly west @-@ northwestward , and another ship experienced its strong winds on October 7 . There were no further observations , so its complete track is unknown . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The final known hurricane of the season was observed on October 15 , to the northeast of the central Bahamas . The ship " Jim Cow " , en route from New York to Panama , suffered heavy damage from the storm , so much that it could not complete its voyage . Moving generally northeastward , the hurricane was estimated to have reached peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , based on ship reports . On October 17 the cyclone was absorbed by a rapidly intensifying extratropical cyclone off the coast of New England . It never affected land . 
 = Psycho @-@ Pass = 
 Psycho @-@ Pass ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> , stylized as <unk> @-@ PASS ) is an anime television series that was produced by Production I.G , directed by Naoyoshi Shiotani & Katsuyuki Motohiro and written by Gen Urobuchi . The series was aired on Fuji TV 's Noitamina programming block between October 2012 and March 2013 . The story takes place in an authoritarian future dystopia , where omnipresent public sensors continuously scan the Psycho @-@ Pass of every citizen in range . The sensors measure mental state , personality , and the probability that the citizen will commit crimes , alerting authorities when someone exceeds accepted norms . To enforce order , the officers of the Public Safety Bureau carry hand weapons called Dominators . The story follows Akane Tsunemori , Shinya Kogami , and other members of Unit One of the Public Safety Bureau 's Criminal Investigation Division , and the crimes they investigate using Dominators . 
 Psycho @-@ Pass originated from Production I.G. ' s interest in making a successor to Mamoru Oshii 's achievements . The series was inspired by several live @-@ action films . Chief director Katsuyuki Motohiro aimed to explore psychological themes in society 's youth using dystopian storylines . Several rules were used to focus on making the dystopia that the characters live in . 
 The series was licensed by Funimation in North America . A second season began airing in October 2014 , with an animated film released in January 2015 . A manga adaptation has been in serialization in Shueisha 's Jump Square magazine and several novels , including an adaptation and prequels to the original story , have been published . An episodic video game adaptation called Chimi Chara Psycho @-@ Pass was developed by Nitroplus Staffers in collaboration with Production I.G. New novels and another manga were serialized in 2014 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Psycho @-@ Pass is set in 2112 . The Sibyl System ( <unk> , <unk> Shisutemu ) is actively measuring the populace 's mental states , personalities , and the probability that individuals will commit crimes , using a " <unk> scan " of the brain . The resulting assessment is called a Psycho @-@ Pass ( <unk> , <unk> ) . When the probability of a person engaging in crimes measured by the Crime Coefficient ( <unk> , <unk> ) index exceeds a certain level in an individual , he or she is pursued , apprehended , and killed if necessary . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot focuses on Akane Tsunemori , a new Inspector of Unit One — a police unit from the Public Safety Bureau 's Criminal Investigation Division . Tsunemori hunts criminals alongside a special team of so @-@ called latent criminals called Enforcers . Inspectors and Enforcers use large handguns called " Dominators " — special weapons designed to fire only at those with a higher @-@ than @-@ acceptable Crime Coefficient . Akane is ashamed of shooting the Enforcer Shinya Kogami during her first mission to protect a latent criminal . Kogami thanks her for stopping him from becoming a murderer , which persuades Akane to stay . She is accompanied by veteran Inspector Nobuchika Ginoza , a strict man who looks down on Enforcers , Tomomi Masaoka , a middle @-@ aged man who used to be a detective , <unk> Kagari , a carefree young man who has been a latent criminal ever since he was a child , and Yayoi <unk> , a former musician turned into a latent criminal after interacting with a terrorist . During Akane 's first investigations , the group learns about the existence of Shogo Makishima , a mastermind who is responsible for multiple crimes . Being Criminally Asymptomatic ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , Makishima 's criminal psychology yields a low Crime Coefficient , making him safe from the Sibyl System and the Dominator . 
 The Enforcers and Inspectors start hunting Makishima , who aims to destroy the society created by the Sibyl System . To do this he causes riots in the city to draw the police away from the Health and Welfare Ministry 's Nona Tower facility , where Sibyl is located . Akane and Kogami stop Makishima 's forces while Enforcer <unk> Kagari follows one of Makishima 's allies to the tower where Bureau Chief <unk> <unk> kills Makishima 's ally and Kagari to keep the true form of Sibyl a secret . <unk> tells Makishima that Sibyl is a hivemind of similarly asymptomatic individuals and wishes him to join the system but Makishima escapes . Realizing the truth behind Makishima 's escape , Kogami leaves the group to kill him . Akane is later directly contacted by the Sibyl system , which orders her to capture Makishima alive . She agrees to do this on the condition that they withdraw the execution order for Kogami . Learning that Makishima plans to commit bioterrorism to weaken Japan 's economy and bring the system down , the Criminal Investigation Division searches for both Makishima and Kogami . There , Makishima tries killing Ginoza but Masaoka sacrifices his life to save him . Despite Akane 's efforts , Kogami kills Makishima and the former 's erstwhile comrades never see him again . 
 In season two , Akane , now the leader of a restored Unit One including rookie inspector Mika Shimotsuki , Ginoza , who is demoted to an enforcer , Yayoi and two new enforcers , Sakuya Togane and Sho <unk> , face a new threat in the form of Kirito Kamui , another criminal mastermind who , just like Shogo , intends to bring down the Sybil System by exploiting its flaws instead of just wreaking havoc . Skilled in avoiding all forms of detection and capable of helping his supporters to keep their Crime Coefficients low , only a very few believe that he actually exists , including Akane . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was directed by Naoyoshi Shiotani , written by Gen Urobuchi and features character designs by Reborn ! manga artist Akira Amano . It stars Kana Hanazawa as Akane Tsunemori , Tomokazu Seki as Shinya Kogami and Takahiro Sakurai as Shogo Makishima . Psycho @-@ Pass originated from Production I.G. ' s interest in making a successor to Mamoru Oshii 's Ghost in the Shell and Patlabor ; the company hired Katsuyuki Motohiro — who became the series ' chief director — and veteran I.G. animator Naoyoshi Shiotani to supervise direction . 
 Motohiro wanted to return to making anime after a long hiatus but he needed a charismatic script writer . Motohiro and his staff were surprised with Gen Urobuchi 's contribution to the anime series Puella Magi Madoka Magica . Motohiro was fascinated by Madoka Magica ; he read other works from Urobuchi , which persuaded him to talk to Urobuchi . In early 2011 , Motohiro proposed to Urobuchi that the pair should work together . Early in the making of the series , Motohiro told Naoyoshi Shiotani not to make anything that could not be adapted into a live @-@ action film . 
 Before work on Psycho @-@ Pass started , Shiotani was busy working on the film Blood @-@ C : The Last Dark . As soon as his work with the film ended , Shiotani focused on the series ' quality . After episode 16 , which proved to be the most challenging and popular of the series , the team found themselves " out of stamina " . The next two episodes were made by an outside team , which is reflected in several problems with the animation . In response to this , the producer of the episode said that while he expected problems , he worked to make it the best he could . Shiotani also apologized for the episode 's quality . The original team continued working from episode 19 on until the finale ; they decided to remake episodes 17 and 18 for their retail release . 
 The series was first announced in late March 2012 by Fuji TV at its Noitamina press conference . In March 2013 , Shiotani stated there could be a second season if the show received enough support . Once development of the second season started , Shiotani said the new episodes are more difficult to make than those in the first season . He said , " it 's more about the show 's inflexibility " because the staff have to maintain consistency . For the second season Tow Ubukata replaced Urobuchi as main writer . Ubukata mentions he was given the idea of expanding the setting in the form of a sequel . As a result of being given the scenario of the TV series and the film , Ubukata had to write the characters ' personalities . Although time of the production was short , he had the time to discuss with the first series ' staff . Shiotani aided the team for the final episode which Ubukata was satisfied with . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 When hearing the comments from Atsuko Ishizuka , director of The Pet Girl of <unk> , about the way the characters were designed first , Shiotani realized it was the opposite for his team , who had to create the setting first and then the characters because they " are almost being played by the world " . As a result , the characters were designed by manga artist Akira Amano to balance them with the dark atmosphere by having them " palatable and very relate @-@ able " . The staff avoided using bright colors that would stand out . Akane Tsunemori was created as the most relatable character , who would question the setting from the audience 's point of view and as the heroine who would come between the main character , Shinya Kogami , and his main rival , and enemy , Shogo Makishima . Akane 's progression from an innocent newcomer to a mature and haunted person was one of the staff 's main objectives . 
 Motohiro allowed his team to use very graphic elements , even though they could reduce female viewership . He acknowledges that the series may be too violent for a younger demographic and said that he would not want his son to watch it because of its psychological brutality . He added that the team did not want to make a violent series but an " artistic series that just happened to have some violence included in it " . About the amount of violence , Shiotani told Urobuchi , " just let us deal with it " . Some of these violent scenes occur off @-@ camera , but whenever a protagonist was involved the moment was developed to be memorable . The team twice had to remake scenes because the television station complained that they went " overboard . " 
 Motohiro wanted the series to counter concurrent anime trends . The use of moe ( slang ) was banned at staff meetings because they appreciated dramas like Mobile Suit Gundam and Patlabor that focus on conflicts between male characters . As the series was " anti @-@ moe " , the team decided to avoid having the female lead character Akane remove her clothes and instead had Kogami do it . Nevertheless , the show attracted a female viewership because the conflict between the male characters appeared to attract the shonen ai genre fans . Although Shiotani also wanted the series to avoid romance between male characters , he believed the fight scenes between male characters unintentionally attracted female fans . The staff decided to focus on friendships rather than romantic relationships . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The series was inspired by several Western films , most notably L.A. Confidential . Director Naoyoshi Shiotani cited several other influences , including Minority Report , Gattaca , Brazil and Blade Runner ; the latter of which he compared very closely to Psycho @-@ Pass . Before the making of the series , Urobuchi insisted on using a Philip K. Dick @-@ inspired , dystopian narrative . The psychological themes were based on the time Shiotani watched Lupin III during his childhood because he thought about adding " today 's youth trauma " to the series . The rivalry between the main characters was based on the several dramas the staff liked . Other voice actors have been credited in the making of the series because of the ways they added traits to the characters . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The staff had problems composing an opening theme for the series until someone provided some music by Ling <unk> <unk> , who was engaged to compose the opening theme . Egoist , who composed the ending theme , had debuted on Noitamina with Guilty Crown . Shiotani said they asked Egoist to record three versions of the ending theme so they could alternate them to match the episode 's ending . Across the series , time limits resulted in the ending songs being removed or replaced with instrumental versions to avoid cutting scenes from the episode . When there were concerns from the producers of the songs , Tomohiro and Shiotani discussed this with them . 
 Two Psycho @-@ Pass CDs were included in the second and fifth Japanese home media release of the series . The Psycho Pass original soundtrack was released by Sony Music Entertainment on May 29 , 2013 . It features fifty @-@ five tracks composed by Yugo Kanno . The second original soundtrack was released on March 18 , 2015 . A two @-@ volume drama CD called Namae no nai <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " The Monster with no Name " ) based on the prequel novel was released between September 25 and November 27 , 2013 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 As some critics have noted , Psycho @-@ Pass explores societal and psychological themes , such as the price of living without stress , and without fear of crime . Indeed , the Sibyl System targets individuals who are considering performing actions that might cause stress to others . But this raises the question of whether it is morally and socially acceptable to charge individuals with crimes they have not yet committed . For example , in the first episode , a woman is raped , and the resultant trauma causes her Psycho @-@ Pass to become clouded . According to Sibyl 's instructions , the police are therefore prepared to kill her . But Akane steps in , refusing to accept Sibyl 's verdict , and manages to bring the woman 's Psycho @-@ Pass level back to the acceptable range by speaking gently to her . Consequently , this challenges the notion that the potential to commit a crime necessarily correlates with actually committing the crime . According to Anime News Network , " We are all capable of doing bad things at times — should we be punished because we thought of hurting someone before we act on it ? Or because we were victims ? It really all comes back to that first episode and Akane 's reaction to the victim who presented as a violent criminal " . 
 Psycho @-@ Pass further suggests that the price of living without stress includes overriding the individual 's needs in favor of general social value . It is morally and socially acceptable to kill individuals who may potentially commit crimes , so long as we accept that the harm that a criminal causes to society outweighs the harm we cause to an individual who is falsely charged . In other words , the Sibyl System operates on the principles of opportunity cost and acceptable risk . But relying on the Sibyl System paradoxically creates a society which fears no crime as a whole , but individuals who personally fear the consequences of the Sibyl System 's verdicts . As such , Urobuchi himself has said that one of the series ' central thematic ideas is " fear " as seen through Shogo Makishima 's feeling of being out of place - because the Sibyl System cannot recognize him for what he actually is , he feels displaced and deviant within the structure of society itself . 
 Emotional repression is also explored in Psycho @-@ Pass . The identification of latent criminals is partially based around the avoidance of emotions that society judges to be negative , such as sadness or anger . To avoid being identified as a latent criminal , one must not feel these emotions heavily outside , where their Psycho @-@ Pass can be scanned . Kotaku states , " because of these scans , Psycho @-@ Pass shows an interesting future where ' mental beauty ' is as sought after as physical beauty . It is also a future where the police 's job is little more than to watch the latent criminals they control — because if they did any real detective work , they might start to think like the criminals they are trying to catch and thus become latent criminals themselves . " Many of the main characters feel nostalgia throughout the series . The many references to older literature , philosophy , music and theatre create a " nostalgic world building for a time before psycho @-@ passes " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The anime series produced by Production I.G. was broadcast in Japan on Fuji TV 's Noitamina programming block between October 12 , 2012 and March 22 , 2013 . Toho started releasing the series on DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats on December 21 , 2012 and the eighth and final volume was released on July 26 , 2013 . Funimation has licensed the series in North America and simulcast it on its website , first in Japanese , and later weekly in English . Psycho @-@ Pass was one of three initial shows aired as a Funimation " broadcast dub . " A home media release was planned for March 2014 . In the United Kingdom , the series is licensed by Manga Entertainment and in Australia by Madman Entertainment . 
 On July 6 , 2013 , Production I.G. president <unk> Ishikawa said at Anime Expo that production on a second season had begun . The second season , titled Psycho @-@ Pass 2 , began airing in October 2014 ; the film was released in January 2015 . Before the debut broadcast of the second season , the first season — condensed into 11 one @-@ hour episodes — began airing in July 2014 . The fourth episode was cancelled due to similarities with a real life murder . Director Naoyoshi Shiotani apologized for this in his Twitter account . Nevertheless , Funimation streamed the episode . A Blu @-@ ray box set was announced with a scheduled release on October 15 , 2014 . This set contains both the original first season broadcast and the edited one @-@ hour rerun episodes . 
 The second series aired on Fuji TV 's Noitamina programming block between October 9 , 2014 and December 18 , 2014 . The series was collected in a total of five DVD and Blu @-@ ray volumes between December 17 , 2014 and April 15 , 2015 . 
 A new animated film was announced on September 6 , 2013 . It was released in Japanese cinemas on January 9 , 2015 . Urobuchi and Makoto Fukami are contributing together as the film 's writers . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga adaptation illustrated by Hikaru Miyoshi , titled Inspector Akane Tsunemori ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Tsunemori Akane ) , began serialization in Shueisha 's Jump Square magazine from November 2 , 2012 . Its first tankōbon volume was released by Shueisha on February 4 , 2013 . In November 2013 , it was announced that 380 @,@ 000 copies of the manga were shipped in Japan with three volumes . 
 Another manga titled Psycho @-@ Pass : Inspector Shinya Kogami ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Shinya ) premiered in the August issue of Mag Garden 's Monthly Comic Blade magazine on June 30 , 2014 . <unk> Sai is illustrating the series and the story is written by Midori Gotou and Production I.G. 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 A novelization of the series by Makoto Fukami has been published by Mag Garden in two volumes released on February 4 and April 4 , 2013 . Shiotani said the novels were more violent than the television series . A prequel titled Namae no Nai <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " The Monster with no Name " ) was written by Aya <unk> , who worked on the television series . Before the novel was released , it was first published on the " Noitamina Novel " page on Noitamina 's official website . The novel was released on February 4 , 2013 . 
 A new series of novels focusing on four characters by Ryō <unk> began publication in the August issue of Hayakawa Publishing 's S @-@ F Magazine on June 25 , 2014 . After the serialization ends , Hayakawa Bunko JA revised the novels and published them in October 2014 . Other stories will focus on Choe Gu @-@ sung , <unk> Kagari , Yayoi <unk> and Shion <unk> . Hayakawa Bunko JA also published the Psycho Pass Genesis book in December 2014 , which revealed the origins of Sybil and <unk> Masaoka 's involvement . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Interactive visual novels titled Chimi Chara Psycho @-@ Pass , which feature chibi versions of the series ' characters in original stories , were included with Blu @-@ ray Disc volumes of the anime and are playable on any Blu @-@ ray playing device . In May 2014 , it was announced by Anime News Network that a video game based on the series , named Psycho @-@ Pass : Mandatory Happiness , was being developed by 5pb. for the Xbox One ; with a PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 4 port announced in December 2015 . The game features an original story written by Urobuchi , which takes place during the time period of the anime 's first six episodes and focuses on a new set of protagonists confronting a new enemy on a remote <unk> America is localizing Psycho @-@ Pass : Mandatory Happiness for the PlayStation 4 , Vita and an exclusive PC version via Steam for Fall 2016 . The Xbox One version of the game will not be localized . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fuji TV producer Akitoshi Mori said Psycho @-@ Pass was the first work under his control . Early screenings of the series at the Noitamina Shop & Café attracted few viewers , which bothered Mori . However , as the series continued , the quantity of viewers increased . By the final episode , over 1 @,@ 000 people had queued to watch the finale even though the venue could only accommodate seventy people . This made Mori happy because he realized how many fans were following and supporting the show ; he wanted to see a bigger audience at future screenings . DVDs and Blu @-@ ray discs of the series achieved good sales . In April 2014 , the series was nominated for the Seiun Award . In the Newtype anime awards from 2013 , it was voted as fourth best title of the year . Episode 11 of the series was awarded " Best Episode " in the Noitamina 10th anniversary fan vote . Shinya Kogami , Akane Tsunemori and Shogo Makishima also appeared in such polls as winners of their own categories . Anime News Network also listed as the fifth most accessible anime series for people who have not watched Japanese animation . 
 The series was well received by publications for anime , manga and other media . Rebecca Silverman from Anime News Network praised the show for its " high level of interest " in depicting its dystopian world . However , she said that its violent scenes were so gruesome they might scare viewers . Kotaku 's Richard Eisenbeis called it a " compelling cyberpunk mystery " , praising the society depicted and the series of murders orchestrated by Shogo Makishima . However , he criticized the use of advanced technology and compared it with other science fiction films despite saying that it handled the themes better whereas Makishima 's immunity to it was left unexplained . DVD Talk gave high praise to Makishima because of his achievements across the story and his personality . Certain episodes have been referred as " filler " because they are used as a build @-@ up to the climactic ones . Bamboo Dong of Anime News Network gave high praise stating that from episode 12 , the series was " a real blast to watch " and that she was glad with the development of the protagonist , Akane Tsunemori . However , she severely criticized the plot twist regarding the Sybil System 's true identity calling it " one of the stupidest revelations in the history of anime " . 
 Thomas Zoth from The Fandom Post praised the show 's focus on the relationships between the protagonists and the development from these . Akane 's growth across the series earned major praise by multiple reviewers . Zoth enjoyed the series ' climactic action scenes between Kogami and Makishima , and the scenes portraying the status quo . He said the sixteenth episode is " Urobuchi 's masterpiece . " Silverman commented on the parallelism between Akane 's and Kogami 's development , which resulted in an ambiguous ending that should be decided by the viewers . The supporting cast received similar praise by DVD Talk but the reviewer said some were underwhelming and Shion is the least @-@ explored character . 
 During the streaming of the series , Silverman criticized the animation because of the low lighting levels that might make it hard to understand . Hiroko Yamamura from Japanator noted the series ' high budget and praised the animation style and the focus on details and technology . She was attracted by its premise and expected the quality to remain consistent across the entire series . Similarly , Jacob Hope Chapman from ANN praised the animation for its high quality . Episode 18 , which is known for its flawed animation , was improved for the home media release of the series . 
 = The Edukators = 
 The Edukators ( German : Die fetten Jahre sind vorbei ) is a 2004 German @-@ Austrian crime drama film directed by Hans Weingartner . It stars Daniel Brühl , Stipe Erceg and Julia Jentsch as three young , anti @-@ capitalist Berlin activists involved in a love triangle . The friends , calling themselves " the Edukators " , invade upper @-@ class houses , rearrange the furniture , and leave notes identifying themselves . 
 Weingartner , a former activist , wrote the film based on his experiences and chose to use nonviolent characters . The film , shot in Berlin and Austria with digital hand @-@ held cameras , was made on a low budget which Weingartner said kept the focus on the acting . First shown at the Cannes Film Festival on 17 May 2004 and released in its home countries later that year , The Edukators was praised by critics and audiences . It grossed more than $ 8 million worldwide and received a number of awards and nominations . It did , however , receive criticism mainly for its political statements and also for its long running time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in 2004 , the film revolves around three young anti @-@ capitalist activists in Berlin 's city centre : Jule ( Julia Jentsch ) , her boyfriend Peter ( Stipe Erceg ) and his best friend Jan ( Daniel Brühl ) . Jule is a waitress struggling to pay off a € 100 @,@ 000 debt she incurred a year ago when she crashed into a Mercedes @-@ Benz S @-@ Class belonging to a wealthy businessman named Hardenberg ( <unk> Klaußner ) . After her eviction for non @-@ payment of rent she moves in with Peter and Jan , who are often out all night . While Peter is in Barcelona , Jan tells Jule that he and Peter spend their nights " educating " upper @-@ class people by breaking into their houses , moving furniture around and leaving notes saying " die fetten Jahre sind vorbei " ( " the days of plenty are over " ) or " Sie haben zu viel Geld " ( " you have too much money " ) . 
