 After hearing this , Jule convinces the reluctant Jan to break into Hardenberg 's home in the affluent Berlin suburb of Zehlendorf while he is away on business . During the break @-@ in , the thrill of the moment entices them to kiss before Jan leaves Jule alone for a few minutes ; he does not want to destroy his friendship with Peter . As she wanders around outside Jule accidentally sets off the house 's floodlights , and they quickly leave . 
 When Peter returns the next day , Jan and Jule do not tell him about their activities the night before . Jule realises that her mobile phone is gone , and she and Jan leave later that night to look for it in the house . After she finds it , Hardenberg walks in the door and struggles with Jule when he recognises her . Hearing them , Jan comes downstairs and knocks Hardenberg unconscious with a flashlight . Not knowing what to do , they call Peter and he comes to their aid . 
 The three cannot decide what to do with Hardenberg and take him to a remote , rarely used cabin belonging to Jule 's uncle in the Tyrolean Austrian Alps near <unk> , overlooking <unk> . As they try to decide how to deal with their hostage , they learn that Hardenberg was a radical himself during the 1960s . A leader of the Socialist German Student Union , he was a good friend of Rudi <unk> before marrying , getting a good job and abandoning his ideals . 
 As the story progresses , political ideology and the characters ' relationships become the main issues . Peter and Jan temporarily fall out over Jan 's developing romance with Jule , and Hardenberg seems to regain some of his former self . 
 The trio finally decide that kidnapping Hardenberg was wrong and take him back to his house to let him go . As they prepare to leave , Hardenberg gives Jule a letter forgiving her debt and promising not to involve the police . The film ends with Peter , Jan and Jule asleep in the same bed as a group of heavily armed police ( <unk> ) gather outside their flat and knock on the door . Jule wakes up when she hears a knock , and the police force their way into the almost @-@ empty flat . Apparently in Barcelona , Jule opens the door to a hotel maid who wishes to clean their room . In the Berlin apartment , the police find a note : " Manche Menschen <unk> sich nie " ( " some people never change " ) . In the original German version , the Edukators set off in Hardenberg 's boat in the Mediterranean , presumably to disrupt the island signal towers supplying most television programming to Western Europe . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and characters = = = 
 According to Weingartner , The Edukators was influenced by his past as a political activist : " There 's some of me in the film " . It describes the last 10 years of his life , an attempt to find a political movement satisfying his ideals . He considers it an autobiographical film , with Brühl playing Weingartner . The director opted for nonviolence because violence " only makes the system stronger " , citing the Baader @-@ Meinhof gang which " practically killed the Left movement in Germany ... because they gave the police an excuse to really arm up and create a more totalitarian system . " Instead , Weingartner gave his characters " poetic resistance . " 
 Although Brühl thought the film " very realistic " , he was dissatisfied with his character 's authenticity . The actor felt " attached " to Jan , admiring his " courage to want to change the way things are going , to act to defend his beliefs " , but thought it was " very utopian and naive , that they take so much risk to break into some rich man 's house to move things around . " 
 The authenticity of the love triangle was " very important " to Weingartner , who was once part of such a relationship . Although the actors were uncertain at first that Peter could forgive Jan and Jule 's betrayal , Weingartner uses the situation to explore his concept of friendship : " Friendship means more to him than bourgeois moral values . Peter loves Jule – he doesn 't own her . He can tell that when she falls in love with Jan , their love is a wonderful thing , coloured by a joint rebellion – a shared rejection of social constraint . " 
 = = = Production and filming = = = 
 Weingartner said he received an offer large enough that " I would not have to work for the rest of my life " from an American studio but refused it , opting to produce the film with his own studio , <unk> , and <unk> , an Austrian studio . A low @-@ budget film , it was funded by a € 250 @,@ 000 loan Weingartner obtained with his parents ' house as collateral . His second feature film , The Edukators was shot with hand @-@ held digital cameras , allowing the director " to explore the space and give actors license to go wherever they wanted . " Weingartner wanted a technically simple film focused on the actors . His decision to have a low budget was measured : " More money means more pressure . This way , I used a limited crew and was able to set the shooting schedule the way I wanted it - usually . The huge advantage of this kind of film @-@ making is that it 's rapid . " Most of the film was shot in Berlin , except for scenes in the Austrian Alps . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The character of Peter was written for Erceg , after Weingartner saw him " in a friend 's film . " Brühl , already a popular actor in Germany , was known to the director , who saw him as a " perfect match " for Erceg . Klaußner was cast because , according to Weingartner , " I knew the energy and vibe between us was right . " The most difficult role to cast was Jule ; Weingartner searched for eight months , and when he found Jentsch she was committed to another film . Since he was certain that the actress was " the perfect cast " , he rescheduled filming . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Weingartner commented that the film is " about economic revolution , about poor vs. rich . " He also tried to explore in the film the fact that , in his opinion , " Today , we live in a society in which revolution is on sale . " However , it deals with " lots of themes , " and " the theme of revolution , of rebellion , " and of " how a person can change the course of his life " are the main ones . Similarly , Brühl commented that " there are different things you can take out of it " as the film also deals with generational conflict and stories of love and friendship . 
 Hardenberg 's " psycho @-@ sexual powerplay " against the main characters while in the Alps stands for what Weingartner considers " a betrayal of European Left by hippie @-@ era survivors including Joschka Fischer , Gerhard Schroder — and Tony Blair . " 
 Even if the subject of the film is political , Weingartner said , " the whole idea of ' <unk> ' is playful . The movie is full of jokes . And happiness . I read somewhere that kids laugh out loud more than 150 times a day . Adults laugh only 10 times a day . Well , I want people to laugh . I want people to go see the film and have fun . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Accolades and public reception = = = 
 The Edukators premiered on 17 May at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival , where it received a standing ovation , and was nominated for the Palme d 'Or . Cinematographers Daniela Knapp and Matthias Schellenberg were nominated for the 2004 Camerimage . The film won the <unk> de Plata ( second place ) at the 2004 Seville European Film Festival , and that year Brühl was nominated for a European Film Award for Best Actor . Of the German Cinema New Talent Awards at the 2004 Munich Film Festival , Weingartner was Best Director , Erceg Best Actor , and writers Weingartner and Held received a jury award . 
 Erceg and Jentsch were nominated for the 2005 New Faces Award . At the 2005 German Film Awards The Edukators shared the Best Feature Film Silver Award with Sophie Scholl – The Final Days , Klaußner was Best Supporting Actor and Weingartner was nominated for the Best Director Award . It was the Best Film and Jentsch the Best Actress at the 2005 German Film Critics Association Awards . At the 2005 Bavarian Film Awards , Jentsch won Best New Actress . The film shared the Audience Award for Best Dramatic Feature at the 2005 Miami International Film Festival with The Overture and Red Dust . 
 The Edukators debuted in German theaters on 25 November 2004 , and the following day in Austria . According to the European Audiovisual Observatory , the film was seen by over 1 @.@ 4 million people in Europe : almost 890 @,@ 000 in Germany , 71 @,@ 000 in Austria and 67 @,@ 000 in Switzerland . The highest attendance in non @-@ German @-@ speaking countries was in France ( over 72 @,@ 000 ) and Turkey ( almost 69 @,@ 000 ) . Box Office Mojo reported gross earnings of $ 8 @,@ 152 @,@ 859 in Argentina , Austria , the Czech Republic , Germany , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Portugal , Slovakia , Taiwan , the United Kingdom and the United States . In Germany and Austria , the film 's home countries , it grossed $ 4 @,@ 540 @,@ 541 and $ 479 @,@ 678 respectively . Since its release The Edukators has become a cult film , according to CBS News , and The Epoch Times called it " a landmark film and international cultural phenomenon " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film was generally well received by critics . Based on 75 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , it has an overall approval rating of 69 percent from critics and an average score of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . According to the website 's consensus , " The Edukators engagingly plays out the clash between youthful idealism and older <unk> . " Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating from 100 top reviews by mainstream critics , calculated a score of 68 based on 28 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Stephanie Bunbury of The Age wrote that in Germany it was a " huge hit ... Abroad , however , it has been the butt of plenty of criticism . It is too earnest , too naive , too Teutonic and sincere . " 
 Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal called The Edukators " an uncommonly smart and interesting " film , and the Austin Chronicle 's Marc Savlov said the film was a " smart , kicky little gem that owes as much to Guy Debord and the Situationists . " According to Sean Axmaker of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , it was " a rare film that gets smarter as it goes along ... inject [ ing ] a satisfying dash of pragmatism every time it seems ready to slip into either unearned idealism or cynical fatalism . " Ray Bennett wrote for The Hollywood Reporter , " The Edukators is that rare beast , a terrific movie that boasts intelligent wit , expert storytelling , delightful characters and grown @-@ up dialogue plus suspense and a wicked surprise ending . " 
 A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that despite " its shortcomings " on political subjects , it " succeeds brilliantly in telling the story of a man who falls in love with his best buddy 's girlfriend and doesn 't know what to do about it . " Tim Appelo of Seattle Weekly praised " the marvelous acting , the sensitive , utterly realistic treatment of the young @-@ love triangle , " adding : " The Edukators is educational — not intellectually , but emotionally . " Washington Post critic Stephen Hunter praised the film 's realism : " The whole thing feels messy , painful , funny and believable , just like that hideous circus known as real life . " The Times ' Howard Swains wrote that it " manages to combine political discourse , a love @-@ triangle and a hostage plot , all without sacrificing its graceful humour . " Los Angeles Times critic Carina Chocano described it as a " sweet , funny and gripping romantic adventure , " and " The only accurate , ironic and poignant depiction of what it 's like to be young and socially committed in the WTO era " . Chocano choose it as one of the 13 best films released in 2005 . 
 Not all reviews were positive . The Orlando Sentinel 's Roger Moore called The Edukators " a surprisingly generic German ' Stockholm Syndrome ' romantic triangle thriller , " adding : " It ends interestingly , but it would 've ended better , and played better , had it been half an hour shorter . " In Slant Magazine , Jason Clark wrote that the film needed " a touch of the perverse " , but " Weingartner plays out the drama far too earnestly , and the story barely sustains the length of a movie half of its running time . " According to Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News , " The dialogue between the captive and the captors gets a little didactic , and the ending is as contrived as it is cynical . " Similar criticism of the film 's didacticism was made by Brett Michel of Boston Phoenix , Kriss Allison of Stylus Magazine and Glenn Whipp of the Los Angeles Daily News . 
 Andre Wright wrote for The Stranger , " [ It ] starts strong , with an <unk> anarchic vibe , but quickly devolves into a dust @-@ dry , hectoring socialist lecture : a cinematic version of Kenner 's My First Revolution playset . " Jonathan Romney of The Independent said that Weingartner " presents his indictment of the System in crudely stacked terms that make The Edukators very much a teen movie rather than a plausible political statement . " In The Times , Wendy Ide wrote : " What could have been an effective piece of drama , a dialogue to cause both sides to question the very foundations of their belief systems , is just a two @-@ hour rant from a wispy bearded idealist whose idea of brotherhood is to sleep with his best friend 's girlfriend . " 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 In 2006 a group of left @-@ wing activists calling itself " Hamburg for Free " dressed as superheroes , robbing food from upper @-@ class stores to distribute to the underclass . The media considered the crimes inspired by the film , and some protesters had T @-@ shirts and banners reading " Die fetten Jahre sind vorbei " ( The Edukators ' original title ) . In 2009 , a statue stolen from Bernard Madoff was returned with a note ( " Bernie the <unk> , Lesson : Return stolen property to rightful owners " ) signed by " The Educators " . 
 It gained international attention and in 2006 it was announced that Brad Anderson would adapt and direct a version of the film set in the United States . 
 = King 's College London = 
 King 's College London ( informally King 's or KCL ) is a public research university located in London , United Kingdom , and a founding constituent college of the federal University of London . King 's was founded in 1829 by King George IV and the Duke of Wellington and received its royal charter in the same year . In 1836 , King 's became one of the two founding colleges of the University of London . In the late 20th century , it grew through a series of mergers , including with Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College of Science and Technology ( in 1985 ) , the Institute of Psychiatry ( in 1997 ) , the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy 's and St Thomas ' Hospitals and the Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery ( in 1998 ) . 
 King 's is regarded as a leading multidisciplinary research university , ranked 19th in the world by the 2015 / 16 QS World University Rankings , and 27th in the world by the 2015 / 16 Times Higher Education . It is usually considered part of the " golden triangle " along with the University of Oxford , the University of Cambridge , University College London , Imperial College London , and the London School of Economics . It is a member of academic organisations such as the Association of Commonwealth Universities , the European University Association , and the Russell Group . 
 King 's has five campuses : its historic main campus on the Strand in central London , three other Thames @-@ side campuses ( Guy 's , St Thomas ' and Waterloo ) and one in Denmark Hill in south London . As of 2014 / 15 , King 's had 28 @,@ 730 students and 5 @,@ 948 staff and a total income of £ 684 @.@ 2 million , of which £ 210 @.@ 8 million was from research grants and contracts . It has the fifth largest endowment of any university in the United Kingdom , and the largest of any in London . Its academic activities are organised into nine faculties which are subdivided into numerous departments , centres and research divisions . King 's is home to six Medical Research Council centres and is a founding member of the King 's Health Partners academic health sciences centre , Francis Crick Institute and <unk> . It is the largest European centre for graduate and post @-@ graduate medical teaching and biomedical research , by number of students , including the world 's first nursing school , the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery . 
 King 's alumni and staff include 12 Nobel laureates ; contributors to the discovery of DNA structure , Hepatitis C , and the Higgs boson ; and key researchers advancing radar , radio , television and mobile phones . Alumni also include heads of states , governments and intergovernmental organisations ; nineteen members of the current House of Commons and sixteen members of the current House of Lords ; and the recipients of two Oscars , three Grammys and an Emmy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 King 's College London , so named to indicate the patronage of King George IV , was founded in 1829 in response to the theological controversy surrounding the founding of " London University " ( which later became University College London ) in 1826 . London University was founded , with the backing of <unk> , Jews and non @-@ Anglican Christians , as a secular institution , intended to educate " the youth of our middling rich people between the ages of 15 or 16 and 20 or later " giving its nickname , " the godless college in Gower Street " . 
 The need for such an institution was a result of the religious and social nature of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge , which then educated solely the sons of wealthy Anglicans . The secular nature of London University was disapproved by The Establishment , indeed , " the storms of opposition which raged around it threatened to crush every spark of vital energy which remained " . Thus , the creation of a rival institution represented a Tory response to reassert the educational values of The Establishment . More widely , King 's was one of the first of a series of institutions which came about in the early nineteenth century as a result of the Industrial Revolution and great social changes in England following the Napoleonic Wars . By virtue of its foundation King 's has enjoyed the patronage of the monarch , the Archbishop of Canterbury as its visitor and during the nineteenth century counted among its official governors the Lord Chancellor , Speaker of the House of Commons and the Lord Mayor of London . 
 = = = = Duel in Battersea Fields , 21 March 1829 = = = = 
 The simultaneous support of the Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington ( who was also UK 's Prime Minister then ) , for an Anglican King 's College London and the Roman Catholic Relief Act , which was to lead to the granting of almost full civil rights to Catholics , was challenged by George Finch @-@ Hatton , 10th Earl of Winchilsea , in early 1829 . Winchilsea and his supporters wished for King 's to be subject to the Test Acts , like the universities of Oxford , where only members of the Church of England could matriculate , and Cambridge , where non @-@ Anglicans could matriculate but not graduate , but this was not Wellington 's intent . 
 Winchilsea and about 150 other contributors withdrew their support of King 's College London in response to Wellington 's support of Catholic emancipation . In a letter to Wellington he accused the Duke to have in mind " insidious designs for the infringement of our liberty and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State " . The letter provoked a furious exchange of correspondence and Wellington accused Winchilsea of imputing him with " disgraceful and criminal motives " in setting up King 's College London . When Winchilsea refused to retract the remarks , Wellington – by his own admission , " no advocate of duelling " and a virgin duellist – demanded satisfaction in a contest of arms : " I now call upon your lordship to give me that satisfaction for your conduct which a gentleman has a right to require , and which a gentleman never refuses to give . " 
 The result was a duel in Battersea Fields on 21 March 1829 . Winchilsea did not fire , a plan he and his second almost certainly decided upon before the duel ; Wellington took aim and fired wide to the right . Accounts differ as to whether Wellington missed on purpose . Wellington , noted for his poor aim , claimed he did , other reports more sympathetic to Winchilsea claimed he had aimed to kill . Honour was saved and Winchilsea wrote Wellington an apology . " Duel Day " is still celebrated on the first Thursday after 21 March every year , marked by various events throughout King 's , including reenactments . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 King 's opened in October 1831 with the cleric William Otter appointed as first principal and lecturer in divinity . The Archbishop of Canterbury presided over the opening ceremony , in which a sermon was given in the chapel by Charles Blomfield , the Bishop of London , on the subject of combining religious instruction with intellectual culture . Despite the attempts to make King 's Anglican @-@ only , the initial prospectus permitted , " nonconformists of all sorts to enter the college freely " . William Howley : the governors and the professors , except the linguists , had to be members of the Church of England but the students did not , though attendance at chapel was compulsory . 
 King 's was divided into a senior department and a junior department , also known as King 's College School , which was originally situated in the basement of the Strand Campus . The Junior department started with 85 pupils and only three teachers , but quickly grew to 500 by 1841 , outgrowing its facilities and leading it to relocate to Wimbledon in 1897 where it remains today , though it is no longer associated with King 's College London . Within the Senior department teaching was divided into three courses : a general course comprised divinity , classical languages , mathematics , English literature and history ; a medical course ; and miscellaneous subjects , such as law , political economy and modern languages , which were not related to any systematic course of study at the time and depended for their continuance on the supply of occasional students . In 1833 the general course was reorganised leading to the award of the Associate of King 's College ( AKC ) , the first qualification issued by King 's . The course , which concerns questions of ethics and theology , is still awarded today to students and staff who take an optional three @-@ year course alongside their studies . 
 The river frontage was completed in April 1835 at a cost of £ 7 @,@ 100 , its completion a condition of King 's College London securing the site from the Crown . Unlike those in the school , student numbers in the Senior department remained almost stationary during King 's first five years of existence . During this time the medical school was blighted by inefficiency and the divided loyalties of the staff leading to a steady decline in attendance . One of the most important appointments was that of Charles Wheatstone as professor of Experimental Philosophy . 
 At this time neither King 's , " London University " , nor the medical schools at the London hospitals could confer degrees . In 1835 the government announced that it would establish an examining board to grant degrees , with " London University " and King 's both becoming affiliated colleges . This became the University of London in 1836 , the former " London University " becoming University College , London ( UCL ) . The first University of London degrees were awarded to King 's College London students in 1839 . 
 In 1840 , King 's opened its own hospital on Portugal Street near Lincoln 's Inn Fields , an area composed of overcrowded rookeries characterised by poverty and disease . The governance of King 's College Hospital was later transferred to the corporation of the hospital established by the King 's College Hospital Act 1851 . The hospital moved to new premises in Denmark Hill , Camberwell in 1913 . The appointment in 1877 of Joseph Lister as professor of clinical surgery greatly benefited the medical school , and the introduction of Lister 's antiseptic surgical methods gained the hospital an international reputation . 
 In 1845 King 's established a Military Department to train officers for the Army and the British East India Company , and in 1846 a Theological Department to train Anglican priests . In 1855 , King 's pioneered evening classes in London ; that King 's granted students at the evening classes certificates of college attendance to enable them to sit University of London degree exams was cited as an example of the worthlessness of these certificates in the decision by the University of London to end the affiliated colleges system in 1858 and open their examinations to everyone . 
 In 1882 the King 's College London Act amended the constitution . The act removed the <unk> nature of King 's , changing the name of the corporation from " The Governors and Proprietors of King 's College , London " to " King 's College London " and annulling the 1829 charter ( although King 's remained incorporated under that charter ) . The act also changing King 's College London from a ( technically ) for @-@ profit corporation to a non @-@ profit one ( no dividends had ever been paid in over 50 years of operation ) and extended the objects of King 's to include the education of women . The Ladies ' Department of King 's College London was opened in Kensington Square in 1885 , which later in 1902 became King 's College Women 's Department . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 See also Contribution of King 's College London to the discovery of the structure of DNA and Photo 51 
 The King 's College London Act 1903 , abolished all remaining religious tests for staff , except within the Theological department . In 1910 , King 's was ( with the exception of the Theological department ) merged into the University of London under the King 's College London ( Transfer ) Act 1908 , losing its legal independence . 
 During World War I the medical school was opened to women for the first time . The end of the war saw an influx of students , which strained existing facilities to the point where some classes were held in the Principal 's house . 
 In World War II , the buildings of King 's College London were used by the Auxiliary Fire Service with a number of King 's staff , mainly those then known as college servants , serving as <unk> . Parts of the Strand building , the quadrangle , and the roof of apse and stained glass windows of the chapel suffered bomb damage in the Blitz . During the post @-@ war reconstruction , the vaults beneath the quadrangle were replaced by a two @-@ storey laboratory , which opened in 1952 , for the departments of Physics and Civil and Electrical Engineering . 
 One of the most famous pieces of scientific research performed at King 's were the crucial contributions to the discovery of the double helix structure of DNA in 1953 by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin , together with Raymond Gosling , Alex Stokes , Herbert Wilson and other colleagues at the Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics at King 's . 
 Major reconstruction of King 's began in 1966 following the publication of the Robbins Report on Higher Education . A new block facing the Strand designed by E. D. <unk> Mathews was opened in 1972 . In 1980 King 's regained its legal independence under a new Royal Charter . In 1993 King 's , along with other large University of London colleges , gained direct access to government funding ( which had previously been through the university ) and the right to confer University of London degrees itself . This contributed to King 's and the other large colleges being regarded as de facto universities in their own right . 
 King 's College London underwent several mergers with other institutions in the late 20th century . These including the reincorporation in 1983 of the King 's College School of Medicine and Dentistry , which had become independent of King 's College Hospital at the foundation of the National Health Service in 1948 , mergers with Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College of Science and Technology in 1985 , and the Institute of Psychiatry in 1997 . In 1998 the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy 's and St Thomas ' Hospitals merged with King 's to form the King 's College London GKT School of Medical Education . Also in 1998 Florence Nightingale 's original training school for nurses merged with the King 's Department of Nursing Studies as the Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery . The same year King 's acquired the former Public Record Office building on Chancery Lane and converted it at a cost of £ 35 million into the Maughan Library , which opened in 2002 . 
 = = = 2001 to present = = = 
 In July 2006 , King 's College London was granted degree @-@ awarding powers in its own right , as opposed to through the University of London , by the Privy Council . This power remained <unk> until 2007 , when King 's announced that all students starting courses from September 2007 onwards would be awarded degrees conferred by King 's itself , rather than by the University of London . The new certificates however still make reference to the fact that King 's is a constituent college of the University of London . All current students with at least one year of study remaining were in August 2007 offered the option of choosing to be awarded a University of London degree or a King 's degree . The first King 's degrees were awarded in summer 2008 . 
 In April 2011 King 's became a founding partner in the UK Centre for Medical Research and Innovation , subsequently renamed the Francis Crick Institute , committing £ 40 million to the project . The Chemistry department was reopened in 2011 following its closure in 2003 . 
 In September 2014 King 's College London opened King 's College London Mathematics School , a free school sixth form located in Lambeth that specialises in <unk> . In October 2014 , Ed Byrne replaced Rick Trainor as Principal of King 's College London , the latter having served for 10 years . In December 2014 , King 's announced its plans to rebrand its name to ' King 's London ' . It was emphasised that there were no plans to change the legal name of King 's , and that the name ' King 's London ' was designed to promote King 's and to highlight the fact that King 's is a university in its own right . King 's announced that the rebranding plans had been dropped in January 2015 . 
 On 10 March 2015 , King 's acquired a 50 @-@ year lease for the Aldwych Quarter which includes the historic grand Bush House building . King ’ s will occupy Bush House and Strand House on a phased basis from September 2016 , and adjacent buildings King House and Melbourne House from 2025 . Once King ’ s takes full occupation of the four main buildings , the Aldwych Quarter will provide approximately 300 @,@ 000 square feet of additional space for student study and social space , new teaching facilities and academic accommodation 
 = = Campus = = 
 = = = Strand Campus = = = 
 The Strand Campus is the founding campus of King 's . It is located on the Strand in the City of Westminster , sharing its frontage along the River Thames . Most of the Schools of Arts & Humanities , Law , Social Science & Public Policy and Natural & Mathematical Sciences ( formerly Physical Sciences & Engineering ) are housed here . The campus combines the Grade I listed King 's Building of 1831 designed by Sir Robert Smirke , and the Byzantine Gothic college chapel , redesigned in 1864 by Sir George Gilbert Scott with the more modern Strand Building , completed in 1972 . The Chesham Building in Surrey Street was purchased after the Second World War . The Macadam Building of 1975 houses the Strand Campus Students ' Union centre and is named after King 's alumnus Sir Ivison Macadam , first President of the National Union of Students . 
 The nearest Underground stations are Temple , Charing Cross and Covent Garden . 
 = = = = King 's Building = = = = 
 The Grade I listed King ’ s Building was designed by Sir Robert Smirke in 1831 . It is the founding building of King 's , located alongside Somerset House . Sir John Nash ( the architect of Buckingham Palace ) offered free services for the building , yet this was declined by King 's since the same was in favour of the services of Sir Robert Smirke ( the architect of the British Museum and King 's neighbour , Somerset House ) . 
 Marble statues of Sappho and Sophocles were bequeathed by Frida Mond in 1923 , a friend of Israel Gollancz , Professor of English Language and Literature at King 's . They were placed in the foyer ( old entrance hall ) of the King 's Building , where they have remained ever since . The two statues symbolise King ’ s motto of ‘ sancte et <unk> ’ ( ‘ with holiness and with wisdom ’ ) . The Great Hall is one of the central congregation spaces within the King 's Building . Many original features and styles of the Hall , such as the oak paneling and the King 's College crest , was repaired , and Grade I listed windows , ceiling and column capital were refurbished in the 21st century . 
 = = = = Chapel = = = = 
 The original King 's College London Chapel was designed by Sir Robert Smirke and was completed in 1831 as part of the King 's building . Given the foundation of the university in the tradition of the Church of England the chapel was intended to be an integral part of the campus . This is reflected in its central location within the King 's Building on the first floor above the Great Hall , accessible via a grand double staircase from the foyer . The original chapel was described as a low and broad room " fitted to the ecclesiological notions of George IV 's reign . " However , by the mid nineteenth century its style had fallen out of fashion and in 1859 a proposal by King 's chaplain , the Reverend E. H. Plumptre , that the original chapel should be reconstructed was approved by King 's College London council , who agreed that its " <unk> and poverty " made it unworthy of King 's . 
 King 's approached Sir George Gilbert Scott to make proposals . In his proposal of 22 December 1859 he suggested that , " There can be no doubt that , in a classic building , the best mode of giving ecclesiastical character is the adoption of the form and , in some degree , the character of an ancient basilica . " His proposals for a chapel modelled on the lines of an classical basilica were accepted and the reconstruction was completed in 1864 at a cost of just over £ 7 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Somerset House East Wing = = = = 
 In December 2009 , King 's signed a 78 @-@ year lease to the East Wing of Somerset House . It has been described as one of the longest @-@ ever property negotiations , taking over 180 years to complete . Since King 's was built it has been in various discussions to expand into one of the wings of Somerset House itself , however , the relationship between King 's and HM Revenue and Customs that occupied the East Wing were sometimes difficult . Sir Robert Smirke 's design of King 's was sympathetic to that of Somerset House which is situated adjacent to the Strand Campus . A condition of King 's acquiring the site in the 1820s was that it should be erected " on a plan which would complete the river front of Somerset House at its eastern extremity in accordance with the original design of Sir William Chambers " which had for so long offended " every eye of taste for its incomplete appearance " . 
 In 1875 , a dispute arose when new windows were added to the façade overlooking King 's . Following a complaint by King 's College London council at the loss of privacy , the response of the Metropolitan Board of Works was that " the terms under which the college is held are not such as to enable the council to restrict Her Majesty from opening windows in Somerset House whenever she may think proper " . By the end of World War I , King 's began to outgrow its premises which led to rekindled efforts to acquire the East Wing . There was even a suggestion that King 's should be relocated to new premises in Bloomsbury to alleviate space concerns , however , these plans never came to fruition . Instead , a new top floor was added to the King 's Building to house the Anatomy Department and other buildings along Surrey Street were purchased . 
 Following the publication of the Robbins Report on Higher Education in 1963 a further attempt was made to acquire the East Wing . The report recommended a large expansion in student numbers accommodated by a new building programme . The King 's " quadrilateral plan " was to create a campus stretching from Norfolk Street in the east to Waterloo Bridge Road in the west . Plans were also drawn up for modern high @-@ rise buildings along the Strand and Surrey Street to house a new library and laboratories . A contemporary report stated that the redevelopment would provide " London with a university precinct on the Strand of which the capital could be proud " . The plans were revisited in the early 1970s by the then Principal , Sir John Hackett , however , progress was prevented by funding problems and the unwillingness of the Government to re @-@ house its civil servants . In 1971 the Evening Standard led a public campaign for Somerset House to be transformed into a new public arts venue for London . Proposals were also aired for the relocation of the Tate Gallery to the site . In the 1990s the eventual vacation by government departments and a comprehensive restoration programme saw the opening of the Courtauld Gallery , the Gilbert and Hermitage collections and the Edmond J. <unk> Fountain Court . 
 In early 2010 a £ 25 million renovation of the East Wing was undertaken and took 18 months to complete . On 29 February 2012 , Queen Elizabeth II officially opened the building . It is home to the School of Law , a public exhibition space called the Inigo Rooms curated by the King 's Cultural Institute as well as adding a further entrance to the Strand Campus . 
 = = = = Strand Lane ' Roman bath ' = = = = 
 A Stuart cistern and later eighteenth century public bath protected by the National Trust and popularly known as the ' Roman bath ' is situated on the site of the Strand Campus beneath the Norfolk Building and can be accessed via the Surrey Street entrance . Hidden by surrounding King 's buildings , the bath was widely thought to be of Roman origin giving its popular name , however it is more likely that it was originally a cistern for a fountain built in the gardens of Somerset House for Queen Anne of Denmark in 1612 . Evidence of its first use as a public bath was in the late eighteenth century . The ' Roman bath ' is mentioned by Charles Dickens in chapters thirty @-@ five and thirty @-@ six of the novel David Copperfield . 
 There was an old Roman bath in those days at the bottom of one of the streets out of the Strand — it may be there still — in which I have had many a cold plunge . Dressing myself as quietly as I could , and leaving Peggotty to look after my aunt , I tumbled head foremost into it , and then went for a walk to Hampstead . 
 Moreover , Aldwych tube station , a well @-@ preserved but disused London Underground station , is integrated as part of the campus . A rifle range used by King 's is located on the site of one of the platforms since the closure of the station in 1994 . 
 = = = Guy 's Campus = = = 
 Guy 's Campus is situated close to London Bridge and the Shard on the South Bank of the Thames and is home to the School of Biomedical Sciences ( also at the Waterloo Campus ) , the Dental Institute and the School of Medicine . 
 Thomas Guy , the founder and benefactor of Guy 's Hospital established in 1726 in the London Borough of Southwark , was a wealthy bookseller and also a governor of the nearby St Thomas ' Hospital . He lies buried in the vault beneath the eighteenth @-@ century chapel at Guy 's . Silk @-@ merchant William Hunt was a later benefactor who gave money in the early nineteenth century to build Hunt 's House . The original Hunt ’ s House was closed due to war damage , and was eventually demolished as part of campus development . Today this is the site of New Hunt 's House , which was opened in September 1999 following the merger of UMDS and King ’ s . The Henriette Raphael building , constructed in 1902 , and the Gordon Museum are also located here . In addition , the Hodgkin building , Shepherd 's House and Guy 's chapel are prominent buildings within the campus . The Students ' Union centre at Guy 's is situated in Boland House . Guy 's Campus is located opposite the Old Operating Theatre Museum , which was part of old St Thomas Hospital in Southwark . 
 The nearest Underground stations are London Bridge and Borough . 
 = = = = Guy 's Chapel = = = = 
 The Grade II * listed Guy 's Chapel is one of the oldest parts of the original hospital . It was finished in 1780 and features Victorian stained glass windows and mosaic murals . The chapel is in the centre block of the west wing of the original Guy 's Hospital . There is a white marble monument to Thomas Guy by John Bacon inside the main door of the chapel . The monument was erected in 1779 , and is set in a semicircular @-@ arched surround made of green marble . The chapel houses the tomb of Thomas Guy , and is the resting place of English surgeon and anatomist Sir Astley Cooper . The coffin @-@ shaped stone tomb of Guy where his remains rest is located in the crypt beneath the chapel . The chapel also contains memorials to hospital 's benefactors and members of the hospital staff . 
 = = = = The Colonnade = = = = 
 The Colonnade is also part of the original Guy 's Hospital . It was built with two courtyards on either side . A round @-@ hooded Portland stone alcove with a figure sitting inside is located at the eastern courtyard of the Colonnade . The alcove was originally part of , and is one of the surviving fragments of the old London Bridge that was demolished in 1831 . The alcove was brought to the hospital in 1861 , and was re @-@ erected within the eastern internal court in 1926 . The alcove now houses the statue of John Keats , an English Romantic poet who studied at Guy 's Hospital from 1815 to 1816 to become an apothecary . The statue displayed at the western courtyard on the other side of the Colonnade is that of William Morris , 1st Viscount Nuffield , another benefactor of Guy 's Hospital . The front courtyard , named the General Court , was later built in 1738 , and the part of the Georgian complex was completed in 1780 . A brass statue of Thomas Guy by Peter Scheemakers stands in the centre of the General Court , upon a pedestal with bas @-@ reliefs of " Christ Healing the Sick " and the " Good Samaritan " . 
 = = = = Henriette Raphael House = = = = 
 Henriette Raphael House was opened in 1902 . It is the first purpose built nurses ' home in London . The house was named after Henriette Raphael , and was funded by donations from her merchant banker husband Henry Louis Raphael , and her sons Walter Raphael and barrister Herbert Raphael . 
 = = = = Hodgkin Building = = = = 
 The Hodgkin Building was named after Thomas Hodgkin , the demonstrator of morbid anatomy ( anatomical pathology as it is now called ) , the former curator of the museum at Guy ’ s Hospital Medical School and best known for the first account of Hodgkin 's disease . The building is the original medical school building of Guy ’ s Hospital . 
 The entrance hall and corridor of the Hodgkin Building displays busts of King ’ s alumni and benefactors , including Thomas Addison , William Babington , Golding Bird , Richard Bright , Astley Cooper and Richard Mead . The Hodgkin Building currently houses lecture theatres , teaching laboratories , dissecting rooms , museums ( Gordon Museum of Pathology and Museum of Life Sciences ) and research centres . The original medical school library , Wills Library , is also located on the ground floor of the building . 
 = = = Waterloo Campus = = = 
 The Waterloo Campus is located across Waterloo Bridge from the Strand Campus , near the South Bank Centre in the London Borough of Lambeth and consists of the James Clerk Maxwell Building and the Franklin – Wilkins Building . 
 Cornwall House , now the Franklin @-@ Wilkins Building , constructed between 1912 and 1915 was originally the His Majesty 's Stationery Office ( responsible for Crown copyright and National Archives ) , but was requisitioned for use as a military hospital in 1915 during World War I. It became the King George Military Hospital , and accommodated about 1 @,@ 800 patients on 63 wards . King 's acquired the building in the 1980s and today it is home to the School of Biomedical Sciences ( also at the Guy 's Campus ) , parts of the School of Social Science & Public Policy ( also at the Strand Campus ) , Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division ( part of the School of Medicine ) and <unk> ( London Dental Education Centre ) , part of the Dental Institute ( also at Guy 's and Denmark Hill ) . The building , one of London 's largest university buildings , underwent refurbishment and was reopened in 2000 . The building is named after Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins for their major contributions to the discovery of the structure of DNA . 
 The James Clerk Maxwell Building houses the Principal 's Office , most of the central administrative offices of King 's and part of the Florence Nightingale School of Nursing & Midwifery . The Building was named after Scottish mathematical physicist James Clerk Maxwell , who was the Professor of Natural Philosophy at King 's from 1860 to 1865 . 
 The nearest Underground station is Waterloo . 
 = = = St Thomas ' Campus = = = 
 The St Thomas ' Campus in the London Borough of Lambeth , facing the Houses of Parliament across the Thames , houses parts of the School of Medicine and the Dental Institute . The Florence Nightingale Museum is also located here . The museum is dedicated to Florence Nightingale , the founder of the Nightingale Training School of St Thomas ' Hospital ( now King 's Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery ) . St Thomas ' Hospital became part of King 's College London School of Medicine in 1998 . The St Thomas ' Hospital and Campus were named after St Thomas Becket . The Department of Twin Research ( <unk> ) , King 's College London is located in St. Thomas ' Hospital . 
 The nearest Underground station is Westminster . 
 = = = Denmark Hill Campus = = = 
 Denmark Hill Campus is situated in south London near the borders of the London Borough of Lambeth and the London Borough of Southwark in Camberwell and is the only campus not situated on the River Thames . The campus consists of King 's College Hospital , the Maudsley Hospital and the Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience ( IoPPN ) . In addition to the Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience , parts of the Dental Institute and School of Medicine , and a large hall of residence , King 's College Hall , are situated here . Other buildings include the campus library known as the Weston Education Centre ( WEC ) , the James Black Centre , the Rayne Institute ( <unk> @-@ oncology ) and the Cicely Saunders Institute ( palliative care ) . 
 The Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute was opened by the Princess Royal in 2015 at the Denmark Hill Campus . It is named after British philanthropist Maurice Wohl , who had a long association with King ’ s and supported many medical projects . 
 The nearest Overground station is Denmark Hill . 
 = = = Redevelopment programme = = = 
 As of 2016 , King 's is undergoing a £ 1 billion redevelopment programme of its estates . Since 1999 over half of the activities of King 's have been relocated in new and refurbished buildings . Major completed projects include a £ 35 million renovation of the Maughan Library in 2002 , a £ 40 million renovation of buildings at the Strand Campus , a £ 25 million renovation of Somerset House East Wing , a £ 30 million renovation of the Denmark Hill Campus in 2007 , the renovation of the Franklin @-@ Wilkins Library at the Waterloo Campus and the completion of the £ 9 million Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care in 2010 . The college chapel at the Strand Campus was also restored in 2001 . 
 The Strand Campus redevelopment won the Green Gown Award in 2007 for sustainable construction . The award recognised the " reduced energy and carbon emissions from a sustainable refurbishment of the historic South Range of the King 's Building " . King 's was also the recipient of the 2003 City Heritage Award for the conversion of the Grade II * listed Maughan Library . 
 Current projects include a £ 45 million development for the Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute , £ 18 million on modernising King 's learning and teaching environments , a sports pavilion at Honor Oak Park . In April 2012 a £ 20 million redevelopment of the Strand Campus Quad was announced and will provide an additional 3 @,@ 700 square metres of teaching space and student facilities . 
 King 's acquired a lease for the Aldwych Quarter with initial term of 50 years . King 's will occupy Bush House and Strand House from September 2016 , and King House and Melbourne House from 2025 . The Chairman of King 's College London , Duke of Wellington said that the King 's Strand Campus has had inadequate and cramped teaching space for too long , and the acquisition will transform the original campus of King 's which dates back to 1829 . 
 = = Organisation and administration = = 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 The head of King 's College London is formally the principal and president , currently held by Ed Byrne . The office is established by the charter of King 's as " the chief academic and administrative officer of the College " and King 's statutes require the principal to have the general responsibility to the council for " ensuring that the objects of the College are fulfilled and for maintaining and promoting the efficiency , discipline and good order of the College " . The charter and statutes granted in 2009 created the additional position of " president " . As such the full title of the head of King 's College London is the " Principal and President " . Senior officers are called the Principal 's Central Team . Six vice @-@ principals have specific responsibilities for education ; research and innovation ; strategy and development ; arts and sciences ; international ( developing the global research networks of King 's ) ; and health ( where there is also a deputy vice @-@ principal ) . 
 The council is the supreme governing body of King 's College London established under the charter and statutes , comprising 21 members . Its membership include the president of King 's College London Students ' Union ( KCLSU ) , as the student member ; the principal and president ; up to seven other staff members ; and up to 12 lay members who must not be employees of King 's . It is supported by a number of standing committees . The current chairman of the council is Charles Wellesley , 9th Duke of Wellington . Sir Christopher <unk> will succeed the Duke of Wellington as Chairman of Council from the beginning of the 2016 academic year . 
 The dean of King 's College is an ordained person , which is unusual among British universities . The dean is " responsible for overseeing the spiritual development and welfare of all students and staff " . The Office of the Dean co @-@ ordinate the Associateship of King 's College programme , the chaplaincy and the chapel choir , which includes 25 choir scholarships . One of the dean 's roles is to encourage and foster vocations to the Church of England priesthood . 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury is the King 's College London 's visitor by right of office owing to the role of the Church of England in King 's foundation . 
 = = = Faculties and departments = = = 
 In the 19th century , King 's College London had five departments : Theological , General Literature and Science , Applied Sciences , Medical and Military . The Theological Department provided studies in ecclesiastical history , pastoral theology and Exegesis of testaments . Languages and literature , history , law and jurisprudence , political economy , commerce , fencing , mathematics , zoology and natural history were taught within the Department of General Literature and Science , and natural philosophy , geology , mineralogy and arts @-@ related subjects were taught within the Department of Applied Sciences . 
 Currently , King 's is made up of eight academic faculties , which are subdivided into departments , centres and research divisions . In 2017 , these will be joined by a ninth with the opening of King 's Business School in Bush House . 
 = = = = Faculty of Arts and Humanities = = = = 
 The Faculty of Arts and Humanities is an academic faculty of King 's . It was formed in 1989 following the amalgamation of the faculties of Arts , Music and Theology . The faculty encompasses traditional disciplinary subjects , as well as less @-@ common subjects such as Hellenic , Portuguese and Medieval Studies , and emerging disciplines such as Digital Humanities and Queer Studies . 
 The Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) is administered through King 's , and its students graduate alongside members of the departments which form the Faculty of Arts and Humanities . As RADA does not have degree awarding powers , its courses are validated by King 's . 
 = = = = Dental Institute = = = = 
 The Dental Institute is the dental school of King 's . The institute focuses on understanding disease , enhancing health and restoring function . The institute is the successor of Guy 's Hospital Dental School , King 's College Hospital Dental School , Royal Dental Hospital of London School of Dental Surgery , and the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy 's and St Thomas ' Hospitals . It was a part of King 's School of Medicine and Dentistry until 2005 , when the dental school became the Dental Institute . 
 In 1799 Joseph Fox started to give a series of lectures on dental surgery at Guy ’ s Hospital , and was appointed dental surgeon in the same year . Thomas Bell succeeded Fox as dental surgeon either in 1817 or 1825 . Frederick Newland Pedley , who was appointed assistant dental surgeon at Guy ’ s Hospital in 1885 , advocated the establishment of a dental school within the hospital , and he flooded the two dental schools in London , the Metropolitan School of Dental Science and the London School of Dental Surgery , with patients to prove that a further hospital was needed . In December 1888 , Guy ’ s Hospital Dental School was established . Guy ’ s Hospital Dental School was recognised as a school of the University of London in 1901 . In the 1970s , since there was a decline in the demand for dental services , the Department of Health of the UK suggested that there should be a decrease in the number of dental undergraduate students as well as the duration of all courses . In response to the recommendations , Royal Dental Hospital of London School of Dental Surgery amalgamated with the Guy ’ s Hospital Dental School of the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy 's and St Thomas ' Hospitals on 1 August 1983 . 
 The establishment of King 's College Hospital Dental School was proposed by Viscount Hambleden at a Hospital Management Committee meeting on 12 April 1923 . The dental school was opened on 12 November 1923 in King ’ s College Hospital . Under the 1948 National Health Act , King 's Medical and Dental School split from King 's and became an independent school , but the school remerged with King 's in 1983 . The school further merged with the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy ’ s and St Thomas ’ Hospitals in 1998 . 
 = = = = Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine = = = = 
 The King 's Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine was created as a result of the merger of the School of Medicine with the School of Biomedical Sciences in 2014 . There are two schools of education in the Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine . The GKT School of Medical Education is responsible for the medical education and training of students on the MBBS programme , and the School of Bioscience Education is responsible for the biomedical and health professions education and training . The faculty is divided into 18 academic divisions , including Cancer Studies , Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care , Medical Education and Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics . Formerly divisions of the School of Biomedical Sciences , the MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology and Wolfson Centre for Age @-@ Related Diseases have moved to the Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience in 2014 . 
 = = = = Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience = = = = 
 Formerly known as the Institute of Psychiatry ( <unk> ) , the Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience ( IoPPN ) is a school of King 's and a research institution dedicated to discovering what causes mental illness and diseases of the brain , and to help identify new treatments of the diseases . The institute is the largest centre for research and postgraduate education in psychiatry , psychology and neuroscience in Europe . Originally established in 1924 as the Maudsley Hospital Medical School , the institute changed its name to the Institute of Psychiatry in 1948 , merged with King ’ s College London in 1997 , and was renamed IoPPN in 2014 . 
 = = = = The Dickson Poon School of Law = = = = 
 Previously known as King 's College London School of Law , the Dickson Poon School of Law is the law school of King 's . The Dickson Poon School of Law at King 's College London has been ranking top of the UK for world leading research above Oxford , Cambridge , UCL and LSE since 2014 . The school includes various research centres and groups which serve as focal points for research activity , including the Centre of European Law ( established in 1974 ) , Centre of Medical Law and Ethics ( established in 1978 ) , Centre of British Constitutional Law and History ( established in 1988 ) , Centre of Construction Law , Centre for Technology , Ethics and Law in Society , Centre for Politics , Philosophy and Law , Transnational Law Institute and Trust Law Committee . Law has been taught at King 's since 1831 and it was taught within the Senior Department , the Department of General Literature and Science in 1839 , then the Faculty of Arts in 1893 . The Faculty of Laws was founded in 1909 and became the School of Law in 1991 . 
 = = = = Faculty of Natural and Mathematical Sciences = = = = 
 Following the reorganisation of the King 's School of Physical Sciences and Engineering in 2010 , the Faculty of Natural and Mathematical Sciences was established . The faculty provides education and research in chemistry , <unk> , physics , mathematics and telecommunications . Physics and Mathematics has been studied at the university since 1829 and 1830 respectively , and there are six Nobel laureates who were either students or academic staff of the faculty . 
 Chemistry has been taught at King 's since its foundation in 1829 , and Copley medallist John Frederic Daniell was appointed the first professor . The Department of Chemistry was forced to close in 2003 due to a decline in student numbers and reduced funding . In 2012 , a new Department of Chemistry was established and a new undergraduate degree , Chemistry with <unk> , was launched . The new department covers traditional areas of chemistry ( organic , inorganic , physical and computational chemistry ) and other academic discipline including cell biology and physics . King 's Department of Engineering was established in 1838 , making it arguably the oldest school of engineering in England . The Department of Engineering was the largest engineering school in the UK in 1893 , and engineering students were taught by prominent scientists including James Clerk Maxwell , Charles Wheatstone and Sir William Siemens . The Division of Engineering was closed in 2013 . 
 The 1920s were a significant period for the Faculty of Natural and Mathematical Sciences . In 1921 , Albert Einstein visited King 's and delivered a lecture on the topic ‘ The Development and Present Position of the Theory of Relativity ’ . Einstein referred in the lecture to the work of King 's Professor of Natural Philosophy James Clerk Maxwell . 
 = = = = Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery = = = = 
 The Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery is one of the largest schools in King 's . It primarily concerned with the education of people to become nurses and midwives , but also carries out nursing research and provides continuing professional development and postgraduate programmes . Formerly known as the Nightingale Training School and Home for Nurses , the faculty was established by Florence Nightingale in 1860 , and is the first nursing school in the world to be continuously connected to a fully serving hospital and medical school . 
 The Nightingale Training School was amalgamated in 1996 with the Olive Haydon School of Midwifery and the Thomas Guy and Lewisham School of Nursing , and all staff and students were integrated at King ’ s by 1996 . 
 = = = = Faculty of Social Science and Public Policy = = = = 
 The Faculty of Social Science and Public Policy was established in 2001 , and is one of the largest university schools focusing on policy @-@ oriented research in the UK . The Department of War Studies in the faculty is unique in the UK , and is supported by facilities such as the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives , the Centre for Defence Studies , and the King 's Centre for Military Health Research ( <unk> ) . 
 Set up in 2002 , the King 's Centre for Risk Management ( <unk> ) holds international research relating to risk management , governance and communication , and supports various projects , conferences and academic fellowships , facilitating in translating risk research into relevant and practical policy solutions . 
 The School of Global Affairs was created in 2015 by <unk> eight King ’ s Global Institutes ; the Brazil Institute , the Lau China Institute , the India Institute , the Russia Institute , the Institute of North American Studies , the International Development Institute , the African Leadership Centre and the Institute of Middle Eastern Studies . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 In the financial year ended 31 July 2014 , King 's had a total income of £ 603 @.@ 67 million ( 2012 / 13 – £ 586 @.@ 95 million ) and total expenditure of £ 605 @.@ 81 million ( 2012 / 13 – £ 577 @.@ 38 million ) . Key sources of income included £ 201 @.@ 08 million from tuition fees and education contracts ( 2012 / 13 – £ 174 @.@ 58 million ) , £ 171 @.@ 55 million from research grants and contracts ( 2012 / 13 – £ 164 @.@ 03 million ) , £ 122 @.@ 43 million from Funding Council grants ( 2012 / 13 – £ 130 @.@ 67 million ) and £ 5 @.@ 77 million from endowment and investment income ( 2012 / 13 – £ 6 @.@ 4 million ) . During the 2012 / 13 financial year King 's had a capital expenditure of £ 105 @.@ 9 million ( 2012 / 13 – £ 73 million ) . 
 At 31 July 2014 King 's had total endowments of £ 162 @.@ 6 million ( 31 July 2013 – £ 154 @.@ 09 million ) and total net assets of £ 828 @.@ 37 million ( 31 July 2013 – £ 810 @.@ 05 million ) . King 's has a credit rating of AA from Standard & Poor 's . 
 In 2013 / 14 , King 's had the seventh @-@ highest total income of any British university . 
 In October 2010 King 's launched a major fundraising campaign — " World questions | King 's answers " — fronted by former British Prime Minister John Major , with a goal to raise £ 500 million by 2015 . This was surpassed even before 2015 and King 's subsequently increased the target to £ 600 million . It again met and beat this new target by raising £ 610 million . This is the third highest fund raised by a UK university , only behind Oxford and Cambridge respectively . 
 = = = Coat of arms = = = 
 The coat of arms displayed on the King 's College London charter is that of George IV . The shield depicts the royal coat of arms together with an inescutcheon of the House of Hanover , while the supporters embody King 's motto of sancte et <unk> . No correspondence is believed to have survived regarding the choice of this coat of arms , either in King 's archives or at the College of Arms , and a variety of unofficial adaptations have been used throughout the history of King 's . The current coat of arms was developed following the mergers with Queen Elizabeth College and Chelsea College in 1985 and incorporates aspects of their heraldry . The official coat of arms , in heraldic terminology , is : 
 Arms : 
 Or on a Pale Azure between two Lions rampant <unk> Gules an Anchor Gold ensigned by a Royal Crown proper on a Chief Argent an Ancient Lamp proper inflamed Gold between two Blazing <unk> also proper . 
 The crest and supporters : 
 On a Helm with a Wreath Or and Azure Upon a Book proper rising from a Coronet Or the rim set with jewels two Azure ( one manifest ) four Vert ( two manifest ) and two Gules a demi Lion Gules holding a Rod of Dexter a female figure habited Azure the cloak lined coif and sleeves Argent holding in the exterior hand a <unk> Cross <unk> Gold and sinister a male figure the Long Coat Azure trimmed with Sable proper shirt Argent holding in the interior hand a Book proper . 
 = = = = Coat of arms of the medical schools = = = = 
 Although the St Thomas 's Hospital Medical School and Guy 's Medical School became legal bodies separate from St Thomas ' Hospital and Guy 's Hospital in 1948 , the tradition of using the hospitals ' shields and coat of arms continues today . 
 In 1949 , St Thomas 's Hospital Medical School was granted its own coat of arms . However , the St Thomas ' Hospital coat of arms has still been used . Guy ’ s Medical School proposed to apply for its own coat of arms after separating from Guy ’ s Hospital , yet the school decided to continue to use Guy 's Hospital ’ s arms in 1954 . The two medical schools merged in 1982 and became the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy 's and St Thomas ' Hospitals ( UMDS ) . Simon <unk> , secretary of UMDS , said that because of the name of the medical school it was more appropriate to use the hospital 's coat of arms . 
 UMDS merged with King 's College Hospital to become Guy 's , King 's and St Thomas ' School of Medicine in 1998 . The shields of Guy ’ s and St Thomas ’ hospitals are used in conjunction with King 's shield in the medical schools ' publications and graduation materials . 
 = = = Affiliations and partnerships = = = 
 King 's College London is a constituent college and was one of the two founding members of the federal University of London . King 's is a member of Association of Commonwealth Universities ( ACU ) , European University Association ( <unk> ) and Universities UK . In 1998 , King 's joined the Russell Group , an association of 24 public research universities established in 1994 . King 's is currently the only British member of the Institutional Network of the Universities from the Capitals of Europe ( UNICA ) , a network of major higher education institutions in the European capital cities . 
 King 's is a founding member of Global Medical Excellence Cluster ( <unk> ) , the largest life science bio @-@ cluster in the world established with the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford , University College London and Imperial College London . King 's is also the founding partner of <unk> , a massive open online course learning platform founded in December 2012 . Launched in 2014 , <unk> is the collaboration between King 's and the other two main science universities in London , Imperial College and University College London . In 2016 , King 's College London , together with Arizona State University and University of New South Wales , forms the <unk> Alliance , an international university alliance to address global challenges . King 's is also often regarded as part of the " golden triangle " , a group of elite universities located in the English cities of Cambridge , Oxford and London , including the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford , Imperial College London , London School of Economics and University College London . 
 King 's College London is also a part of King 's Health Partners , an academic health science centre comprises Guy 's and St Thomas ' NHS Foundation Trust , King 's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust , South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King 's College London itself . King 's is a participant and one of the founding members of the Francis Crick Institute . King 's offers joint degrees with many universities and other institutions , including Columbia University , University of Paris I , University of Hong Kong , National University of Singapore , Royal Academy of Music , British Library , Tate Modern , Shakespeare ’ s Globe , National Gallery , National Portrait Gallery and British Museum . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 In 2005 , the Sunday Times ranked King 's as the sixth @-@ most difficult UK university to gain admission to . In terms of average UCAS points of entrants , King 's ranked 15th in Britain in 2014 . According to the 2015 Times and Sunday Times Good University Guide , approximately 30 % of King 's undergraduates come from independent schools . 
 A freedom @-@ of @-@ information request in 2015 revealed that the university received 31 @,@ 857 undergraduate applications and made 13 @,@ 302 offers in 2014 @-@ 15 . This resulted in an offer rate of 41 @.@ 8 % , a yield rate on offers of 45 @.@ 3 % and an overall acceptance rate of 18 @.@ 9 % . The School of Medicine received 1 @,@ 764 applications , only 39 offers were made resulting in an offer rate of just 2 @.@ 2 % . Nursery & Midwifery , Physiotherapy and Clinical Dentistry had the lowest offer rates of 14 % , 16 % and 17 % respectively . 
 = = = Teaching = = = 
 King 's academic year runs from the last Monday in September to the first Friday in June . Different faculties and departments adopt different academic term structures . For example , the academic year of the Mathematics School and Department of War Studies is divided into three terms ( Autumn , Spring and Summer terms ) ; while the Faculty of Arts & Humanities academic year runs in two semesters . 
 = = = Graduation = = = 
 Graduation ceremonies are held in January ( winter ) and June or July ( summer ) , with ceremonies held in the Barbican Centre . During summer graduation , while most graduands attend the ceremonies in the Barbican , the graduation ceremonies for the School of Medical Education and the Dental Institute are held in Southwark Cathedral ; this is owing to St Thomas 's Medical School roots that could be traced to St Mary <unk> Priory . 
 After being vested the power to award its own degrees separately from the University of London in 2006 , graduates began wearing King 's College London academic dress in 2008 . King 's graduates have since worn gowns designed by Vivienne Westwood . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 In 2013 / 14 King 's had a total research income of £ 171 @.@ 55 million , of which £ 47 @.@ 64 million was from UK charitable bodies ; £ 38 @.@ 26 million from Research Councils ; £ 32 @.@ 97 million from UK central government , local authorities , health and hospital authorities ; £ 21 @.@ 38 million from EU government and other bodies ; £ 17 @.@ 09 million from overseas ( excluding EU ) ; £ 13 @.@ 11 million from UK industry , commerce and public corporations ; and £ 1 @.@ 11 million from other sources . 
 King 's submitted a total of 1 @,@ 369 staff across 27 units of assessment to the 2014 Research Excellence Framework ( REF ) assessment ( compared with 1 @,@ 172 submitted to the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise ( RAE 2008 ) ) . In the REF results 40 % of King 's submitted research was classified as 4 * , 45 % as 3 * , 13 % as 2 * and 2 % as 1 * , giving an overall GPA of 3 @.@ 23 . In rankings produced by Times Higher Education based upon the REF results King 's was ranked 6th overall for research power and 7th for GPA ( compared to 11th and joint 22nd respectively in the equivalent rankings for the RAE 2008 ) . The Times Higher Education described King 's as " arguably the biggest winner " in <unk> after it rose 15 places on GPA , while submitting about 200 more people . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 King 's claims to be the largest centre for healthcare education in Europe . King 's College London School of Medicine has over 2 @,@ 000 undergraduate students , over 1 @,@ 400 teachers , four main teaching hospitals – Guy 's Hospital , King 's College Hospital , St Thomas ' Hospital and University Hospital Lewisham – and 17 associated district general hospitals . King 's College London Dental Institute is the largest dental school in Europe . The Florence Nightingale School of Nursing & Midwifery is the oldest professional school of nursing in the world . 
 King 's is a major centre for biomedical research . It is a founding member of King 's Health Partners , one of the largest academic health sciences centres in Europe with a turnover of over £ 2 billion and approximately 25 @,@ 000 employees . It also is home to six Medical Research Council centres , and is part of two of the twelve biomedical research centres established by the NHS in England – the <unk> Biomedical Research Centre at Guy 's and St Thomas ' NHS Foundation Trust and King 's College London , and the <unk> Biomedical Research Centre at the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King 's College London . 
 The Drug Control Centre at King 's was established in 1978 and is the only WADA accredited anti @-@ doping laboratory in the UK and holds the official UK contract for running doping tests on UK athletes . In 1997 , it became the first International Olympic Committee accredited laboratory to meet the ISO / IEC <unk> quality standard . The centre was the anti @-@ doping facility for the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 King 's library facilities are spread across its campuses . The collections encompass over one million printed books , as well as thousands of journals and electronic resources . 
 = = = = Maughan Library = = = = 
 The Maughan Library is King 's largest library and is housed in the Grade II * listed 19th century gothic former Public Record Office building situated on Chancery Lane at the Strand Campus . The building was designed by Sir James Pennethorne and is home to the books and journals of the Schools of Arts & Humanities , Law , Natural & Mathematical Sciences , and Social Science & Public Policy . It also houses the Special Collections and rare books . Inside the Library is the octagonal Round Reading Room , inspired by the reading room of the British Museum , and the former Rolls Chapel ( renamed the Weston Room following a donation from the Garfield Weston Foundation ) with its stained glass windows , mosaic floor and monuments , including a Renaissance terracotta figure by Pietro <unk> of Dr Yonge , Master of the Rolls , who died in 1516 . 
 = = = = Other libraries = = = = 
 Foyle Special Collections Library : Situated at Chancery Lane , the library houses a collection of 180 @,@ 000 printed works as well as thousands of maps , slides , sound recordings and some manuscript material . The collections are built up by purchase , gift and bequest over centuries , which cover all subject areas and contain many special items , including incunabula . The collections are particularly strong in European military and diplomatic history , Jewish and Christian theology , the history of the British Empire , Greece and the Eastern Mediterranean , Germany , voyages and travels , medicine and science . 
 Tony Arnold Library : Situated at Chancery Lane , it houses a collection of over 3000 law books and 140 law journals . It was named after Tony Arnold , the longest serving Secretary of the Institute of Taxation . The library was opened on 18 December 1997 , and in September 2001 , the library became part of the law collection of King 's College London . 
 Archives Reading Room : Situated at Chancery Lane , it holds a collection of institutional and research papers from King 's and organisations merged with or founded by King 's ( such as King ’ s College Hospital , Guy ’ s and St Thomas ’ medical and dental schools , the Institute of Psychiatry ) . The reading room also houses research papers of former staff and students , including Sir Charles Wheatstone , Maurice Wilkins and Eric Mottram . 
 Franklin @-@ Wilkins Library : Situated at the Waterloo Campus , the library is home to extensive management and education holdings , as well as wide @-@ ranging biomedical , health and life sciences coverage includes nursing , midwifery , public health , pharmacy , biological and environmental sciences , biochemistry and forensic science . 
 Wills Library and Keats Room : Situated in the Hodgkin Building at Guy 's Campus , it was originally the main library for the Guy ’ s Hospital Medical School . The Wills Library was a gift in 1903 by the former governor of Guy 's Hospital , the late Sir Frederick Wills and it was opened as the Medical School Library . Many books , archives and documents that were kept in the Wills Library , such as Guy 's committee minute books , have been moved to the King 's College London Archives in 2004 , although the library still contains a collection of books that can be retrieved by request . The Wills Library also incorporates the Keats Room named after King 's alumni John Keats , who was a medical student at Guy 's Hospital . 
 New Hunt 's House Library : Situated at Guy 's Campus , the library covers all aspects of biomedical science , including anatomy , biochemistry , cell biology , genetics , neuroscience , pharmacology and physiology . There are also extensive resources for medicine , dentistry , physiotherapy and health services . 
 St Thomas ' House Library : Situated at St Thomas ' Campus , its holdings cover all aspects of basic medical sciences , clinical medicine and health services research , and particularly focus on dermatology and paediatrics . 
 Institute of Psychiatry Library : The library is largest psychiatric library in Western Europe , holding 3 @,@ 000 print journal titles , 550 of which are current subscriptions , as well as access to over 3 @,@ 500 electronic journals , 42 @,@ 000 books , and training materials . The collections focus on psychiatry , psychology , neuroscience , neurology , genetics and psychotherapy . 
 Weston Education Centre Library : Situated at the Denmark Hill Campus , the library has particular strengths in the areas of gastroenterology , liver disease , diabetes , obstetrics , gynaecology , paediatrics and the history of medicine . The collection supports the teaching and research of the GKT School of Medicine and the Dental Institute , and also the clinical work of the King 's College Hospital and the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust . 
 Additionally , King 's students and staff have full access to Senate House Library , the central library for the University of London and the School of Advanced Study . Undergraduate and postgraduate students also have reference access to libraries of other University of London institutions under the University of London Libraries Access Agreement . 
 = = = Museums , galleries and collections = = = 
 King 's currently operates two museums : Gordon Museum of Pathology and Museum of Life Sciences . Opened in 1905 at Guy 's Campus , the Gordon Museum is the largest medical museum in the United Kingdom , and houses a collection of approximately 8000 pathological specimens , artefacts , models and paintings , including Astley Cooper 's specimens and Sir Joseph Lister 's antiseptic spray . The Museum of Life Sciences was founded in 2009 adjacent to the Gordon Museum , and it houses historic biological and pharmaceutical collections from the constituent colleges of the modern King 's College London . 
 Between 1843 and 1927 , the King George III Museum was a museum within King 's College London which housed the collections of scientific instruments of George III and eminent nineteenth @-@ century scientists ( including Sir Charles Wheatstone and Charles Babbage ) . Due to space constraints within King 's , much of the museum 's collections were transferred on loan to the Science Museum in London or kept in King 's College London Archives . 
 The Anatomy Museum was a museum situated on the 6th floor of the King 's Building at the Strand Campus . The Anatomy Theatre was built next door to the museum in 1927 , where anatomical dissections and demonstrations took place . The Anatomy Museum 's collection includes casts of injuries , leather models , skins of various animals from Western Australia donated to the museum in 1846 , and casts of heads of John Bishop and Thomas Williams , the murderers in the Italian Boy 's murder in 1831 . The last dissection in the Anatomy Theatre was performed in 1997 . The Anatomy Theatre and Museum was renovated and refurbished in 2009 , and is now a facility for teaching , research and performance at King 's . 
 The Foyle Special Collections Library also houses a number of special collections , range in date from the 15th century to present , and in subject from human anatomy to Modern Greek poetry . The Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) Historical Collection is the largest collection contains material from the former FCO Library . The collection was a working tool used by the British government to inform and influence foreign and colonial policy . Transferred to King ’ s in 2007 , the FCO Historical Collection contains over 80 @,@ 000 items including books , pamphlets , manuscript , and photographic material . The Medical Collection include the historical library collections of the constituent medical schools and institutes of King 's . The Rare Books Collection holds 12 @,@ 000 printed books , including a 1483 Venice printing of Silius <unk> ’ s <unk> , first editions of Charles Dickens ' novels , and the 1937 ( first ) edition of George Orwell 's The Road to Wigan Pier . 
 King ’ s College London Archives holds the institution 's records , which are among the richest higher education records in London . King 's archives collections include institutional archives of King 's since 1828 , archives of institutions and schools that were created by or have merged with King 's , and records relating to the history of medicine . Founded in 1964 , the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives holds the private papers of over 800 senior British defence personnel who held office since 1900 . 
 Science Gallery London is set to open in 2016 on King 's Guy 's Campus . It is a public science centre where ' art and science collide ' , and is a part of Global Science Gallery Network . A flagship project for ' Culture at King ’ s College London ' , Science Gallery will include 2 @,@ 000 m2 ( 21 @,@ 528 sq ft ) of public space and a newly landscaped Georgian courtyard . There will be exhibition galleries , theatres , meeting spaces and a café ; while unlike other science centre , it will have no permanent collection . Daniel Glaser , the former Head of Engaging Science at Wellcome Trust , is Director of Science Gallery London . 
 = = = Rankings and reputation = = = 
 Internationally , King 's is consistently ranked among the top universities in the world by all major global university rankings compilers , having been placed between 19th by the 2015 QS World University Rankings , 27th by the world university rankings of the Times Higher Education and 55th worldwide by the Academic Ranking of World Universities . 
 As of 2015 , King 's is ranked in the top seven UK universities in all the six major academic rankings of global universities : QS , Times Higher Education , ARWU , University Ranking by Academic Performance , U.S. News & World Report ( Best Global Universities Rankings ) and Center for World University Rankings . 
 King 's was ranked joint 14th overall in The Sunday Times 10 @-@ year ( 1998 – 2007 ) average ranking of British universities based on consistent league table performance . In recent years , however , the university has performed less well in domestic league tables , being placed outside of the top 20 in all three major tables for 2016 . It should be noted that the methodologies of these tables include student satisfaction scores with teaching and feedback as a significant input . In common with most other London institutions , King 's performs less well on the National Student Survey ( NSS ) , ranking 133rd for student satisfaction ( out of 160 institutes ) in the 2015 survey . 
 According to the 2015 Times and Sunday Times University Guide , their inclusion of student satisfaction scores , along with international guides including reputation scores from academics and employers , explains the disparity between King 's ranking on their ( domestic ) table and global tables . They add that when the university is ranked according to student satisfaction scores from undergraduates on factors such as academic support , teaching , assessment and feedback , " King ’ s ranks 106 out of 123 institutions " , although " despite the iffy student satisfaction scores , students continue to apply here in their droves " with an average of 8 @.@ 1 applicants per place available for 2014 entry . However , although the Complete University Guide has used the results of the NSS since at least 2011 , King 's retained a position in their top 20 until the 2015 tables ( published 2014 ) , managing 19th on the 2014 tables despite ranking joint 102nd ( out of 124 ) for student satisfaction . 
 According to the 2017 Complete University Guide , 8 out of the 30 subjects offered by King 's rank within the top 10 nationally , including Education ( 4th ) , Food Science ( 4th ) , Dentistry ( 5th ) , Law ( 5th ) , Music ( 5th ) , Business & Management Studies ( 6th ) , History ( 9th ) , and Classics & Ancient History ( 10th ) . The Guardian University Guide 2017 ranks King 's in the top ten in 8 subjects , including Law ( 4th ) , Economics ( 6th ) , Media & film studies ( 6th ) , Anatomy & physiology ( 8th ) , Dentistry ( 8th ) , Politics ( 9th ) , Classics & ancient history ( 10th ) , and History ( 10th ) . King 's College London has had 24 of its subject @-@ areas awarded the highest rating of 5 or 5 * for research quality , and in 2007 it received a good result in its audit by the Quality Assurance Agency . It is in the top tier for research earnings . The Times Higher Education listed King 's College London as eighth in the list of the top 10 universities in clinical , pre @-@ clinical and health subjects in its 2016 world rankings . 
 In September 2010 , the Sunday Times selected King 's as the " University of the Year 2010 – 11 " . King 's was ranked as the 5th best university in the UK for the quality of graduates according to recruiters from the UK 's major companies . 
 In a survey by The New York Times assessing the most valued graduates by business leaders , King 's College London graduates ranked 22nd in the world and 5th in the UK . In the 2015 Global Employability University Survey of international recruiters , King 's is ranked 43rd in the world and 7th in the UK . King 's was chosen as the 5th best UK university by major British employers in 2015 . 
 In 2014 , King 's ranked 5th amongst multidisciplinary UK universities for highest graduate starting salaries ( i.e. graduates ' average annual salary six months after graduation ) . In a big data research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies , University of Cambridge and Harvard University , it was revealed the top 10 % of King 's male graduates working in England were the 7th highest earning students 10 years after graduation in comparison to graduates of all Higher Education providers ( both multi and uni @-@ disciplinary universities ) in the UK and the top 10 % of its female graduates were the 9th highest earning students 10 years after graduation in the same study . The Guardian University Guide 2017 named King 's as the 6th best university in the country for graduate career prospects , with 84 @.@ 3 % of students finding graduate @-@ level jobs within six months of graduation . 
 = = = Associateship of King 's College = = = 
 The Associateship of King 's College ( AKC ) is the original award of King 's College , dating back to its foundation in 1829 and first awarded in 1835 . It was designed to reflect the twin objectives of King 's College 's 1829 royal charter to maintain the connection between " sound religion and useful learning " and to teach the " doctrines and duties of Christianity " . 
 Today , the AKC is a modern tradition that offers an inclusive , research @-@ led programme of lectures that gives students the opportunities to engage with religious , philosophical and ethical issues alongside their main degree course . Graduates of King ’ s College London may be eligible to be elected as ' Associates ' of King 's College by the authority of King 's College London council , delegated to the academic board . After election , they are entitled to use the post @-@ nominal letters " AKC " . 
 = = = Fellowship of King 's College = = = 
 The Fellowship of King 's College ( <unk> ) is the highest award that can be bestowed upon an individual by King 's College London . The award of the fellowship is governed by a statute of King 's College London and reflects distinguished service to King 's by a member of staff , conspicuous service to King 's , or the achievement of distinction by those who were at one time closely associated with King 's College London . 
 The proposal to establish a fellowship of King 's was first considered in 1847 . John Allen , a former chaplain of King 's , was the first <unk> . Each fellow have to pay two guineas for the fellowship privilege initially , but the fee was ceased from 1850 . A wide variety of people were elected as fellows of King 's , including former principal Alfred Barry , former King ’ s student then professor Thorold Rogers , architect William Burges and ornithologist Robert Swinhoe . The first women fellows were elected in 1904 . Lilian Faithfull , vice @-@ principal of the King ’ s Ladies ’ Department from 1894 to 1906 , was one of the first women fellows . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Students ' union = = = 
 Founded in 1873 , King 's College , London Union Society which later , in 1908 , reorganised into King 's College London Students ' Union , better known by its acronym KCLSU , is the oldest Students ' Union in London ( University College London Union being founded in 1893 ) and has a claim to being the oldest Students ' Union in England . Athletic Club was one of the nineteenth @-@ century student societies at King 's formed in 1884 . The Students ' Union provides a wide range of activities and services , including over 50 sports clubs ( which includes the Boat Club which rows on the River Thames and the Rifle Club which uses King 's College London 's shooting range located at the disused Aldwych tube station beneath the Strand Campus ) , over 200 activity groups , a wide range of volunteering opportunities , two bars / eateries ( The Waterfront and Guy 's Bar ) , a shop ( King 's Shop ) and a gym ( Kinetic Fitness Club ) . Between 1992 and 2013 the Students ' Union operated a nightclub , Tutu 's , named after alumnus Desmond Tutu . 
 The former President of KCLSU , Sir Ivison Macadam , after whom the Students ' Union building on the Strand Campus ( Macadam Building ) has since been named , went on to be elected as the first President of the National Union of Students . 
 " Reggie the Lion " ( informally " Reggie " ) is the official mascot of the Students ' Union . In total there are four <unk> in existence . The original can be found on display in the Macadam Building in the Students ' Union student centre at the Strand Campus . A papier @-@ mâché Reggie lives outside the Great Hall at the Strand Campus . The third Reggie , given as a gift by alumnus Willie Kwan , guards the entrance of Willies Common Room in Somerset House East Wing . A small sterling silver incarnation is displayed during graduation ceremonies , which was presented to King ’ s by former Halliburton Professor of Physiology , Robert John Stewart McDowall , in 1959 . 
 = = = Student media = = = 
 KCLSU Student Media won Student Media of the Year 2014 at the Ents Forum awards and came in the top three student media outlets in the country at the NUS Awards 2014 . 
 Roar News is a tabloid newspaper for students at King 's which is owned and funded by KCLSU . It is editorially independent of both the university and the students ' union and its award winning website is read by tens of thousands of people per month in over 100 countries . In 2014 it had a successful awards season , scooping several national awards and commendations , including a Mind Media Award and Student Media of the Year . 
 The radio station of KCLSU , KCL Radio , was founded in 2009 as a podcast producer . The first live broadcast of KCL Radio was in 2011 at the London Varsity . In 2013 , KCL Radio relaunched as a live station with more than 45 hours of live programming a week . The schedule of the radio station includes news , music , entertainment , debate , sport and live performance . 
 Other King 's student media groups include the student television station <unk> , and the photographic society KCLSU <unk> . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 There are over 50 sports clubs , many of which compete in the University of London and British Universities & Colleges ( BUCS ) leagues across the South East . The annual Macadam Cup is a varsity match played between the sports teams of King 's College London proper ( KCL ) and King 's College London Medical School ( <unk> ) . King 's students and staff have played an important part in the formation of the London Universities and Colleges Athletics . 
 Created in January 2013 , King ’ s Sport , a partnership between King 's College London and KCLSU , manages all the sports activities and facilities of King 's . King ’ s Sport runs the King ’ s Sport Health and Fitness Centre situated at the Waterloo Campus , which has been refurbished in 2014 and features an indoor cycling studio , fixed resistance and free weights and cardiovascular areas . King ’ s Sport also operates 3 sports grounds in New Malden , Honor Oak Park and Dulwich . There are also on @-@ campus sports facilities at Guy ’ s , St Thomas 's and Denmark Hill campuses . King 's students and staff can utilize Guy 's and St Thomas ' NHS Foundation Trust 's fitness centre and swimming pool based within the Guy 's and St Thomas ' hospitals . 
 = = = Student @-@ led think tank = = = 
 In February 2011 , King 's College London students founded London 's first student @-@ led think tank , the King ’ s Think Tank ( formerly known as KCL Think Tank ) . With a membership of more than 2000 , it is the largest organisation of its kind in Europe . This student initiative organises lectures and discussions in seven different policy areas , and assists students in lobbying politicians , non @-@ governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and other policymakers with their ideas . Every September , it produces a peer @-@ reviewed journal of policy recommendations called The Spectrum . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 There are many music societies at King 's including a cappella groups , orchestras , choir , musical theatre and jazz society . King 's has three orchestras : King 's College London Symphony Orchestra ( <unk> ) , King 's College London Chamber Orchestra and KCL Concert Orchestra . 
 Founded in 1945 , the Choir of King 's College London , one of the most acclaimed university choirs in England , consists of around 30 choral scholars . The choir regularly broadcasts on BBC Radio 3 and Radio 4 and has made recordings mainly focus on 16th @-@ century English and Spanish repertoire . 
 All the King 's Men ( <unk> ) is an all @-@ male a cappella ensemble from King 's College London . Founded in 2009 , it has since risen to prominence in the university , becoming the first group outside of Oxford and Cambridge to win The Voice Festival UK . 
 = = = Rivalry with University College London = = = 
 Competition within the University of London is most intense between King 's and University College London , the two oldest institutions . Indeed , the University of London when it was established has been described as " an umbrella organisation designed to disguise the rivalry between UCL and KCL . " In the early twentieth century , King 's College London and UCL rivalry was centred on their respective mascots . University College 's was Phineas <unk> , a wooden tobacconist 's sign of a kilted Jacobite Highlander purloined from outside a shop in Tottenham Court Road during the celebrations of the relief of Ladysmith in 1900 . King 's later addition was a giant beer bottle representing " bottled youth " . In 1923 it was replaced by a new mascot to rival Phineas – Reggie the Lion , who made his debut at a King 's @-@ UCL sporting rag in December 1923 , protected by a lifeguard of engineering students armed with T @-@ squares . Thereafter , Reggie formed the centrepiece of annual freshers ' processions by King 's students around Aldwych in which new students were typically flour bombed . 
 Although riots between respective college students occurred in central London well into the 1950s , rivalry is now limited to the rugby union pitch and skulduggery over mascots , with the annual London Varsity series culminating in the historic match between King 's College London RFC and University College London RFC . 
 = = = Rivalry with the London School of Economics = = = 
 On 2 December 2005 , tensions between King 's and the London School of Economics ( LSE ) were ignited when at least 200 students from LSE ( located in Aldwych near the Strand Campus ) diverted off from the annual " barrel run " and caused an estimated £ 32 @,@ 000 of damage to the English department at King 's . The Times reported that LSE director Howard Davies attended the fun run event , while LSE claimed that Davies only attended for a short time . King 's principal , Sir Rick Trainor , deplored the behaviour , appealed to King 's students to remain calm and called for no retaliation . The LSE Students ' Union later on 6 December issued a formal apology , condemned the actions , as well as promising to foot the bill for the damage repair . 
 = = = Student residences = = = 
 = = = = Halls of residence = = = = 
 King 's has a total of nine halls of residence located throughout London . Priority is given to students whose home address is outside the M25 motorway . Great Dover Street Apartments , Wolfson House and Iris Brook and Orchard Lisle are located on Guy 's Campus in London Bridge . Brian Creamer House , which was named after Dean of St Thomas 's Hospital Medical School Brian Creamer , and the Rectory are situated in the grounds of Lambeth Palace near St Thomas ' Campus . Stamford Street Apartments is located opposite Waterloo Campus and within walking distance of Strand Campus , and Champion Hill Residence is close to Denmark Hill Campus in south London . <unk> Tower Bridge is located within a walking distance from the Tower of London and Tower Bridge . Angel Lane in Stratford , Ewen Henderson Court , Julian Markham House in Elephant and Castle , Moonraker Point in Southwark and Stratford One are nominated residences run by the Unite Group . Hampstead Residence was a residence near the former King 's Hampstead Campus , but was sold by King 's College London and is no longer a King 's venue . 
 = = = = Intercollegiate halls of residence = = = = 
 In addition to halls of residence run by King 's , full @-@ time students are eligible to stay at one of the Intercollegiate Halls of Residence offered by the University of London . King 's has the largest number of <unk> in the University of London Intercollegiate Halls . There are a total of eight intercollegiate halls of the University of London . Canterbury Hall , College Hall , Commonwealth Hall , Connaught Hall , Hughes Parry Hall and International Hall are located near Russell Square in Bloomsbury . Lillian Penson Hall is situated in Paddington , and <unk> House is situated in Marble Arch . Additionally , students can apply to live in International Students House . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 King 's has educated numerous foreign Heads of State and Government including two former Presidents of Cyprus , <unk> Papadopoulos , and <unk> <unk> , Prime Minister of Jordan <unk> al @-@ Bakhit , President of the Seychelles France @-@ Albert René , Prime Minister of the Bahamas Sir Lynden <unk> , President of Uganda Godfrey <unk> , Prime Minister of Iraq Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ <unk> , Prime Minister of Grenada Maurice Bishop ; Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis Sir Lee Moore , Governor General of Ghana William Hare , 5th Earl of Listowel , Governor General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sir Sydney Gun @-@ Munro , Governor of the Turks and Caicos Islands Martin Bourke , and Acting Prime Minister of Moldova Natalia Gherman . At ministerial level King 's alumni include Deputy Prime Ministers of Canada ( Anne McLellan ) , Singapore ( S. Rajaratnam ) and Egypt ( Ziad <unk> @-@ Eldin ) ; Vice Presidents of Kenya ( Michael <unk> <unk> ) and Sierra Leone ( Francis <unk> and <unk> Conteh ) ; Foreign Ministers of Bulgaria ( Nikolay <unk> , now UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process ) , Japan ( Hayashi Tadasu ) , Malaysia ( Rais Yatim ) , Pakistan ( Sir Muhammad <unk> Khan , later President of the UN General Assembly and the International Court of Justice ) , Ghana ( <unk> Asamoah ) , Kenya ( James <unk> ) , Sierra Leone ( J. B. <unk> ) and Guyana ( Sir <unk> <unk> , later Secretary @-@ General of the Commonwealth , and Frederick Wills ) ; and Irish Finance Minister Michael Collins . 
 Notable King 's alumni to have held senior positions in British politics include two Speakers of the House of Commons ( Lord <unk> @-@ King and Lord Ullswater ) and the former Cabinet ministers Lord Watkinson , Lord <unk> and Lord Wilmot . As of the current Parliament there are 19 King 's graduates in the House of Commons , namely Douglas Carswell , Nic Dakin , Natascha Engel , Mark Francois , John Glen , Dan Jarvis , Phillip Lee , Brandon Lewis , Fiona <unk> , Sarah Newton , Matthew Offord , Daniel Poulter , Lucy Powell , Tulip Siddiq , Keith Simpson , Gary Streeter , Gareth Thomas , David Warburton , and Sarah Wollaston . As of the current Parliament there are 16 King 's graduates in the House of Lords including Lord Carlile , Lord Clinton @-@ Davis , Lord Dunlop , Lord Kakkar , Lord MacGregor , Baroness Morgan , Baroness O <unk> , Lord Owen , Lord Plant , Lord Rowlands , Baroness Watkins , and the Lords Spiritual Tim Dakin , Nick <unk> , and Tim Thornton . 
 Notable alumni in the sciences include Nobel laureates Peter Higgs , Michael Levitt , Max <unk> and Sir Frederick Hopkins ; polymath Sir Francis Galton ; pathologist Thomas Hodgkin ; pioneer of IVF Patrick Steptoe ; discoverers of Hepatitis C Michael Houghton and Qui @-@ Lim Choo ; DNA researchers Raymond Gosling and Herbert Wilson ; founder of modern hospice philosophy Dame Cicely Saunders ; botanist David Bellamy ; the Wolf Prize laureates Michael Fisher and Anthony Pawson , and at least 111 Fellows of the Royal Society . 
 King 's alumni in religion include the Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Archbishop Emeritus of Cape Town , Desmond Tutu , former Archbishop of Canterbury , Lord Carey , former Chief Rabbi of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth , Lord Sacks , Primate of All Ireland , Richard Clarke , Archbishops of Cape Town , <unk> <unk> and Joost de Blank , Archbishop of the West Indies John Holder , Archbishop of New Zealand Churchill Julius , and the Ethiopian cardinal <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 Notable King 's alumni in poetry and literature include the poet John Keats and the writers Thomas Hardy , Sir Arthur C. Clarke , Virginia Woolf , Alain de <unk> , Michael Morpurgo , W. Somerset Maugham , Charles Kingsley , C. S. Forester , John Ruskin , Radclyffe Hall , Susan Hill , Hanif Kureishi , Maureen Duffy , <unk> Singh , Sir Leslie Stephen and the Booker Prize winner Anita <unk> . In addition , the dramatist Sir W. S. Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan graduated from King 's in 1856 . 
 King 's alumni in the arts include the impressionist Rory Bremner ; Queen bassist John Deacon ; Chief Executive of the Royal Opera House Alex Beard ; Oscar winners Greer Garson and Edmund <unk> ; Grammy Award winners Boris Karloff , Sir John Eliot Gardiner and Peter Asher ; Emmy Award winning director Sacha Gervasi , and the Golden Globe winning composer Michael Nyman . 
 In law , King 's alumni include the current High Court judges Sir David Foskett , Dame Geraldine Andrews and Dame Bobbie <unk> @-@ Grubb ; Judge of the International Court of Justice , Patrick Lipton Robinson ; Chief Justice of Western Australia , Wayne Martin and the current Attorneys General of Trinidad and Tobago ( Faris Al @-@ <unk> ) and Bermuda ( Trevor Moniz ) . 
 King 's alumni in the military include the current Chairman of the NATO Military Committee Petr Pavel , Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe Sir Adrian Bradshaw , the former head of the British Army Lord Harding , head of the Singapore Armed Forces Neo Kian Hong , head of the Nigerian Armed Forces Ola Ibrahim , head of the Maltese Armed Forces Martin Xuereb , head of the Malaysian Army Md Hashim bin Hussein , head of the Pakistan Air Force Sohail Aman , head of the Sri Lankan Air Force Harsha <unk> and two heads of the Indian Air Force , Pratap Chandra Lal and Sir Richard Peirse ; three Commandant General 's of the Royal Marines , Ed Davis , Andy Salmon , and Sir Robert Fry , and two recipients of the Victoria Cross , Ferdinand Le Quesne and Mark Sever Bell . 
 King 's is also the alma mater of the founder of Bentley Motors , Walter Bentley ; oil magnate and philanthropist Calouste Gulbenkian ; journalists Martin Bashir , Sophie Long , Marc Wadsworth , Jane Corbin , David Bond , Sean Fletcher and Anita Anand ; and the Olympic gold medalists Katherine Grainger , and Kieran West . 
 = = = Nobel laureates = = = 
 There are 12 Nobel laureates who were either students or academics at King 's . 
 = = = Notable academics and staff = = = 
 King 's has benefited from the services of academics and staff at the top of their fields , including Sir Charles Lyell ( lawyer and geologist ) , Sir Charles Wheatstone ( best known for the Wheatstone bridge ) , Robert Bentley Todd ( best known for describing Todd 's paresis ) , James Clerk Maxwell ( mathematical physicist ) , Florence Nightingale ( the founder of modern nursing ) , Joseph Lister ( pioneer of antiseptic surgery ) , Charles Barkla ( best known for the study of X @-@ rays ) , Sir Charles Sherrington ( known for his work on the functions of neurons ) , Sir Edward Appleton ( physicist ) , Sir Owen Richardson ( physicist ) , Maurice Wilkins ( best known for contributions to the discovery of the structure of DNA ) , Rosalind Franklin ( best known for contributions to the discovery of the structure of DNA ) , Mario Vargas Llosa ( writer ) , Sir Roger Penrose ( mathematical physicist ) and John Ellis ( theoretical physicist ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Fictional alumni = = = 
 In the Sherlock episode " The Blind Banker " , King 's College London can be seen listed in Watson 's curriculum vitae . 
 In Philip Roth 's novel The Professor of Desire , the main character David <unk> spent a certain period of time studying comparative literature at King 's on a Fulbright Scholarship . 
 In some of the paintings of Henry Hudson , Young Sen – a Chinese scientific prodigy who has been offered an unconditional place at King 's to read medicine – is depicted in his biographical painting series , showing the rise and fall of the protagonist . 
 = = = Fictional staff = = = 
 In the Sherlock Holmes story " The Adventure of the Resident Patient " , Dr Percy Trevelyan describes himself as a " London University man " who joined King 's College Hospital after graduating . 
 = = = Non @-@ fictional staff = = = 
 Nicole Kidman has been playing the life of Rosalind Franklin in a play called Photograph 51 at the Noël Coward Theatre in the City of Westminster which started at the beginning of September 2015 . Franklin 's colleague at King ’ s , Maurice Wilkins , was played by Stephen Campbell Moore . The title refers to Photo 51 , an x @-@ ray crystallography image of the DNA double helix structure produced by Franklin and a PhD student in 1952 at King ’ s College , London . 
 = = = Fictional settings = = = 
 Part of Dan Brown 's novel The Da Vinci Code was set in the Round Reading Room of the Maughan Library , although no part of the film adaption was filmed there . 
 = = = Film settings = = = 
 The neoclassical façade of King 's , with the passage which connects the Strand to the Somerset House terrace has been utilised to reproduce the late Victorian Strand in the opening scenes of Oliver Parker 's 2002 film The Importance of Being Earnest . The East Wing of King 's appears , as a part of Somerset House , in a number of other productions , such as Wilde , Flyboys , and The Duchess . 
 The Maughan Library has also been the location of some film shoots of popular movies , most notably The Da Vinci Code , Johnny English ( see Maughan Library description ) , The Imitation Game and V for Vendetta . 
 = Magnus Olafsson = 
 Magnús Óláfsson ( died 1265 ) was a mid 13th century Manx @-@ Hebridean king , the son of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles . Magnús and Óláfr descended from a long line of Norse @-@ Gaelic kings who ruled the Isle of Man ( Mann ) and parts of the Hebrides . Some leading members of the Crovan dynasty , such as Óláfr , styled themselves " King of the Isles " ; other members , such as Magnús and his brothers , styled themselves " King of Mann and the Isles " . Although kings in their own right , leading members of the Crovan dynasty paid tribute to the Kings of Norway and generally recognised a nominal Norse overlordship of Mann and the Hebrides . 
 In 1237 , Óláfr died and was succeeded by his elder son , Haraldr , who later drowned in 1248 . The kingship was then taken up by his brother , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson . After a reign of only weeks , Rögnvaldr was slain and the kingship was taken up by Haraldr Guðrøðarson , a descendant of Óláfr 's half @-@ brother and deadly rival , Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles . After a short reign , this Haraldr was removed from power by his overlord , Hákon Hákonarson , King of Norway . In Haraldr 's absence , Magnús and a relation of his , Eógan mac Donnchada , King in the Isles , unsuccessfully attempted to conquer Mann . A few years later , Magnús successfully made his return to the island and was proclaimed king . 
 In the 1240s , following attempts to purchase the Isles from Hákon , Alexander II , King of Scots resorted to warfare to win the region . His death in 1249 brought an abrupt end to his westward invasion , and it was not until the 1260s that a Scottish king again attempted to impose his authority into the Isles . In 1261 , Alexander II 's son and successor , Alexander III , attempted to purchase the Isles without success , before Scottish forces raided into the Hebrides . Hákon 's response to Scottish aggression was to organise a massive fleet to re @-@ assert Norwegian authority . In the summer of 1263 , the fleet sailed down through the Hebrides . Although his forces gained strength as they sailed southwards , the Norwegian king received only lukewarm support from many of his Norse @-@ Gaelic vassals — in fact , Magnús was one of the few who came out whole @-@ heartedly for Hákon . At one point during the campaign , Hákon sent Magnús and some other vassals raiding deep into Lennox . Meanwhile , the main Norwegian force was occupied with the Battle of Largs — a famous , but inconclusive series of skirmishes against the Scots . Following this action , Hákon 's demoralised fleet returned home having accomplished little . Not long after Hákon 's departure and death , Alexander launched a punitive expedition into the Hebrides , and threatened Mann with the same . Magnús ' subsequent submission to the Scottish king , and the homage rendered for his lands , symbolises the failure of Hákon 's campaign , and marks the complete collapse of Norwegian influence in the Isles . 
 Magnús , the last reigning king of his dynasty , died at Rushen Castle in 1265 , and was buried at the Abbey of St Mary , Rushen . At the time of his death , he was married to Eógan 's daughter Máire . In the year after his death , the Hebrides and Mann were formally ceded by King of Norway to the King of Scots . Ten years after Magnús ' death , Guðrøðr , a bastard son of his attempted to establish himself as king on Mann . Guðrøðr 's revolt was quickly and brutally crushed by Scottish forces , and the island remained part of the Kingdom of Scotland . By the 1290s , the Hebridean portion of Magnús ' former island @-@ kingdom had been incorporated into a newly created Scottish sheriffdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 Magnús was a member of the Crovan dynasty — a line of Norse @-@ Gaelic sea @-@ kings whose kingdom encompassed the Isle of Man ( Mann ) and the northern parts of the Hebrides , from the late 11th century to the mid 13th century . Although the kingdom originally encompassed the entirety of the Hebrides , much of the Inner Hebrides was permanently lost in the mid 12th century , but the dynasty retained control of the largest Hebridean islands of Lewis and Harris and Skye . Magnús was the son of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles ( d . 1237 ) . Although Óláfr is known to have had two wives , and no contemporaneous source names the mother of his children , Magnus ' mother may have been Óláfr 's second wife — Christina , daughter of Fearchar , Earl of Ross , ( d. circa 1251 ) . 
 Óláfr was a younger son of Guðrøðr Óláfsson , King of the Isles ( d . 1187 ) . Before his death in 1187 , Guðrøðr instructed that Óláfr should succeed to the kingship . However , Guðrøðr was instead succeeded by his elder son , Rögnvaldr ( d . 1229 ) , who had popular support . Rögnvaldr and Óláfr , who are thought to have had different mothers , subsequently warred over the dynasty 's kingdom in the early 13th century , until Rögnvaldr was slain battling Óláfr in 1229 . Rögnvaldr 's son , Guðrøðr ( d . 1231 ) , who was also in conflict with Óláfr , took up his father 's claim to the throne , and at his height co @-@ ruled the kingdom with Óláfr in 1231 . Guðrøðr was slain in 1231 , and Óláfr ruled the entire kingdom without internal opposition until his own death in 1237 . Óláfr was succeeded by his son , Haraldr , who later travelled to Norway and married a daughter of Hákon Hákonarson , King of Norway ( d . 1263 ) , but lost his life at sea on his return voyage in 1248 . In May 1249 , Haraldr 's brother , Rögnvaldr ( d . 1249 ) , formally succeeded to the kingship of the Crovan dynasty 's kingdom . 
 Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's reign was an extremely short one ; only weeks after his accession , he was slain on Mann . His killer is identified by a contemporary source as a knight named Ívarr who may have been an ally of Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's second cousin once removed , Haraldr Guðrøðarson ( fl . 1249 ) , who seized the kingship immediately following the killing . Although at first Haraldr was recognised as a legitimate ruler of the kingdom by Henry III , King of England ( d . 1272 ) , Haraldr was later regarded as a usurper by his Norwegian overlord , Hákon . In 1250 , Hákon summoned Haraldr to Norway to answer for his seizure of the kingship , and Haraldr was kept from returning to the Isles . 
 = = = Relations and rivals = = = 
 The pedigree below outlines the patrilineal descendants of Óláfr Guðrøðarson ( d . 1153 ) . Illustrated is the degree of relationship between Magnús and his rival , Haraldr Guðrøðarson , his second cousin once removed . Also shown is the degree of relationship between Magnús and his ally , Eógan mac Donnchada , who was not only his father @-@ in @-@ law , but also his second cousin once removed . The names of females are italicised . Several of the leading members of the Crovan dynasty styled themselves in Latin rex insularum ( " King of the Isles " ) . The sons of Óláfr Guðrøðarson ( d . 1237 ) — Magnús and his brothers — styled themselves in Latin rex <unk> et insularum ( " King of Mann and the Isles " ) . 
 = = Eógan of Argyll and the invasion of Mann = = 
 Eógan mac Donnchada , Lord of Argyll ( d. in or after 1268 ) was a prominent member of the meic Somairle , the descendants of Somairle mac Gilla Brigte , King of the Isles , Lord of Argyll and Kintyre ( d . 1164 ) . Through Somairle 's wife , Ragnhildr , daughter of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of the Isles ( d . 1153 ) , several leading members of the meic Somairle claimed kingship in the Hebrides . In 1248 , Eógan and his second cousin , Dubgall mac Ruaidrí , Lord of Garmoran ( d . 1268 ) , travelled to Hákon in Norway and requested the title of king in the Hebrides . Hákon subsequently bestowed the title upon Eógan , and the following year , upon learning of Haraldr Óláfsson 's death , Hákon sent Eógan westward to take control of the Isles ( at least temporarily ) on his behalf . Up until this point Eógan had two overlords : the King of Norway , who claimed the Hebrides ; and the King of Scots , who claimed Argyll and coveted the Hebrides . Unfortunately for Eógan , soon after his return from Norway , Alexander II , King of Scots ( d . 1249 ) led an expedition deep into Argyll and demanded that Eógan renounce his allegiance to Hákon . Eógan refused to do so and was subsequently driven from his Scottish lordship . 
 In 1250 , following Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's summons to Norway , the Chronicle of Mann records that Magnús and Eógan arrived on Mann with a force of Norwegians . The exact intentions of the invaders are unknown ; it is possible that they may have intended to install Magnús as king . At the very least , Eógan was likely looking for some form of compensation for his dispossession from his mainland Scottish lordship . The chronicle states that the invaders made landfall at Ronaldsway , and entered into negotiations with the Manx people ; although , when it was learned that Eógan styled himself " King of the Isles " , the Manxmen took offence and broke off all dialogue . 
 The chronicle indicates that Eógan had his men form @-@ up on St Michael 's Isle , an island that was attached to Mann by a tidal causeway . As evening drew near , the chronicle records that an accomplice of the knight Ívarr led a Manx assault on the island and routed the invading forces . The next day , the chronicle states that the invading forces left the shores of Mann . Ívarr 's connection to the Manx attack on the invading forces of Eógan and Magnús suggests that there was still considerable opposition on Mann by adherents of Haraldr to the prospect of Magnús ' kingship there . 
 The following year , Henry III commanded the Justiciar of Ireland , John fitz Geoffrey ( d . 1258 ) , to prohibit Magnús from raising military forces in Ireland for an invasion of Mann . A year later Magnús succeeded to the kingship , as the chronicle records that he returned to Mann and , with the consent of the people , began his reign . There are indications that opposition to Magnús , and thus possibly support of Haraldr , continued into the mid 1250s . For example , the chronicle records that when Hákon bestowed upon Magnús the title of king in 1254 , it further notes that when Magnús ' opponents heard of this , they became dismayed and that their hopes of overthrowing him gradually faded away . Furthermore , a letter of protection , written on behalf of Henry to Magnús in 1256 , orders Henry 's men not to receive Haraldr and Ívarr , which may thus indicate that these two men were still alive and active . Although Magnús ' eldest brother , Haraldr Óláfsson , appears to have ruled over the entirety of the dynasty 's 13th century sea @-@ realm , as did Magnús from 1252 onwards , the situation during the years between Haraldr Óláfsson 's death and Magnús ' accession is uncertain , and it is possible that the kingdom was partitioned between feuding dynasts , as it had been during the bitter inter @-@ dynastic strife of the early 13th- and 12th centuries . Clearly the situation in the Isles was unsettled in the 1250s . For example , Henry is known to have written letters to Alexander , Hákon , and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ( d . 1282 ) , the co @-@ ruler of Gwynedd , ordering them not allow their men invade Mann in Magnús ' absence there in 1254 . 
 = = Scottish aggression = = 
 In 1244 , Alexander made the first of several attempts by Scottish monarchs to purchase the Hebrides from the Kingdom of Norway . It was following this unsuccessful bid that Hákon sent Eógan into the Isles in 1249 , which in turn led to Eógan 's expulsion from the Scottish @-@ mainland when Alexander launched a full @-@ scale summer invasion into Argyll . Alexander 's sudden death in the Hebrides brought an abrupt end to his westward invasion , and it was not until the 1260s that a Scottish king again attempted to impose his authority into the Isles . 
 In 1261 , Alexander III , King of Scots ( d . 1286 ) sent an emissary to Norway to discuss the Isles . Negotiations proved fruitless , and the following year Uilleam , Earl of Ross ( d . 1274 ) is recorded to have launched a vicious attack on Skye . The assault was likely carried out on behalf of Alexander , in response to the failure of Scottish mission to Norway the year previous . In response , Hákon organised a massive military force to re @-@ assert Norwegian control along the western seaboard of Scotland . At this time , the Norwegian king was at the height of his power , and his only son had just recently been recognised as heir to the throne . 
 = = Norwegian retaliation = = 
 Late in the summer of 1263 , Hákon 's fleet reached the northern seaboard of Scotland . Although the precise size of the fleet is unknown , the Icelandic Annals remark that " so great a host that an equally great army is not known ever to have gone from Norway " . Upon reaching the Scottish @-@ mainland , the late 13th century Hákonar saga Hákonarsonar ( " The Saga of Hákon Hákonarson " ) , states that Hákon levied a tax upon Caithness and considered plundering into the Moray Firth . It is possible that he intended these acts as a form of retribution for the Earl of Ross ' savage attack on Skye . The fleet then made its way south along the western seaboard to Skye , where the saga records that Hákon was met by Magnús . The saga states that Hákon 's fleet then sailed south to Kerrera , where Dubgall mac Ruaidrí , King in the Isles ( d . 1268 ) and Magnús amongst others , were sent to lead fifty ships towards Kintyre , while a smaller group was sent to Bute . The fleet sent to Kintyre was likely tasked with obtaining the allegiance of Áengus mac Domnaill , Lord of Islay ( d. circa 1293 ) and a certain Murchad , both who are stated by the saga to have afterwards submitted to Hákon . The saga records that several castles were secured by Hákon 's forces : Rothesay Castle on Bute ; and an unnamed castle in southern Kintyre , which was more than likely <unk> Castle . At Gigha , the saga relates that Eógan surrendered himself to Hákon , and informed the Norwegian king that he had decided to side with the Scots from whom he held a larger grant of lands . At about the time when Hákon let Eógan go free , the saga records that the first messengers from the King of Scots arrived to parley . 
 The saga indicates that negotiations started peacefully enough , although as time drew on , and the weather grew worse , a time @-@ pressed Hákon broke off all dialogue . He sent a detachment of ships deep into Lennox , through Loch Long — different versions of the saga number the force at forty and sixty ships — led by Magnús , Dubgall , <unk> mac Ruaidrí ( Dubgall 's brother ) , Áengus , and Murchad . The saga states that the ships were dragged across land to Loch Lomond — which indicates that the invaders would have beached their ships and made portage across the isthmus between the two lochs ( between what are today the settlements of Arrochar and Tarbet ) . The saga vividly describes how the invaders wasted the well @-@ inhabited islands of the loch and the dwellings surrounding the loch . The fact that Hákon tasked his Norse @-@ Gaelic magnates with leading this foray likely indicates that their boats were lighter than those of the Norwegians , and thus easier to portage from one loch to another ; it could also indicate that the undertaking was meant to test their faithfulness to the Norwegian cause . 
 While Lennox was being plundered , Hákon and his main force , stationed between the <unk> and the Scottish mainland , were occupied with the events surrounding the Battle of Largs , between 30 September and 3 October . Although claimed by later Scottish chroniclers as a great victory , in reality the so @-@ called battle was nothing more than " a series of disorderly skirmishes " , with relatively few casualties that achieved little for either side . Following the encounter , Hákon led his fleet northward up through the Hebrides . At Mull , he parted with his Norse @-@ Gaelic lords : Dubgall was rewarded with Eógan 's former island @-@ domain ; Murchad was given Arran , and a certain Ruaidrí was given Bute . The Norwegian fleet left the Hebrides and reached Orkney by the end of October , where an ill Hákon died in mid December . Despite the saga 's claim that Hákon had been triumphant , in reality the campaign was a failure . Alexander 's kingdom had successfully defended itself from Norwegian might , and many of Hákon 's Norse @-@ Gaelic supporters had been reluctant to support his cause . 
 = = Hebridean @-@ Manx subjugation = = 
 Within months of Hákon 's abortive campaign , embassies were sent forth from Norway to discuss terms of peace . Meanwhile , Alexander seized the initiative and made ready to punish the magnates who had supported Hákon . In 1264 , Alexander assembled a fleet and made ready to invade Mann . Without any protection from his Norwegian overlord , or from Henry III ( who was held captive at the time ) , Magnús had no choice but to submit to the demands of the powerful King of Scots . The two monarchs met at Dumfries , where Magnús swore oaths to Alexander , rendered homage , and surrendered hostages . In return for Alexander 's promise of protection against Norwegian retribution , Magnús was forced to provide Alexander 's navy with several " pirate type galleys " — five of twenty oars and five of twelve oars . Alexander then ordered an invasion of the Western Isles , led by Uilleam , Earl of Mar ( d. in or before 1281 ) , Alexander Comyn , Earl of Buchan ( d . 1289 ) , and Alan Durward ( d . 1275 ) . According to Scottish chronicler John of Fordun ( d. in or after 1363 ) , the Scots invaders plundered and killed throughout the islands ; the expedition itself is corroborated by the late 13th century Magnúss saga <unk> ( " The Saga of Magnús the <unk> " ) , which indicates that Scottish forces went into the Hebrides and secured the submission of Áengus amongst others . Another punitive expedition , possibly led by the Earl of Ross , was launched into Caithness and Ross . The submission forced upon the island @-@ magnates , particularly that of Magnús , marked the complete collapse of Norwegian influence in the Isles . 
 = = Acta and honours = = 
 Only twenty originals , copies , or abstract versions of royal charters of the kings of the Crovan dynasty are known . Of these , only three date to the reign of Magnús — one of which , a grant to <unk> Priory in 1256 , is the only original royal charter of the dynasty in existence . Important devices attached to royal charters were double @-@ sided waxen seals , used to authentic such instruments . Although no seals of the dynasty now survive , there exists several 17th- and 18th century descriptions and depictions of ones believed to have belonged to Magnús ' uncle Rögnvaldr , and brother Haraldr . This limited evidence suggests that , in the 12th- and 13th centuries , the kings of the dynasty bore a sailing ship upon their seals , which would have likely represented the clinker @-@ built galley utilised in the Isles at the time . Borne by men whose strength lay in the power of armed galley @-@ fleets , such a symbol would have represented their authority in the Isles . 
 The Chronicle of Mann , the only narrative source for the dynasty 's realm , was compiled on Mann during Magnús ' reign . Analysis of the document reveals that the main scribe 's last entry dates to 1257 , in an account which records the dedication of the Abbey of St Mary , Rushen in the presence of Magnús and Richard , Bishop of the Isles . The chronicle thus appears to have been commissioned by , or on behalf of , Magnús himself . The chronicle is somewhat biased in favour of one line of the dynasty over another — the line of Magnús 's father , Óláfr , over that of Óláfr 's rival half @-@ brother Rögnvaldr . For example , Haraldr Guðrøðarson is depicted as a usurper and tyrant , in contrast to the legitimate kingship of his cousin , Magnús . In fact , one reason for the chronicle 's composition may have been to legitimise the line of Óláfr which , at the time of the chronicle 's compilation , was then represented by Magnús himself . 
 Like his father and his brother Haraldr , Magnús is recorded within the Chronicle of Mann as having been knighted by Henry III . The knighthoods of Haraldr ( in 1247 ) and Magnús ( in 1256 ) appear to be confirmed by independent English sources . For example , within Henry 's letter to Magnús in 1256 , Magnús is described to have been invested with a military belt by the English king . 
 = = Death = = 
 Following his submission to Alexander , Magnús , the last reigning king of the Crovan dynasty , ruled peacefully until his death in 1265 . According to the Chronicle of Mann , the king died at Rushen Castle on 24 November , and was buried at the Abbey of St Mary , Rushen . There is a possibility that a coffin @-@ lid found at Rushen , may be associated with the tomb of one of the three kings of the dynasty known to have been buried there . At the time of his death , Magnús is known to have been married to Eógan 's daughter , Máire ( d . 1302 ) . As the last of a long line of Norse @-@ Gaelic rulers of Mann , his death ended the island 's so @-@ called " golden @-@ age " of Scandinavian sea @-@ kings . The Annals of Furness record simply , that on his death , " kings ceased to reign on Mann " . 
 = = Dismantled kingdom = = 
 Three years after the inconclusive skirmish at Largs , terms of peace were finally agreed upon between the kingdoms of Norway and Scotland . On 2 July 1266 , with the conclusion of the Treaty of Perth , the centuries @-@ old territorial dispute over Scotland 's western seaboard was at last settled . Within the treaty , Magnús Hákonarson , King of Norway ( d . 1280 ) ceded the Hebrides and Mann to Alexander , who in turn agreed to pay 4 @,@ 000 merks sterling over four years , and in addition to pay 100 merks sterling in perpetuity . Other conditions stipulated that the inhabitants of the islands would be subject to laws of Scotland ; that they were not to be punished for their actions previous to the treaty ; and that they were free to remain or leave their possessions peacefully . In 1266 , the Chronicle of Lanercost records that Alexander ruled Mann through appointed bailiffs ; Scottish exchequer accounts record that the Sheriff of Dumfries was given allowance for maintaining seven Manx hostages . 
 In 1275 , Magnús Óláfsson 's illegitimate son , Guðrøðr , led a revolt on Mann and attempted to establish himself as king . According to the Chronicle of Mann and the Chronicle of Lanercost , a Scottish fleet landed on Mann on 7 October , and early the next morning the revolt was crushed as the Scots routed the rebels at the Battle of Ronaldsway . Guðrøðr may very well have been slain in the defeat , although one source , the Annals of Furness , state that he , his wife and his followers escaped the carnage to Wales . 
 By the end of the 13th century , the islands once ruled by Magnús and his fellow members of the Crovan dynasty before him , were incorporated into the Scottish realm . In 1293 , the parliament of John , King of Scots ( d . 1314 ) established three new sheriffdoms within his kingdom . One of these three , the Sheriffdom of Skye , was granted to Uilleam , Earl of Ross ( d . 1323 ) . This sheriffdom included the seaboard north of Ardnamurchan ( Wester Ross and Kintail ) , and the islands of Skye , Lewis , Uist , Barra , Eigg , and Rum . It is possible that parts of the sheriffdom may have been taken over earlier , sometime after the dismantling of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Coffin birth = 
 Coffin birth , known in academia by the more accurate term postmortem fetal extrusion , is the expulsion of a nonviable fetus through the vaginal opening of the decomposing body of a deceased pregnant woman as a result of the increasing pressure of intra @-@ abdominal gases . This kind of postmortem delivery occurs very rarely during the decomposition of a body . The practice of chemical preservation , whereby chemical preservatives and disinfectant solutions are pumped into a body to replace natural body fluids ( and the bacteria that reside therein ) , have made the occurrence of " coffin birth " so rare that the topic is rarely mentioned in international medical discourse . 
 Typically during the decomposition of a human body , naturally occurring bacteria in the organs of the abdominal cavity ( such as the stomach and intestines ) generate gases as by @-@ products of metabolism , which causes the body to swell . In some cases , the confined pressure of the gases can squeeze the uterus ( the womb ) , even forcing it downward , and it may turn inside @-@ out and be forced out of the body through the vaginal opening ( a process called prolapse ) . If a fetus is contained within the uterus , it could therefore be expelled from the mother 's body through the vaginal opening when the uterus turns inside @-@ out , in a process that , to outward appearances , mimics childbirth . The main differences lie in the state of the mother and fetus and the mechanism of delivery : in the event of natural , live childbirth , the mother 's contractions encourage the infant to emerge from the womb ; in a case of coffin birth , built @-@ up gas pressure within the <unk> body of a pregnant woman pushes the dead fetus from the body of the mother . 
 Cases have been recorded by medical authorities since the 16th century , though some archaeological cases provide evidence for its occurrence in many periods of human history . While cases of postmortem fetal expulsion have always been rare , the phenomenon has been recorded under disparate circumstances and is occasionally seen in a modern forensic context when the body of a pregnant woman lies undisturbed and undiscovered for some time following death . There are numerous examples that have demonstrated that the term coffin birth is a misnomer under many circumstances . There are also cases whereby a fetus may become separated from the body of the pregnant woman about the time of death or during decomposition , though because those cases are not consistent with the processes described here , they are not considered true cases of postmortem fetal extrusion . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The <unk> a of postmortem fetal extrusion is not completely understood , as the event is neither predictable nor replicable under experimental conditions . Evidence has accumulated opportunistically and direct observation is serendipitous . While it is possible that more than one etiology can produce the same result , there is an accepted hypothesis , based on established research in the fields of biochemistry and forensic taphonomy , Note b and further supported by observational research , that accounts for the taphonomic mechanisms that would result in the most often encountered cases of postmortem extrusion of a nonviable fetus . 
 Typically , as a dead body decomposes , body tissues become depleted of oxygen and the body begins to <unk> ; anaerobic bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract proliferate and as a result of increased metabolic activity , release gases such as carbon dioxide , methane , and hydrogen sulfide . These bacteria secrete <unk> c to break down body cells and proteins for ingestion which thus weakens organ tissues . Increasing pressure forces the diffusion of excessive gases into the weakened tissues where they enter the circulatory system and spread to other parts of the body , causing both torso and limbs to become bloated . These decompositional processes weaken the structural integrity of organs by separating necrotizing tissue layers . <unk> usually begins from two to five days after death , depending on external temperature , humidity , and other environmental conditions . As the volume of gas increases , the pressure begins to force various body fluids to exude from all natural orifices . It is at this point during the decomposition of a pregnant body that amniotic membranes become stretched and separated , and intraabdominal gas pressure may force the eversion and prolapse of the uterus , Note d which would result in the expulsion of the fetus through the vaginal canal . It has been observed that the bodies of multiparous <unk> e are more likely to spontaneously expel the fetus during decomposition than those who died during their first pregnancy , because of the more elastic nature of the cervix . 
 = = History = = 
 Numerous documented cases of postmortem fetal extrusion were described in the medical compendium Anomalies and Curiosities of Medicine , first published in 1896 . The earliest presented case occurred in 1551 when a pregnant woman was tried and hanged by the courts of the Spanish Inquisition . Four hours after her death , and while the body still hung by the neck , two dead infants were seen to fall free of the body . This is unusual for the short amount of time elapsed between death and the postmortem delivery . As no information is given regarding other ambient circumstances , it is unclear whether the onset of putrefaction was accelerated , or if other causal factors were at work . In the city of Brussels , in 1633 , a woman died in convulsions and three days later the fetus was spontaneously expelled . In Weissenfels , in 1861 , postmortem fetal extrusion was observed sixty hours after the death of a pregnant woman . Other cases are described , though only a few describe the unexpected discovery of fetal remains following exhumation . Most cases occurred prior to burial ; in some of these , the body was in the casket while in other cases the body was still on its deathbed or on a bier . 
 During the late 19th century , modern embalming techniques were developed , whereby preservative and disinfectant chemical compounds ( such as formaldehyde ) are pumped into a body , flushing out the body 's natural fluids , and with them the bacteria that flourish during putrefaction and generate the gases that comprise the active force behind the expulsion of the fetus . However , the phenomenon was still recognized by medical science and in 1904 , John Whitridge Williams wrote a textbook on obstetric medicine that included a section on " coffin birth " . Although the text has remained an important reference in obstetrics , the subject , whether called " coffin birth " or " postmortem fetal extrusion " , was excluded by its 13th edition in 1966 , and was not mentioned in the edition published in 2009 . The subject was discussed in German medical literature during the 20th century , though more detailed case reports in the forensic literature have been published recently . 
 In 2005 , the body of a 34 @-@ year @-@ old woman , eight months pregnant , was discovered in her apartment in Hamburg , Germany . The body was bloated and discolored , and upon initial examination , it was found that the head of the fetus had made its appearance in the vaginal opening . At autopsy , medical examiners found that both the head and shoulders of the fetus had emerged , and concluded that it was a case of postmortem fetal extrusion in progress . The woman , who had given birth twice before , had died of a heroin overdose . The case was unusual and serendipitous , as few medical practitioners have been able to observe and document the progress of postmortem fetal extrusion . 
 In 2008 , the body of a 38 @-@ year @-@ old woman , seven months pregnant , was discovered in an open field four days after she had disappeared from her residence in Panama . A plastic bag had been left over her head , and she had been gagged ; the case was ruled a homicide . The body had suffered from the tropical heat and high humidity , and was bloated and highly discolored . At autopsy , the remains of the fetus were discovered in the woman 's <unk> f Although the fetus was in a similar state of decomposition , the umbilical cord was intact and still attached to the placenta inside the uterus . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Postmortem fetal extrusion can be very difficult to recognize once a body has undergone complete <unk> , and <unk> are often very cautious about asserting the presence of this phenomenon . There are numerous cultural reasons why a mother and an infant might be interred together , so the joint presence of neonatal remains and an adult female is not taken as conclusive evidence of postmortem fetal extrusion ; however , there have been excavated burials where the position of a set of fetal remains relative to those of an adult female supported this hypothesis . There are a few general guidelines when an archaeologist is assessing the placement of the fetus and the adult : 
 If the fetal remains are found in a fetal position and are wholly within the pelvic cavity of the adult , the fetus died and was interred prior to delivery . The pregnant woman may therefore have died due to labor complications . 
 If the infant is found alongside the adult , with the head oriented in the same direction as the adult , then the infant was delivered , whether naturally or by caesarian incision , at about the time of death , and thereafter interred . 
 Delivered infants have also been interred between or alongside the tibiae ( shins ) , but the infant is still oriented in the same direction as the adult . 
 If the majority of the fetal remains are in the pelvic cavity of the adult , yet the legs are extended and / or the cranium lies among the ribs , then the infant may have been delivered and then placed on top of the mother 's torso prior to burial . As both bodies skeletonized , the infant 's bones would have settled among the mother 's ribs and vertebrae . 
 If the fetal remains are complete and in a position inferior to and in @-@ line with the pelvic outlet , with the head oriented opposite to that of the mother ( toward the foot of the coffin or grave ) , then there is the possibility of coffin <unk> for postmortem fetal extrusion may be less ambiguous when the fetal remains are found to lie within the pelvic outlet of the adult , thus indicating that partial extrusion had occurred during decomposition . 
 In 1975 , it was reported that during the excavation of a medieval cemetery in Kings Worthy , England , fetal remains appeared to lie within the birth canal of the skeleton of a young woman , with the fetal cranium external to the pelvic outlet and between the two femora ( thigh bones ) and the fetal leg bones clearly within the pelvic cavity . Other cases of coffin birth at archaeological sites have been described , such as in 1978 at a Neolithic site in Germany , at a medieval site in Denmark in 1982 , and in 2009 at an Early Christian period site at Fingal , Ireland . A coffin birth was also described in a 2011 episode of the BBC show History Cold Case , featuring the Roman era remains of a woman and three neonates discovered near Baldock , Hertfordshire . 
 = = Applicability of diagnosis = = 
 Because postmortem fetal extrusion is so rare , and occurs under highly idiosyncratic conditions regarding the individual and the ambient environment , this phenomenon has not been studied for possible applications to forensic investigation . Even if the study of postmortem fetal extrusion could lead to improved investigative methods , experimental research would be highly problematic . At present , forensic scientists have at their disposal an array of established techniques and procedures for a death investigation at the stages of decomposition when postmortem fetal extrusion typically occurs . 
 In archaeology , the study of mortuary context , that is , the interpretation of the postmortem treatment of the dead , whether an individual or as pertains to patterns within a group , has led to the development of hypotheses on social status and / or hierarchy regarding many cultures , ancient and extant . In addition , the determination of whether or not delivery actually occurred prior to death has a bearing on analyses of the mother 's population , as the concentration of trace elements differ markedly between the skeletons of <unk> adult women ( before giving birth ) and women who are lactating ; the identification of coffin birth would lead to more accurate analyses of the number of lactating women in a population or the rate of maternal mortality . It is therefore necessary for investigators to be able to recognize postmortem fetal extrusion when encountered in an excavated burial . 
 = = Comparable phenomena = = 
 There are also many cases where the remains of the fetus are found separate from the body of the mother , but expulsion was not through the birth canal , and separation of the two bodies may have been influenced by external environmental factors . The process of separation is so unusual that a specific term for the phenomenon may not have been proposed to the scientific community . These cases may have comparable results , but they are not cases of postmortem fetal extrusion . 
 In April 2003 , the body of Laci Peterson washed up on a shore near San Francisco Bay ; she had been pregnant when she disappeared four months earlier , and the fetus she had been carrying was discovered on a separate beach . When questioned by the media , medical authorities initially speculated that a " coffin birth " might have occurred . However , at autopsy the cervix was found to be in a <unk> condition . Medical examiners later concluded that while Peterson 's body was in the bay , the skin over the abdominal cavity had ruptured due to natural decompositional processes . Seawater entered the abdominal cavity and washed out most of the internal organs , along with the fetus . 
 In 2007 , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old woman in India , over eight months pregnant , hanged herself after contractions had begun . A viable infant was spontaneously delivered unassisted from the woman 's body , which was suspended by the neck . The healthy infant was found on the floor , still tethered to the body of the mother by the umbilical cord . The primary cause of the delivery was the otherwise normal contractions , which had begun prior to death , and was therefore not related to processes of decomposition . While this is not postmortem fetal extrusion , it may be referred to as a case of postmortem delivery , a term which is applied to a broad range of techniques and phenomena with a resultant delivery of a live infant . 
 In 2008 , it was reported from Germany that a 23 @-@ year @-@ old woman in her third trimester was involved in a motor vehicle accident and died ; the nonviable fetus was found between her feet . Following initial impact the vehicle she was in caught fire . The woman was unable to escape due to internal injuries and burned to death . Investigators came to the conclusion that the extreme heat of the fire burned away epidermal and subcutaneous tissue around the abdominal cavity , after which the anterior aspect of the uterus ruptured , causing the fetus to spill out of the uterine cavity and land on the floor between the woman 's feet . The umbilical cord was still intact and connected the fetus to the placenta through the ruptured wall of the uterus . Unlike the woman , who suffered fourth @-@ degree burns over her entire body , the body of the fetus was relatively undamaged . Because the primary cause of separation from the mother 's body was thermally induced traumatic rupture of the abdominal and uterine cavities ; traumatic separation was not related to normal decompositional processes ; and expulsion of the fetus did not involve passage through the birth canal , this is not considered a case of postmortem fetal extrusion . 
 = Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze = 
 Friedrich Freiherr ( Baron ) von Hotze ( 20 April 1739 – 25 September 1799 ) , was a Swiss @-@ born field marshal in the Austrian army during the French Revolutionary Wars , campaigned in the Rhineland during the War of the First Coalition and in Switzerland in the War of the Second Coalition , notably at Battle of Winterthur in late May 1799 , and the First Battle of Zürich in early June 1799 . He was killed at the Second Battle of Zürich . 
 Hotze was born on 20 April 1739 in Richterswil in the Canton of Zürich , in the Old Swiss Confederacy ( present @-@ day Switzerland ) . As a boy , he graduated at the Carolinum in Zürich and pursued studies at the University of Tübingen . In 1758 , he entered the military service of the Duke of Württemberg , and was promoted to captain of cavalry ; he campaigned in the Seven Years ' War , but saw no combat . Later , he served in the Russian army in Russia 's War with Turkey , ( 1768 – 74 ) . 
 His persistent attentiveness to Joseph II garnered for him a commission in the Austrian imperial army , and he served in the brief War of Bavarian Succession ( 1778 – 79 ) . A diligent and creative commander , he rose quickly through the ranks . His campaigning in the War of the First Coalition , particularly at the Battle of Würzburg , earned him the Knight 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa and , in 1798 , the Commander 's Cross . Archduke Charles placed him in full command of the center of the Austrian line at the First Battle of Zürich in 1799 . He was killed by French musket fire in the morning mist near Schänis , in Canton of St. Gallen on 25 September 1799 . 
 = = Childhood and early career = = 
 Friedrich Hotze was the second son of Johannes Hotze , a doctor and surgeon in Hessian military service and his Zürich @-@ born wife , <unk> Gessner . Hotze came from an old Swiss family , and was a cousin of Heinrich Pestalozzi , the pedagogue and education reformer . As a young man , Hotze studied at the renowned Gymnasium Carolinum ( Zürich ) . Later he attended the University of Tübingen . In October 1758 , Hotze entered the military service of the Duke of Württemberg , in a Hussar regiment as an officer cadet ( ensign ) . By 1759 , he had been promoted to lieutenant , and in 1761 , to cavalry captain ( or Rittmeister ) . He left the Duke 's service during the disagreement between the Duke and the Württemberg Estates over financial matters involved in maintaining a standing army , and entered the service of the King of Prussia , where he remained until the end of the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) . After service in Prussia , he took a brief vacation in Switzerland . 
 In May 1768 , Hotze entered the service of Catherine II , the Tsarina of Russia , but only as lieutenant of a regiment of dragoons , the so @-@ called <unk> , named for the territory between Lake Peipus , the <unk> River , and Lake Ladoga , in the old Grand Duchy of Novgorod . He participated in several battles in Russia 's on @-@ going conflict with the Ottoman Empire , attracting the attention of Field Marshal Alexander Suvorov during the battle at Giurgiu , on the lower Danube , during which he was wounded . Suvarov praised him for his bravery and promoted him to major . 
 = = Habsburg service = = 
 The war between Russia and the Ottoman Empire ended with the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca , signed on 21 July 1775 . In 1776 , Hotze returned to his home near Zürich . On the return journey , he stopped in Vienna , to present himself to the Emperor , Joseph II , and to seek an appointment as a major in the imperial Austrian army . When Joseph traveled to Hüningen near Basel , in the upper Rhine in 1777 , Hotze once again presented himself , after which he finally secured a major 's commission in the Cuirassiers Regiment 26 , known as the Baron of Berlichingen ( Freiherr von Berlichingen ) regiment . His regiment served in the field during the brief War of Bavarian Succession ( 1778 – 79 ) . He served for a short time with the cuirassiers regiment Marquis de <unk> in Hungary , and returned with this regiment to Vienna in 1783 . In 1784 , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel ( Oberstleutnant ) and given command of the 1 . <unk> Lancers , which , in 1795 , became the foundation of the 1 . Lancers Regiment . 
 Hotze 's experience with military preparedness and organization gave him an advantage in establishing the lancers as a new combat arm . Recognizing the importance of lancers as part of the Austrian armed force , he embarked on an organizational and training program . The Emperor named him as commander of these corps , with the rank of a full colonel . In 1787 , he returned temporarily to Russia , this time to establish a similar force in Catherine the Great 's army . At the outbreak of the border war between the Ottoman Empire and Austria , he returned to Austria and took command of his regiment . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 Initially , the rulers of Europe viewed the revolution in France as an event between the French king and his subjects , and not something in which they should interfere . In 1790 , Leopold succeeded his brother Joseph as emperor and by 1791 , he considered the situation surrounding his sister , Marie Antoinette , and her children , with greater alarm . In August 1791 , in consultation with French émigré nobles and Frederick William II of Prussia , he issued the Declaration of Pilnitz , in which they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis and his family . They threatened ambiguous , but quite serious , consequences if anything should happen to the royal family . 
 The French Republican position became increasingly difficult . Compounding problems in international relations , French émigrés continued to agitate for support of a counter @-@ revolution abroad . Chief among them were the Prince Condé , his son , the Duke de Bourbon , and his grandson , the Duke d 'Enghien . From their base in Koblenz , adjacent to the French @-@ German border , they sought direct support for military intervention from the royal houses of Europe , and raised an army . On 20 April 1792 , the French National Convention declared war on Austria . In this War of the First Coalition ( 1792 – 1798 ) , France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her , plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = = War of First Coalition = = = 
 In April 1792 , Hotze and his regiment joined the autonomous Austrian Corps under Paul Anton II , Count von Esterházy in the Breisgau although they took no part in any military clashes . Early in 1793 , Hotze and his regiment were assigned to the Upper Rhine Army , commanded by General of Cavalry Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser , at which time Hotze was promoted to major general . As commander of the third column , he played an essential role the storming of the line at Wissembourg and <unk> , for which he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Maria Theresia Order . In the following year , 1794 , he was assigned to the Army Corps of the Prince von Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg , on the left bank of the Rhine , and later , from May – September at <unk> on the Rhine , <unk> , <unk> , and Landau in der Pfalz , against the French army commanded by the general of division Louis Desaix . 
 In each of these assignments , Hotze proved himself as a confident and courageous general against the stronger French Army of the Moselle . In recognition , he was promoted to lieutenant field marshal , a rank unusual for a man from a non @-@ aristocratic family . He was also raised to the rank of baron ( Freiherr ) by Emperor Francis II . In the campaign of 1795 , he served again under the command of Wurmser ; his troops secured Rhineland positions near Mannheim , and later took part in engagements at <unk> and Kaiserslautern . 
 In the Battle of Neresheim ( 11 August 1796 ) , Hotze commanded 13 battalions and 28 cavalry squadrons , a total of 13 @,@ 300 men , and formed the center of Archduke Charles ' line . Although Hotze 's force managed to push the French out of several villages , his force was not strong enough to follow up on his advantage . Following the action at Neresheim , his force participated in the joint battles of Neumarkt and Lauf , followed by the Battle of Würzburg on 3 September 1796 . During these consecutive actions , Hotze 's organization and initiative led to the overwhelming of the French lines . For his actions in this campaign , he was awarded a promotion on 29 April 1797 , and received the Commander 's Cross of the Order of Maria Theresa . 
 = = = Peace and the Congress of Rastatt = = = 
 The Coalition forces — Austria , Russia , Prussia , Great Britain , Sardinia , among others — achieved several victories at Verdun , Kaiserslautern , Neerwinden , Mainz , Amberg and Würzburg . While experiencing greater success in the north , in Italy , the Coalition 's achievements were more limited . Despite the presence of the most experienced of the Austrian generals — Dagobert Wurmser — the Austrians could not lift the siege at Mantua , and the efforts of Napoleon Bonaparte in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces to the border of Habsburg lands . Napoleon dictated a cease @-@ fire at Leoben on 17 April 1797 , which led to the formal peace treaty , the Treaty of Campo Formio , which went into effect on 17 October 1797 . 
 The treaty called for meetings between the involved parties , to work out the exact territorial and remunerative details . These were to be convened at a small town in the mid @-@ Rhineland , Rastatt , close to the French border . The primary combatants of the First Coalition , France and Austria , were highly suspicious of each other 's motives , and the Congress quickly derailed in a mire of intrigue and diplomatic posturing . The French demanded more territory than originally agreed . The Austrians were reluctant to cede the designated territories . The Rastatt delegates could not , or would not , orchestrate the transfer of agreed upon territories to compensate the German princes for their losses . Compounding the Congress 's problems , tensions grew between France and most of the First Coalition allies , either separately or jointly . Ferdinand of Naples refused to pay agreed @-@ upon tribute to France , and his subjects followed this refusal with a rebellion . The French invaded Naples and established the Parthenopaean Republic . A republican uprising in the Swiss cantons , encouraged by the French Republic which offered military support , led to the overthrow of the Swiss Confederation and the establishment of the Helvetic Republic . 
 Other factors contributed to the rising tensions . On his way to Egypt in 1798 , Napoleon had stopped on the Island of Malta and forcibly removed the Hospitallers from their possessions . This angered Paul , Tsar of Russia , who was the honorary head of the Order . Furthermore , the French Directory was convinced that the Austrians were conniving to start another war . Indeed , the weaker the French Republic seemed , the more seriously the Austrians , the Neapolitans , the Russians , and the English actually discussed this possibility . 
 = = = Outbreak of war in 1799 = = = 
 With the signing of the Treaty of Campo Formio on 17 October 1797 , Hotze left Austrian service and returned to his home in Switzerland . Hardly had he arrived there when the government of the Swiss Confederation in Bern was overthrown , with the assistance of the French Directory . He returned to Austria , received a new commission and a new command . He was already in the border regions between Switzerland , Austria , and Liechtenstein when the war broke out again in 1799 . Archduke Charles of Austria , arguably among the best commanders of the House of Habsburg , had taken command of the Austrian army in late January . Although Charles was unhappy with the strategy set forward by his brother , the Holy Roman Emperor Francis II , he had acquiesced to the less ambitious plan to which Francis and his advisers , the Aulic council , had agreed : Austria would fight a defensive war and would maintain a continuous defensive line from the southern bank of the Danube , across the Swiss Cantons and into northern Italy . The archduke had stationed himself at Friedberg for the winter , 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 8 km ) east @-@ south @-@ east of Augsburg . His army settled into cantonments in the environs of Augsburg , extending south along the Lech River . 
 As winter broke in 1799 , on 1 March , General Jean Baptiste Jourdan and his army of 25 @,@ 000 , the Army of the Danube , crossed the Rhine at Kehl . Instructed to block the Austrians from access to the Swiss alpine passes , Jourdan planned to isolate the armies of the Coalition in Germany from allies in northern Italy , and prevent them from assisting one another . His was a preemptive strike . By crossing the Rhine in early March , Jourdan acted before the Charles ' army could be reinforced by Austria 's Russian allies , who had agreed to send 60 @,@ 000 seasoned soldiers and their more @-@ seasoned commander , Generalissimo Alexander Suvorov . Furthermore , if the French held the interior passes in Switzerland , they could not only prevent the Austrians from transferring troops between northern Italy and southwestern Germany , but could use the routes to move their own forces between the two theaters . 
 The Army of the Danube , meeting little resistance , advanced through the Black Forest in three columns , through the Höllental ( Hölle valley ) , via Oberkirch , and Freudenstadt ; a fourth column advanced along the north shore of the Rhine , and eventually took a flanking position on the north shore of Lake Constance . Jourdan pushed across the Danube plain and took up position between Rottweil and Tuttlingen and eventually pushing toward the imperial city of Pfullendorf in Upper Swabia . At the same time , the Army of Switzerland , under command of Andre Massena , pushed toward the Grisons , intending to cut the Austrian lines of communication and relief at the mountain passes by <unk> and Feldkirch . A third Army of Italy , commanded by Louis Joseph Schérer , had already advanced into northern Italy , to deal with Ferdinand and the recalcitrant Neapolitans . 
 = = = War of the Second Coalition = = = 
 When Hotze took up arms against the French in Switzerland , the revolutionary Swiss government in Bern revoked his Swiss citizenship . For the Coalition allies , though , his Swiss roots made him an ideal emissary between Vienna and Confederation sympathizers in Switzerland . He worked with William Wickham , and a Colonel Williams , an Englishman in Austrian service , to establish the Bodensee ( Lake Constance ) Flotilla . A Lieutenant Field Marshal , he commanded 15 @,@ 000 troops in the Vorarlberg against France 's Army of Switzerland , commanded by André Masséna . After fortifying Feldkirch , he overwhelmed the fortress at St. <unk> , an important pass ( elevation : 713 metres ( 2 @,@ 339 ft ) ) in the Canton of Graubünden that links Swiss Confederation and Liechtenstein . Then , realizing that the main French army had crossed the Rhine and moved north of Lake Constance , he reorganized the defenses of Feldkirch , and deputed command to Franjo Jelačić , an able officer and commander . Hotze took 10 @,@ 000 of the 15 @,@ 500 troops designated for the defense of the Vorarlberg toward Lake Constance , intending to support Archduke Charles ' left wing at the battles of Ostrach and , a few days later Stockach . Although his forces did not arrive in time to participate in the battles , the threat of their pending arrival influenced French planning . In his absence , <unk> 's 5 @,@ 500 men faced 12 @,@ 000 under the command of generals of division Jean Joseph <unk> and Claude Lecourbe , inflicting enormous casualties ( 3000 ) on the French while suffering minimal losses ( 900 ) of their own . 
 = = = First Battle of Zürich = = = 
 By mid @-@ May 1799 , the Austrians had wrested control of Switzerland from the French as the forces of Hotze and Count Heinrich von Bellegarde pushed them out of the Grisons ; after pushing Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan 's force , the Army of the Danube , back to the Rhine , Archduke Charles ' own sizable force — about 110 @,@ 000 strong — crossed the Rhine , and prepared to join with the armies of Hotze and Bellegarde on the plains by Zürich . The French Army of Switzerland and the Army of the Danube , now both under the command of Masséna , tried to prevent this merger of the Austrian forces ; in a preliminary action at Winterthur , the Austrians succeeded in pushing the French forces out of Winterthur , although they took high casualties . 
 Once the union took place in the first two days of June , Archduke Charles , supported by Hotze 's command , attacked French positions at Zürich . In first Battle of Zürich , on 4 – 7 June 1799 , Hotze commanded the entire left wing of Archduke Charles ' army , which included 20 battalions of infantry , plus support artillery , and 27 squadrons of cavalry , in total , 19 @,@ 000 men . Despite being wounded , he remained on the field . His troops not only pushed the French back , but harassed their retreat , forcing them across the Limmat river , where they took up defensive positions . 
 = = = Death at Second Battle of Zürich = = = 
 In August 1799 , Archduke Charles received orders from his brother , the Emperor , to withdraw the Austrian army across the Rhine . While Charles could see this to be unreasonable — Alexander Suvorov had not yet reached central Switzerland , and it was folly to think that Alexander Korsakov 's force of 30 @,@ 000 and Hotze 's 20 @,@ 000 could hold all of the region until the arrival of the rest of the Russian force — the order was emphatic . Charles delayed as long as he could , but in late August he withdrew his force across the Rhine and headed toward Phillipsburg . When Suvorov heard of this breach of military common @-@ sense , he wondered " the owl [ referring to the Emperor ] has either gone out of his mind , or he never had one . " The order was eventually reversed too late for the Archduke to stop his withdrawal . 
 Unlike Korsakov , Hotze knew his military business , and he had organized a competent defense of the St. Gallen border , on Korsakov 's left flank , reasoning , correctly , that Suvorov was on his way and needed St. Gallen as a safe haven after he passed through the Canton Schwyz . On the morning of 25 September , Hotze and his chief of staff , Colonel Count von <unk> , conducted a reconnaissance ride near the village of Schänis , on the Linth river , only 32 kilometers ( 20 mi ) from Richterswil , the village in which he had been born . In the heavy morning mist , they encountered a party French scouts from the 25th demi @-@ brigade concealed behind a hedge . Summoned to surrender , Hotze wheeled around and spurred his horse , where both he and Colonel <unk> were killed by a volley of musketry . Initially , Hotze was taken from the battlefield to the church in Schänis , where he was buried . In 1851 , his body was moved to Bregenz and established in a monument there . 
 = = Consequences of Hotze 's death = = 
 Hotze was sorely missed . Despite mis @-@ communication between and among the British , the Austrians and the Russians , the British miscalculation of the size of troops ( consistently 10 – 25 percent higher than they actually were ) , the lack of Swiss volunteers , and failed promises of transport mules , Suvorov organized his impressive march across the Alps from northern Italy , counting on Korsakov and his Austrian allies to hold Zürich . His soldiers took the pass at St. Gotthard in a bayonet charge , and endured incredible hardships navigating the narrow trails of the Alps . By the time the Russian army reached Schwyz , preparing to descend from the mountains into the Zürich plain , Masséna 's army already had crushed the incompetent Korsakov 's force at Zürich , and , in Hotze 's absence , Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult 's French division overwhelmed the Austrian flank at Schänis and crossed the Linth unhindered . When Suvorov cleared the mountains , he had nowhere to go ; he was forced to withdraw in another arduous march into the Vorarlberg , where his starving and ragged army arrived in late October . Between Korsakov 's inability to hold the French at Zürich , and Hotze 's death at Schänis , the Swiss campaign degenerated to an utter shambles . 
 = Colin Farrell = 
 Colin James Farrell ( born 31 May 1976 ) is an Irish actor . He first appeared on the BBC 's TV drama Ballykissangel in 1998 , made his film debut in the Tim Roth @-@ directed drama The War Zone a year later and was discovered by Hollywood when Joel Schumacher cast him in the lead in his war drama Tigerland ( 2000 ) . He then starred in Schumacher 's psychological thriller Phone Booth ( 2002 ) and the American thrillers S.W.A.T. and The Recruit ( both 2003 ) , establishing his international box @-@ office appeal . During that time , he also appeared in Steven Spielberg ’ s science fiction thriller Minority Report ( 2002 ) and as the villain Bullseye in the superhero film Daredevil ( 2003 ) . After starring in the independent films Intermission ( 2003 ) and A Home at the End of the World ( 2004 ) , he headed Oliver Stone ’ s biopic Alexander ( 2004 ) and Terrence Malick 's The New World ( 2005 ) . 
 Work in Michael Mann ’ s Miami Vice , the adaptation of John Fante 's Ask the Dust ( both 2006 ) and Woody Allen ’ s Cassandra 's Dream ( 2007 ) followed , underscoring Farrell 's popularity among Hollywood writers and directors ; however , it was for his role in Martin McDonagh ’ s In Bruges ( 2008 ) that he received a Golden Globe Award . In recent years , he co @-@ starred in the comedy @-@ horror film Fright Night ( 2011 ) and the sci @-@ fi action film Total Recall ( 2012 ) , both remakes , and McDonagh 's second feature , the black comedy crime film Seven Psychopaths ( 2012 ) . Farrell also starred with Noomi Rapace in the Niels Arden Oplev @-@ directed action film Dead Man Down , and as Travers Goff in the period drama Saving Mr. Banks ( both in 2013 ) about the author of Mary Poppins . In 2014 , Farrell starred as Peter Lake in the supernatural fable Winter 's Tale , an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Mark Helprin . In 2015 , he starred as Detective Ray <unk> in the second season of HBO 's True Detective , alongside Vince Vaughn and Rachel McAdams . 
 A favourite with film critics like Peter Bradshaw , Manohla Dargis and Roger Ebert in the 2000s , Farrell developed a reputation as a lothario and dated numerous famous women for a time . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Farrell was born in Dublin , Ireland , the son of Rita ( née Monaghan ) and Eamon Farrell . His father played football for Shamrock Rovers and ran a health @-@ food shop . His uncle , Tommy Farrell , also played for Shamrock Rovers . 
 The actor has an openly gay older brother , Eamon , Jr . , who is married to artist Stephen Mannion , and two sisters , Claudine and Catherine ; Claudine , his older sister , is his personal assistant . When Farrell was ten , his family moved to <unk> , a Dublin suburb . He was educated at St. Brigid 's National School , followed by secondary school at <unk> College and then <unk> College in County Meath . Farrell unsuccessfully auditioned for the Irish musical group Boyzone around this time . 
 He was inspired to try acting when Harry Butlers performance in E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial moved him to tears . With his brother 's encouragement he attended the Gaiety School of Acting , dropping out when he was cast as Danny Byrne on Ballykissangel , a BBC television drama about a young English priest who becomes part of an Irish rural community . 
 As an 18 @-@ year @-@ old travelling in Sydney , Australia he was at one time suspected for attempted murder . The police sketch admittedly looked remarkably like him and he had even described blacking out the night in question . His only alibi was apparently a journal kept by his friend that explained the two had been across town that night ingesting MDMA . 
 Colin Farrell 's dad Eamon , was married at age of 73 to partner Eileen Pollard , who is of Greek Cypriot heritage , on 5th July 2016 . Eamon was married in Limassol , Cyprus with Colin flying in for the event . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Farrell had roles in television shows and films , including Ballykissangel and Falling for a Dancer in 1998 and 1999 . He made his feature film debut in English actor Tim Roth 's directorial debut The War Zone , a drama about an incident of child abuse , starring Ray Winstone and Tilda Swinton as parents of a girl Farrell 's character ( Nick ) dates . The actor also appeared in Ordinary Decent Criminal with Kevin Spacey and Linda Fiorentino , a film loosely based on the life of Martin Cahill . In 2000 , Farrell was cast in the lead role of Private Roland <unk> in Tigerland , an under @-@ released film directed by American Joel Schumacher . He reportedly got the part on the basis of his charm . Emanuel Levy of Variety said that the actor " shines as the subversive yet basically decent lad whose cynicism may be the only sane reaction to a situation " . Michael Holden of The Guardian wrote that the actor was " too much the hero " to fit the classic rebel archetype properly , but he did not mind . Tigerland earned $ 139 @,@ 500 . 
 = = = First box office successes ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Farrell 's next American films , American Outlaws ( 2001 ) and Hart 's War ( 2002 ) , were not commercially successful . His 2002 – 2003 films , including Phone Booth , The Recruit and S.W.A.T. ( all thrillers , with the former two his first starring roles ) , were well received by critics and successful at the box office . Of Phone Booth , Ebert wrote that it is " Farrell 's to win or lose , since he 's onscreen most of the time , and he shows energy and intensity " . Philip French of The Observer praised Farrell 's performance . In S.W.A.T. , the actor starred in an ensemble cast including Samuel L. Jackson , Michelle Rodriguez , Olivier Martinez and Jeremy Renner ; Renner became a friend . Alan Morrison of Empire wrote , " Farrell can usually be relied upon to bring a spark to the bonfire . That 's also true of [ this movie ] . " Elvis Mitchell of the New York Times criticised Farrell 's accent , writing that he " employ [ ed ] a wobbly American accent that makes him sound like an international criminal a step ahead of the authorities " . Ebert and the New York Times 's A.O. Scott disagreed on the actor 's effectiveness in The Recruit ; Ebert noted the actor 's likability , but Scott felt that Farrell " spends his time in a caffeinated frenzy , trying to maintain his leading @-@ man sang @-@ froid while registering panic , stress and confusion " . Phone Booth earned $ 46 @.@ 6 million , S.W.A.T. $ 116 @.@ 9 million and The Recruit $ 52 @.@ 8 million at the box office . 
 Farrell 's supporting roles include an ambitious Justice Department agent opposite Tom Cruise , a potential criminal in Minority Report ( 2002 ) , and the villain Bullseye in Daredevil ( 2003 ) . Matt Damon was originally offered the Minority Report role , turning it down to appear in Ocean 's Eleven . Farrell said " he had no problem " being the producer 's fallback after Damon declined . Bullseye is an assassin , proud of his accuracy . Farrell was signed to the role in December 2001 , although he was considered for the lead role of Matt Murdock ( Daredevil ) until Ben Affleck signed . Farrell was encouraged to keep his Irish accent , since this version of Bullseye is from Ireland . He read Frank Miller 's Daredevil comics to understand Bullseye " because the expression on the character 's faces in the comic books , and just the way they move sometimes , and the exaggerations of the character I 'm playing ... he 's so over @-@ the @-@ top that you do draw from that . But it 's not exactly a character you can do method acting for ... you know , running around New York killing people with paper clips " . That year , he was voted sixth World 's " Sexiest Man " by Company magazine . 
 = = = From independents to epics ( 2003 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In late 2003 Farrell starred as a criminal who plots a bank robbery with Cillian Murphy in the dark comedy Intermission , which held the record for highest @-@ grossing Irish independent film in Irish box @-@ office history for three years and remains a cult classic there . In 2004 he appeared in several other independent films receiving limited theatrical release in most countries , including A Home at the End of the World ( adapted from Michael Cunningham 's 1990 novel ) . Roger Ebert praised Farrell , saying that he was " astonishing in the movie , not least because the character is such a departure from everything he has done before " . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle differed , saying that the actor " is keen on making good .... The effort is there , but it 's a performance you end up rooting for rather than enjoying , because there 's no way to just relax and watch " . 
 Farrell played the title role of Alexander the Great in Oliver Stone 's 2004 biographical film Alexander , which , while receiving some favourable reviews internationally , was poorly received in the United States . Its portrayal of the conqueror as bisexual was controversial ; the film was criticised by some historians for its treatment of the ancient Persians , although others praised it for its accuracy . An ancient @-@ history scholar at the University of Nebraska wrote : 
 I would compare [ Alexander ] to Lawrence of Arabia , in terms of sheer scope , pacing , and its unrelenting focus on a single individual .... In many ways , this is a movie for Greek and Alexander " geeks . " The more one knows , the more one will recognise — the historical accuracy of sets is better than I 've seen in some documentaries . 
 The film grossed $ 167 million worldwide , just exceeding its budget of $ 155 million . 
 Farrell 's next film was 2005 's Academy Award @-@ nominated The New World , his second historical epic . He played the lead role of Captain John Smith , the founder of 17th @-@ century colonial Jamestown , Virginia who falls in love with the Native American princess Pocahontas ( Q <unk> <unk> ) . Director Terrence Malick went out of his way to keep Farrell and <unk> apart until they were filmed together . Although it was released in only 811 theatres worldwide and had a relatively low box @-@ office gross , the film received a large number of positive reviews . In one of four reviews in The Guardian , John Patterson described it as a " bottomless movie , almost unspeakably beautiful and formally harmonious " . The New World was followed by Ask the Dust , a period romance set in Los Angeles based on a John Fante novel and co @-@ starring Salma Hayek . Reviews were mixed ; Manohla Dargis of the New York Times favourably described Farrell 's work , but Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian found " something a little forced in both lead performances " . With a limited theatrical release , it was not a financial success . 
 The actor was more successful in 2006 with his role opposite Jamie Foxx in Michael Mann 's action crime drama , Miami Vice . The film grossed $ 164 million worldwide on a budget of $ 135 million , and TimeOut New York ranked it among the top 50 movies of the decade . ( The DVD , released the same year , also managed to sell over a million copies ( equivalent to $ 7 @.@ 91 million in pirated versions ) in its first week alone . , and , as of 11 February 2007 , had grossed over $ 36 @.@ 45 million in rentals . A. O. Scott criticised Farrell 's work : " When he 's not on screen , you don 't miss him , and when he is , you find yourself , before long , looking at someone or something else . " Conversely , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone was enthusiastic . The actor also reportedly took a slight pay cut to make friend and recent Oscar winner Jamie Foxx happy : His salary was initially larger than Foxx 's . 
 Farrell next appeared in Woody Allen 's Cassandra 's Dream , which premiered in 2007 and was distributed in the US in early 2008 . Reviews were mixed , with Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide writing that Allen 's work was " shallow and unconvincing from beginning to end " and Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle saying that although " it 's not as good as Match Point or Crimes and Misdemeanors ... taken on its own , it 's a fairly impressive piece , a <unk> vigorous , well @-@ acted , tightly constructed movie " . LaSalle praised Farrell : " Allen is notorious for not giving his actors explicit instructions , and yet somehow this worked wonders for Farrell , who has never seemed so naked , so clear and so unencumbered as he does here . " Manohla Dargis concurred in the New York Times , adding that he thought Farrell was well @-@ matched with co @-@ star Ewan McGregor . 
 Farrell 's next film , Martin McDonagh 's first full @-@ length feature In Bruges , opened the 2008 Sundance Film Festival . While the New Yorker and TimeOut London 's film critics found co @-@ star Brendan Gleeson 's performance the stronger of the two , Bradshaw of The Guardian found Farrell ( as hitman Ray ) " absolutely superb : moody and funny , lethally sexy , sometimes heartbreakingly sad and vulnerable like a little boy " . Time called the film " the prettiest bloodbath of 2008 " , and Farrell received his first Golden Globe . 
 Shortly thereafter he appeared in Kicking It , a documentary following six homeless men from Kenya , Russia , Afghanistan , Ireland , Spain and the US as they attempt to qualify for the Homeless World Cup . Farrell appeared on screen and provided the narration , donating his earnings to a homeless shelter in Ireland . The film was released simultaneously in theatres and on television , airing on ESPN2 in a very short window before its DVD release . Farrell received positive reviews for his involvement in the true story . 
 Later in 2008 Farrell was brother @-@ in @-@ law to Edward Norton 's character in Pride and Glory , a police drama directed by American Gavin O 'Connor . Roger Ebert disliked the film and A. O. Scott said that the actor " once again indulges his blustery mixture of menace and charm , overdoing both , " but Gregory Kirschling of Entertainment Weekly liked Farrell 's work . 
 = = = Recent work ( 2009 – present ) = = = 
 On 11 January 2009 , Farrell won the Golden Globe award for Best Actor : Musical or Comedy for In Bruges , in which he co @-@ starred with Brendan Gleeson . That year he also appeared in Terry Gilliam 's film The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus , starring Christopher Plummer and Andrew Garfield . Farrell was one of three actors ( with Johnny Depp and Jude Law ) , who helped complete Heath Ledger 's role when Ledger died before filming ended . They played " Imaginarium " versions of Ledger 's character Tony , donating their earnings to Ledger 's daughter Matilda . 
 Farrell also starred that year in Triage , directed by Oscar @-@ winning Bosnian screenwriter and director Danis <unk> , about the life of a war correspondent . He lost 30 pounds for the role . The actor 's work was described as " dedicated " by Variety 's Todd McCarthy , and Julian Sancton of Vanity Fair wrote that the film was " a hell of a lot more insightful than other movies that deal with a similar topic " . However , Triage was not widely distributed due to the marketing challenges posed by its difficult topics ( including PTSD ) . That year , Farrell played a supporting role ( as Tommy Sweet ) in Crazy Heart with Jeff Bridges . 
 Another 2009 release was Ondine , a fantasy @-@ drama directed by Neil Jordan starring Farrell as a fisherman with a handicapped daughter . Shot in the village of <unk> on Ireland 's southwest coast , it featured cinematography by longtime Wong Kar @-@ wai collaborator Christopher Doyle . Mary Pols of Time magazine called the role " tailor @-@ made for Farrell " , saying that the actor gave a " beautifully confident performance " . Todd McCarthy of Variety singled Farrell out , noting that he worked well as an ensemble actor " graciously allowing [ child star Alison Barry ] to steal every scene she 's in " . 
 The next year , Farrell starred with Keira Knightley in the crime romance London Boulevard . The film , American William Monahan 's debut as director after writing screenplays for The Departed and Body of Lies , was panned by critics . Peter Bradshaw of the Guardian wrote that the film " uses up all its energy , wit and ideas in the first 20 or so minutes , before collapsing into a flurry of boring violence " . Leslie Felperin of Variety described it as " like a fancy , retro @-@ styled pocket watch that someone accidentally broke and tried to reassemble with only a vague idea of clockwork " . Felperin thought the stars ' work was frail , with Farrell " mostly taciturn and vacuous . " 
 The actor starred in the 2011 comedy Horrible Bosses , directed by Seth Gordon , with Jennifer Aniston , Jason Bateman , Charlie Day , and Jason Sudeikis . The film focuses on a trio of employees who plot to murder their tyrannical superiors . The London Observer 's Mark Kermode wrote that although the film would have benefited from a tighter script , Farrell and Jamie Foxx had juicy roles which they " riff with panache " . Michael Phillips of the Los Angeles Times wrote that Farrell brought " massive , <unk> relish " to his role as Sudeikis 's cocaine @-@ fiend boss . 
 Later that year , Farrell played the main antagonist in the Fright Night remake , joining Anton Yelchin , David Tennant and Toni Collette in the story of a charismatic vampire who moves next door to a high @-@ school student and his single mother . The film was released by DreamWorks , with Craig Gillespie ( of Lars and the Real Girl ) directing a script by Buffy the Vampire Slayer writer Marti Noxon . Sukhdev Sandhu of the Telegraph wrote that Farrell " proves his comedy credentials once more .... utterly seductive as the <unk> <unk> carpenter @-@ cum @-@ bloodsucker " , while the New York Times 's A.O. Scott thought that Farrell played his role with " a wink and a snarl and a feline purr " . Logan Hill of New York magazine , on the other hand , was confused by the actor 's performance : " Sure , [ it ] may not make much sense , but neither do centuries @-@ old vampires living in Nevadan subdivisions . So he goes for it . " 
 Farrell starred with Kate Beckinsale in Columbia Pictures ' Total Recall , a 2012 remake of the 1990 film with Arnold Schwarzenegger . Filmed from May to September 2011 in Toronto and directed by Len Wiseman , the film was a new sci @-@ fi take about a sleeper agent . <unk> Jessica Biel appreciated Farrell 's skills , calling the actor " surprising and exciting . He just has the ability to be trying different things all the time . " Roger Ebert and the New York Times said that although they believed Farrell the better actor , Schwarzenegger in the original was " more of a movie presence and better suited for the role " . 
 After premiering at the Toronto Film Festival , Seven Psychopaths ( Farrell 's second film with McDonagh ) was released in October 2012 . The actor starred as creatively blocked writer Marty in a black comedy with Sam Rockwell , Woody Harrelson and Christopher Walken . It broke even at the box office and reviews were generally good , with David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter writing that Farrell " serves as an excellent foil for Rockwell " and the actor " is in subdued mode ... his performance largely defined by the endless expressivity of his eyebrows " . That month , Farrell appeared on the cover of the magazine Details . 
 March 2013 saw the release of Dead Man Down , a thriller directed by Niels Arden Oplev reuniting Farrell with Terrence Howard for the first time since Hart 's War ten years earlier . Noomi Rapace , star of Oplev 's The Girl with a Dragon Tattoo , starred as a facially scarred woman who blackmails Farrell 's character into killing the man who disfigured her in a car crash . Reviews were mixed , with Empire calling the film " a pleasingly intricate double ( or is it triple ? ) revenge plot anchored by excellent acting " and the Hollywood Reporter saying that " [ J.H. ] Wyman 's script and the measured pace don 't lend themselves to the necessary escalating tension that would have resulted in a more rewarding climax . " The New York Times ' Manola Dargis called the film a failure , but said of the actor : " Farrell and his sensitive , hardworking eyebrows help keep it from becoming a full @-@ bore lampoon . " Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News also disliked the film ; it contained " a lot to roll your eyes over " and , while Farrell was commendable , he was " as stoic as a statue " . 
 In 2014 , Farrell starred in a film adaptation of Mark Helprin 's Winter 's Tale . The film was written and directed by Akiva Goldsman and based on Helprin 's 1983 novel , and co @-@ starred Jessica Brown Findlay , Russell Crowe , and Will Smith . Farrell won the lead role over younger actors Garrett Hedlund , Tom Hiddleston and Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson . Although the film generally received negative reviews due to the overly romantic nature of the film , writers such as The Village Voice 's Stephanie Zacharek had nothing but praise for Farrell . She described him as " an extraordinary appealing actor " who " has always made a terrific bad boy , but ... seems to be settling into some very serious , responsible @-@ adult roles . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle agreed , writing that the actor " holds the movie together " and is part of " the most beautiful [ love scene ] so far of 2014 . " 
 His work as the alcoholic father that P.L. Travers adores in Saving Mr. Banks got contrasting reviews with Variety 's Scott <unk> calling it " excellent " and Leslie Felperin of The Hollywood Reporter " his best work in some time " but The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw describing it as " bland " and " uninspired " and The Telegraph 's Robbie Collin expressing that the actor was wrong for the role . 
 Liv Ullmann 's adaptation of August Strindberg 's Miss Julie with Jessica Chastain and Samantha Morton . His turn as John , the serving man to Chastain 's character 's father , was described by Stephen Holden of the New York Times as the " strongest " of the three performances and Ullmann 's direction too flat by most reviewers . He starred in the second season of HBO 's True Detective as Ray <unk> , alongside Vince Vaughn , Taylor Kitsch , and Rachel McAdams . The first two episodes were directed by Justin Lin . He worked with a dialect coach to get the nonstandard California accent for his character , which he found challenging . 
 The actor is also starring in the The Lobster , a romantic science fiction thriller due to be released in 2015 and directed by Greek director <unk> <unk> in his English @-@ language debut . Its script was awarded the ARTE International Prize for Best <unk> 2013 Project at the 42nd Rotterdam International Film Festival . Set in a dystopian near @-@ future in which finding a partner is a matter of life and death , the film tells an unconventional love story . The film also stars Rachel Weisz , Ben Whishaw , Olivia Colman , Léa Seydoux and John C. Reilly . 
 Farrell will also appear in the upcoming Harry Potter spin @-@ off film Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them . 
 = = Charity work and causes = = 
 In 2007 , Farrell joined other celebrities as a spokesman for the Special Olympics World Games in Shanghai , China . He has also lent his support to the anti @-@ bullying campaign Stand Up ! organised by the Irish LGBT youth organisation <unk> To in March 2012 . The actor appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show two years earlier to increase awareness of the subject . In 2015 Farrell became an official Ambassador of the Homeless World Cup which uses street football to inspire homeless people to change their lives . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships and children = = = 
 Colin met English actress and singer Amelia Warner at the premiere of Quills in 2000 . They dated from July to November 2001 . There was speculation that they married ; of the experience , the actor said " Too fast , too young . " However , in December 2011 Warner told The Sun that the marriage was never legal : " We had a ceremony on a beach in Tahiti that was by no means legal and we knew it wasn 't ... It was just a thing we did on holiday . We went shark feeding and then we did that . We booked them both on the activities desk at the hotel . " Colin has a tattoo of <unk> name around his ring finger . 
 By the end of 2003 he was linked to singer Britney Spears , Playboy cover girl Nicole Narain , model Josie Maran and actresses Angelina Jolie , Maeve Quinlan and Demi Moore . 
 Colin and Kim <unk> became parents of James Padraig Farrell , born in 2003 , in Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center , Los Angeles . In October 2007 he said his son has Angelman syndrome , a rare genetic disorder characterised by intellectual and developmental delay , lack of speech and a happy , excitable demeanor . 
 From 2007 to 2008 the actor dated <unk> McDonnell , an Irish medical student . 
 Farrell and British @-@ American writer Emma Forrest dated for over a year , an experience she discusses in depth in her memoir Your Voice in My Head ( focusing on her relationship with her therapist , who died unexpectedly ) ; it is a planned film starring either Emily Blunt or Emma Watson , and Stanley Tucci , and directed by Francesca Gregorini . According to Forrest , she and Farrell planned to have a child together before he ended the relationship . 
 Farrell fathered his second child , Henry Tadeusz Farrell ( 2009 ) , with Ondine co @-@ star Alicja <unk> @-@ <unk> . Their relationship ended in mid @-@ 2010 . 
 = = = Drug addiction = = = 
 In December 2005 , Farrell checked into a rehabilitation treatment centre for addictions to recreational drugs and painkillers . He spoke about it on the Late Show with David Letterman after coming out of rehab and continued to do so in the years following . " There was an energy that was created , " he says of the time when he was addicted , " a character that was created , that no doubt benefited me . And then there was a stage where it all began to crumble around me . " 
 = = = Stalker = = = 
 On 20 July 2006 , as Farrell was being interviewed by Jay Leno on The Tonight Show , telephone sex worker <unk> Bradford evaded security , walked on stage , confronted Farrell and threw a book on Leno 's desk . Farrell escorted her off the stage as she shouted " I 'll see you in court " , handing her over to NBC security . After being held by the Burbank police , Bradford was released . The next day , Farrell obtained a restraining order against her and the incident was edited out of the broadcast . 
 Bradford had twice attempted to sue Farrell for abusive messages , but the lawsuits were dismissed due to a lack of evidence . She failed a lie @-@ detector test on an Ion Television program when attempting to prove her claims . 
 = = = Sex tape = = = 
 In July 2006 , Farrell filed a lawsuit against his former girlfriend , Playboy model Nicole Narain , and the Internet Commerce Group ( ICG ) for the unauthorised public distribution of a 13 @-@ minute sex tape which they made in 2003 . ( He was offered $ 5 million for its rights . ) While ICG tried to release it , Narain said that she would work with Farrell to ensure that the tape remained private ; Farrell said she tried to release it to damage his acting career and " make money out of it " , a claim Narain denies . On 16 April 2006 they reached a confidential settlement ; Farrell 's lawsuit against ICG continued , with a trial date of 21 July 2006 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Selected awards = = 
 = Sakakibara Kenkichi = 
 Sakakibara Kenkichi ( Japanese : <unk> , 19 December 1830 – 11 September 1894 ) , was a Japanese samurai and martial artist . He was the fourteenth headmaster of the Jikishinkage school of sword fighting . Through his Jikishinkage contacts he rose to a position of some political influence ; he taught swordsmanship at a government military academy and also served in the personal guard of Japan 's last two shoguns . 
 After the fall of the Tokugawa shogunate Sakakibara was instrumental in preserving traditional Japanese sword techniques in the early Meiji Era . Despite his eventual opposition to the practice of sword fighting for sport , his work during this period laid the foundations for the modern sport of kendo . In his later years he taught a number of noted martial artists , and was honoured by the All Japan Kendo Federation after his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sakakibara was born on the fifth day of the eleventh month of <unk> ( 19 December 1830 ) into the Sakakibara clan ; his given name at birth was <unk> ( <unk> ) . His family lived in the village of <unk> near modern @-@ day Tokyo . He started studying Kashima Shinden Jikishinkage @-@ ryū with Otani <unk> in 1843 . He proved proficient in that style , and was granted a <unk> <unk> ( licence of mastery ) by Otani in 1856 , despite his family being too poor to pay for it . He was later to become the fourteenth headmaster of the school . As a talented swordsman , he once duelled with Yamaoka <unk> ; the two men faced off for over forty minutes without moving , before sheathing their swords with neither striking a blow . 
 = = Edo period = = 
 In 1856 Sakakibara was appointed as a professor at the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a shogunate @-@ sponsored military academy . He received this post through the auspices of his teacher Otani , who had himself been granted a teaching position there . In this role , Sakakibara was noticed by the shogun Tokugawa Iemochi , who appointed Sakakibara as his bodyguard and fencing instructor . He also married Taka , the daughter of the shogun 's personal retainer <unk> <unk> . In order that his <unk> of the Jikishinkage ryu would not interfere with his duties to the shogun , his student Matsuoka <unk> was temporarily placed in charge of the school . 
 By 1863 , Sakakibara was a head keeper at Edo Castle and received a stipend of 300 ryō per year . He resigned from this post in 1866 , after Iemochi 's death and started a dojo in Kurumazaka ( a neighbourhood of Edo , now part of modern Ueno ) . 
 = = Meiji period = = 
 Despite his connections to the shogunate , at the Battle of Ueno in 1868 Sakakibara did not participate in the fighting between the pro @-@ shogunate and Imperial forces , considering it to be his duty to guard the Kan 'ei @-@ ji temple . He did , in fact , rescue the Imperial Prince <unk> Yoshihisa ( who was at the time the abbot of Kan 'ei @-@ ji ) from the <unk> , physically carrying him away from the combat . Sakakibara subsequently returned to the service of the Tokugawa family as Captain of the Guard under Tokugawa <unk> , whom he served until 1870 . After the Meiji Restoration Sakakibara was offered a position with the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department , which he refused out of loyalty to Iemochi . He was , however , part of the group of fencers who created the forms for the <unk> @-@ ryū ( <unk> ) , the style of sword fighting created in 1868 for use by the police , and he worked briefly as a prison guard at the police headquarters . 
 The new Meiji Government had banned the carrying of swords and in 1876 banned the practice of duelling , and so traditional swordsmanship was no longer popular . Sakakibara tried to find new ways of promoting kenjutsu . His motives may have been financial , as without a sponsor he , like many other martial artists of the era , was suffering from penury – his poverty was such that he had to accept help from his wife 's uncle Katsu Kaishū in constructing a residence . He began organising gekiken kogyo ( <unk> , " sword combat performances " ) , feeling that such public competitions would instil an appreciation for the art of the swordsman in their audiences . He started an organisation called the <unk> Kaisha ( <unk> , " Fencing Society " ) , which , inspired by the popularity of sumo wrestling , organised these contests . The first public kogyo organised by Sakakibara 's group took place in April 1873 , and lasted for over a week . Other martial artists , witnessing the success of the <unk> Kaisha , followed suit . 
 As part of his public performances Sakakibara occasionally demonstrated a <unk> technique called <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , " helmet breaking " ) , which involved slicing through a steel helmet with a single stroke of the sword . In 1887 he performed this before the Emperor Meiji , as part of a demonstration organised by one of the Emperor 's relatives . Of the three sword masters present who attempted this cut , Sakakibara was the only one to succeed in cutting the helmet , despite the fact that he had been unable to make the cut in practice attempts . 
 Despite the success of the gekiken kogyo performances , in his later years Sakakibara regretted their development . In his view , the rules and strictures of gekiken were perverting kenjutsu into new forms that were no longer relevant to battlefield combat . He disdained the point @-@ scoring swordsmanship of other <unk> of his era , ignoring light touches by his opponents in order to deliver his own powerful strikes . Nonetheless , the gekiken kogyo practices which he began created an interest in fencing which led ultimately to the development of modern kendo . 
 In his later years Sakakibara returned to coach and train in his dojo in Kurumazaka , after trying his hand unsuccessfully at running a <unk> ( <unk> , " storytelling " ) theatre and an <unk> ( <unk> ) ( bar ) . Those who trained at the Kurumazaka dojo included Naitō <unk> , who was to become head of the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai , and foreigners such as Austrian ambassador and fencing expert Heinrich von Siebold , and German Erwin <unk> , physician to the Japanese Imperial Family . Takeda <unk> , the founder of Daitō @-@ ryū Aiki @-@ jūjutsu , also studied with Sakakibara at Kurumazaka . 
 On New Year 's Day of 1894 , Sakakibara passed on the Jikishinkage <unk> to his disciple <unk> Yamada . Sakakibara died of heart failure due to beriberi on 11 September the same year , at the age of 63 . He was entombed at <unk> @-@ ji temple <unk> , Tokyo and given the posthumous Buddhist name <unk> <unk> <unk> Koji ( <unk> ) . In 2003 he was inducted into the All Japan Kendo Federation 's Kendo Hall of Fame ( <unk> ) . 
 = Kingdom of Sicily = 
 The Kingdom of Sicily ( Sicilian : <unk> di Sicilia , Italian : Regno di Sicilia , Latin : Regnum <unk> , Catalan : <unk> de <unk> , Spanish : Reino de Sicilia ) was a state that existed in the south of the Apennine peninsula from its founding by Roger II in 1130 until 1816 , much prior to the existence of a nation of ' Italy ' . It was a successor state of the County of Sicily , which had been founded in 1071 during the Norman conquest of the southern peninsula . Until 1282 the Kingdom ( sometimes called the regnum <unk> et <unk> , " Kingdom of Apulia and Sicily " ) covered not only the island of Sicily , but also the whole Mezzogiorno region of the southern <unk> and the Maltese archipelago . The island was divided into three regions : Val di Mazara , Val Demone and Val di Noto ; ' val ' being the Arabic word meaning ' district ' . 
 In 1282 , a revolt against Angevin rule , known as the Sicilian Vespers , threw off Charles of Anjou 's rule of the island of Sicily . The Angevins managed to maintain control in the mainland part of the kingdom , which became a separate entity also styled Kingdom of Sicily , although it is commonly referred to as the Kingdom of Naples , after its capital . The island became a separate kingdom under the Crown of Aragon . After 1302 the island kingdom was sometimes called the Kingdom of Trinacria . Often the kingship was vested in another monarch such as the King of Aragon , the King of Spain or the Holy Roman Emperor . In 1816 the island Kingdom of Sicily merged with the Kingdom of Naples to form the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . In 1861 its areas were subsumed with Sardinia and several northern city @-@ states and duchies to form the Kingdom of Sardinia which renamed itself the Kingdom of Italy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Norman conquest = = = 
 By the 11th century mainland southern Apennine powers were hiring Norman mercenaries , who were descendants of the Vikings ; it was the Normans under Roger I who conquered Sicily , taking it away from the Arab Muslims . After taking Apulia and Calabria , Roger occupied Messina with an army of 700 knights . In 1068 , Roger I of Sicily and his men defeated the Muslims at <unk> but the most crucial battle was the siege of Palermo , which led to Sicily being completely under Norman control by 1091 . 
 = = = Norman kingdom = = = 
 The Norman Kingdom was created on Christmas Day , 1130 , by Roger II of Sicily , with the agreement of Pope Innocent II , who united the lands Roger had inherited from his father Roger I of Sicily . These areas included the Maltese Archipelago , which was conquered from the Arabs of the Emirates of Sicily ; the Duchy of Apulia and the County of Sicily , which had belonged to his cousin William II , Duke of Apulia , until William 's death in 1127 ; and the other Norman vassals . Roger threw his support behind the Antipope Anacletus II , who enthroned him as King of Sicily on Christmas Day 1130 . 
 In 1136 , the rival of Anacletus , Pope Innocent II , convinced Lothair III , Holy Roman Emperor to attack the Kingdom of Sicily with help from the Byzantine Emperor John II Comnenus . Two main armies , one led by Lothair , the other by Duke of Bavaria Henry the Proud , invaded Sicily . On the river Tronto , William of Loritello surrendered to Lothair and opened the gates of Termoli to him . This was followed by Count Hugh II of Molise . The two armies were united at Bari , from where in 1137 they continued their campaign . Roger offered to give Apulia as a fief to the Empire , which Lothair refused after being pressured by Innocent . At the same period the army of Lothair revolted . 
 Then Lothair , who had hoped for the complete conquest of Sicily , gave Capua and Apulia from the Kingdom of Sicily to Roger 's enemies . Innocent protested , claiming that Apulia fell under papal claims . Lothair turned north , but died while crossing the Alps on December 4 , 1137 . At the Second Council of the Lateran in April 1139 , Innocent excommunicated Roger for maintaining a schismatic attitude . On March 22 , 1139 , at <unk> , Roger 's son Roger III , Duke of Apulia ambushed the papal troops with a thousand knights and captured the pope . On March 25 , 1139 , Innocent was forced to acknowledge the kingship and possessions of Roger with the Treaty of Mignano . 
 Roger spent most of the decade , beginning with his coronation and ending with the Assizes of Ariano , enacting a series of laws with which Roger intended to centralise the government , fending off multiple invasions and quelling rebellions by his premier vassals : <unk> of Bari , Robert II of Capua , Ranulf of <unk> , Sergius VII of Naples and others . 
 It was through his admiral George of Antioch that Roger then proceeded to conquer the Mahdia in Africa ( Ifriqiya ) , taking the unofficial title " King of Africa " . At the same time Roger 's fleet attacked the Byzantine Empire , making Sicily the leading maritime power in the Mediterranean Sea for almost a century . 
 Roger 's son and successor was William I of Sicily , known as " William the Bad " , though his nickname derived primarily from his lack of popularity with the chroniclers , who supported the baronial revolts which William suppressed . His reign ended in peace ( 1166 ) , but his son , William II , was a minor . Until the end of the boy 's regency in 1172 , the kingdom saw turmoil which almost brought the ruling family down . The reign of William II is remembered as two decades of almost continual peace and prosperity . For this more than anything , he is nicknamed " the Good " . He died in 1189 without having heirs , which led the kingdom to decline . 
 Tancred of Lecce seized the throne but had to contend with the revolt of his distant cousin Roger of Andria and the invasion of Henry VI , Holy Roman Emperor on behalf of his wife , Constance , the daughter of Roger II . Constance and Henry eventually prevailed and the kingdom fell in 1194 to the House of Hohenstaufen . Through Constance , the Hauteville blood was passed to Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor . 
 = = = Hohenstaufen kingdom = = = 
 The accession of Frederick , a child who would then become also the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II in 1197 , greatly affected the immediate future of Sicily . For a land so used to centralised royal authority , the king 's young age caused a serious power vacuum . His uncle Philip of Swabia moved to secure Frederick 's inheritance by appointing Markward von <unk> , margrave of Ancona , regent in 1198 . Meanwhile , Pope Innocent III had reasserted papal authority in Sicily , but recognised Frederick 's rights . The pope was to see papal power decrease steadily over the next decade and was unsure about which side to back at many junctures . 
 The Hohenstaufen 's grip on power , however , was not secure . Walter III of Brienne had married the daughter of Tancred of Sicily . She was sister and heiress of the deposed King William III of Sicily . In 1201 William decided to claim the kingdom . In 1202 , an army led by the chancellor Walter of <unk> and Dipold of <unk> was defeated by Walter III of Brienne . Markward was killed , and Frederick fell under the control of William of <unk> , an ally of the Pisans . Dipold continued the war against Walter on the mainland until the claimant 's death in 1205 . Dipold finally wrested Frederick from <unk> in 1206 and gave him over to the guardianship of the chancellor , Walter of <unk> . Walter and Dipold then had a falling out , and the latter captured the royal palace , where he was besieged and captured by Walter in 1207 . After a decade , the wars over the regency and the throne itself had ceased . 
 The reform of the laws began with the Assizes of Ariano in 1140 by Roger II . Frederick continued the reformation with the Assizes of Capua ( 1220 ) and the promulgation of the Constitutions of Melfi ( 1231 , also known as Liber <unk> ) , a collection of laws for his realm that was remarkable for its time . The Constitutions of Melfi were created in order to establish a centralized state . For example , citizens were not allowed to carry weapons or wear armour in public unless they were under royal command . As a result , rebellions were reduced . The Constitutions made the Kingdom of Sicily an absolute monarchy , the first centralized state in Europe to emerge from feudalism ; it also set a precedent for the primacy of written law . With relatively small modifications , the Liber <unk> remained the basis of Sicilian law until 1819 . During this period , he also built the Castel del Monte , and in 1224 , he founded the University of Naples , now called Università Federico II . It remained the sole athenaeum of southern Italy for centuries . 
 After the death of Frederick , the Kingdom was ruled by Henry VII of Germany and Conrad IV of Germany . The next legitimate heir was Conrad II , who was too young at the period to rule . Manfred of Sicily , the illegitimate son of Frederick , took the power and ruled the kingdom for fifteen years while other Hohenstaufen heirs were ruling various areas in Germany . After long wars against the Papal States , the Kingdom managed to defend its possessions , but the Papacy declared the Kingdom escheated because of disloyalty of the Hohenstaufen . Under this pretext he came to an agreement with Louis IX , King of France . Louis 's brother , Charles of Anjou , would become king of Sicily . In exchange , Charles recognized the overlordship of the Pope in the Kingdom , paid a portion of the papal debt , and agreed to pay annual tribute to the Papal States . The Hohenstaufen rule in Sicily ended after the 1266 Angevin invasion and the death of Conradin , the last male heir of Hohenstaufen , in 1268 . 
 = = = Angevin Sicily = = = 
 In 1266 , conflict between the Hohenstaufen house and the Papacy led to Sicily 's conquest by Charles I , Duke of Anjou . With the usurpation of the Sicilian throne from Conradin by Manfred of Sicily in 1258 , the relationship between the Papacy and the Hohenstaufen had changed again . Instead of the boy Conradin , safely sequestered across the Alps , the Papacy now faced an able military leader who had greatly supported the Ghibelline cause at the battle of Montaperti in 1260 . Accordingly , when negotiations broke down with Manfred in 1262 , Pope Urban IV again took up the scheme of <unk> the Hohenstaufen from the kingdom , and offered the crown to Charles of Anjou again . With Papal and Guelph support Charles descended into Italy and defeated Manfred at the battle of Benevento in 1266 and in 1268 Conradin at the battle of <unk> . 
 Opposition to French officialdom and taxation combined with incitement of rebellion by agents from the Crown of Aragon and the Byzantine Empire led to the successful insurrection of the Sicilian Vespers followed by the invitation and intervention by king Peter III of Aragon in 1282 . The resulting War of the Sicilian Vespers lasted until the Peace of <unk> in 1302 , dividing the old Kingdom of Sicily in two . The island of Sicily , called the " Kingdom of Sicily beyond the Lighthouse " or the Kingdom of Trinacria , went to Frederick III of the house of Aragon , who had been ruling it . The peninsular territories ( the Mezzogiorno ) , contemporaneously called Kingdom of Sicily but called Kingdom of Naples by modern scholarship , went to Charles II of the house of Anjou , who had likewise been ruling it . Thus , the peace was formal recognition of an uneasy status quo . The division in the kingdom became permanent in 1372 , with the Treaty of Villeneuve . Though the king of Spain was able to seize both crowns in the 16th century , the administrations of the two halves of the Kingdom of Sicily remained separated until 1816 , when they were reunited in the Kingdom of Two Sicilies . 
 = = = The insular kingdom of Sicily under the Crown of Aragon and Spain = = = 
 Sicily was ruled as an independent kingdom by relatives or cadet branch of the house of Aragon until 1409 and thence as part of the Crown of Aragon . The Kingdom of Naples was ruled by the Angevin ruler René of Anjou until the two thrones were reunited by Alfonso V of Aragon , after the successful siege of Naples and the defeat of René on June 6 , 1443 . Eventually , Alfonso of Aragon divided the two kingdoms during his rule . He gave the rule of Naples to his illegitimate son Ferdinand I of Naples , who ruled from 1458 to 1494 , and the rest of the Crown of Aragon and Sicily to Alfonso 's brother John II of Aragon . From 1494 to 1503 successive kings of France Charles VIII and Louis XII , who were heirs of Angevins , tried to conquer Naples ( see Italian Wars ) but failed . Eventually the Kingdom of Naples was reunited with the Crown of Aragon . The titles were held by the Aragonese kings of the Crown of Aragon until the end of the Spanish branch of the House of Habsburg in 1700 . 
 = = = Malta under the Knights = = = 
 In 1530 , in an effort to protect Rome from Ottoman invasion from the south , Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor , as Charles I of Spain , gave the Islands of Malta and Gozo to the Knights Hospitaller in perpetual fiefdom , in exchange for an annual fee of two Maltese falcons , which they were to send on All Souls ' Day to the Viceroy of Sicily . The Maltese Islands had formed part of the County , and later the Kingdom of Sicily , since 1091 . The feudal relationship between Malta and the Kingdom of Sicily was continued throughout the rule of the Knights , until the French occupation of Malta in 1798 . 
 The occupation was not recognized , and Malta was de jure part of the Kingdom of Sicily from 1798 to 1814 . After the Maltese rebellion against the French , Malta was under British protection until it became a British crown colony in 1813 . This was officially recognized by the Treaty of Paris of 1814 , which marked the end of Malta 's 700 @-@ year relationship with Sicily . 
 = = = The War of the Spanish Succession = = = 
 From 1713 until 1720 the Kingdom of Sicily was ruled briefly by the House of Savoy , which had received it by the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht , which brought an end to the War of the Spanish Succession . The kingdom was a reward to the Savoyards , who were thus elevated to royal rank . The new king , Victor Amadeus II , travelled to Sicily in 1713 and remained a year before returning to his mainland capital , Turin , where his son the Prince of Piedmont had been acting as regent . In Spain the results of the war had not been truly accepted , and the War of the Quadruple Alliance was the result . Sicily was occupied by Spain in 1718 . When it became evident that Savoy had not the strength to defend as remote a country as Sicily , Austria stepped in and exchanged its Kingdom of Sardinia for Sicily . Victor Amadeus protested this exchange , Sicily being a rich country of over one million inhabitants and Sardinia a poor country of a few hundred thousand , but he was unable to resist his " allies " . Spain was finally defeated in 1720 , and the Treaty of the Hague ratified the changeover . Sicily belonged to the Austrian Habsburgs , who already ruled Naples . Victor Amadeus , for his part , continued to protest for three years , and only in 1723 decided to recognize the exchange and desist from using the Sicilian royal title and its subsidiary titles ( such as King of Cyprus and Jerusalem ) . 
 = = = The Tunisian @-@ Sicilian War = = = 
 The Tunisian @-@ Sicilian War occurred between June 1801 and April 1804 , when Tunisian pirates with Tunisian and Algerian military support attacked and captured several Sicilian ships . The main purpose of their attacks was to capture Christian @-@ European slaves for the Muslim @-@ Arab slave market in North Africa . The Sicilians defeated the forces of Tunis and then occupied Bizerte and La Goulette until 1808 . 
 = = = The two kingdoms under the house of Bourbon of Spain = = = 
 In 1735 , Naples and Sicily were reconquered by King Philip V of Spain , a Bourbon , who installed his younger son , Duke Charles of Parma , as King Charles VII of Naples and Sicily , starting a cadet branch of the house of Bourbon . In 1799 Napoleon conquered Naples , governed by Ferdinand IV of Naples ( later Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies ) at the time . It was formed into the Parthenopaean Republic with French support . Under British pressure , especially from Lord William Bentinck , who was commander of British troops in Sicily , Naples was then handed back to Ferdinand , being forced to create a constitution for the Kingdom of Sicily . 
 A two @-@ chamber parliament in Palermo and in Naples was formed . The formation of the parliament brought the end of feudalism in the Kingdom . After the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 Ferdinand repealed all reforms . The people of Sicily rebelled but were defeated by Spanish and Austrian forces . In 1848 another Sicilian revolution of independence occurred , which was put down by Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies , who was surnamed Re Bomba after his 5 @-@ day bombardment of Messina . From 1816 to 1861 the kingdoms were united under the name Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . 
 = = = Unification with the Kingdom of Italy = = = 
 On April 4 , 1860 a revolt against the Bourbon regime broke out . Giuseppe Garibaldi assisted the revolt with his forces , launching the so @-@ called Expedition of the Thousand . He arrived at Marsala on May 11 , 1860 with 1 @,@ 000 <unk> . Garibaldi announced that he was assuming dictatorship over Sicily in the name of King Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia . On May 15 , the <unk> fought the Battle of Calatafimi and within weeks Palermo was freed . Francis II of the Two Sicilies tried to regain control of the Kingdom . On June 25 , 1860 he restored the constitution of the Kingdom , adopted the Italian tricolour as the national flag , and promised special institutions for the Kingdom . 
 On October 21 , 1860 a plebiscite regarding the unification with Italy was conducted . An overwhelming majority of the Kingdom 's voters ( 99 % ) favored unification : most Sicilians viewed the unification as acceptance of the House of Savoy , in which belonged Victor Emmanuel II , the first king of Italy . 
 = = Society = = 
 During the Norman Kingdom of Sicily , the local communities maintained their privileges . The rulers of the Hohenstaufen Kingdom replaced the local nobility with lords from northern Italy , leading to clashes and rebellions against the new nobility in many cities and rural communities . These revolts resulted in the destruction of many agrarian areas and the rise of middle class nationalism , which eventually led to urban dwellers becoming allies of the Aragonese . This situation was continued during the short rule of the Angevin until their overthrowing during the Sicilian Vespers . The Angevin began <unk> the country , increasing the power of the nobility by granting them jurisdiction over high justice . During the 15th century due to the isolation of the Kingdom , the Renaissance had no impact on it . 
 At the same period the feudalisation of the Kingdom of Sicily was intensified , through the enforcement of feudal bonds and relations among its subjects . In 1669 the eruption of Mount Etna destroyed Catania . In 1693 , 5 % of the Kingdom 's population was killed because of earthquakes . In that period there were also plague outbreaks . The 17th and 18th century were an era of decline of the Kingdom . Corruption was prevalent among the upper and middle classes of the society . Widespread corruption and maltreatment of the lower classes by the feudal lords led to the creation of groups of brigands , attacking the nobility and destroying their fiefs . These groups which were self @-@ named " Mafia " , were the foundation of the modern Mafia . The escalation of revolts against the monarchy eventually led to the unification with Italy . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 During the reign of Frederick II the kingdom had a population of about 2 @.@ 5 million . During the Hohenstaufen era , the Kingdom had 3 towns with a population of over 20 @,@ 000 each . After the loss of the northern provinces in 1282 during the Sicilian Vespers and several natural disasters like the eruption of Mount Etna in 1669 , the population of the Kingdom of Sicily was reduced . In 1803 the population of the Kingdom was 1 @,@ 656 @,@ 000 . The main cities of the Kingdom at that period were Palermo , Catania , Messina , Modica , Syracuse . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The high fertility of the land led the Norman kings to bring settlers from neighbouring regions or to resettle farmers to areas where cultivation of land was needed . This led to increase of agrarian production . The main sources of wealth for the Kingdom of Sicily at that period were its maritime cities , most important of which were Naples and Amalfi , from which local products were exported . The main export was hard grain , with other products exported including nuts , timber , oil , bacon , cheese , skins , hides , hemp and cloth . Grain and other dry products were measured in <unk> , which was equivalent to 275 @.@ 08 litres in the western part of the Kingdom , and 3 @.@ 3 litres in the eastern part . The <unk> was divided in 16 <unk> . One <unk> was equivalent to 17 @,@ 193 litres . Weight was measured in <unk> . One <unk> was equivalent to 79 @.@ 35 kilograms ( 174 @.@ 9 lb ) and was divided in one hundred <unk> . Cloth was measured in <unk> . One canna was 2 @.@ 06 meters long . By the end of the 12th century Messina had become one of the leading commercial cities of the kingdom . 
 Under the Kingdom , Sicily 's products went to many different lands . Among these were Genoa , Pisa , the Byzantine Empire , and Egypt . Over the course of the 12th century , Sicily became an important source of raw materials for north Italian cities such as Genoa . As the centuries went on , however , this economic relationship became less advantageous to Sicily , and some modern scholars see the relationship as frankly exploitative . Furthermore , many scholars believe that Sicily went into decline in the late Middle Ages , though they are not agreed on when this decline occurred . Clifford Backman argues that it is a mistake to see the economic history of Sicily in terms of victimization , and contends that the decline really began in the second part of the reign of Frederick III , in contrast to earlier scholars who believed that Sicilian decline had set in earlier . Where earlier scholars saw late medieval Sicily in continuous decline , Stephen Epstein argued that Sicilian society experienced something of a revival in the 15th century . 
 Various treaties with Genoa secured and strengthened the commercial power of Sicily . 
 The <unk> of the society during the Angevin rule reduced royal wealth and treasury . The dependence of the Angevin on north Italian commerce and financing by Florentine bankers were the main factors which led to the decline of the Kingdom 's economy . The continuation of the economic decline combined with the increased population and urbanization led to decrease of agrarian production . 
 In 1800 one @-@ third of the available crops was cultivated , with obsolete cultivation methods escalating the problem . In the later period of Spanish rule the trading system was also inefficient in comparison with previous periods because of high taxes on exports and monopolising corporations which had total control of prices . 
 = = Coinage = = 
 The Norman kings in the 12th century used the tari , which had been used in Sicily from 913 as the basic coin . One tari weighed about one gram and was 16 1 ⁄ 3 carats of gold . The Arab dinar was worth four tari , and the Byzantine solidus six tari . In the kingdom one <unk> was equivalent to thirty tari or five florins . One tari was worth twenty <unk> . One grana was equivalent to six denari . After 1140 the circulation of the copper coin <unk> stopped and it was replaced by the <unk> . Twenty four <unk> were equivalent to one Byzantine <unk> . 
 After defeating the Tunisians in 1231 Frederick II , Holy Roman Emperor minted the <unk> . It was minted in 21 1 ⁄ 2 carats and weighed 5 @.@ 28 grams . In 1490 the <unk> were minted in Sicily . They were equivalent to the Venetian ducat . One <unk> was worth 11 1 ⁄ 2 <unk> . One aquila was worth twenty <unk> . In transactions tari and <unk> were mainly used . 
 = = Religion = = 
 During the Norman reign , several different religious communities coexisted in the Kingdom of Sicily . They were : Latin Christians ( Roman Catholics ) , Greek @-@ speaking Christians ( Eastern Orthodox ) , Muslims and Jews . Although local religious practices were not interrupted , the fact that Latin Christians were in power tended to favor Latin Christianity ( Roman Catholicism ) . Bishops of the Eastern Orthodox rite were obliged to recognize the claims of the Latin Church in Sicily , while Muslim communities were no longer ruled by local emirs . Greek @-@ speaking Christians , Latin Christians , and Muslims interacted on a regular basis , and were involved in each other 's lives , economically , linguistically , and culturally . Some intermarried . Christians living in an Arabic @-@ speaking area might adopt Arabic or even Muslim names . In many cities , each religious community had its own administrative and judicial order . In Palermo , Muslims were allowed to publicly call for prayer in mosques , and their legal issues were settled by qadis , judges who ruled in accordance with Islamic law . 
 After the establishment of Hohenstaufen authority <unk> and Greek @-@ speaking Christians maintained their privileges , but the Muslim population was increasingly oppressed . The settlements of Italians brought from northern Italy ( who wanted Muslim property for their own ) led many Muslim communities to revolt or resettle in mountainous areas of Sicily . These revolts resulted in some acts of violence , and the eventual deportation of Muslims , which began under Frederick II . Eventually , the government removed the entire Muslim population to Lucera in Apulia and <unk> in Calabria , where they paid taxes and served as agricultural laborers , craftsmen , and crossbowmen for the benefit of the king . The colony at Lucera was finally disbanded in 1300 under Charles II of Naples , and many of its inhabitants sold into slavery . The Jewish community was expelled after the establishment of the Spanish Inquisition from 1493 to 1513 in Sicily . The remaining Jews were gradually assimilated , and most of them converted to Roman Catholicism . 
 = Stan Walters = 
 Stanley Peter Walters , Jr . ( born May 27 , 1948 ) is a former professional American football offensive tackle . After playing college football for Syracuse , he was drafted by the Cincinnati Bengals in the ninth round of the 1972 NFL Draft . He spent three years with the Bengals , starting at left tackle for the majority of his tenure , before he was traded to the Philadelphia Eagles in 1975 . A two @-@ time Pro Bowl selection with the Eagles , Walters started in 122 consecutive games at left tackle in his nine years with the team . Following his retirement , he was a radio color commentator for the Eagles from 1984 through 1997 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Walters grew up a New York Giants fan in Rutherford , New Jersey . His father worked as a machinist in Jersey City , New Jersey . Walters attended St. Mary High School in Rutherford , where he lettered in football and basketball . 
 = = College career = = 
 Walters was a two @-@ year letterman in football for Syracuse University , and started at left guard in his senior season in 1971 . He participated in the Senior Bowl in 1971 . He majored in history at Syracuse . He was selected to the Syracuse All @-@ Century team in 1999 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Walters was selected by the Cincinnati Bengals in the ninth round ( 210th overall ) of the 1972 NFL Draft . He began the 1972 season on the team 's taxi squad , and he was promoted to the starting roster midway through the season owing to an injury to starter Rufus Mayes . Walters started the remaining eight games of the season at left offensive tackle . An unknown illness in 1973 resulted in his losing 14 pounds in a ten @-@ day span and missing a game against the Cleveland Browns on October 6 . He played in only four games that season . He returned as a starter in 1974 and played in all fourteen games . 
 The Bengals traded Walters and quarterback Wayne Clark to the Philadelphia Eagles in exchange for quarterback John Reaves and a 1976 second @-@ round draft pick ( which was used on guard Glenn <unk> ) on July 3 , 1975 . Walters considered a meeting with head coach Dick Vermeil before the 1976 season as the critical moment in his playing career . Vermeil , who had just been hired by the Eagles , told Walters that if he did not start playing better he would be released . Walters said , " It shook me up . It definitely made a difference . " He started in every game from 1975 through 1982 at left tackle . Harvey Martin , a defensive end who played for the Dallas Cowboys and frequently played against Walters , called Walters the smartest offensive tackle in the league during his career . 
 Walters earned two consecutive Pro Bowl selections , in 1978 and 1979 . In 1979 , Walters blocked for running back Wilbert Montgomery , who rushed for a team @-@ record 1 @,@ 512 yards . In 1980 he did not allow any sacks as the team 's largest player at 275 pounds ( 125 kg ) . He injured his back in the first half of the 1981 NFC Championship Game against the Dallas Cowboys , but took a painkiller shot to go back into the game to help the team rush for 263 yards and advance to the Super Bowl . Walters played in Super Bowl XV against the Oakland Raiders . The Eagles lost the game , 27 – 10 . Walters was limited by a strained knee in the beginning of the 1981 season . 
 Walters re @-@ signed with the Eagles before training camp in 1983 . He played in the first preseason game against the Detroit Lions , but had to leave the game due to an injury . Three days later , on August 8 , he announced his retirement from football , saying " After 12 years of playing in the NFL , I earned the right to go to my head coach and just say I 've fought my battle . It 's over . " However , when his replacement , Dean <unk> , suffered a sprained knee in the next preseason game , Walters ended his week @-@ long retirement to re @-@ join the Eagles on August 15 . The contract offered to him included a clause that the organization would put up a barn next to his house . He re @-@ injured his knee against the St. Louis Cardinals on September 25 and had to leave the game . Before the November 20 game against the New York Giants , Walters was benched , along with four other starters , by head coach Marion Campbell in an attempt to rejuvenate the team with younger players after five straight losses . He finished the season with ten starts in twelve games . He ended a streak of 122 consecutive starts at left tackle for the Eagles during the 1983 season . 
 In 1991 , Walters was inducted in the Philadelphia Eagles Ring of Honor with fellow offensive tackle Jerry <unk> . 
 = = After football = = 
 After retiring from football again after the 1983 season , Walters worked alongside Merrill Reese as a radio color commentator for the Eagles from 1984 to 1997 before he moved to Cobham , England when his wife , Kathy , got transferred in her job in the paper industry . The couple had previously lived in Alpharetta , Georgia . He and his wife lived in England for five years while Walters raised their two children . As of November 2010 , Walters resides in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = 2nd Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2nd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was initially raised for service during the First World War as part the Australian Imperial Force and saw action at Gallipoli before being sent to the Western Front in mid @-@ 1916 , where it spent the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years taking part in the fighting in the trenches of France and Belgium . Following the conclusion of hostilities , the battalion was disbanded in early 1919 as part of the demobilisation process . 
 In 1921 , the battalion was re @-@ raised as a part @-@ time unit of the Citizens Forces based in Newcastle , New South Wales , drawing lineage from a number of previously existing infantry units . They remained in existence until 1929 when , due to austerity measures during the Great Depression and manpower shortages , the battalion was amalgamated with two other infantry battalions over the course of a number of re @-@ organisations . It was re @-@ formed in 1939 and undertook garrison duty in Australia during the Second World War until 1943 when it was merged once again . 
 Following the end of the war , the 2nd Battalion was re @-@ raised as part of the Citizens Military Force in 1948 . In 1960 , it was reduced to a company @-@ level formation but was re @-@ formed as a battalion of the Royal New South Wales Regiment in 1965 . It remained on the Australian order of battle until 1987 when it was amalgamated with the 17th Battalion , to form the 2nd / 17th Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment , a unit which remains part of the Australian Army Reserve today . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 = = = = Formation and training = = = = 
 The 2nd Battalion was raised at Randwick , New South Wales , in August 1914 as part of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) , which was formed from volunteers for overseas service shortly after the outbreak of the First World War . Drawing the majority of its personnel from the Maitland , Newcastle and Hunter Valley regions of the state of New South Wales , the battalion formed part of the 1st Brigade and , along with the 1st , 3rd and 4th Battalions , it was one of the first infantry units raised by Australia following its entry into the war . Upon formation , the battalion was established with a complement of over 1 @,@ 000 men organised into a headquarters , a machine @-@ gun section of two heavy Maxim medium machine @-@ guns , and eight rifle companies , each consisting of three officers and 117 other ranks . The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel George Braund , a citizen soldier and Member of Parliament in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly , who held the seat of Armidale . 
 The physical standards under which the first contingent of the AIF was recruited were very strict , nevertheless by the end of August over 20 @,@ 000 men had been recruited into one infantry division — the 1st Division — and one light horse brigade , the 1st Light Horse Brigade . Following a brief period of training in Australia , the force set sail for the Middle East , assembling off Albany , Western Australia , in early November 1914 before leaving Australian waters , with the 2nd Battalion embarked upon the HMAT Suffolk . 
 Initially it had been planned that the Australians would be sent to the United Kingdom , where they would undertake further training prior to being sent to the Western Front in France and Belgium . However , the Ottoman Empire 's entry into the war on Germany 's side on 29 October meant that the strategically vital Suez Canal was threatened , and as a result of this and overcrowding in training grounds in the United Kingdom , upon the convoy reaching the Suez at the end of November , plans for the use of the Australian force were changed and they were disembarked in Egypt instead . 
 The 2nd Battalion arrived in Egypt on 2 December . The following month , it undertook further training along with the rest of the 1st Division . The battalion was also re @-@ organised into four companies , as the Australian Army converted to the new battalion structure that had been developed by the British Army . Although the battalion 's authorised strength remained the same , the eight companies were merged into four , each consisting of six officers and 221 other ranks . 
 In February 1915 , Ottoman Empire forces attacked the Suez Canal , and although some units of the 1st Division were put into the line , the 2nd Battalion was not required , and in the end the attack was turned back mainly by Indian units . Later , in an effort to open shipping lanes to the Russians and also knock the Turks out of the war , the British high command decided to land a force on the Gallipoli peninsula near the Dardanelles using mainly British , French and Indian troops along with the Australians and New Zealanders . 
 = = = = Gallipoli = = = = 
 During the Landing at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 , the 2nd Battalion , under Braund 's command , came ashore in the second and third waves , landing a total of 31 officers and 937 other ranks . Upon landing , the 2nd Battalion dispatched two companies , ' A ' and ' D ' to assist the 3rd Brigade who were pushing inland towards a high feature known as " Baby 700 " , which overlooked the beachhead . One of the 2nd Battalion 's platoons , under Lieutenant Leslie Morshead , advanced further than any other Australian unit , making it to the slopes of Baby 700 , before a determined counter @-@ attack by Ottoman forces drove them back in the afternoon . 
 Meanwhile , the battalion 's other two companies , ' B ' and ' C ' , had been held back in reserve . In the early afternoon , Braund led them up the steep terrain under fire to the vital junction between two positions known as " Walker 's Ridge " and " Russell 's Top " . The battalion proceeded to hold this position until reinforcements arrived from the Wellington Battalion two days later , at which time the 2nd Battalion undertook a bayonet charge which cleared the crest of Russell 's Top . A determined enemy counter @-@ attack forced them back to the junction where they remained until 28 April when they were ordered into reserve on the beach . 
 In early May , part of the battalion was sent to reinforce the 3rd Battalion . At around midnight on the night of 3 / 4 May , the 2nd Battalion 's commanding officer , Braund , who was partially deaf , was accidentally killed as he attempted to visit 1st Brigade headquarters after failing to hear a challenge from a sentry , who shot him believing that he was an enemy soldier . Following his burial , the battalion second @-@ in @-@ command , Robert Scobie , was promoted to lieutenant colonel and took over as commanding officer . 
 Following the initial establishment of the beachhead , the campaign moved into a second phase as the Australians began work to consolidate and slowly expand their position around the lodgement . During this time , the fighting at Anzac evolved into largely static trench warfare . In mid @-@ May , however , the Turks decided to launch an attack on Anzac . This began late on 18 May with the heaviest artillery bombardment of the campaign to that point , during which the 2nd Battalion 's orderly room , located on " MacLaurin 's Hill " , was hit . The assault began the following day , during which the 2nd Battalion , established around a position known as the " Pimple " , was attacked by elements of the Ottoman 48th Regiment who poured into their forward positions through " Owen 's Gulley " , which rose as a re @-@ entrant between the 2nd Battalion 's position and that of 3rd Battalion which was on their left at the " Jolly " . At risk of having the line split in two and enduring heavy attack in their sap head , the 2nd called for reinforcements which came in the shape of artillerymen from the 8th Battery , who were pressed into the line as infantrymen . With only limited machine @-@ guns and with bad light hindering the supporting artillery , the job of turning back the Turkish assault fell to the riflemen and by maintaining strict fire discipline , great effect was achieved . By 24 May , the attack had been decisively defeated and a brief truce was called for both sides to bury the dead . Following this , the Ottoman forces around Anzac adopted a defensive posture . It was during this time , that one of the 2nd Battalion 's soldiers , Lance Corporal ( later Sergeant ) William Beech , invented the periscope rifle . 
 In early August , in order to create a diversion to draw Ottoman reserves away from a major attack at Hill 971 , which had been conceived as part of an attempt to break the stalemate that had developed around the beachhead , the 1st Brigade conducted an attack at Lone Pine . The 2nd Battalion was chosen to take part in the initial assault . After gaining possession of the main enemy line , the Australians were subjected to a series of determined counter @-@ attacks which would last the next three days , which , although successfully repulsed , proved very costly for the Australians . The 2nd Battalion suffered considerably . Having started the action with 22 officers and 560 other ranks , they lost 21 officers and 409 other ranks killed or wounded . Among those killed was its commanding officer , Scobie , who was shot dead while attempting to repulse a counter @-@ attack on 7 August . In Scobie 's place , the battalion second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Arthur Stevens , who had been a second lieutenant less than 12 months before , took over as temporary commander . 
 Elsewhere , the main offensive which had been launched at Hill 971 and Sari Bair , and the fresh landings that had taken place at Suvla Bay , also faltered . Ultimately , the August Offensive , of which the fighting at Lone Pine had been a part , failed to deliver the Sari Bair heights to the British Empire forces and their allies , nor did it break the deadlock . Following this , stalemate returned to the peninsula during September and October , and although small skirmishes continued , the Australians were mainly involved in defensive actions . As a result of the setback , many of the strategic goals that had been the basis of the campaign were abandoned and as a bitter winter set @-@ in in November , there was much debate among the British high command about the utility of continuing the campaign . In the intervening months , some personnel had been shifted away from Gallipoli as other the situation in other theatres became more relevant , and in late November , Lord Kitchener toured the peninsula . Finally , on 8 December , the order to begin the evacuation was given . The evacuation , which has been described as " more brilliantly conducted ... than any other phase of the campaign " , took place in stages , and with the maintenance of secrecy a key consideration , a series of " ruses " were used to conceal the withdrawal . Each unit left in drafts , maintaining a presence along the line until the very end . Finally , just before dawn on 20 December , the evacuation was complete . A small element from the 2nd Battalion was among the last Australian troops to leave , with a group of 64 men remaining in possession of the " Black Hand " position until 2 : 50 am on the final morning . 
 = = = = Egypt = = = = 
 Following the withdrawal from Gallipoli , the AIF returned to Egypt where they underwent a period of re @-@ organisation . Part of this saw the influx of large numbers of reinforcements and the expansion of the AIF . The 2nd Division had been formed in July 1915 , and part of this had been dispatched to Gallipoli in the later stages of the campaign , but the large increase in volunteers in Australia meant that further plans for expansion could take place . The 3rd Division was raised in Australia , while two new divisions , the 4th and 5th Divisions , were raised in Egypt from reinforcements in holding depots and experienced cadre personnel which were drawn from the infantry battalions of the 1st Division . In this regard , the 1st Brigade helped raise the 14th Brigade , with personnel from the 2nd Battalion being transferred to the 54th Battalion ; the split occurring while the battalion was at Tel el Kebir on 14 February . They were quickly brought up to full strength and training began shortly afterwards . 
 Earlier in the month , Stevens was promoted to lieutenant colonel and placed in substantive command of the battalion ; he would subsequently lead them through to November 1916 . Around this time , the units of the 1st Division , of which the 2nd Battalion was a part , became part of the larger I Anzac Corps , and in early March , this corps embarked for France – the 2nd Battalion leaving from Alexandria on the SS Ivernia – where they were to take part in the fighting on the European battlefield . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 After being landed in Marseilles , they proceeded north by railway to staging areas near Hazebrouck . Shortly afterwards , on 7 April , the units of I Anzac Corps were assigned to a " quiet " sector of the line near Armentières to gain experience of trench warfare . Due to concerns about a German attack , almost immediately the Australians set to work to improve the defences around their position . It had been hoped by the high command to initially keep the Australian presence a secret in order to gain some advantage from it , however , on 23 April it became apparent that the Germans had become aware of their arrival when a signal lamp flashed a message in Morse code from the trench opposite the 2nd Battalion 's position stating , " Australians go home " . To this , the Australians , despite orders against responding , replied matter @-@ of @-@ factly , " Why ? " 
 In June , during a brief period away from the line in billets , the battalion , along with the rest of the 1st Brigade , was reviewed by the Australian prime minister , Billy Hughes near Fleurbaix . Following this , although several units from I Anzac Corps took part in a number of raids against the German line during late June and early July , the 2nd Battalion was not involved and as such , apart from experiencing some enemy shelling , the 2nd Battalion 's first significant action came at Pozières in July 1916 . The battalion entered the line on the night of 19 / 20 July as the 1st was sent forward to relieve the British 68th Brigade along with the 3rd Brigade ; just after midnight the 2nd Battalion , after an approach march over which they had endured gas attack , arrived at its position opposite the south @-@ western side of the village . 
 On 23 July , following an intense artillery barrage , the attack began . Leaving their form @-@ up point near the " Chalk Pit " , the 2nd Battalion , which had been allocated the position of the left forward battalion in the assault with the 1st Battalion on their right and the 4th Battalion following them up , moved out into no man 's land just after midnight . A short time afterwards a flare was fired from the German lines followed by sporadic rifle and machine @-@ gun fire , which was directed somewhere away from the battalion 's axis @-@ of @-@ advance . As they advanced over the broken ground , suddenly a sentry called out a challenge and the entire battalion froze , but when firing broke out it became clear that it was directed away to their right towards the 3rd Brigade who were advancing over open ground . Advancing beneath the supporting barrage , under the direction of their officers whose job it was to ensure that they did not get ahead of the creeping artillery , the battalion probed forward trying to locate the enemy defences , finally finding an abandoned trench located amongst a group of tree stumps . After striking the railway , they began to dig @-@ in just beyond it to secure the left flank , as the 3rd and 4th Battalions passed between them and advanced to secure the brigade 's front along the line of the main Bapaume road . Following this , the 2nd Battalion maintained the left @-@ most position on the brigade line , with its pits curling around the left flank and folding in behind the 4th Battalion 's position . 
 The Germans put in a determined counter @-@ attack at dawn with a whole battalion , which was turned back after a stiff fight . That night , reinforcements were brought up from the 2nd Brigade , and early in the morning on 24 July the Germans opened up with a devastating artillery barrage . On 25 July , the men of the 2nd Battalion , having suffered terribly in the open trenches , were relieved by the 7th Battalion . During the operations around Pozières , the battalion lost 10 officers and 500 men killed or wounded . 
 After this , they were sent to <unk> for rest and re @-@ organisation , and after being brought back up to about two @-@ thirds strength , the 2nd Battalion 's next involvement in the fighting came around Mouquet Farm when they were briefly put into the line on 18 / 19 August to provide reinforcement , before being quickly relieved a few days later . In early September , I Anzac Corps was transferred from the Somme region to Ypres , in Belgium , swapping with the Canadians for a rest . Taking up a position north of the Ypres – Commines canal , the battalions of the 1st Division were placed in the centre of the line between those of the 4th , on the right to the south , and the 2nd on the left , to the north . The sector was a relatively quiet one , although not without its dangers due to constant mortar attacks , sniping , and the need to maintain patrols in no man 's land . Nevertheless , duties in this time were focused mainly upon maintaining a defensive presence in the line and rebuilding the defences . In addition , a number of small @-@ scale raids were also undertaken in an effort to draw some attention away from the fighting that was occurring on the Somme . 
 On 6 October , in concert with three parties from the 1st Battalion , the 2nd carried out a minor raid on a German position to the north @-@ east of a position known as " The Bluff " in order to gain intelligence . After encountering a German patrol , they were forced to abandon their attempt , however , a short time later , one of their own patrols captured a German soldier from the 414th Infantry Regiment in no man 's land . The next week , on 12 October , just after 6 : 00 pm a small party moved out into no man 's land to raid another German position near The Bluff . After being spotted , they were subjected to several grenade attacks , forcing them to retire . Their covering force was already in position , however , and so a number of the attacking force joined them and together , at 6 : 30 pm , after a box barrage by the artillery had cut the wire in front of the German position , they entered it . Killing seven Germans , they overcame the enemy resistance and brought back two defenders as prisoners . On the way back , several of their own wounded became lost , although all except one of these men were later recovered . The other man , one of the officers , was later found to have died of his wounds . In total the raid had cost the battalion two killed and seven wounded . 
 After this , the units of I Anzac Corps returned to the Somme , to relieve units of the Fourth Army , which had managed to push their lines to a position just below the Bapaume heights throughout September . The 2nd Battalion was not involved in any major actions during this time , although elements from the 1st Brigade — specifically the 1st Battalion with support from the 3rd — put in an attack on a salient that had developed in the front line north of Gueudecourt , which failed amid exceptionally muddy conditions . 
 Winter began to set in at this point , and even though combat operations all but ceased during this time , the battalion endured considerable hardships amid snow and rain , in a sector that has been described as " the worst ... of the sodden front " . For a brief period during December , Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Blamey commanded the battalion before taking over as acting commander of the 1st Brigade . During this time , the battalion was reorganised as part of a wider @-@ Army restructure that resulted in an attempt to increase the firepower of the each platoon . Earlier in the year , the battalion machine @-@ gun section had been deleted and replaced by a single Lewis gun held within each company ; by end of the year this had been increased to one Lewis per platoon . 
 As 1917 began with the Allies making fresh plans , the Germans , finding themselves outnumbered and needing to shorten their lines , began a skilful staged withdrawal beginning in February and ending in April . Falling back up to 31 miles ( 50 km ) in some places , they took up positions along a series of heavily fortified , purpose @-@ built strong @-@ points which the Allies subsequently named the " Hindenburg Line " , which , due to the reduced frontage , enabled them to free up some 13 divisions of reserves . Following up the Germans , the Allies advanced towards this line , finding that the Germans had adopted a scorched earth policy as they had moved back ; the result of this was that in order to establish their own lines , the Allies had to undertake significant construction work . 
 Due to the shifting front line , the 2nd Battalion 's first major engagement of 1917 did not come until 9 April when , on the periphery of the Arras offensive , they took part in an attack on Hermies , one of the outpost villages of the Hindenburg Line . Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Milligan , who had taken over on 17 March , the battalion had departed <unk> at 7 : 30 pm the previous evening and marched to their form @-@ up point . The plan was to attack with the battalion 's four companies advancing side @-@ by @-@ side from the north @-@ east to attack from behind the German defences , sweeping down on the village like a fan with the left @-@ most company providing flank protection and establishing a series of posts to stop the garrison from escaping while the two centre and the right @-@ most companies took the village . At the same time , two companies from the 3rd Battalion would attack the German main defensive position from the south @-@ west . 
 In the end , the Australians were detected while waiting to step off and , after being illuminated by flares and taking fire from a German picquet , hastily launched the attack . After overcoming this , the left @-@ centre company , having lost all of their officers , lost their formation and had to be re @-@ organised before the attack on the eastern side of the village could continue . The two companies passed through hedges and the ruined buildings , clearing the outskirts of the village with little resistance . The left @-@ most company then began its task of establishing outposts to the east . At the same time , on the right , the right @-@ most company had advanced to the <unk> – Hermies road when they had begun to take fire . Overcoming this and skirting a wire obstacle , they began moving towards the rear of the German main defence line . At this point , they came under fire from a low hill on the western outskirts of the village , which took them in the flank and pinned them on its slope . In the darkness , the location of the enemy machine @-@ gun could not be ascertained initially . The Australians remained fixed there for almost an hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half before members of the right centre company , who had avoided most of the German resistance , were able to locate it and destroy it from the rear just before dawn . The two centre companies were then able to enter the village proper , forcing large numbers of the garrison to try to escape to the north @-@ east , where they were taken prisoner in large numbers . Here the left @-@ most company had been establishing a number of posts in the open fields . Most of these were established with minimal resistance , however , one platoon became heavily engaged by a machine @-@ gun positioned near a sandpit on the other side of a road . A small group of men crossed the road and attempted to provide covering fire for the platoon . Amongst this group was Private Bede Kenny who , under heavy fire , rushed the enemy position and destroyed it with grenades , taking the surviving Germans prisoner . For his actions , he was later awarded the Victoria Cross . Minor skirmishing continued after this , but by 6 : 00 am the village had been captured and 200 prisoners taken , for a loss to the 2nd Battalion of eight officers and 173 other ranks killed or wounded . 
 The battalion played only a limited , supporting role during the 1st Division 's repulse of the German counter @-@ attack at Lagnicourt in mid @-@ April , and following this the battalion 's next major action came in early May when it was involved in the Second Battle of Bullecourt . The day before the attack , the battalions of the 1st Brigade , despite being due for rest , had been attached to the 2nd Division , and they were subsequently employed to provide work parties to release reserves among the 2nd Division units to take part directly in the fighting . Having not yet recovered its losses from the fighting around Hermies , and being subjected to artillery bombardment during their approach to the front , the 2nd Battalion entered the line on 4 May with just 16 officers and 446 other ranks , subsequently relieving the 24th Battalion . As the Germans attempted to force the Australians back , the 2nd Battalion was moved around a number of times to shore up the line , until units of the 5th Division came up to relieve those of the 1st Brigade on 8 May . 
 The battalion 's next major action came in mid @-@ September when they were committed to the fighting around Menin Road , which formed part of the wider Third Battle of Ypres , in a supporting role . On 16 September , the battalions of the 1st Brigade relieved the 47th ( London ) Division around <unk> Ridge , located about 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of Ypres , holding the line until relieved on 18 September by the 2nd and 3rd Brigades who were to undertake the assault within the 1st Division 's sector of the line . Following the assault , the 1st Brigade , including the 2nd Battalion , went forward on 21 September and secured the ground that had been gained . They were subsequently relieved shortly afterwards on the night of 22 / 23 September by troops from the 14th Brigade , as fresh divisions were brought up to continue the attack at Polygon Wood . The battalion 's casualties during this time amounted to 11 officers and 188 other ranks killed or wounded . 
 After a brief period of rest , they returned to the line near Broodseinde on 1 October , taking up a position near <unk> , on the right of I Anzac 's position for the upcoming battle . The attack went in on 4 October , and after overcoming an encounter with a German infantry regiment , the 212th , in no man 's land , the Australians successfully managed to capture their objectives . During the battle , the 2nd Battalion lost 10 officers and 144 other ranks killed or wounded , some of which were suffered after an intense German mortar barrage had fallen upon the troops in their form @-@ up point prior to the attack , killing or wounding up to one seventh of the assault force . 
 On 19 December 1917 , after the battalion had moved to the relatively quiet Messines sector in Flanders along with the other Australian divisions following their involvement in the Passchendaele operations , Stevens resumed command ; Milligan having been elevated to the general staff . Stevens would subsequently lead them through until September 1918 when he was granted " Anzac leave " which allowed personnel who had enlisted in 1914 to return Australia for an extended period of leave . 
 Throughout the winter , the Australian divisions remained around Messines , where they had been formed into the Australian Corps . During this time , the brigades rotated through the line , taking their turn to man the divisional sector . The 2nd Battalion had spent Christmas at Kemmel before moving on to Wytschaete Ridge on 26 December . They stayed there until late January when they moved on to Méteren . In early 1918 , the collapse of the Russian resistance on the Eastern Front enabled the Germans to transfer a large number of troops to the west . As a result , on 21 March , they launched an offensive along the Western Front . On the opening day of the offensive , the 2nd Battalion 's lines near Belgian Wood were raided by the 72nd Infantry Regiment and although the attack was beaten off , four men from the battalion were forcibly taken back to the German lines as prisoners . The initial attack , coming along a 44 @-@ mile ( 71 km ) front between La Bassée and La Fère , was quite successful and with the Germans making rapid gains , the Australians were transferred to the Somme Valley where they were put into the line around Amiens to blunt the attack in early April . 
 Shortly thereafter , during the Battle of the Lys , the 2nd Battalion , along with the rest of the 1st Division , were sent to Hazebrouck . Upon arriving there on 12 April , they took up defensive positions around <unk> to await the German advance . On 17 April , while defending the village of Sec Bois , the battalion helped turn back a determined German attack . 
 Following this , between late April and July , a period of lull followed . During this time , the Australians undertook a series of small @-@ scale operations that became known as " peaceful penetrations " . After relieving the 3rd Brigade around Méteren on 27 April , the battalions of the 1st Brigade began patrols on 30 April to capture German soldiers to gain intelligence and harass the enemy . These were generally met with considerable success , although they were not without mishap . Two separate patrols were undertaken by the 2nd Battalion on 2 May . The first resulted in one officer being shot while attempting to enter a German trench , while the second resulted in another being shot by an Australian sentry who had not been warned that a patrol had gone out . Later in May , they took up a position opposite Merris , remaining there until the end of the month . Throughout June and July they alternated between <unk> and Merris during which time they continued to raiding operations , which advanced the line about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) without significant loss . 
 In August , having gained the initiative , the Allies launched their own offensive commencing at Amiens on 8 August 1918 , where the battalions of the 1st Brigade were attached temporarily to the 4th Division , to act as its reserve , guarding the river crossing at Cerisy . Following this they were involved in the advance through Chipilly and Lihons , remaining in reserve until 11 August . Throughout the period of the first week of the offensive , the battalion suffered three officers and 45 other ranks killed or wounded . 
 After this , the battalion continued operations throughout August and into September . On the night of 10 / 11 September , while around <unk> , the 2nd Battalion carried out peaceful penetration raids against German reserve positions around Jeancourt . Finding the village empty , they encountered a German patrol from the 81st Infantry Regiment , which was attacked and quickly overwhelmed . At noon the following day , they launched a larger attack with artillery and mortar support , destroying two German outposts to the south of the village , killing eight Germans and capturing 22 others . In their last action , against the Hindenburg Outpost Line on 18 / 19 September , the battalion suffered a further 77 casualties . 
 On 23 September the battalion was relieved by American forces . At this time they were withdrawn from the line along with the rest of the 1st Division . They would take no further part in the fighting . In early October , the rest of the Australian Corps , severely depleted due to heavy casualties and falling enlistments in Australia , was also withdrawn upon a request made by Prime Minister Billy Hughes , to re @-@ organise in preparation for further operations . On 11 November , an armistice came into effect , and as hostilities came to an end , the battalion 's personnel were slowly repatriated back to Australia for demobilisation and discharge . This was completed in May 1919 . 
 Throughout the war , the 2nd Battalion lost 1 @,@ 199 men killed and 2 @,@ 252 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one Victoria Cross , four Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George , 20 Military Crosses , 21 Distinguished Conduct Medals , 58 Military Medals with two Bars , four Meritorious Service Medals , 55 Mentioned in Despatches and five foreign awards . 
 = = = Inter war years and the Second World War = = = 
 The battalion was re @-@ raised in Newcastle , New South Wales , in May 1921 as part the re @-@ organisation of the Australian military that took place at that time , with the battalion becoming a part @-@ time unit of the Citizens Forces , assigned to the 8th Brigade of the 2nd Military District . Upon formation , the battalion drew its personnel from three previously existing Citizens Forces units : the 2nd and 5th Battalions of the 2nd Infantry Regiment and the 2nd Battalion of the 13th Infantry Regiment , and perpetuated the battle honours and traditions of its associated AIF battalion . As a result of this re @-@ organisation , the battalion adopted the complex lineage of the 2nd Infantry Regiment , which could trace its history through a series of re @-@ organisations back to the 1st Regiment , New South Wales Rifle Volunteers ( Newcastle Volunteer Rifle Corps ) , which had been raised in 1860 . 
 In 1927 , territorial unit titles were introduced into the Australian Army , and the battalion adopted the title of the " City of Newcastle Regiment " . At the same time , the battalion was afforded the motto Nulli Secundus . In 1929 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , the compulsory training scheme was suspended altogether as it was decided to maintain the part @-@ time military force on a volunteer @-@ only basis . In order to reflect the change , the Citizen Forces was renamed the " Militia " at this time . The end of compulsory training and the fiscal austerity that followed due to the economic downturn of the Great Depression meant that the manpower available to many Militia units at this time was limited and as a result their frontage dropped well below their authorised establishments . Because of this , the decision was eventually made to amalgamate a number of units . Subsequently the 2nd Battalion was amalgamated with the 41st in 1929 , forming the 2nd / 41st Battalion , although they were later split in 1933 at which time the 2nd was merged with the 35th , becoming the 2nd / 35th Battalion . 
 Together these two units remained linked until 4 September 1939 when , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel William <unk> , the 2nd Battalion was once again raised as a separate unit as part of an effort by the Australian government to hastily expand the Militia following the outbreak of the Second World War . During the war , although mobilised and assigned to the 1st Brigade , the battalion did not see active service overseas and was instead used as a garrison force in Australia until 2 December 1943 when it was merged once again with the 41st Battalion , forming the 41st / 2nd Battalion . They remained linked until 17 December 1945 , when they were disbanded as part of the demobilisation process . 
 = = = Post Second World War = = = 
 In 1948 , Australia 's part @-@ time military force , under the guise of the Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) , was re @-@ raised . At this time , only two divisions were formed along with other supporting units . The 2nd Battalion was one of those units that was re @-@ established , returning to the order of battle in April 1948 , as part of the 2nd Division . 
 Between 1951 and 1960 a national service scheme had operated and during this time the CMF 's numbers remained reasonably steady . However , in 1960 the scheme was suspended and the Australian Army was reorganised with the introduction of the Pentropic divisional structure . As a result of this the CMF was greatly reduced and 14 infantry battalions were disbanded altogether , while many others were amalgamated into the battalions of the six sequentially numbered multi @-@ battalion State @-@ based regiments . As a result of this , on 1 July 1960 , the 2nd Battalion became part of the Royal New South Wales Regiment , and was reduced to a company @-@ sized element of the Pentropic 2nd Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment ( 2 RNSWR ) , forming ' C ' Company ( City of Newcastle Company ) . Just prior to this , on 30 April 1960 , the battalion had been afforded the Freedom of the City of Newcastle . 
 In 1961 , the Pentropic 2 RNSWR was entrusted with the battle honours that had been awarded to the 2 / 2nd Battalion , which had been raised as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force and which had served in North Africa , Greece , Crete and New Guinea . These honours would be retained by the 2nd Battalion throughout the rest of its existence . 
 The Australian Army abandoned the Pentropic divisional structure in 1965 , and in an attempt to restore some of the regional ties of the State @-@ based regiments , a number of the regional companies of the State @-@ based regiments were split and used to form new battalions with their traditional numerical designations . As a result , on 1 July 1965 , ' C ' Company , 2 RNSWR was used to re @-@ raise the 2nd Battalion in its own right . This unit remained in existence until 1987 , when further reforms to the Army Reserve led to a reduction in the number of infantry units across Australia and , at a ceremony held at Newcastle on 5 December 1987 , the 2nd Battalion was amalgamated with the 17th to form the 2nd / 17th Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment , within the 8th Brigade . Before amalgamation , the battalion 's regimental march was Braganza , which was confirmed in 1953 . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 The 2nd Battalion held the following alliances : 
 United Kingdom – The Queen 's Royal Regiment ( West Surrey ) : 1929 – 59 ; 
 United Kingdom – The Queen 's Royal Surrey Regiment : 1959 – 60 ; 
 Canada – The Queen 's Rangers ( 1st American Regiment ) : 1934 – 36 ; 
 Canada – The Queen 's York Rangers ( 1st American Regiment ) : 1936 – 60 . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2nd Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 First World War : Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Lys , Hazebrouck , Amiens , Albert 1918 ( Chuignes ) , Hindenburg Line , Epehy , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , ANZAC , Landing at ANZAC , Defence at ANZAC , Suvla , Sari Bair – Lone Pine , Egypt 1915 – 16 , and <unk> . 
 Second World War : But – Dagua , North Africa , Bardia 1941 , Capture of Tobruk , Greece 1941 , Mount Olympus , Tempe Gorge , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 45 , Kokoda Trail , Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing II , Oivi – Gorari , Buna – Gona , Sanananda Road , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , and <unk> Ridge . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2nd Battalion during the First World War : 
 Lieutenant Colonel George Braund ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Scobie ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Stevens ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Blamey ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Milligan . 
 = = Lineage = = 
 The following represents the 2nd Battalion 's lineage : 
 1860 – 70 : 1st Regiment , NSW Rifle Volunteers ( Newcastle Volunteer Rifle Corps ) ; 
 1870 – 76 : The Northern Battalion Volunteer Rifles ; 
 1876 – 78 : The Northern Rifle Regiment ; 
 1878 – 84 : New South Wales Volunteer Infantry , Northern District ; 
 1884 – 1901 : 4th Admin Regiment , NSW Volunteer Infantry Northern Districts ; 
 1901 – 03 : 4th Infantry Regiment ; 
 1903 – 08 : 4th Australian Infantry Regiment ; 
 1908 – 12 : 1st Battalion , 4th Australian Infantry Regiment ; 
 1912 – 14 : 16th Infantry ( Newcastle Battalion ) ; 
 1914 : 2nd Battalion ( AIF ) raised ; 
 1915 – 18 : 15th Infantry ; 
 1918 – 19 : 2nd Battalion , 2nd Infantry Regiment ; 
 1919 : 2nd Battalion ( AIF ) disbanded ; 
 1921 – 27 : 2nd Battalion ; 
 1927 – 29 : 2nd Battalion ( The City of Newcastle Regiment ) ; 
 1929 – 33 : 2nd / 41st Battalion ; 
 1933 – 39 : 2nd / 35th Battalion ; 
 1939 – 43 : 2nd ( The City of Newcastle ) Battalion ; 
 1939 : 2 / 2nd Battalion ( 2nd AIF ) raised ; 
 1943 – 45 : 41st / 2nd Australian Infantry Battalion ( AIF ) ; 
 1945 – 46 : 41st / 2nd Australian Infantry Battalion ( AIF ) and 2 / 2nd Battalion ( 2nd AIF ) disbanded ; 
 1948 – 60 : 2nd Infantry Battalion ( The City of Newcastle Regiment ) ; 
 1960 – 65 : ' C ' Company ( City of Newcastle Company ) , 2nd Battalion , The Royal New South Wales Regiment ; 
 1965 – 87 : 2nd Battalion , The Royal New South Wales Regiment ; 
 1987 – present : 2nd / 17th Battalion , The Royal New South Wales Regiment . 
 = Arthur S. Carpender = 
 Arthur Schuyler Carpender ( 24 October 1884 – 10 January 1960 ) was an American admiral who commanded the Allied Naval Forces in the Southwest Pacific Area during World War II . 
 A 1908 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , Carpender sailed around the world with the Great White Fleet . He commanded a landing force that went ashore at Puerto Cortes , Honduras in 1911 , and participated in the United States occupation of Veracruz as adjutant of the First Regiment of Bluejackets in 1914 . As commander of the destroyer USS Fanning in the action of 17 November 1917 during World War I , he engaged the U @-@ boat U @-@ 58 , and forced it to surrender . 
 At the start of World War II Carpender was Commander Destroyers , Atlantic Fleet . In July 1942 , he arrived in the Southwest Pacific Area , where he became commander of Task Force 51 , the naval forces based in Western Australia . On September 1942 , he was appointed commander of the Southwest Pacific Force , later renamed the Seventh Fleet , and Allied Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific Area , which he led through the Battle of Buna – Gona and the Battle of the Bismarck Sea . The following year he oversaw the fleet 's operations during Operation Cartwheel . He commanded the Ninth Naval District from January 1944 until August 1945 , retiring in November 1946 with a tombstone promotion to the rank of admiral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 A direct descendant of <unk> <unk> Van <unk> , one of the early settlers the New Netherland colony , Arthur Schuyler Carpender was born in New Brunswick , New Jersey , the sixth of seven children of John Neilson Carpender and his wife Anna Neilson née Kemp on 24 October 1884 . He was educated at St. Paul 's School in Concord , New Hampshire , and Rutgers Preparatory School in New Brunswick . 
 Carpender was appointed to the United States Naval Academy by Senator John Kean in 1904 . He graduated in 1908 . At the time midshipmen had to serve two years service at sea before being commissioned , so he reported for duty with the crew of the new battleship USS Minnesota . This was one of the battleships of the Great White Fleet sent by President Theodore Roosevelt on an epic voyage around the world in 1907 . In 1909 , Carpender was transferred to the USS Marietta . He was commissioned as an ensign in the United States Navy on 6 June 1910 . Amidst the backdrop of the Banana Wars , he commanded a 16 @-@ man landing force from the Marietta that was put ashore at Puerto Cortes , Honduras , on 14 January 1911 to help protect American citizens during a period of unrest ; after four days ashore Carpender 's force returned to the ship . 
 Leaving the Marietta in March 1911 , Carpender was involved with the fitting out of the new battleship USS Utah . Like other naval officers of the day , he acquired a nickname , " Chips " ( a traditional nickname for a ship 's carpenter in the days of wooden ships ) . He married Helena Bleecker Neilson , who was also from New Brunswick , on 30 April 1912 . Their marriage produced no children . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Carpender participated in the United States occupation of Veracruz in April 1914 during the Mexican Revolution as adjutant of the First Regiment of Bluejackets , which was formed from sailors from Florida , Utah and Arkansas . Landing mid @-@ morning on 21 April , the sailors remained under fire on the beachhead until early the next morning when they began their advance through Veracruz . After a series of street fights , they captured the town shortly before noon on 22 April . The town was cleared and defense lines established before it was handed over to United States Army troops on 30 April . On returning to the United States , Carpender was assigned to the Office of Naval Militia Affairs in Washington , D.C. 
 In June 1916 , Carpender helped fit out and commission the new destroyer USS Davis at the Bath Iron Works in Bath , Maine . He served as a member of its crew until March 1917 , when he assumed command of the destroyer USS Fanning . During the action of 17 November 1917 , he engaged the U @-@ boat U @-@ 58 , which was forced to the surface and compelled to surrender . For his part in the engagement , Carpender was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 In December 1917 , Carpender became an aide to the Commander , Destroyer Flotillas Operating in European Waters . In August 1918 he reported to the Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company to help fit out the new destroyer USS Radford , and assumed command of the ship when it was commissioned on 30 September 1918 . The ship sailed for Europe in October 1918 , escorting a convoy . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Carpender returned to the United States in April 1919 , and became a Member of the Naval Examining Board , and Judge Advocate General of the General Court Martial at the Naval Training Station Great Lakes . In August 1921 he assumed command of the USS Maddox . He reported to the Naval Submarine Base New London for training in June 1922 , after which he was posted to the United States Asiatic Fleet as commander of Submarine Division 14 . 
 In August 1923 Carpender returned to Washington , D.C. , where he served ashore for the next two years in the Bureau of Navigation , before becoming executive officer of the USS Pittsburgh in December 1925 . He was assigned to the Receiving Ship , New York , from October 1926 until March 1927 , when he assumed command of the destroyer USS Macdonough . 
 Following the familiar pattern of shore duty alternating with sea duty , Carpender served in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington , D.C. from 1928 until 1931 . This was followed by two years as executive officer of the light cruiser USS Omaha . He then attended the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island , after which he returned to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations . In June 1936 , he became Chief of Staff of Destroyers , Scouting Force . He assumed command of the cruiser USS Northampton in August 1937 . In February 1938 he became Professor of Naval Science and Tactics of the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps at Northwestern University at Evanston , Illinois . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Carpender returned to sea duty in September 1939 , when he helped fit out a new destroyer squadron , Destroyer Squadron 32 . He commanded it until September 1940 , when he became Director of Officer Personnel at the Bureau of Navigation . In this capacity , he helped foster the careers of many other officers . In December 1941 he was promoted to rear admiral , as Commander Destroyers , Atlantic Fleet . 
 In July 1942 , Carpender arrived in the Southwest Pacific Area , where he reported to Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary , the commander of the Southwest Pacific Force and Allied Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific Area . Leary assigned Carpender to replace Captain Charles A. Lockwood in command of the naval forces based in Western Australia , known as Task Force 51 . The main U.S. naval forces based in the west were the submarines , which remained under Lockwood . As a submariner himself , Carpender took a great interest in submarine operations , and did not like what he saw . Carpender and Lockwood did not get along well , and soon came to detest one another . " I 've heard about how they run things in the Atlantic Fleet " , Lockwood wrote , " so often that I 'm ready to shoot any Atlantic Fleet sailor on sight — and they , after all , haven 't done so much to write home about . " 
 On 11 September 1942 , Carpender succeeded Leary as commander of both the Southwest Pacific Force and the Allied Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific Area . In the former role , he reported to the Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest J. King ; in the latter he was answerable directly to the Commander in Chief , Southwest Pacific Area , General Douglas MacArthur . The new post came with a promotion to the rank of vice admiral , but Carpender was not the most senior naval officer in the theater , as the Royal Australian Navy ′ s Admiral Sir Guy Royle and the Royal Netherlands Navy ′ s Vice Admiral Conrad Helfrich were both senior to him . The Southwest Pacific Force was small ; when Carpender assumed command , it consisted of just five cruisers , eight destroyers and 20 submarines . 
 Leary 's reluctance to risk his ships , and his habit of communicating directly with King without going through MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) in Brisbane , had aroused the ire of MacArthur . Carpender would soon find himself involved in similar conflicts . In October , Carpender rebuffed a request for the Allied Naval Forces to transport troops to Cape Nelson . Carpender refused as there was no adequate hydrographic survey of that part of the Papuan coast , making it dangerous to sail at night , and movements in the area by day were subject to attack from Japanese aircraft . A survey was conducted in October and lighters and luggers began making their way up the coast to Cape Nelson , escorted on occasion by Royal Australian Navy corvettes . 
 In November 1942 , Carpender turned down a similar request from the Commander of Allied Land Forces , General Sir Thomas Blamey , for the Allied Naval Forces to escort some small transports to Oro Bay , as the Imperial Japanese Navy was doing during the Battle of Buna – Gona . However , Carpender subsequently relented somewhat and , starting in December , small ships escorted by corvettes carried out Operation Lilliput to deliver vital supplies to Oro Bay . During the Pacific Military Conference in March 1943 , MacArthur 's chief of staff , Major General Richard K. Sutherland , spoke to Admiral King and expressed his dissatisfaction with Carpender . 
 On 15 March 1943 , the Southwest Pacific Force , known colloquially as " MacArthur ’ s Navy " , became the Seventh Fleet . It remained very small . The Seventh Fleet acquired an amphibious force under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey . This eventually became the VII Amphibious Force , but for some time most of its strength was only on paper , or en route to Australia from the United States . Observing the capabilities of PT boats during his evacuation from the Philippines , MacArthur encouraged their use , although initial results were disappointing . Carpender made effective use of them during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea on 25 March 1943 . 
 Carpender oversaw the Seventh Fleet 's operations during the early stages of Operation Cartwheel , MacArthur 's advance towards the main Japanese base at Rabaul . A crisis arose during the Battle of Finschhafen , when Carpender became reluctant to reinforce the Australian position . As the situation at Finschhafen became increasingly precarious , Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring grew frustrated with Carpender 's attitude , and appealed to Blamey , who in turn took up the matter with MacArthur . On 29 September 1943 , Carpender agreed to use high @-@ speed transports to send an additional battalion to Finschhafen , and the crisis passed . Carpender told Lieutenant General Frank Berryman that he " resented the implication that Uncle Sam 's Navy was letting [ the Australians ] down at Finschhafen . " 
 Carpender was replaced by Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid on 26 November 1943 . For his services in the Southwest Pacific , he was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal by MacArthur , and the Legion of Merit by the Navy . He was also appointed an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire on the recommendation of the Australian government , and a Grand Officer of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau by the Netherlands . He returned to the United States , where he commanded the Ninth Naval District from 3 January 1944 until 31 August 1945 , for which he was awarded a second Legion of Merit . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Carpender 's last naval assignment was as Coordinator of Public Relations in the Office of the Secretary of the Navy from 28 May 1946 . He retired from the Navy on 1 November 1946 , with a tombstone promotion to the rank of admiral . He lived in retirement in Washington , D.C. until his death on 10 January 1960 , and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery . His papers are held by the New Jersey Historical Society . 
