 = Just Dance ( song ) = 
 " Just Dance " is the debut single by American recording artist Lady Gaga . The song was produced by RedOne and co @-@ written by RedOne , Gaga and Akon , while also featuring labelmate Colby O 'Donis . It was released in 2008 as the lead single from Gaga 's debut studio album , The Fame . The song was written by Gaga in ten minutes as " a happy record " . " Just Dance " also has influences of R & B and lyrically speaks about being intoxicated at a club . 
 The song received positive reviews from music critics , who complimented its club anthem @-@ like nature and the synthpop associated with it . The song has also achieved commercial success by topping charts in the United States , Australia , Canada , the Republic of Ireland , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , as well as reaching the top ten in many other countries . In the United States , " Just Dance " was a sleeper hit , spending almost five months on the Billboard Hot 100 before finally reaching the summit of the chart in January 2009 , after being released in April 2008 . The single is among the best @-@ selling singles of all time , having sold over 10 million copies . 
 The music video of the song portrayed Lady Gaga appearing in a party where she plays the song , prompting party @-@ goers to start dancing in enjoyment . Gaga compared her experience of shooting the video with being on a Martin Scorsese set . " Just Dance " was performed by Gaga in a number of live appearances including all of her concert tours . In 2009 , the song received a Grammy nomination in the Best Dance Recording category but lost to electronic duo Daft Punk for their song " Harder , Better , Faster , Stronger ( Alive 2007 ) " . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Just Dance " is written by Gaga and Akon with co @-@ writing by RedOne , who also produced the track . In an interview with Heat Gaga explained her inspiration for writing the song . She said , " I was very hung @-@ over . I wrote the song in about 10 minutes with [ producer ] RedOne . And it was my first time being in a Hollywood studio . Very pristine , big huge room with giant speakers . " Gaga wrote " Just Dance " during January 2008 and according to her it was " hard work and a lot of people didn 't believe in it at first " . Later , Gaga reflected on the song by saying , 
 " That record saved my life . I was in such a dark space in New York . I was so depressed , always in a bar . I got on a plane to LA to do my music and was given one shot to write the song that would change my life and I did . I never went back . I left behind my boyfriend , my apartment . I still haven 't been back . My mother went in and cleared it for me . " 
 In an interview with Contactmusic.com Gaga explained that " Just Dance " is a happy record and is supposed to be appreciated by people going through rough times like losing jobs and homes etc . Gaga further explained with Artistdirect that she wanted to write a beautiful record with " Just Dance " . Being asked the reason for which " Just Dance " has become popular , Gaga said that she thought , " Everyone is looking for a song that really speaks to the joy in our souls and in our hearts and having a good time . It 's just one of those records . It feels really good , and when you listen to it , it makes you feel good inside . It 's as simple as that . I don 't think it 's rocket science when it comes to the heart . I think it 's a heart theme song . " In March 2010 , the song was released as downloadable content for the music @-@ based videogame series Rock Band , alongside " Poker Face " , " Monster " and " Bad Romance " as part of " Lady Gaga Pack 01 " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Just Dance " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop and synthpop song . The song combines synths of clipped marching beats , soaring electronics and contains mild R & B infused beats . It is written in the key of C ♯ minor and is set at a moderate dance tempo of 119 beats per minute . Gaga 's vocal spans from the low note of G ♯ 3 to the high note of C ♯ 5 . The song begins with a fast tempo following by the synth arrangement and Gaga uttering " RedOne " . " Just Dance " has a basic progression of C ♯ m – E – B – F ♯ m . Colby O 'Donis sings the interlude in the same range as Gaga followed by an R & B influenced interlude by her , after which the chorus is repeated with O 'Donis providing backup vocals and the marching beats . The song ends with an echoing of the word " dance " . 
 Lyrically , " Just Dance " throws a partial tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek perspective with lyrics like " What 's going on on the floor ? / I love this record , baby but I can 't see straight anymore " . The lyrics deal with being completely intoxicated at a party . The opening lyric " A RedOne " has often been misinterpreted as " red wine " but in actuality is a reference to producer RedOne . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has garnered mostly positive reviews . Matthew Chisling of AllMusic described the song as " a powerhouse of dance waves and infectiously produced beats " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called it a " beguilingly compulsive tale of pulling a drug @-@ induced <unk> , with a combination of clipped marching beats , sawing electronics and mild R & B flavor that bears a vague resemblance to Nelly Furtado 's " Maneater " . Ben Norman of About.com said that the song " opens the album like a valkyrie leading the charge [ ... ] riding triumphant ahead of her army . If you don 't know this song , use your browser . I won 't waste time explaining what it sounds like . " However he also noted that the song is not groundbreaking and compared it to the music of Rihanna , Chris Brown and The Pussycat Dolls . Bill Lamb from About.com called the song tame but catchy enough for Gaga to be noticed by mainstream . He also added that " ' Just Dance ' has strong energy and features Lady GaGa 's striking voice , but it ultimately adds up to rather bland dance @-@ pop . " Colby O ' <unk> ' smooth vocals were also complimented . 
 Evan Sawdey of PopMatters.com said that " Just Dance " is an intensely catchy single and is an excellent indicator of what the album was all about . Ben Hogwood of MusicOMH praised the song saying , " You won 't get many more catchy party odes than the chart topping Just Dance this year , a polished gem set to lodge in your head for the next few weeks . " Freedom lu Lac of The Washington Post described the song to be " filled with mindlessly frothy synth @-@ pop that matches low @-@ grade dance grooves with GaGa 's icy , almost disembodied vocals about dancing bliss " . Lynn <unk> from The Ottawa Citizen , while reviewing Gaga 's The Fame Ball Tour , called the song a perfect sing @-@ along club anthem . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine wrote that the song resembles the " desperate train wreck you 're likely to encounter getting wasted at any dive on the L.E.S. at four in the morning " as is emphasized by the lyrics . Talia <unk> from BBC called the song irresistible and said that " the catchiness of her songs is sure to cement her place in the list of pop idols " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " Just Dance " was initially a club @-@ hit after its release , peaking at number two on both the Hot Dance Airplay and Hot Dance Club Play charts during the summer of 2008 . The song entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 76 on August 16 , 2008 . After 5 months , it gradually rose to number two on the Hot 100 , after selling 419 @,@ 000 in downloads on January 10 , 2009 . The next week , the song reached number one on the Hot 100 . The single took a total of 22 weeks to hit the top spot , which is the longest climb to number one since Creed 's " With Arms Wide Open " took 27 weeks before finally reaching number one in November 2000 . The song also reached the top of the Mainstream Top 40 chart , becoming Gaga 's first number @-@ one song . " Just Dance " spent a total of 49 weeks on the Hot 100 and on May 29 , 2015 , the single was certified eight times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of eight million copies . It was the second song to reach the six million mark in paid downloads , following " I Gotta Feeling " by the Black Eyed Peas . As of April 2016 , " Just Dance " has sold 7 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States and is the ninth best @-@ selling digital single of all time in the United States . In Canada , the song debuted at number 97 on the Canadian Hot 100 for the issue dated June 7 , 2008 . It reached the top of the chart on August 23 , 2008 , and was present there for five consecutive weeks . The song was certified six times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) in June 2009 , for sales of 240 @,@ 000 copies in paid digital downloads . 
 The track debuted at number 34 on the ARIA Singles Chart on July 21 , 2008 , and moved up to number 17 the next week . On September 15 , 2008 , the track reached the top of the chart . " Just Dance " was certified three times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 210 @,@ 000 copies . The song was credited as the longest charting single in ARIA history , spending over 81 weeks in the top 100 . " Just Dance " debuted on the New Zealand charts at number 19 , and reached a peak of number three . It has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the single . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Just Dance " debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart , on January 4 , 2009 . It rose to number one the next week with total sales of 65 @,@ 764 copies , and remained at the top for three weeks . In an interview with Daily Mail , Gaga explained her feelings on reaching number @-@ one in the United Kingdom saying , " It 's been a long running dream to have a big hit in the UK – my fans there are so sexy and the people are so innovative and free in how they think about pop culture and music . I was in my apartment in Los Angeles getting ready to go to dance rehearsal when they called and told me , and I just cried . " According to the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) the song was certified platinum , and in July 2016 it became Gaga 's third song to pass 1 million sales in the United Kingdom . In Ireland , the song debuted at number eleven , and after one week it peaked the chart . The song also peaked the Dutch Top 40 on February 28 , 2009 . Across Europe , " Just Dance " reached the top ten in Austria , Denmark , Finland , Germany , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland and the top twenty of Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) and France . Worldwide the song has sold over 10 million digital copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Released in May 2008 , the video was directed by music video director Melina Matsoukas , and is based on the thematic content of the song of being in a party . The video begins with Gaga arriving with her background dancers at a house party , which seems to have ended . One of the dancers puts a <unk> Boombox on , blaring the music through the house . The crowd at the party appear to be sleeping in different areas , and are awoken by the music . They all start to dance , and scenes of the party are inter cut with scenes of a scantily dressed Gaga dancing in a poncho , with a disco ball or in a small rubber pool playing with an inflated killer whale . She wears a blue , lightning @-@ bolt shaped sticker beneath her right eye like that on the single cover , which paid tribute to the album cover of David Bowie 's Aladdin Sane , as he is one of her musical idols . O 'Donis appears in the video being flanked by several girls during the " When I come through on the dance floor " interlude . Cameo appearances are made by Akon and Space Cowboy . MTV called the video as an ode to the " Me Decade " . During an interview with Australian radio in September 2008 , Gaga said that " The whole video is performance art about being drunk at a party . " When asked about the shooting experience of the music video , Gaga explained , 
 " Oh it was so fun , it was amazing . For me it was like being on a Martin Scorsese set . I 've been so low budget for so long , and to have this incredibly amazing video was really very humbling . It was really fun , but you 'll see if you ever come to a video shoot of mine one day – I 'm very private about those things , I don 't really talk to everybody . I 'm not like the party girl running around . I might even seem to be a bit of a diva . I 'm sort of with myself , in my work head space worrying about costumes , and if extras look right , and placement . I don 't just show up for things , you know . That video was a vision of mine . It was Melina the director who wanted to do something , to have a performance art aspect that was so pop but it was still commercial , but that felt like lifestyle . It was all those things , I love it . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In July , she performed the song for the first time at the swimsuit competition of the Miss Universe 2008 in Vietnam , later Lady Gaga performed the song on many television shows in the United States . She appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , So You Think You Can Dance and The Ellen DeGeneres Show . In Australia , she performed on Sunrise , where her performance was condemned for lip @-@ synching . Gaga denied it and released a statement saying " I was sick the day of the show but I absolutely , 100 per cent , was singing live . [ ... ] have never lip @-@ synched and never will . Even on my worst day , I never will . " In the United Kingdom , she performed the song on GMTV . She also performed the single during her AOL sessions . 
 " Just Dance " was added to the setlist of her first headlining The Fame Ball Tour , where it was performed before the Encore . As the performance for the acoustic version of " Poker Face " ended , Gaga exited from the stage and a video interlude called " The Face " starts telling about Gaga 's alternate persona Candy Warhol and teaching her to speak . Gaga appeared on the stage wearing a tutu shaped dress with pointed <unk> and peplum . Her dancers were clad in Louis Vuitton Steven Sprouse printed trousers which matched Gaga 's shoes . The backdrop changed to show blinking disco lights and Gaga stood wearing her video sunglasses , displaying the line " Pop Music Will Never Be Low Brow " . A remix of the intro for " Just Dance " started and Gaga started singing the song , while moving around in choreographed dance moves . 
 The song was also added to the setlist of The Monster Ball Tour , performed as the second song of the list . After the opening song " Dance in the Dark " , she strapped on a portable silver jewelled keyboard and started performing " Just Dance " while inside a white cube from which she emerged from the top , and the video screen came up . She was raised on a platform with a keytar over her shoulder as eight dancers in white bodysuits locked into steps below her . In May 2011 , Gaga performed the song during Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . She also made her debut performance on Irish TV screens performing Just Dance , on the Irish talk show Tubridy Tonight in January 2009 . 
 " Just Dance " was included on her third concert tour , the 2012 Born This Way Ball , where Gaga performed it on the extended stage walkway and shouted off to her fans for joining and dancing onstage . Emily Zemler from The Hollywood Reporter noted that " For all her preconceived speeches , these genuine moments resonated deeply with the audience , most of whom were dressed in tribute to the singer . " For the 2014 ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour , Gaga combined " Just Dance " with short performances of " Poker Face " and 2010 single , " Telephone " . While she danced and sang the songs , the backdrops displayed multiple images of Gaga writhing around , while wrapped in tinsel and moss . Melissa Ruggieri from The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution was impressed with Gaga 's vocals and complimented her for performing " old songs " in her actual voice . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Fame . 
 Lady Gaga – lead vocals , songwriting , background vocals 
 RedOne – songwriting , production , background vocals , instrumentation , music programming , recording at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , Los Angeles , California 
 Akon – songwriting , background vocals 
 Colby O 'Donis – additional lead vocals , background vocals 
 Dave Russel – audio engineering 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Louis Klein = 
 Dominique Louis Antoine Klein ( 19 January 1761 – 2 November 1845 ) served in the French military during the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars as a general of cavalry . 
 Initially part of the house guard at the royal residences for Louis XVI , Klein left the military in 1787 . During the French Revolution , he enlisted and rose rapidly from a lieutenant to a brigadier general ; he participated in the French invasion of southwestern Germany in 1796 , and was part of the Army of the Danube in 1799 . His cavalry played critical roles in the battles of Austerlitz and Jena and Auerstadt . Following the Prussian campaign , he retired from active service , entered politics , and performed administrative duties in Paris . 
 Klein served in the French Senate , and voted for Napoleon Bonaparte 's abdication in 1814 ; he did not participate in the Hundred Days and Louis XVIII of France raised him to the French peerage upon the second restoration . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Initially , Klein served in the royal house guard for the King of France , holding the prestigious position as guard of the gate . He left military service in 1787 . After the French Revolution began in 1789 , he rejoined the military and in 1792 , he was listed as an infantry lieutenant in the Army of the North . His cavalry regiment participated in the Battle of Fleurus . 
 = = = French Revolutionary Wars = = = 
 By 1795 , Klein was a brigadier general in the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse , where he replaced Adjutant @-@ General Michel Ney . Klein was appointed general of division in 1799 and crossed the Rhine at Kehl in Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan 's Army of the Danube . He commanded the right flank of the Advance Guard , under command of François Joseph Lefebvre . His command included the 4th and 5th Hussar Regiments , the 17th Dragoons , the 1st Chasseurs à cheval , a light horse regiment , two companies of horse artillery , two of foot artillery , and a company of sappers . At the Battle of Ostrach , Klein 's cavalry helped to secure the village of <unk> , a strategically important forward post , prior to the general engagement . After the French losses at Ostrach and the subsequent Battle of Stockach , Jourdan ordered a general withdrawal to the Black Forest . The reserve cavalry and most of Klein 's division crossed the mountains and quartered near Offenburg , where their horses could find better forage . Despite the organized withdrawal and the relatively secure positions on the western side of the Black Forest , the army was in shambles . Jourdan placed his chief of staff Jean Augustin Ernouf in provisional command and went to Paris to complain about the state of his army , its equipment and its provisions . Discipline in the ranks disintegrated . Most of the divisional generals left their posts , except for Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino , Joseph Souham , Dominique Vandamme and Klein . In May , Andre Massena received overall command of both the Army of the Danube and the Army of Helvetia ; Klein 's column joined Massena near Zurich . 
 In May 1799 , Klein led a cavalry division of 2 @,@ 010 prior to the Battle of Winterthur . A few days later , he commanded the cavalry reserve against the Archduke Charles and the Austrian army at the First Battle of Zurich . Charles ' superior numbers and position forced the French to retreat from Zurich , taking up position on the western side of the Limmat River . In September , he again commanded the cavalry reserve , the VII . Division , of 3 @,@ 696 on the left ( west ) bank of the <unk> river . He was responsible for guarding the Frick valley ( <unk> ) . There , as the dispositions developed for the Second Battle of Zurich on 25 September , Klein remained under direct command of Massena . Klein prepared to support either the troops of Jean Thomas Guillaume Lorge or Édouard Adolphe Casimir Joseph Mortier , on the north or south flanks respectively , as required . The Austrian assault fell hardest on Mortier , who was driven back from the strategically placed <unk> . Klein 's reserve enabled the French to retake and hold the village . This convinced the Russian commander in Zurich , Alexander Korsakov , that he should draw his troops back to the city fortifications . Later , as Korsakoff relinquished these , the Russians executed a confused withdrawal to Constance . In the chaos , Honoré Théodore Maxime Gazan 's division , supported by Klein 's reserve , pressed the Coalition forces hard at the west end of Constance , by the bridge to the abbey at <unk> . They nearly captured the Prince Condé and the Duke d 'Enghien themselves . Although the French took many prisoners , including many of the Army of Condé , the French emigrant army , these prisoners were not massacred whole @-@ sale , as had happened after earlier battles . Klein and Mortier issued instructions , which were supported by Massena , that the émigrés be assigned Russian names — they were , after all , under Russian pay and wearing the Russian cockade in their caps — and treated with dignity ; they were eventually exchanged for French officers held prisoner by the Austrians and Russians . 
 Returning to France after the Peace of Lunéville in 1801 , Klein remained inactive for several months . In 1802 he was recalled to military service as Inspector of Cavalry . He was given command of the 1st Division of Dragoons and in 1804 was made a Grand Officer of the Legion d 'honneur . 
 = = = Napoleonic Wars = = = 
 In 1805 , Klein 's division was part of the newly created VIII . Corps , under command of Édouard Mortier ; the role of the Corps was to patrol and secure the northern shore of the Danube river , limiting the Austro @-@ Russian activity . Napoleon incorrectly assumed that the Russians and the Austrians would make a stand near St. Pölten , northwest of Vienna . Klein 's entire regiment of dragoons patrolled the northern Danube shore , while the rest of his division , the last in the extended line of march , was more than a day behind Maxime Gazan 's lead division . Klein 's division did not take part in the Battle of Dürenstein , although his dragoons were with Mortier and Gazan immediately prior to the engagement . 
 Klein 's division was part of the decisive defeat of the Austrian and Russian force at the subsequent Battle of Austerlitz three weeks later . Initially , his dragoons , assigned to support Friant 's division , occupied a position of observation on the Marchfeld . The rest of his dragoons remained near Stockerau , just to the west of Vienna , and these dragoons , plus Louis @-@ Nicolas Davout 's , François Antoine Louis Bourcier 's and Marc Antoine Beaumont 's divisions of dragoons , formed a cordon between <unk> and Pressburg , and could move either west or east , depending on the actions of the Archduke Charles or the Russian commander Kutuzov . Consequently , Klein 's dragoons , held the road between Austerlitz and Vienna , eliminating a possible Austrian retreat . 
 In the War of the Fourth Coalition , Klein fought in the Grande Armée under command of Joachim Murat . After the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstadt , Klein was with his division of dragoons in the village of <unk> , the only escape route open to the Prussian General Blücher . Blücher was surprised to find Klein in possession of the village , but convinced him an armistice has been concluded between Prussia and Napoleon . Reports differ on the conduct of Klein and Blücher . William Milligan Sloane insists that Frederick William III of Prussia was with Blücher and that only the old general 's bluff prevented the King 's capture . Some historians assert that Klein believed him , and learned too late that he had been deceived . Others assert that Klein 's force was too weak to resist the greater Prussian numbers . He had only 800 cavalry and Antoine Lasalle , to the west , had two regiments . Blücher had either 7 @,@ 000 , according to Charles <unk> , or more than 12 @,@ 000 Prussian infantry , artillery and horse . Regardless , Klein and Lasalle either pragmatically maintained the fiction or fell for the ruse ; Blücher and his Prussians passed through the village . Charles <unk> maintains that Klein vowed revenge ; with his division , he pursued and attacked Blücher force the following day . He took 10 Prussian standards and 1 @,@ 000 prisoners , including a general officer , although he did not capture Blücher . Frances Lorraine Petrie gives that credit to Soult , and so does Adolphe Thiers ; furthermore , Petre maintains , Klein 's dragoons were sent to guard the communications lines between Erfurt and Weimar , where several groups of Prussians had skirmished with the French rear guard . 
 = = = Administrative and political duties = = = 
 Following the Prussian campaign , Napoleon appointed Klein as governor of the Imperial palace . In 1807 , Klein was called to the Senate . In 1808 , he was raised by letters of patent to a count of the empire and awarded the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Bavarian Lion . In 1812 , he was placed in command of the recruitment and training of a cohort of the National Guard . 
 He remained in the Senate until April 1814 , when he voted for Napoleon 's abdication . In 1814 , during the Bourbon Restoration , he was named a knight of the Order of Saint Louis . He did not support Napoleon 's return in the Hundred Days . In the Second Restoration , Louis XVIII raised him to the French peerage . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Louis Klein was born on 25 January 1761 in <unk> ( Meurthe ) , in the Lorraine region . He married 7 January 1783 to Marie @-@ Agathe <unk> , with whom he had a son Edouard Marie Arsène ( 1784 – 1843 ) . Edouard had two daughters , Arsène Louise Marie , born 1820 , married Mathieu Prosper Morey ; and Louise Françoise Clémence , born in <unk> , 1825 , married in Paris to Henri <unk> . 
 In 1808 , Klein divorced <unk> , with the Emperor 's permission , and on 2 July of that year remarried to Caroline of <unk> @-@ <unk> , daughter of the Countess of <unk> , a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting to the Empress Josephine de Beauharnais . In this marriage , he had a son , Eugene Joseph Napoleon , who was born in 1813 in Paris and died in 1872 . Louis Klein died 2 November 1845 in Paris . 
 = Silent Alarm = 
 Silent Alarm is the debut studio album by British indie rock band Bloc Party . Recorded in Copenhagen and London in mid @-@ 2004 with producer Paul Epworth , it was released in February 2005 on Wichita Recordings . The record peaked at number three on the United Kingdom Albums Chart . In the United States , it entered the Billboard 200 at number 114 and the Billboard Top Independent Albums at number seven . The double A @-@ side " So Here We Are / Positive Tension " , " Banquet " , and " Pioneers " were released as singles . Silent Alarm went on to achieve worldwide sales of over one million copies . 
 Bloc Party aimed to create an album that appealed to followers of different musical genres . Building on the arrangements in their demo songs recorded in 2004 , the band members moulded tracks largely through live takes during the Silent Alarm studio sessions . The compositional focus was on rhythm and the drum and bass parts , while lyricist Kele Okereke 's writing examined the feelings and hopes of young adults , including views on global politics . Following the album 's completion , Bloc Party embarked on promotional tours before its release . 
 Silent Alarm garnered widespread critical acclaim with praise often centered on its fast tempo and passionate delivery . Later in 2005 , it was remixed as Silent Alarm Remixed and was re @-@ released with bonus tracks to coincide with Bloc Party 's worldwide touring schedule . The album has received accolades throughout the music industry since its release . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2003 , Bloc Party consisted of guitarists Kele Okereke and Russell Lissack , and bassist Gordon Moakes . After drummer Matt Tong auditioned and joined the trio , the band members ' songwriting evolved and they started crafting tracks for Silent Alarm . Discussing the first demo " She 's Hearing Voices " , Okereke has stated that it " was really just a drum beat , which was something we couldn 't do before because we relied on writing songs only with guitars " . Self @-@ recorded in a small , hired space in Acton , London , the song was followed by the May 2004 double A @-@ side single , " Banquet / Staying Fat " , produced by Paul Epworth . Bloc Party EP was subsequently released by Moshi Moshi Records in the UK , containing all three previous songs and new material . 
 After exposés in British magazines and newspapers and a successful performance on BBC Radio 1 , Bloc Party received a contract offer from Parlophone . The band members declined the opportunity because they did not want to work for a major record label and instead signed a recording contract with East London indie label Wichita Recordings , chosen because it did not want to stamp its agenda on the conception of records . Frontman and chief writer Okereke wanted Silent Alarm to emphasise the importance of finding pleasure in small mundane things , because " those are the sort of things that can be incredibly touching " . The album was borne out of " a nagging youthful urgency " and the realisation that responsibility has to be taken for the first time as a young adult . Before recording started , Okereke attended singing lessons to open up his voice . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In June 2004 , Bloc Party convened at <unk> Studios in Copenhagen to make Silent Alarm with Paul Epworth . The band had already written demo songs to record , but Okereke has noted that " it is a creative process and you have to let yourself be inspired while you 're in the studio as well " . The <unk> set @-@ up posed problems , because it included bare mains cables and dated , malfunctioning equipment from the 1960s and 1970s . Bloc Party took three sessions to get acquainted with Epworth 's methodology . The producer has called the recording time a " growing process " because Okereke was not wholly comfortable singing in front of people , especially after tonsil problems . Although the band members had preliminary ideas about a track 's rhythm , they did not know how songs were going to start or end . Okereke often asked Tong to play something on the drums , which inspired him to mould a track by adding guitar chords to the beat . 
 Bloc Party 's priority when recording Silent Alarm was " to give the music more depth , sonically speaking " rather than focus on making a punk funk record . The band believed that 21st @-@ century rock music could only survive if people started " mixing styles that aren 't supposed to be together " . Okereke has suggested that forward @-@ thinking bands reach a plateau and start to question the boundaries of their medium ; this leads to experimentation with elements from other genres . Bloc Party set out to explore the idea of merging different styles in the debut album , rather than in later work . Silent Alarm was crafted to appeal to R & B , electro , and pop fans , on top of the band 's core indie rock fanbase . Okereke wanted the album to sound " very rich and full " . 
 Preferring live recording takes for better sound authenticity , Epworth 's style separated the band 's elements by accentuating the bass and by allowing the guitarists space to improvise . The producer meticulously tuned and retuned the components of the drum kit for a specific sound and used ribbon or condenser microphones lined up in an equidistant formation . According to Lissack , the basic idea was to emulate the " optimum audio representation " of songs heard in a club environment by adding guitar lines on top of boosted drum and bass tracks . Epworth advised Bloc Party to shape dynamics " a bit more subtly " . As the sessions progressed , the band members started experimenting with distortion pedals to add to their " chiming , clean guitar sound " , although they did not listen to the producer about song structure . In the end , 15 tracks were recorded in 22 days in Copenhagen , while the vocal overdubbing was subsequently done at London locations . Throughout the studio sessions , Okereke focused closely on the nuances of songs by often amending " <unk> " . 
 Epworth 's bass @-@ oriented production was key to creating a universally appealing album and was also used as a musical background to the lyrics . Okereke has explained that the songs were crafted to balance dark lyrics with uplifting melodies . He called the final version of Silent Alarm " <unk> " due to its stylistic choices and indicated that Bloc Party achieved the aim of making the songs sound " better and bigger " when they were recorded in the studio . Moakes later pointed out that the band members were relative novices when they entered the recording sessions , and that for the most part they only did what they were advised ; this is an additional reason why the album is disjunct and not focused on any particular musical style . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Many of the arrangements on Silent Alarm are strongly percussive . The leading song , " Like Eating Glass " , was inspired by a remix of The Smiths ' " There Is a Light That Never Goes Out " Okereke heard in 2002 . Its drum track was deliberately mixed louder than usual to add emphasis to the album 's opening . " Helicopter " has a quick tempo of 171 beats per minute , while " Positive Tension " begins with a solitary bassline and builds up pace , first with a rhythmic drumming pattern , and then with a guitar solo towards its conclusion . " Banquet " involves lead guitar and rhythm guitar playing in syncopation , while " Blue Light " has a slower tempo and a crescendo towards the end . During the studio sessions , the Bloc Party EP version of " She 's Hearing Voices " was reworked to include reverberation and stereo separation of the instrumental parts . " This Modern Love " begins minimally with panned vocals before the rhythm section enters the mix and the song intensifies . 
 The second half of Silent Alarm includes more studio effects . " Pioneers " opens with a series of delayed guitar harmonics , while " Price of Gas " is driven by a marching @-@ like sound created by Moakes walking in the studio with planks of wood strapped to his feet . " So Here We Are " is the only track on the album to not include vocal overdubbing . The song contains layered audio tracks of guitar and is followed by " Luno " , which begins with 32 bars of bass guitar and drums . " Plans " has a slower tempo and uses a synthesizer and effects such as flanging during the chorus . The final track , " Compliments " , incorporates an electronic drum kit and the use of reverberation . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Silent Alarm does not contain a solitary lyrical centre and simply observes people 's lives . Okereke wanted to leave individual listeners space to make their own conclusions , but has admitted that the record " operates in the realm of cultural politics " . Much of the songwriting is inspired by the style of confessional poetry authors like Anne Sexton and musicians Thom Yorke and Björk . In general , Silent Alarm tries to make clear an existential pointlessness in life . With hindsight , Okereke noted themes of " helplessness and weariness " because of the album 's focus on how he was feeling between the ages of 18 and 20 . Professor John Sutherland has pointed out literary elements , often similar to Sylvia Plath 's work , in the lyricist 's writing . Discussing the opening track " Like Eating Glass " , he explained , " It strikes me that whoever did the lyrics must have read some of her work . It has the same rather jagged , surprising imagery . It could sit fairly comfortably in a poetry anthology . " The recurring line " We 've got crosses on our eyes " is inspired by cartoon characters who have crosses on their eyes when they die . Okereke tried to convey the feelings in a failing relationship , " of being completely disorientated " , using childhood metaphors . 
 According to Heather Phares of AllMusic , " Pioneers " and " Price of Gas " exemplify the political undercurrent on Silent Alarm , the latter including the explicit chant " War / War / War / War " . " Helicopter " focuses in equal measure on America 's " red states " and on UK apathy and " the people queueing for the McDonald 's by [ Okereke 's ] house " . " Positive Tension " concerns boredom and its dangers , focusing on how it " can lead you into dark places " , while " Banquet " details " how sex is about power , submission , domination and real rapacious desire " . The lyrics in the chorus of " She 's Hearing Voices " , " Red pill / Blue pill / Milk of amnesia " , are in reference to the medications a friend of Okereke 's took to relieve the symptoms of schizophrenia . The lyricist has described the moment in " This Modern Love " when the backing vocals enter the mix before the second chorus as " perfect " , because it evokes the idea of " two people on the telephone , who can 't touch each other , and as the song and the conversation progress , everything amplifies " . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Bloc Party EP was distributed in America in September 2004 by Dim Mak Records , while the band performed several gigs at the end of the year in the US and Canada . The release of Silent Alarm was preceded by the marketing of Little Thoughts EP in Japan in December 2004 , containing previous UK singles " Little Thoughts / Tulips " and " Helicopter " and new material . Bloc Party commenced UK promotional touring in January 2005 by performing during the NME Awards Tour . " Tulips " was released from Little Thoughts EP in the US on 25 January . The first single from Silent Alarm , " So Here We Are / Positive Tension " , was released on 31 January and peaked at number five on the UK Singles Chart , the band 's second highest peaking release on the chart ( behind 2007 's " The Prayer " which reached number 4 ) . Between 31 January and 4 February , Bloc Party performed after autograph signing sessions in UK HMV stores . The band achieved exposure largely because of word @-@ of @-@ mouth and favourable press reviews . 
 Silent Alarm was released on 2 and 14 February 2005 , in Japan and Europe respectively . Chosen because the album has a sense of disquiet , the name comes from an article in New Scientist about an early detection system for earthquakes in Japan , while the cover art is based on a bare winter landscape by freelance photographer Ness Sherry . Bloc Party followed the album 's release with a short European promotional tour in early March 2005 . Between 17 March and 9 April , the band undertook a first headlining US tour to coincide with the American release of Silent Alarm through Vice Records on 22 March . The US marketing was geared to establish a long @-@ term fan base among " tastemakers and early @-@ adopter rock enthusiasts " , rather than a short @-@ term emphasis on radio play . At the time , Okereke stated , " All I ’ m concerned about is playing live shows here to people who want to see us . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Silent Alarm entered the UK Albums Chart and the Irish Albums Chart at number three , selling 61 @,@ 737 copies during the first week in the former country . The album achieved gold certification within 24 hours of its European release . 350 @,@ 000 copies were shipped worldwide by the first week of March 2005 ; 20 @,@ 000 were sent to America , double the record labels ' January forecast . In the US , the record entered the Billboard 200 at number 114 and the Billboard Top Independent Albums at number seven . With little radio support , it became the best @-@ selling release in Vice 's history as a label . 123 @,@ 000 copies of Silent Alarm were sold in the US by the end of July 2005 . The record was listed at number 75 in the end @-@ of @-@ year UK Album Chart and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry after more than 500 @,@ 000 copies were sold in the UK during 2005 . According to Nielsen SoundScan , 280 @,@ 000 copies of the album were sold in the US by January 2007 . More than one million copies have been sold worldwide . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Silent Alarm was received to critical acclaim by both critics and musicians ; aggregating website Metacritic reports a normalised rating of 82 % based on 32 critical reviews which indicates " universal acclaim " . Drowned in Sound 's Gen Williams described the album as " mature and expansive " and wrote that " the autonomy , creativity and sheer , elastic beauty that spans this debut more than justifies the rapidly accelerating hype " . Andrew Romano of Newsweek similarly noted that it " lives up to the hype " . Summing the record up as " dance rock , but highly caffeinated " , Barry Walters of Rolling Stone explained that the tracks are emotive and rhythmic in equal measure , while Nick Southall of Stylus thought that every song is " full of thrilling ideas and inspired moments " . Johnny Davis of Q labelled Silent Alarm " an arty , confident and exhilarating debut " , while Joshua Glazer of URB compared Bloc Party to " every legendary band ever who followed an EP with an even better album and on into greatness " . The Guardian 's Alexis Petridis was less receptive and commented that the " reedy vocals and lyrical evocations of suburban ennui ... induce a worrying ennui of their own " . Heather Phares of Allmusic stated that the record is not perfect , but praised its " passion and polish " . 
 Romano and Glazer compared Silent Alarm to U2 's early work , while Walters claimed that it distills " twenty @-@ five years of spiky British rock , from The Cure to Blur to hot Scots Franz Ferdinand " . Pitchfork Media 's Nitsuh Adebe noted particular similarities between " Banquet " and Franz Ferdinand 's second single " Take Me Out " , calling both songs " wonderfully tight and energetic — the same kind of spiffy half @-@ dancing rock " . Phares suggested that Bloc Party are more comfortable with lyrical proclamations than their contemporaries Franz Ferdinand or The Futureheads , while Imran Ahmed of NME concluded , " Silent Alarm is no Franz Ferdinand . In fact , listen to it with the words ' popular ' and ' arty ' in mind and its spirit is closer to the Manic Street Preachers ' The Holy Bible . " 
 = = Tours and supporting releases = = 
 By the end of April 2005 , Silent Alarm had charted in eighteen countries on four continents . Bloc Party toured in Japan with The Rakes at the start of May and completed a headlining tour of the US in June . The band members played their first concerts in Australia in July and spent the whole of August on the European festivals circuit . The remix album Silent Alarm Remixed was released on 29 August 2005 following Bloc Party 's headlining slots at the Reading and Leeds Festivals on 26 – 28 August . The record includes reworked versions of all original tracks by artists such as Ladytron , Death From Above 1979 , and Nick Zinner from Yeah Yeah Yeahs . 
 In September 2005 , the band members embarked on their second major worldwide tour of the year ; they played several gigs in North America between 8 and 24 September . Another headlining UK tour during the whole of October coincided with the release of new single " Two More Years " . Silent Alarm was re @-@ released in the UK on 17 October 2005 with " Little Thoughts " and " Two More Years " as bonus tracks . It contained a bonus DVD , God Bless Bloc Party , which included Bloc Party 's two June performances and backstage footage at El Rey Theatre , Los Angeles . Dan McIntosh of PopMatters stated that the concert documentary shows the band " can consistently pull off its material live " , but concluded that it focuses on Bloc Party " much too intently , far too soon " . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Silent Alarm was shortlisted for the 2005 Mercury Music Prize , but was beaten by Antony and the Johnsons ' second album I Am a Bird Now . It was also nominated for the 2005 Shortlist Music Prize , but lost to Sufjan Stevens ' fifth album Illinois . The record was named Album of the Year for 2005 by NME ahead of Arcade Fire 's debut album Funeral , by Intro in Germany , and by <unk> in Italy . URB included Silent Alarm in its unnumbered shortlist of the best records of 2005 . It figured highly in other end @-@ of @-@ year best album lists : at number two by Hot Press and by Stylus , at number four by Drowned in Sound , at number six by Spin , at number seven by Metacritic 's chief editor , and at number nine by The Denver Post . Silent Alarm earned Bloc Party several nominations , including Best Alternative Act at the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards , Best British Band at the 2006 NME Awards , and Artist of the Year at the 2006 PLUG Awards . The record itself won Indie Rock Album of the Year at the 2006 PLUG Awards . It was also nominated as Best Album at the 2006 NME Awards , and as Album of the Year at the 2006 PLUG Awards . 
 In 2006 , NME placed Silent Alarm at number 55 in its list of the 100 Greatest British Albums Ever ! , while Drowned in Sound ranked it at number three in its list of the editorial staff 's 66 favourite albums of 2000 – 2006 . In 2009 , Clash placed the record at number 11 in its list of the 50 Greatest Albums , 2004 – 2009 . The same year , Pitchfork Media ranked it at number 156 in its list of The Top 200 Albums of the 2000s , while NME included it at number 38 in the list of The Top 100 Greatest Albums of the Decade decided by the publication 's staff and music industry members . In 2010 , Stylus placed Silent Alarm at number 31 in its list of the Top Albums of the previous decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Bloc Party . 
 Tracks 8 and 9 were mislabelled on album pressings as " The Pioneers " and " Price of Gasoline " respectively . 
 CD hidden track 
 " Every Time Is the Last Time " – 3 : 10 – track 0 ( pregap ) on the UK and US editions and after track 13 on the European edition 
 Vinyl 
 There were two UK LP copies of Silent Alarm distributed by V2 Records : a standard black vinyl copy , and a limited edition picture disc version which has the album cover printed on Side A and the track listing printed on Side B. 
 The US LP issue was distributed by Dim Mak Records . It comprises two limited edition 12 " records which additionally contain a track listing for " Every Time Is the Last Time " on Side A , the appearance of " Little Thoughts " on Side C , and four bonus remix tracks — two of " Positive Tension " ( Jason Clark and Johnny Whitney ) and two of " Price of Gas " ( Automato and Jus <unk> ) — on Sides E and F. 
 DVD 
 A CD with an extra DVD was released in the UK and Europe in February 2005 at the same time as the normal CD version . The DVD portion contains live footage of Bloc Party at Heaven in London . 
 A new version of the CD with an extra DVD was released in the UK in October 2005 . The DVD , titled God Bless Bloc Party , contains a US tour documentary at El Rey Theatre , Los Angeles , live footage of Bloc Party at the 2005 <unk> Festival in Belfort , France , and nine music videos from the band 's career . 
 God Bless Bloc Party was released as a stand @-@ alone DVD in the US by Vice in January 2006 , but did not include the music videos . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Those involved in the making of Silent Alarm are : 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Kelvin Tan = 
 Kelvin Tan Wei Lian ( <unk> ) is a blind Singaporean Mandopop singer who earned a living as a busker before he won the first edition of Project SuperStar in 2005 . He has released three albums , All I Want Is ... ( 2006 ) , i @-@ <unk> ( 2007 ) and Moving Notes ... Kelvin Tan ( 2009 ) . Other highlights of his career include a solo concert at the Singapore Expo , leading a choir at the 2008 Summer Paralympics and singing the NDP 2009 theme song . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born blind due to Leber 's congenital amaurosis ( which causes the retina to disintegrate ) , Tan grew up listening to 1980s Mandopop ballads , which inspired him to learn to play the piano and guitar . He studied at the Singapore School for the Visually Handicapped and <unk> Secondary School . After his O Levels , he worked as a massage therapist and a singer at a café . He also busked at Jurong East and Waterloo Street , playing his guitar and singing Mandopop ballads for two to eight hours per day . According to The New Paper reporter Mindy Tan , his performances drew large crowds ( including Malays and Indians ) , some of whom were so " impressed [ by ] his music " that they would " sit on the pavement nearby for up to an hour listening to him " . 
 = = Project SuperStar = = 
 Tan and four blind friends auditioned for the inaugural season of Project SuperStar , but only he was accepted as a contestant . Throughout the competition , there was extensive debate over whether viewers were voting for him out of sympathy and whether a blind man who could not dance deserved the title . Further controversy arose when his home address was posted online and fans offered him sex services . Nevertheless , he emerged as the male champion and entered the grand final against female champion Kelly Poon . The judges gave Poon more favourable reviews , but Tan garnered 64 % of the 533 @,@ 000 telephone votes . Both finalists also released limited edition singles ; Tan 's cover of <unk> ( Fairytale ) by Michael Wong sold 12 @,@ 239 copies , while Poon 's cover of <unk> ( Lost Goodness ) by Angela Chang sold 11 @,@ 319 copies . Thus Tan became the grand champion and was awarded a recording contract with Play Music ( later acquired by Warner Music ) . 
 = = Music albums = = 
 His debut album <unk> ( All I Want Is ... ) , which contains four original songs and ten covers , was certified platinum in Singapore within five days of its release . Its title track topped the Singapore music charts in February 2006 , while another of its songs , <unk> ( Touch ) , won Best Theme Song at the 2006 Star Awards . In total , the album sold 45 @,@ 000 copies in Singapore and 15 @,@ 000 copies in Malaysia . In 2007 , his second album <unk> ( i @-@ <unk> ) was released and the song <unk> ( Ordinary Man ) topped the Singapore charts that October . This album eventually sold 15 @,@ 000 copies in Singapore and 20 @,@ 000 copies in Taiwan . Several songs that Tan composed himself were included in his third album , <unk> ( Moving Notes ... Kelvin Tan ) , which he promoted through busking appearances . Although its sales figures are not known , the songs <unk> ( Forever Friends ) and <unk> ( Break Up Letter ) topped the Singapore charts in October 2009 , while the album peaked at 5th in the Taiwan charts in February 2010 . In addition , <unk> won two awards at the 2010 Singapore Entertainment Awards and <unk> ( Together ) won Best Theme Song at the 2010 Star Awards . However , his contract with Warner Music expired in September 2010 and was not renewed . 
 = = Showbiz activities = = 
 In 2006 , Tan staged a solo concert at the Max Pavilion ( Singapore Expo ) , which sold 5 @,@ 000 seats . He acted in the <unk> movie 881 and several television serials ( notably The Dream Chasers ) , winning Most Popular Newcomer at the 2006 Star Awards . However , he declined further roles , describing acting as " not [ his ] cup of tea because there 's nothing else [ he ] could act as except a blind man " . He also participated in variety television shows in Singapore ( notably as a guest judge on Campus Superstar ) and Taiwan ( such as Happy Sunday ) , but some Taiwanese hosts rejected him over fears that their jokes would offend him . Another controversy arose when he was a contestant on the Singapore edition of Don 't Forget The Lyrics , as netizens were concerned that being unable to see the monitor would disadvantage him . In 2009 , he was selected to sing <unk> ( Right Here ) , the Mandarin version of the National Day Parade theme song What Do You See ? , and four years later , he sang a tribute to Singapore named " Treasure Every Moment " . 
 = = Charity work = = 
 Due to his disability and achievements , Tan has been an ambassador for several local disability awareness campaigns and performed in various charity shows , including a concert to raise funds for victims of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake . He and Sun Yajun led a choir rendition of the song <unk> ( On The Same Blue Planet ) at the opening ceremony of the 2008 Summer Paralympics sailing regatta at Qingdao , China . In his spare time , he works as a guide for the Singapore edition of Dialogue in the Dark , an exhibition that helps sighted people understand the experiences of blind people . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Tan lives in a four @-@ room HDB flat in western Singapore , together with his father ( a mechanic ) , mother ( a housewife ) and younger sister ( a research analyst ) ; he does not have a girlfriend . Despite his success , he continues to take public transport , eat at hawker centres and go out with friends . He enjoys bowling and was one of only two totally blind Singaporeans who played the sport competitively , even winning a competition organised by the blind associations of Singapore and Perth . In 2012 , he picked up running , joined <unk> ( a running club for people with disabilities ) and participated in the 10 km run of the Singapore Marathon . His other hobbies include travelling to Kuala Lumpur , playing Street Fighter , chatting online with friends and updating his Twitter account . 
 = Benton City – Kiona Bridge = 
 The Benton City – Kiona Bridge is a steel box girder and cable @-@ stayed bridge carrying two lanes of Washington State Route 225 over the Yakima River in Benton City , Benton County , Washington . The current span was opened to traffic on July 4 , 1957 and measures 400 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 121 @.@ 9 m ) by 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 8 m ) wide . Two bridges had previously connected the cities of Benton City and Kiona before and were located 300 feet ( 91 m ) downstream . The first bridge was open by 1901 , and the immediate predecessor bridge was closed and torn down in 1964 . The bridge is owned and maintained by the Washington State Department of Transportation , and was added to the Washington Heritage Register on January 25 , 2002 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Benton City – Kiona Bridge is located about 150 feet ( 46 m ) from the southern terminus of Washington State Route 225 ( SR 225 ) in Benton City , just south of downtown . The unincorporated community of Kiona is just south of concurrent highways Interstate 82 ( I @-@ 82 ) / U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) , where SR 225 terminates . The bridge is 400 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 121 @.@ 9 m ) by 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 8 m ) wide , carrying two lanes of SR 225 , linking Benton City to I @-@ 82 / US 12 . While SR 225 on both sides of the bridge features bicycle lanes , the bridge does not . The bridge does feature 4 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) sidewalks raised 10 inches ( 25 cm ) above the roadway surface . 
 The bridge , as well as the remainder of SR 225 are considered a major collector road by the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) , which the Federal Highway Administration defines as linking towns to larger arterials . Every year , WSDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , WSDOT calculated that 9 @,@ 500 vehicles traveled on SR @-@ 225 along the bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Earlier spans = = = 
 The first span recorded was built by 1901 . That bridge was destroyed during a flood along the Yakima River in late 1917 . This bridge was recorded on the Pasco quadrangle produced by the United States Geological Survey in 1914 . The letters " US " were inscribed in one of the approach spans of the bridge as a way marker for travelers through the region . Major flooding happened along the Yakima River near Benton City in 1894 , 1917 , 1922 , 1933 , and 1948 . A new bridge was built after the original span collapsed in the flood . By 1954 the second bridge was considered no longer sufficient for the traveling public with a roadway less than 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) wide . The second bridge was torn down in 1964 , seven years after the opening of the current bridge . 
 = = = Current span = = = 
 The first proposals for the current bridge were submitted in November 1955 , with a cost estimate of $ 140 thousand ( equivalent to $ 3 million in 2015 ) . The bridge was designed so that there was a clearance of 2 feet 9 inches ( 0 @.@ 84 m ) higher than the 1933 Yakima River flood level . The new bridge was to be built 600 feet ( 180 m ) downstream from the previous bridge , but was built 300 feet ( 91 m ) upstream instead . The second bridge had been in place for 40 years and was seeing an average of 1 @,@ 700 cars @-@ per @-@ day over the bridge . By comparison 9 @,@ 500 cars on an average 2012 day travel over the current bridge . 
 Everett McKellar of Chelan won the contract to build the bridge , designed by Homer M. Hadley in 1956 . Hadley designed the Lacey V. Murrow Memorial Bridge across Lake Washington and the Third Lake Washington Bridge was named after him . The cost of the bridge came out at just over $ 196 thousand ( equivalent to $ 4 @.@ 1 million in 2015 ) , and was opened to traffic on July 4 , 1957 . 
 The bridge is believed to be the first steel box girder bridge built in the United States , and is considered a prototype of the cable @-@ stayed bridge of which a very similar design by the Germans was completed , the <unk> Bridge in Sweden . Similar bridges include a timber @-@ stayed bridge designed in Germany in 1784 , the wrought @-@ iron stayed Albert Bridge in London designed in 1873 , and the Chow Chow Bridge in Grays Harbor County . The bridge was listed on the Washington Heritage Register on January 25 , 2002 . 
 = Fortifications of Valletta = 
 The fortifications of Valletta ( Maltese : Is @-@ Swar tal @-@ Belt Valletta ) are a series of defensive walls and other fortifications which surround the capital city of Valletta , Malta . The first fortification to be built was Fort Saint Elmo in 1552 , but the fortifications of the city proper began to be built in 1566 when it was founded by Grand Master Jean de Valette . Modifications were made throughout the following centuries , with the last major addition being Fort Lascaris which was completed in 1856 . Most of the fortifications remain largely intact today . 
 The city of Valletta , along with Nicosia in Cyprus , was considered to be a practical example of an ideal city of the Renaissance , and this was due to its fortifications as well as the urban life within the city . The fortifications were well known throughout Europe by the 17th century , and might have influenced the designs of part of the Fortress of Luxembourg . In an 1878 book , Valletta was described as " one of the best fortified [ cities ] in the world . " Today , Valletta 's fortifications are regarded as the most important of the fortifications of Malta , and they form part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The construction of a fortified city on the Sciberras Peninsula was first proposed in 1524 , when the Order of St. John sent a commission to inspect the Maltese Islands . Back then , the only fortification on the peninsula was a militia watchtower built by the Aragonese in 1488 . The tower was strengthened in 1533 , but the proposed city was not built since the Order focused on building the fortifications of Birgu , which had become their base . 
 In 1551 , an Ottoman force briefly attacked Malta , and then sacked Gozo and captured Tripoli , and as a result , the Order set up a commission to improve the island 's fortifications . In 1552 , the Aragonese watchtower was demolished and Fort Saint Elmo was built in its place . The fort played a significant role in the Great Siege of Malta of 1565 . It eventually fell after a month of fierce fighting ( in which the Ottoman general Dragut was killed ) . The knights held out in Birgu and Senglea until a relief force arrived , and the siege was lifted . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 After the Order emerged victorious from the siege , it received financial support from Europe , which was used to construct the new capital city on the Sciberras Peninsula . The Italian engineer Francesco <unk> was sent by the Pope to design the city 's fortifications , which were designed along the Italian bastioned system . <unk> 's original design consisted of a bastioned enceinte , with nine cavaliers and a ditch . The city was to be designed along a grid plan , and was to include a naval arsenal and a Manderaggio ( a harbour for small ships ) . 
 The city 's first stone was laid by Grand Master Jean de Valette on 28 March 1566 , and the new city was called Valletta in his honour . The city walls were among the first structures to be built within the city , and were largely complete by the 1570s . Some changes were made to the design while the city was being constructed , and only two cavaliers were constructed , while the arsenal and Manderaggio were never built . Fort St. Elmo , which had been severely damaged in the 1565 siege , was also rebuilt and integrated in the city walls . 
 The city of Valletta officially became the capital city of Malta and the seat of the Order on 18 March 1571 , although it was still unfinished . By the end of the 16th century , Valletta was the largest settlement in Malta . 
 = = = Improvements and modifications = = = 
 In the 17th and 18th centuries , Valletta 's fortifications were strengthened with the construction of various outworks , consisting of four counterguards along the land front , as well as a covertway and a glacis . The northern end of the peninsula , including Fort St. Elmo , was also enclosed in a bastioned enceinte ( known as the Carafa Enceinte ) in the late 1680s to prevent a landing from the sea . 
 Despite the modifications , it was realized that the walls of Valletta were not strong enough to withstand a long siege . In 1635 , construction of the Floriana Lines commenced , enclosing Valletta 's land front . The Floriana Lines were also modified until the 18th century . Later on , the suburb of Floriana developed in the area between the Floriana Lines and the Valletta Land Front , and it is now a town in its own right . 
 The flanks of the city were further protected in the 17th and 18th century , with the construction of the Santa Margherita Lines , Cottonera Lines and Fort Ricasoli on the Grand Harbour side , and Fort Manoel and Fort Tigné on the Marsamxett side . Further proposals , including construction of fortifications on Corradino and Ta ' <unk> , were also made but were never implemented . 
 = = = French occupation and British rule = = = 
 The fortifications of Valletta first saw use during the French invasion of Malta on 9 June 1798 . The Order capitulated only three days later on 12 June , and Valletta and its fortifications were handed over to the French . Upon viewing the fortifications , Napoleon reportedly remarked " I am very glad that they opened the gate for us . " 
 A couple of months after the beginning of the French occupation , the Maltese people rebelled against the French and blockaded them in the Harbour area with British , Neapolitan and Portuguese support . The French managed to hold out in Valletta until September 1800 , when General Vaubois capitulated to the British , who took control of the islands . 
 Various modifications were made to Valletta 's fortifications during British rule . The most significant of these was the construction of Fort Lascaris between 1854 and 1856 . Other alterations included the addition of batteries and concrete gun emplacements , changes to parapets and their embrasures , and the construction of gunpowder magazines . All three original Hospitaller gateways to Valletta were demolished , and two of them were replaced by larger gates . 
 The British proposed the demolition of the fortifications a number of times in the 19th century . The first proposal was made by Major @-@ General Henry Pigot at the beginning of the century . In 1853 , a proposal was made to demolish Saint James Cavalier to make way for a military hospital . In 1855 , Sir John <unk> Pennefather proposed the construction of a citadel on the high ground of the Sciberras peninsula , on the site of the Valletta Land Front and the surrounding area . In 1872 , the demolition of the city 's outworks was proposed , while the demolition of the entire land front was suggested in 1882 . Eventually , the fortifications were left largely intact , and the only part that was demolished was St. Madeleine 's Lunette , which was located near the entrance to the city ( on the site now occupied by the Triton Fountain ) . 
 The fortifications were eventually decommissioned between the late 19th or early 20th centuries . Some parts , such as Fort St. Elmo , Fort Lascaris and the Saluting Battery , remained in use until after World War II , with Fort St. Elmo being decommissioned in 1972 . The fortifications were included on the Antiquities List of 1925 . 
 In the 1960s , the 19th century Porta Reale was demolished to make way for a modern City Gate . 
 = = = Present day = = = 
 The first plans to restore the fortifications of Valletta , along with those of Birgu , Mdina and the Cittadella , were made in 2006 . Restoration started in 2010 , with the project being described as " the biggest in a century " . Squatters were evicted from public lands around the fortifications . The upper part of Fort Saint Elmo has been restored , while its lower parts have been cleaned up . The Chapel of St. Roche on St. Michael 's Counterguard , which was bombed in World War II , was rebuilt in 2014 as part of the restoration . 
 In 2011 , the City Gate which had been built in the 1960s was demolished , and a new City Gate was completed in 2014 . 
 = = Layout = = 
 = = = Land front = = = 
 The Valletta Land Front is the large bastioned enceinte enclosing the landward approach to the city . It consists of the following : 
 St. Michael 's Bastion , also known as Spencer 's Bastion – a demi @-@ bastion on the western extremity of the land front . Two windmills were built on it in 1674 , but they were demolished in the 19th century . The bastion now forms part of Hastings Gardens . 
 St. John 's Curtain – the curtain wall linking St. Michael 's and St. John 's Bastions . It now forms part of Hastings Gardens . 
 St. John 's Bastion – a large obtuse @-@ angled bastion with a reconstructed echaugette at its salient angle . It now forms part of Hastings <unk> John 's Cavalier – a pentagonal cavalier overlooking St. John 's Bastion . It is now the embassy of the <unk> to Malta . 
 Porta Reale Curtain , also known as St. James Curtain – the curtain wall linking St. John 's and St. James Bastions . The city 's main gate is located within the curtain wall . The gate was rebuilt five times , with the present one being constructed between 2011 and 2014 to a design by Renzo Piano . 
 St. James Bastion – a large obtuse @-@ angled bastion with an echaugette at its salient angle . Its thick parapets with embrasures have been dismantled . The bastion is occupied by the Central Bank of Malta and a car <unk> James Cavalier – a pentagonal cavalier overlooking St. James Bastion . It is now a cultural centre . 
 Castile Curtain – the curtain wall linking St. James and St. Peter & Paul Bastions . Its parapet has been largely dismantled to make way for the road leading from Floriana to Valletta . 
 St. Peter and St. Paul Bastion – a two @-@ tiered corner bastion on the eastern extremity of the land front . The upper part is now the Upper <unk> Gardens , while the lower part contains the Saluting Battery . The 19th @-@ century Fort Lascaris is located below the bastion . 
 The entire land front is surrounded by a deep ditch . Remains of a flanking battery within the ditch were unearthed in 2012 . 
 The bastions are further protected by the following outworks : 
 St. Michael 's Counterguard – a three @-@ tiered counterguard built in 1640 near St. Michael 's Bastion . Its lower tier contains an echaugette at its salient angle , and a small chapel dedicated to St. Roche . The chapel was destroyed in World War II , but was rebuilt in 2014 . 
 St. John 's Counterguard – a pentagonal counterguard built in 1640 near St. John 's Bastion . Its salient angle contains an echaugette , and it also contains a gunpowder magazine . It is currently used as a football ground . 
 St. Madeleine 's Lunette – a lunette that protected Porta Reale Curtain and the entrance to the city . It was dismantled in the 19th century , and its site is now occupied by the Triton Fountain . 
 St. James Counterguard – a pentagonal counterguard built in 1640 near St. James Bastion . Its salient angle contains an echaugette , and it also contains a gunpowder magazine . Its central platform houses the Central Bank of Malta annex . 
 St. Peter and St. Paul Counterguard – a two @-@ tiered counterguard built in 1640 near St. Peter and St. Paul Bastion . Its salient angle contains an echaugette , and it also contains a gunpowder magazine and a concrete observation platform . 
 The outworks were surrounded by an advanced ditch , but only a part of it remains since most of it was filled in with rubble . 
 = = = Marsamxett enceinte = = = 
 The enceinte along the side facing Marsamxett Harbour starts from St. Michael 's Bastion of the Valletta Land Front , and ends at St. Gregory 's Bastion of Fort St. Elmo . It consists of the following : 
 St. Andrew <unk> – a small tenaille beneath St. Michael 's Bastion . 
 St. Andrew 's Bastion – an asymmetrical pentagonal bastion . It is two @-@ tiered , with its lower part originally containing the Marsamxett Gate , which was demolished in the early 20th century . A small faussebraye is located beneath the bastion . Ponsonby 's Column was built on the bastion in 1838 , but it was destroyed by lightning in 1864 . 
 Manderaggio Curtain – the curtain wall linking St. Andrew 's and San Salvatore Bastions . It was originally divided into two parts , to allow ships to enter the Manderaggio , but the breach was walled up when work on the Manderaggio was abandoned . 
 San Salvatore Bastion – a flat @-@ faced artillery platform . Various World War II air raid shelters were dug within the bastion . 
 German Curtain – a small curtain wall north of San Salvatore Bastion . Air raid shelters were also dug within its walls . It is sometimes referred to as a bastion . 
 St. Sebastian Curtain – a small curtain wall north of the Germain Curtain . Air raid shelters were also dug within its walls . It is sometimes referred to as a bastion . 
 English Curtain – a long curtain wall near St. Elmo Bay , overlooked by Auberge de <unk> . It contains the Jews ' Sally Port and a number of air raid shelters . A reconstructed echaugette is located between the English and French Curtains . 
 French Curtain – a long curtain wall near St. Elmo Bay , linked to Fort Saint Elmo . 
 = = = Grand Harbour enceinte = = = 
 The enceinte along the side facing the Grand Harbour starts from St. Peter and St. Paul Bastion of the Valletta Land Front , and ends at St. <unk> Curtain of Fort St. Elmo . It consists of the following : 
 Fort Lascaris , also known as Lascaris Battery or Lascaris Bastion – a casemated battery near St. Peter & St. Paul Bastion , built by the British between 1854 and 1856 . The Lascaris War Rooms are located nearby . 
 Marina Curtain , also known as <unk> Curtain – curtain wall linking St. Peter & St. Paul and St. Barbara Bastions . It originally contained Del Monte Gate , which was demolished and replaced by Victoria Gate in the 19th century . 
 St. Barbara Bastion – a flat @-@ faced bastion with a low parapet . An echaugette is located at the bastion 's south corner . 
 St. Lucia Curtain – curtain wall linking St. Barbara and St. Christopher Bastions . 
 St. Christopher Bastion – a two @-@ tiered pentagonal bastion , today breached to make way for the Valletta ring road . The upper part contains the Lower <unk> Gardens , while the lower part contains the Siege Bell War Memorial and the Monument to the Unknown Soldier . A low battery was built near the bastion in the 1680s , but most of it was dismantled to make way for the ring road . 
 St. Lazarus Curtain – curtain wall linking St. Christopher and St. Lazarus Bastions . 
 St. Lazarus Bastion – a flat @-@ faced bastion containing several British gun emplacements and a magazine . 
 = = = Fort Saint Elmo = = = 
 Fort Saint Elmo is the oldest part of the city walls , and it commands the entrance to both the Grand Harbour and Marsamxett . The fort and the surrounding area consists of the following : 
 Upper St. Elmo – the original star fort , consisting of two demi @-@ bastions , two flanks and two faces , a parade ground , barracks and a large cavalier . 
 Vendôme Bastion – a bastion built in 1614 linking the French Curtain to Fort St. Elmo , containing an echaugette . After being surrounded by the Carafa Enceinte , it was converted into a magazine , and later an armoury . The bastion is now part of the National War Museum . 
 Carafa Enceinte – the bastioned enceinte built around the fort after 1687 . It consists of the following bastions : 
 St. Gregory Bastion – an asymmetrical bastion with a long left face . It was altered by the British to house QF 6 pounder 10 cwt guns . 
 St. Gregory Curtain – a curtain wall linking St. Gregory and Conception Bastions . It contains various British gun emplacements . 
 Conception Bastion , also known as Ball 's Bastion – a small pentagonal bastion , containing a number of gun emplacements , magazines , and gun crew accommodation . Sir Alexander Ball was buried in the salient of the bastion . 
 Sta . Scholastica Curtain – curtain wall linking Conception and St. John Bastions . It contains a gun emplacement for a RML 12 @.@ 5 inch 38 ton gun , as well as other British modifications . 
 St. John Bastion , also known as Abercrombie 's Bastion – a large asymmetrical bastion at St. Elmo Point , the tip of the Sciberras Peninsula . The bastion contains several British gun emplacements and magazines . 
 St. <unk> Curtain , also known as Abercrombie 's Curtain – a long curtain wall linking St. John and St. Lazarus Bastions . It contains a number of British gun emplacements . 
 Some barrack blocks are located in the area between Upper St. Elmo and the Carafa Enceinte . 
 = Cyclone Osea = 
 Cyclone Osea was the second of seven cyclones to affect French Polynesia during the 1997 – 98 South Pacific cyclone season . Forming on November 22 , the storm initially remained weak . Moving south and later east , it was named Osea on November 24 after achieving windspeeds equal to a Category 1 cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . Continuing to intensify , Osea soon reached its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Afterwords , Osea began to weaken because of increased wind shear , and the cyclone started moving southeast . By November 28 , Osea was no longer a tropical cyclone . 
 The cyclone brought major damage to some islands in French Polynesia . Around 95 % of the infrastructure in Maupiti was destroyed , including 77 homes , an airport , and a town hall . About 30 % of the infrastructure in Bora @-@ Bora was destroyed , as well as 309 homes and many yachts . Many roads were also damaged . Almost everything on the north side of the island was destroyed . However , no deaths were reported . The name Osea was retired after this usage of the name . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 22 , 1997 , the Fiji Meteorological Service 's Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji ( RSMC Nadi ) and the Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center ( NPMOC ) started to monitor a tropical depression that had developed about 465 km ( 290 mi ) to the northeast of the Northern Cook Island : Manihiki . Over the next two days the depression gradually developed further , as it slowly moved southwards due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge of high pressure . At 1200 UTC on November 23 , the NPMOC reported that the depression had become equivalent to a tropical storm and assigned it the designation 06P . Twelve hours later RSMC Nadi named the system Osea after it had developed into a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . Thereafter , Osea started moving towards the southeast , as an area of high pressure started to develop to the south of the system . 
 During November 25 , RSMC Nadi estimated that Osea had become a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone , while the NPMOC announced that the system had become equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale as it moved through French Polynesia . The next day both agency 's reported that Severe Tropical Cyclone Osea had reached its peak intensity . RSMC Nadi reported 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) ; the NPMOC reported peak 1 @-@ minute sustained windspeeds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) which made it equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane on the SSHS . After attaining peak intensity , Osea gradually weakened . By November 27 , the NPMOC had issued their final warning on the system because the convection had become dislocated over 185 km ( 115 mi ) from the low level circulation center due to increased wind shear . RSMC Nadi subsequently monitored Osea for another 24 hours before it was last noted by the agency on November 28 , around the time it degenerated into a tropical depression . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Prior the arrival of Cyclone Osea on November 24 , various cyclone alerts and warnings were issued for the whole of French Polynesia , while authorities strengthened security measures and advised people not to drive . Throughout the archipelago schools were closed . Furthermore , people on the atoll of Scilly were evacuated by helicopter to other islands . 
 Cyclone Osea was extremely destructive to some of the islands in French Polynesia . Over 700 homes were destroyed or severely damaged on Maupiti , Bora @-@ Bora , and Raiatea . Several roofs were blown off of buildings across the archipelago . On Maupiti , an island with a population of 1 @,@ 100 , about 95 % of the infrastructure was destroyed . The town hall , two schools , and an airfield were destroyed . The town hall was originally being used as an emergency shelter , but was later evacuated due to strong winds and was later destroyed . Furthermore , many roadways and highways were blocked due to flooding . In addition , 77 homes on the island were destroyed . All but three homes that belonged to Mormons on the island were destroyed . 
 On Bora @-@ Bora , an island which had a population of 4 @,@ 500 at the time , roughly 30 % of the infrastructure was destroyed , including 309 houses . Hotels were also impacted during the storm . On the north side of Bora Bora , nearly everything was destroyed , including the village of <unk> and a local yacht club . Across <unk> , roads were blocked by fallen trees and telecommunication lines were severed due to high winds . Seven people on the island were reportedly slightly injured . In addition , the islands of <unk> , Raiatea , and Moorea all sustained damage , though yachts in Raiatea managed to survive unscathed . In another archipelago , 700 homes and various public infrastructures were at least somewhat destroyed by Osea . In addition to the impact on infrastructure , banana trees were knocked down due to the winds , especially in mountain gardens . Throughout the impacted region , no deaths were reported . 
 Osea was the second tropical cyclone to impact French Polynesia during the season ; Cyclone Martin had impacted the islands a few weeks earlier . In the aftermath of the storm , disaster aid was delivered to the victims of Osea . President Gaston <unk> , accompanied by technicians , arrived in Maupiti to help repair the island 's electrical and hydraulic systems . A Latter @-@ Day Saint meeting house was used as an emergency shelter , though the house itself sustained minor damage from the storm . The name Osea was later retired from the South Pacific list of tropical cyclone names . 
 = Crash Team Racing = 
 Crash Team Racing is a kart racing video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation . The game was released in North America on September 30 , 1999 and in Europe on October 20 , 1999 and Australia on January 9 , 2000 . It was re @-@ released for the Sony Greatest Hits line @-@ up in 2000 and for the Platinum Range on January 12 , 2001 . It was later added to the European PlayStation Store on October 18 , 2007 , then on the Japanese store on June 11 , 2008 and then finally to the North American store on August 10 , 2010 . 
 Crash Team Racing is the fourth installment in the Crash Bandicoot series . It is the first Crash Bandicoot game in the racing genre and the final game in the series to be developed by Naughty Dog . The game 's story focuses on the efforts of a ragtag team of characters in the Crash Bandicoot series , who must race against the <unk> Nitros Oxide to save their planet from destruction . In the game , players can take control of one of fifteen Crash Bandicoot series characters , though only eight are available at first . During the races , offensive and speed boosting power ups can be used to gain an advantage . 
 Crash Team Racing was praised by critics for its gameplay and graphics , though the audio was met with mixed opinions . An indirect sequel , Crash Nitro Kart , was released in 2003 for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance and N @-@ Gage . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash Team Racing is a racing game in which the player controls characters from the Crash Bandicoot universe , most of whom compete in karts . While racing , the player can accelerate , steer , reverse , brake , hop or use weapons and power @-@ ups with the game controller 's analog stick and buttons . Two distinct forms of crates are scattered throughout the tracks and arenas of Crash Team Racing . Crates with question marks ( ? ) on them hold power @-@ ups and weapons , which can be obtained by driving through and breaking apart the said crates . When the player collects a weapon or power @-@ up , it will appear in a box at the top of the screen . The player can activate the weapon or power @-@ up to wreak havoc on the other racers or supplement the player 's own performance . " Fruit Crates " carry " Wumpa Fruit " that increase the speed of the player 's kart and strengthen the player 's weapons and power @-@ ups if ten of them are obtained . 
 A crucial maneuver in Crash Team Racing is the power slide ; the player executes the slide by holding down one of the shoulder buttons to perform a hop , and steering before the kart lands . While sliding , the " Turbo Boost Meter " on the lower @-@ right corner of the screen fills up and goes from green to red . At the same time , the exhaust gas from the player 's kart turns black . To get a speed boost , the player quickly presses the opposite shoulder button while the Turbo Boost Meter is red . The player can execute three speed boosts in a row during a power slide , with the third speed boost being more powerful than the previous two . If the player waits too long into the power slide for a boost , the kart back @-@ fires and the chance for a speed boost is lost ; power sliding for too long causes a spin @-@ out . Aside from power slides , speed boosts can be obtained by gathering hang time when leaping over gaps in the track . The longer the player is in the air , the bigger the speed boost will be when the kart lands . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Crash Team Racing features five racing modes : Adventure , Time Trial , Arcade , Versus and Battle . In each mode , the player selects one from eight characters to control . A PlayStation multitap can be installed to allow three or four @-@ player games . The " Adventure Mode " is a one @-@ player game where the player must race through all of the tracks and arenas in the game and collect as many trophies , Relics , Boss Keys , CTR Tokens and Gems as possible . The objective of the Adventure Mode is to save the world from the story 's antagonist , Nitros Oxide , by winning races on 16 different tracks . In the beginning of the game , the player only has access to two levels . As the player wins more races , more tracks on multiple worlds become available . In each level , the player must win a trophy by coming in first place . When the player receives all four trophies in a world , the " Boss Garage " of that world can be accessed . In the Boss Garage , the player competes in a one @-@ on @-@ one race against a boss character . If the boss character is defeated , the character will relinquish a Boss Key , which the player uses to access new worlds and ultimately to face Oxide inside his spaceship . 
 After beating levels , new modes become available , such as the Relic Race , in which the player races through the track alone and completes three laps in the fastest time possible . " Time Crates " scattered throughout the level freeze the game timer when a player drives through them . If all of the Time Crates are destroyed , the player 's final time is reduced by ten seconds . The player wins a Relic by beating the time indicated on the screen . Another mode , the CTR Challenge , is played like a normal race , except that the player must also collect the letters C , T and R scattered throughout the track . If the player manages to collect all three letters and come in first place , a " CTR Token " is awarded . These tokens come in five different colors : Red , Green , Blue , Yellow and Purple . The Purple CTR tokens are awarded for beating the Crystal Bonus Round by collecting 20 Crystal under a certain time limit . If the player collects four tokens of the same color , the player will be able to access the Gem Cup of the corresponding color . Gem Cups are racing tournaments held against computer @-@ controlled opponents and are accessible in a secret area in the " Gemstone Valley " world . A Gem Cup consists of four tracks in a row , in which the player must race for points . If one of these cups is won , a Gem is awarded . To win the game , the player must collect all trophies , Boss Keys , Relics , CTR Tokens and Gems before defeating Nitros Oxide in a one @-@ on @-@ one race . 
 The " Time Trial " mode is a single @-@ player mode where the player attempts to set the best time on any of the tracks in the game . There are no other racers to hinder the player and no power @-@ ups . When the Time Trial is finished , the player has the option to save a " ghost " , a replay of that race ; the next time that track is accessed in this mode , the player can race against the ghost . In the " Arcade " mode , the player can quickly scroll through and race on a selection of tracks . The player can choose to select a Single Race or enter a Cup , in which the player races on four tracks in a row for points . In the Single Race and the Cup Race , one or two players race with the remaining computer @-@ controlled drivers . The difficulty of the race and number of laps can be customized . The " Versus " mode is similar to that of the Arcade mode , with the exception that two or more human players must be involved . 
 In the " Battle " mode , up to four players can fight customized battles , launching weapons during combat in one of seven special battle arenas . The type and length ( the latter modifies how many hit points or minutes the battle will have ) of the battle can be adjusted beforehand , allowing for three types of battles . In a " Point Limit Mode " battle , the first player to achieve 5 , 10 or 15 points wins . In the " Time Limit Mode " battle , the player with the highest points after 3 , 6 or 9 minutes wins . In the " Life Limit Mode " , each player has a set number of lives ( 3 , 6 or 9 ) and the battle has a time limit ( 3 , 6 minutes or forever ) . The player with the most lives at the end of the time limit wins . If " forever " is chosen as the length , the battle lasts until only one player is standing . Three and four players can team up for two @-@ against @-@ one , two @-@ against @-@ two , three @-@ against @-@ one or one @-@ against @-@ one @-@ against @-@ two battles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Fifteen characters are playable in Crash Team Racing , although only eight of them are playable from the start . Crash Bandicoot , the main protagonist of the series , is an all @-@ round racer with balanced acceleration , top speed and handling . Doctor Neo Cortex , Crash 's archenemy , is a mad scientist who wants to stop Nitros Oxide so that he may conquer the world himself . Like Crash , his kart is an all @-@ round performer . Coco Bandicoot , Crash 's younger sister , is a computer genius who installed computer chips into her kart to increase its acceleration prowess . Doctor N. Gin is a rocket scientist who , like Coco , added custom parts to his kart to improve its acceleration . Pura and Polar pilot karts with low speed but improved handling , allowing them to navigate tight corners . Tiny Tiger and Dingodile control karts built for top speed at the cost of turning prowess . 
 The main antagonist of the story , Nitros Oxide , is the self @-@ proclaimed fastest racer in the galaxy who threatens to turn Earth into a concrete parking lot . Preceding Oxide are four boss characters : Ripper Roo , a deranged straitjacket @-@ wearing kangaroo ; Papu Papu , the morbidly obese leader of the island 's native tribe ; Komodo Joe , a Komodo dragon with a speech sound disorder ; and Pinstripe Potoroo , a greedy pinstripe @-@ clad potoroo . The four boss characters , along with an imperfect and morally ambiguous clone of Crash Bandicoot named Fake Crash , become accessible as playable characters if the Adventure Mode is fully completed . Also appearing as secret characters are Doctor Nefarious Tropy , the self @-@ proclaimed Master of Time and who is unlocked by beating his records in the Time Trial Mode ; and Penta Penguin , a neutral penguin who can only be unlocked via a cheat code at the main menu . Contrary to popular belief , Nitros Oxide is not a playable character in the game . 
 Appearing as the player 's tutors in the game are the sentient twin witch doctor masks Aku Aku and Uka Uka , both of whom give hints that help the player develop their racing skills . They double as obtainable power @-@ ups during the races , temporarily protecting the player from all attacks and obstacles while increasing the kart 's speed . However , their power does not protect the player from chasms or deep water . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The inhabitants of Earth are visited by an extraterrestrial named Nitros Oxide , who claims to be the fastest racer in the galaxy . Challenging Earth to a game called " Survival of the Fastest " , he beckons Earth 's best driver to race him . If Earth 's driver wins , he promises to leave Earth alone , but if Oxide wins , he will turn Earth into a concrete parking lot and enslave the Earthlings . In response , the player character gathers all four Boss Keys needed to access Oxide 's spaceship and races him in a one @-@ on @-@ one match . Upon Oxide 's defeat at the hands of the player character , he temporarily leaves Earth , but promises that he will return when all of the Time Relics have been gathered . Oxide faces the player again after all the Time Relics are gathered . After losing once more , Oxide keeps his word and angrily leaves Earth forever . An epilogue is relayed during the end credits , explaining what the characters of the game did after the events of the story . Nitros Oxide himself returns to his home planet of <unk> and <unk> himself from society . After undergoing years of therapy to cope with his loss , he takes up unicycle @-@ racing , only to get into a gruesome accident . 
 = = Development = = 
 Naughty Dog began production on Crash Team Racing after the completion of Crash Bandicoot 2 : Cortex Strikes Back ; the game engine for Crash Team Racing was created at the same time Crash Bandicoot 3 : Warped was produced . Development took place over the course of eight months on a budget of $ 2 @.@ 4 million . During the game 's prototypical stage , the team built a replica of the " Crescent Island " course from Diddy Kong Racing to test whether a racetrack of the same scope and scale was possible on the PlayStation . The turbo system that gives the player boosts of speed during power slides and by gathering hang time was added to make Crash Team Racing feel more interactive and involving than older kart @-@ racing games . The characters of the game were designed by Charles Zembillas and Joe Pearson , who designed the characters of the last three installments of the series . Nitros Oxide was originally a mad scientist obsessed with speed who plotted to speed up the entire world until the end of time . However , having exhausted human , animal , machine , and various combinations for Crash Bandicoot bosses in the past , it was decided to have Nitros Oxide be an otherworldly character . The original " speed up the world " plot is referenced in a promotional comic ( written by Glenn <unk> and drawn by Neal <unk> ) featured in the Winter 2000 issue of Disney Adventures . Crash Team Racing went into the alpha stage of development on August 1999 , and the beta stage on September . In an interview with GameTrailers , Naughty Dog 's co @-@ president Evan Wells , who was a designer on the game , revealed that Oxide was never intended to be a playable character in the game due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation . The said limitations further affected the game 's roster of playable characters ; Polar and Pura were originally to ride in the same kart and be played as a single character , but were ultimately split into separate characters , and both Komodo Brothers were to appear in the game before Komodo Moe was omitted . 
 David Baggett produced the game 's soundtrack , with Josh Mancell of Mutato Muzika composing the music . Sound effects were created by Mike Gollum , Ron Horwitz and Kevin Spears of Universal Sound Studios . The voices of Doctor Neo Cortex and Uka Uka were provided by Clancy Brown , while the voices of Doctor N. Gin , Tiny Tiger and Pinstripe Potoroo were provided by voice actor Brendan O 'Brien . Additional voices were provided by David A. <unk> , Mel Winkler , Michael Ensign , Hynden Walch , Billy Pope , sound effects artist Mike Gollom , Michael Connor and Chip <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash Team Racing received critical acclaim . Official PlayStation Magazine described Crash Team Racing as " the game that made kart racing cool " and proclaimed that " nothing has ever matched its quality . " Electronic Gaming Monthly noted that the game was " heavily inspired by Mario Kart , but still an amazing multiplayer racer . " Doug Perry of IGN stated that the game was " rock solid " in playability and graphics , but was critical of " the insanely capitalistic smile of Crash . " Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot called the game " a great Mario Kart clone " , and that it succeeded where similar games like Mega Man Battle & Chase , Bomberman Fantasy Race , Diddy Kong Racing , Chocobo Racing and Mario Kart had failed . Johnny Liu of Game Revolution concluded that despite the fact that the game " doesn 't add much to the tired genre , it manages to do everything well . " 
 The game 's controls were well received . The D @-@ Pad Destroyer of GamePro praised the controls as " nearly @-@ perfect " and explained that " the transparent controls allow you to concentrate on racing and blasting your opponents , and so the races are faster , more fluid and more fun . " Johnny Liu of Game Revolution concluded that the controls " feel very natural , with an emphasis on maintaining speed rather than fighting lousy controls . " However , Joe Ottoson of Allgame ( " All Game Guide " at the time ) said that the inability to reconfigure the controls was " the only real drawback to Crash 's presentation . " 
 The graphics of the game were positively received . The D @-@ Pad Destroyer of GamePro , while noting that the graphics were not too complex , cited the " cartoony look and the ingenious use of textures and colors " as high points in the graphics department . Doug Perry of IGN commended the " sharp looking " environments as " clean and fully formed " and the characters are " full of funny animations and cleanly designed " . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot said that the environments " are reasonably large , and they convey the cartoon @-@ like attitude of the game very nicely . " Johnny Liu of Game Revolution stated that the graphics were " smooth and seem to push the Playstation 's limits . " 
 Critics expressed mixed opinions of the game 's audio . The D @-@ Pad Destroyer of GamePro said that the " whimsical " background music is " quite enjoyable " and the character sound bites are " varied enough to avoid becoming annoying . " Doug Perry of IGN had a more mixed take , saying that the " classic bouncy , xylophone @-@ heavy beat " is " not necessarily great " , and that after a few courses , " you either stop hearing it , or the incessant simplicity of it makes you want to cry or pull your hair out " . On the subject of the voice acting , he concluded that there is " nothing really that cute , clever or memorable " in the game , and noted that Crash 's voice in the game is extremely similar to that of Luigi from the Mario Kart series . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot wrote that while the music and sound effects " push the game 's cartoon theme , " the themes were not too " over the top " or incessant . Johnny Liu of Game Revolution passed the music off as " standard kitschy fare " and added that while the sound effects " add to the cartoon quality of the game " , some of the character voices were unsatisfactory . Joe Ottoson of Allgame noted that the characters " are all quite vocal " , and the music " sets off the whimsical mood nicely " . 
 Crash Team Racing has sold over 1 @.@ 71 million units in Europe , 2 @.@ 64 million units in the United States and just under 500 @,@ 000 units in Japan . As a result of its success , the game was re @-@ released for the Sony Greatest Hits line @-@ up in 2000 and for the Platinum Range on January 12 , 2001 . An indirect sequel titled Crash Nitro Kart was released in 2003 for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , Nintendo GameCube , Game Boy Advance and N @-@ Gage and was the first game in the Crash Bandicoot series to feature full motion video . 
 = Portal ( video game ) = 
 Portal is a 2007 first @-@ person puzzle @-@ platform video game developed by Valve Corporation , released in a bundle package called The Orange Box for Microsoft Windows via its digital distribution service Steam and Xbox 360 on October 9 , 2007 , the PlayStation 3 on December 11 , 2007 , OS X on the Mac @-@ compatible Steam platform on May 12 , 2010 , a Linux version on Steam as a beta on May 2 , 2013 and released on June 24 , 2013 , and for Android as a port for the Nvidia Shield on May 12 , 2014 . 
 The game consists primarily of a series of puzzles that must be solved by teleporting the player 's character and simple objects using " the Aperture Science Handheld Portal Device " , a device that can create inter @-@ spatial portals between two flat planes . The player @-@ character , Chell , is challenged and taunted by an artificial intelligence named GLaDOS ( Genetic <unk> and Disk Operating System ) to complete each puzzle in the Aperture Science Enrichment Center using the portal gun with the promise of receiving cake when all the puzzles are completed . The game 's unique physics allows momentum to be retained through portals , requiring creative use of portals to maneuver through the test chambers . This gameplay element is based on a similar concept from the game Narbacular Drop ; many of the team members from the DigiPen Institute of Technology who worked on Narbacular Drop were hired by Valve for the creation of Portal , making it a spiritual successor to the game . 
 Portal was acclaimed as one of the most original games of 2007 , despite being considered for its short duration and limited story . The game received praise for its originality , unique gameplay and dark story with a humorous series of dialogue . GLaDOS , voiced by Ellen McLain in the English @-@ language version , received acclaim for her unique characterization , and the end credits song " Still Alive " , written by Jonathan Coulton for the game , was acclaimed for its original composition and humorous twist . Excluding Steam download sales , over four million copies of the game have been sold since its release , spawning official merchandise from Valve including plush Companion Cubes , as well as fan recreations of the cake and portal gun , a standalone version , Portal : Still Alive , on the Xbox Live Arcade service on October 22 , 2008 , which added an additional 14 puzzles to the gameplay , and a sequel , Portal 2 , which was released in 2011 , adding several new gameplay mechanics and a cooperative multiplayer mode . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Portal , the player controls the protagonist , Chell , from a first @-@ person perspective as she is challenged to navigate through a series of rooms using the Aperture Science Handheld Portal Device , or portal gun , under the watchful supervision of the artificial intelligence GLaDOS . The portal gun can create two distinct portal ends , orange and blue . The portals create a visual and physical connection between two different locations in three @-@ dimensional space . Neither end is specifically an entrance or exit ; all objects that travel through one portal will exit through the other . An important aspect of the game 's physics is momentum redirection . As moving objects pass through portals , they come through the exit portal at the same direction that the exit portal is facing and with the same speed with which they passed through the entrance portal . For example , a common maneuver is to jump down to a portal on the floor and emerge through a wall , flying over a gap or another obstacle . This allows the player to launch objects or Chell over great distances , both vertically and horizontally , referred to as ' flinging ' by Valve . As GLaDOS puts it , " In layman 's terms : speedy thing goes in , speedy thing comes out . " If portal ends are not on parallel planes , the character passing through is reoriented to be upright with respect to gravity after leaving a portal end . 
 Chell and all other objects in the game that can fit into the portal ends will pass through the portal . However , a portal shot cannot pass through an open portal ; it will simply deactivate or create a new portal in an offset position . Creating a portal end instantly deactivates an existing portal end of the same color . Moving objects , glass , special wall surfaces , liquids , or areas that are too small will not be able to anchor portals . Chell is sometimes provided with cubes that she can pick up and use to climb on or to hold down large buttons that open doors or activate mechanisms . Particle fields known as emancipation grills , occasionally called " <unk> " in the developer commentary , exist at the end of all and within some test chambers ; when passed through , they will deactivate any active portals and disintegrate any object carried through . The fields also block attempts to fire portals through them . 
 Although Chell is equipped with mechanized heel springs to prevent damage from falling , she can be killed by various other hazards in the test chambers , such as turret guns , bouncing balls of energy , and toxic liquid . She can also be killed by objects falling through portals , and by a series of crushers that appear in certain levels . Unlike most action games at the time , there is no health indicator ; Chell dies if she is dealt a certain amount of damage in a short time period , but returns to full health fairly quickly . Some obstacles , such as the energy balls and crushing pistons , deal fatal damage with a single blow . 
 GameSpot noted , in its initial review of Portal , that many solutions exist for completing each puzzle , and that the gameplay " gets even crazier , and the diagrams shown in the trailer showed some incredibly crazy things that you can attempt . " Two additional modes are unlocked upon the completion of the game that challenge the player to work out alternative methods of solving each test chamber . Challenge maps are unlocked near the halfway point and Advanced Chambers are unlocked when the game is completed . In Challenge mode , levels are revisited with the added goal of completing the test chamber either with as little time , with the least number of portals , or with the fewest footsteps possible . In Advanced mode , certain levels are made more complex with the addition of more obstacles and hazards . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The game features two characters : the player @-@ controlled silent protagonist named Chell , and GLaDOS ( Genetic <unk> and Disk Operating System ) , a computer artificial intelligence that monitors and directs the player . In the English @-@ language version , GLaDOS is voiced by Ellen McLain , though her voice has been altered to sound more artificial . The only background information presented about Chell is given by GLaDOS ; the credibility of these facts , such as Chell being adopted , an orphan , and having no friends , is questionable at best , as GLaDOS is a liar by her own admission . In the " Lab Rat " comic created by Valve to bridge the gap between Portal and Portal 2 , Chell 's records reveal she was ultimately rejected as a test subject for having " too much tenacity " — the main reason Doug <unk> , a former employee of Aperture Science , moved Chell to the top of the test queue . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Portal takes place in the Aperture Science Laboratories Computer @-@ Aided Enrichment Center — Aperture Science for short — which is a research facility responsible for the creation of the portal gun . According to information presented in Portal 2 , the location of the complex is in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan . Information about the company , developed by Valve for creating the setting of the game , is revealed during the game and via the real @-@ world promotional website . According to the Aperture Science website , Cave Johnson founded the company in 1943 for the sole purpose of making shower curtains for the U.S. military . However , after becoming mentally unstable from " moon rock poisoning " in 1978 , Johnson created a three @-@ tier research and development plan to make his organization successful . The first two tiers , the Counter @-@ Heimlich Maneuver ( a maneuver designed to ensure choking ) and the Take @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation ( a program to give the wishes of terminally ill children 's parents to adults who are in need of dreams ) , were commercial failures and led to an investigation of the company by the U.S. Senate . However , when the investigative committee heard of the success of the third tier , a man @-@ sized ad @-@ hoc quantum tunnel through physical space with possible applications as a shower curtain , it recessed permanently and gave Aperture Science an open @-@ ended contract to continue its research . The development of GLaDOS , an artificially intelligent research assistant and disk @-@ operating system , began in 1986 in response to Black Mesa 's work on similar portal technology . A presentation seen during gameplay reveals that GLaDOS was also included in a proposed bid for de @-@ icing fuel lines , incorporated as a fully functional disk @-@ operation system that is arguably alive , unlike Black Mesa 's proposal , which inhibits ice , nothing more . Roughly thirteen years later , work on GLaDOS was completed and the untested AI was activated during the company 's first ever bring @-@ your @-@ daughter @-@ to @-@ work day in May 2000 . Immediately after activation , the facility was flooded with deadly neurotoxin by the AI . Events of the first Half @-@ Life game occur shortly thereafter , presumably leaving the facility forgotten by the outside world due to apocalyptic happenings . Wolpaw , in describing the ending of Portal 2 , affirmed that the Combine invasion , chronologically taking place between Half @-@ Life and Half @-@ Life 2 , occurred during Portal 's events . 
 The areas of the Enrichment Center that Chell explores suggest that it is part of a massive research installation . At the time of events depicted in Portal , the facility seems to be long @-@ deserted , although most of its equipment remains operational without human control . Aperture Science exists in the Half @-@ Life universe . During its development , Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode Two featured a chapter set on Aperture Science 's icebreaker ship Borealis , but this was abandoned and removed before release . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Portal 's plot is revealed to the player via audio messages or " announcements " from GLaDOS and visual elements inside rooms found in later levels . According to The Final Hours of Portal 2 , the year is established to be " somewhere in 2010 " — twelve years after Aperture Science 's abandonment . 
 The game begins with protagonist Chell waking up from a stasis bed and hearing instructions and warnings from GLaDOS , an artificial intelligence , about the upcoming test experience . Chell then enters into distinct test chambers that introduce players to the game 's mechanics , sequentially . GLaDOS 's announcements serve as instructions to Chell and help the player progress through the game , but also develops the atmosphere and characterizes the AI as a person . Chell is promised cake and grief counseling as her reward if she manages to complete all the test chambers . 
 Chell proceeds through the empty Enrichment Center , with GLaDOS as her only interaction . As the player nears completion , GLaDOS 's motives turn more sinister than her helpful demeanor suggests ; although she is designed to appear helpful and encouraging , GLaDOS 's actions and speech suggest insincerity and callous disregard for the safety and well @-@ being of the test subjects . The test chambers become increasingly dangerous as Chell proceeds , and GLaDOS even directs Chell through a live @-@ fire course designed for military androids as a result of " mandatory scheduled maintenance " in the regular test chamber , as well as having test chambers flooded with a bio @-@ hazardous liquid . In another chamber , GLaDOS boasts about the fidelity and importance of the Weighted Companion Cube , a waist @-@ high crate with a single large pink heart centered on each face , for helping Chell to complete the chamber . However , GLaDOS then declares that it " unfortunately must be euthanized " in an " emergency intelligence incinerator " before Chell can continue . Some of the later chambers include automated turrets with childlike voices ( also voiced by McLain ) that fire at Chell , only to sympathize with her after being destroyed or disabled , such as " I don 't blame you " and " No hard feelings " . 
 After Chell completes the final test chamber , GLaDOS congratulates her and prepares her " victory <unk> " , maneuvering Chell into an apparent incinerator . As GLaDOS assures her that " all Aperture technologies remain safely operational up to 4 @,@ 000 degrees [ sic ] Kelvin " , Chell escapes with the use of the portal gun and makes her way through the maintenance areas within the Enrichment Center . GLaDOS becomes panicked and insists that she was only pretending to kill Chell , as part of testing . GLaDOS then asks Chell to assume the " party escort submission position " , lying face @-@ first on the ground , so that a " party associate " can take her to her reward , but Chell continues anyway . Throughout this section , GLaDOS still sends messages to Chell and it becomes clear that she became corrupt and had killed everyone else in the center , something revealed in a later comic . Chell makes her way through the maintenance areas and empty office spaces behind the chambers , sometimes following graffiti messages which point in the right direction . These backstage areas , which are in an extremely dilapidated state , stand in stark contrast to the pristine test chambers . The graffiti includes statements such as " the cake is a lie " , and pastiches of Emily Dickinson 's poem " The Chariot " , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's " The Reaper and the Flowers " , and Emily Brontë 's " No Coward Soul Is Mine " , referring to and mourning the death of the Companion Cube . 
 GLaDOS attempts to dissuade Chell with threats of physical harm and misleading statements claiming that she is going the wrong way as Chell makes her way deeper into the maintenance areas . Eventually , Chell reaches a large chamber where GLaDOS 's hardware hangs overhead . GLaDOS continues to plead with and threaten Chell , but during the exchange a sphere falls off ; Chell drops it in an incinerator . GLaDOS reveals that Chell has just destroyed the morality core or her conscience , one of the multiple " personality cores " which the Aperture Science employees allegedly installed after GLaDOS flooded the enrichment center with a deadly neurotoxin gas , and goes on to state that now there is nothing to prevent her from doing so once again . A six @-@ minute countdown starts as Chell dislodges and incinerates more pieces of GLaDOS , while GLaDOS attempts to discourage her both verbally , with a series of taunts and increasingly juvenile insults , and physically by firing rockets at her . After she has destroyed the final personality core , a portal malfunction tears the room apart and transports everything to the surface . Chell is then seen lying outside the facility 's gates amid the remains of GLaDOS . One of the final scenes is changed through a patch of the PC version that was made available a few days before Portal 2 's announcement ; in this retroactive continuity , Chell is dragged away from the scene by an unseen entity speaking in a robotic voice , thanking her for assuming the " party escort submission position " , revealing the entity to be a " party associate " . 
 The final scene , after a long and speedy zoom through the bowels of the facility , shows a Black Forest cake , and the Weighted Companion Cube , surrounded by a mix of shelves containing dozens of apparently inactive personality cores . One by one a number of the cores begin to light up , before a robotic arm descends and extinguishes the candle on the cake , causing the room to blackout . As the credits roll , GLaDOS delivers a concluding report : the song " Still Alive " , which declares the experiment to be a huge success , as well as serving to indicate to the player that GLaDOS is still alive , that her " happy " core wasn 't disabled . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Portal is Valve 's spiritual successor to the freeware game Narbacular Drop , the 2005 independent game released by students of the DigiPen Institute of Technology ; the original Narbacular Drop team is now employed at Valve . Valve became interested in Narbacular Drop after seeing the game at DigiPen 's annual career fair ; Robin Walker , one of Valve 's developers , saw the game at the fair and later contacted the team providing them with advice and offering to show their game at Valve 's offices . After their presentation , Valve 's president Gabe Newell quickly offered the entire team jobs at Valve to develop the game further . Newell later commented that he was impressed with the DigiPen team as " they had actually carried the concept through " , already having included the interaction between portals and physics , completing most of the work that Valve would have had to commit on their own . Certain elements have been retained from Narbacular Drop , such as the system of identifying the two unique portal endpoints with the colors orange and blue . A key difference in the signature portal mechanic between the two games however is that Portal 's portal gun cannot create a portal through an existing portal unlike in Narbacular Drop . The game 's original setting , of a princess trying to escape a dungeon , was dropped in favor of the Aperture Science approach . Portal took approximately two years and four months to complete after the DigiPen team was brought into Valve , and no more than ten people were involved with its development . Portal writer Erik Wolpaw , who , along with fellow writer Chet Faliszek , was hired by Valve for the game , claimed that " Without the constraints , Portal would not be as good a game " . 
 The Portal team worked with Half @-@ Life series writer Marc Laidlaw on fitting the game into the series ' plot . This was done , in part , due to the limited art capabilities of the small team ; instead of creating new assets for Portal , they decided to tie the game to an existing franchise — Half @-@ Life — to allow them to reuse the Half @-@ Life 2 art assets . Wolpaw and Faliszek were put to work on the dialogue for Portal . The concept of a computer AI guiding the player through experimental facilities to test the portal gun was arrived at early in the writing process . They drafted early lines for the yet @-@ named " polite " AI with humorous situations , such as requesting the player 's character to " assume the party escort submission position " , and found this style of approach to be well @-@ suited to the game they wanted to create , ultimately leading to the creation of the GLaDOS character . GLaDOS was central to the plot , as Wolpaw notes " We designed the game to have a very clear beginning , middle , and end , and we wanted GLaDOS to go through a personality shift at each of these points . " Wolpaw further describes the idea of using cake as the reward came about as " at the beginning of the Portal development process , we sat down as a group to decide what philosopher or school of philosophy our game would be based on . That was followed by about 15 minutes of silence and then someone mentioned that a lot of people like cake . " The cake element along with additional messages given to the player in the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes areas were written and drawn by Kim Swift . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The austere settings in the game came about because testers spent too much time trying to complete the puzzles using decorative but non @-@ functional elements . As a result , the setting was minimized to make the usable aspects of the puzzle easier to spot , using the clinical feel of the setting in the film The Island as reference . While there were plans for a third area , an office space , to be included after the test chambers and the maintenance areas , the team ran out of time to include it . They also dropped the introduction of the Rat Man , a character who left the messages in the maintenance areas , to avoid creating too much narrative for the game , though the character was developed further in a tie @-@ in comic " Lab Rat " , that ties Portal and Portal 2 's story together . According to project lead Kim Swift , the final battle with GLaDOS went through many iterations , including having the player chased by James Bond lasers , which was partially applied to the turrets , Portal Kombat where the player would have needed to redirect rockets while avoiding turret fire , and a chase sequence following a fleeing GLaDOS . Eventually , they found that playtesters enjoyed a rather simple puzzle with a countdown timer near the end ; Swift noted , " Time pressure makes people think something is a lot more complicated than it really is " , and Wolpaw admitted , " It was really cheap to make [ the neurotoxin gas ] " in order to simplify the dialogue during the battle . 
 Chell 's face and body are modeled after <unk> Glidewell , an American freelance actress and voice @-@ over artist , selected by Valve from a local modeling agency for her face and body structure . Ellen McLain provided the voice of the antagonist GLaDOS . Erik Wolpaw noted , " When we were still fishing around for the turret voice , Ellen did a sultry version . It didn 't work for the turrets , but we liked it a lot , and so a slightly modified version of that became the model for GLaDOS 's final incarnation . " Mike Patton performed the growling and snarling voice of GLaDOS 's final personality core , named the Anger Sphere . 
 The Weighted Companion Cube inspiration was from project lead Kim Swift with additional input from Wolpaw from reading some " declassified government interrogation thing " whereby " isolation leads subjects to begin to attach to inanimate objects " ; Swift commented , " We had a long level called Box Marathon ; we wanted players to bring this box with them from the beginning to the end . But people would forget about the box , so we added dialogue , applied the heart to the cube , and continued to up the ante until people became attached to the box . Later on , we added the incineration idea . The artistic expression grew from the gameplay . " Wolpaw further noted that the need to incinerate the Weighted Companion Cube came as a result of the final boss battle design ; they recognized they had not introduced the idea of incineration necessary to complete the boss battle , and by training the player to do it with the Weighted Companion Cube , found the narrative " way stronger " with its " death " . Swift noted that any similarities to psychological situations in the Milgram experiment or 2001 : A Space Odyssey are happenstance . 
 The portal gun 's full name , Aperture Science Handheld Portal Device , can be abbreviated as <unk> , which resembles a shortening of the name Adrian Shephard , the protagonist of Half @-@ Life : Opposing Force . This similarity was noticed by fans before the game 's release ; as a result , the team placed a red herring in the game by having the letters of Adrian Shephard highlighted on keyboards found within the game . According to Kim Swift , the cake is a Black Forest cake that she thought looked the best at the nearby Regent Bakery and Café in Redmond , Washington , and , as an Easter egg within the game , its recipe is scattered among various screens showing lines of binary code . The Regent Bakery has stated that since the release of the game , its Black Forest cake has been one of its more popular items . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Most of the game 's soundtrack is non @-@ lyrical ambient music composed by Kelly Bailey and Mike <unk> , somewhat dark and mysterious to match the mood of the environments . The closing credits song , " Still Alive " , was written by Jonathan Coulton and sung by Ellen McLain ( a classically trained operatic soprano ) as the GLaDOS character . A brief instrumental version of Still Alive is played in an uptempo Latin style over radios in @-@ game . Wolpaw notes that Coulton was invited to Valve a year before the release of Portal , though it was not yet clear where Coulton would contribute . " Once Kim [ Swift ] and I met with him , it quickly became apparent that he had the perfect sensibility to write a song for GLaDOS . " The use of the song over the closing credits was based on a similar concept from the game God Hand , one of Wolpaw 's favorite titles . The song was released as a free downloadable song for the music video game Rock Band on April 1 , 2008 . The soundtrack for Portal was released as a part of The Orange Box Original Soundtrack and includes both GLaDOS 's in @-@ game rendition and Coulton 's vocal mix of " Still Alive " . 
 Portal 's soundtrack was released as part of a four @-@ disc retail release , Portal 2 : Songs To Test By ( Collector 's Edition ) , on October 30 , 2012 , featuring music from both games . The game 's soundtrack became available via Steam Music on September 24 , 2014 . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The popularity of the game and of its characters has led Valve to develop merchandise for Portal made available through its online Steam store . Some of the more popular items were the Weighted Companion Cube plush toys and fuzzy dice . When first released , both were sold out in under 24 hours . Other products available through the Valve store include T @-@ shirts and Aperture Science coffee mugs and parking stickers , and merchandise relating to the phrase the cake is a lie , which has become an internet meme . Wolpaw noted they did not expect certain elements of the game to be as popular as they were , while other elements they had expected to become fads were ignored , such as a giant hoop that rolls on @-@ screen during the final scene of the game that the team had named <unk> . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 = = = = Demo = = = = 
 In January 2008 , Valve released a special demo version titled Portal : The First Slice , free for any Steam user using Nvidia graphics hardware as part of a collaboration between the two companies . It also comes packaged with Half @-@ Life 2 : Deathmatch , Peggle Extreme , and Half @-@ Life 2 : Lost Coast . The demo includes test chambers 00 to 10 ( eleven in total ) . Valve has since made the demo available to all Steam users . 
 = = = = Portal = = = = 
 Portal was first released as part of The Orange Box for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 on October 9 , 2007 , and for the PlayStation 3 on December 11 , 2007 . The Windows version of the game is also available for download separately through Valve 's content delivery system , Steam , and was released as a standalone retail product on April 9 , 2008 . In addition to Portal , the Box also included Half @-@ Life 2 and its two add @-@ on episodes , as well as Team Fortress 2 . Portal 's inclusion within the Box was considered an experiment by Valve ; having no idea of the success of Portal , the Box provided it a " safety net " via means of these other games . Portal was kept to a modest length in case the game did not go over well with players . Since then , a standalone version of the game was released for Microsoft Windows users . 
 Portal was the first Valve @-@ developed game to be added to the OS X @-@ compatible list of games available on the launch of the Steam client for Mac on May 12 , 2010 , supporting Steam Play , in which players that had bought the game either on a Macintosh or Windows computer could also play it on the alternate system . As part of the promotion , Portal was offered as a free title for any Steam user during the two weeks following the Mac client 's launch . Within the first week of this offer , over 1 @.@ 5 million copies of the game were downloaded through Steam . A similar promotion was held in September 2011 , near the start of a traditional school year , encouraging the use of the game as an educational tool for science and mathematics . Valve wrote that they felt that Portal " makes physics , math , logic , spatial reasoning , probability , and problem @-@ solving interesting , cool , and fun " , a necessary feature to draw children into learning . This was tied to Digital Promise , a United States Department of Education initiative to help develop new digital tools for education , and which Valve is part of . 
 During 2014 GPU Technology Conference on March 25 , 2014 , Nvidia announced that they are porting Portal to their Android handheld , the Nvidia Shield . The version was released on May 12 , 2014 . 
 = = = = Portal : Still Alive = = = = 
 Portal : Still Alive was announced as an exclusive Xbox Live Arcade game at the 2008 E3 convention , and was released on October 22 , 2008 . It features the original game , 14 new challenges , and new achievements . The additional content was based on levels from the map pack Portal : The Flash Version created by We Create Stuff and contains no additional story @-@ related levels . According to Valve spokesman Doug Lombardi , Microsoft had previously rejected Portal on the platform due to its large size . Portal : Still Alive was well received by reviewers . 1UP.com 's Andrew Hayward stated that , with the easier access and lower cost than paying for The Orange Box , Portal is now " stronger than ever " . IGN editor Cam Shea ranked it fifth on his top 10 list of Xbox Live Arcade games . He stated that it was debatable whether an owner of The Orange Box should purchase this , as its added levels do not add to the plot . However , he praised the quality of the new maps included in the game . The game ranked 7th in a later list of top Xbox Box Live titles compiled by IGN 's staff in September 2010 . 
 = = = = Mods = = = = 
 A modding community has developed around Portal , with users creating their own test chambers and other in @-@ game modifications . The group " We Create Stuff " created an Adobe Flash version of Portal , titled Portal : The Flash Version , just prior to release of The Orange Box . This flash version was well received by the community and the group have since converted it to a map pack for the published game . Another mod , Portal : Prelude , is an unofficial prequel developed by an independent team of three that focuses on the pre @-@ GLaDOS era of Aperture Science , and contains nineteen additional " crafty and challenging " test chambers . An ASCII version of Portal was created by Joe Larson . An unofficial port of Portal to the iPhone using the Unity game engine was created but only consisted of a single room from the game . <unk> is a fan @-@ made four @-@ player coop mashup of the original Super Mario Bros. and Portal . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Swift stated that future Portal developments would depend on the community 's reactions , saying , " We 're still playing it by ear at this point , figuring out if we want to do multiplayer next , or Portal 2 , or release map packs . " Some rumors regarding a sequel arose due to casting calls for voice actors . On March 10 , 2010 , Portal 2 was officially announced for a release late in that year ; the announcement was preceded by an alternate reality game based on unexpected patches made to Portal that contained cryptic messages in relation to Portal 2 's announcement , including an update to the game , creating a different ending for the fate of Chell . The original game left her in a deserted car park after destroying GLaDOS , but the update involved Chell being dragged back into the facility by a " Party Escort Bot " . Though Portal 2 was originally announced for a Q4 2010 release , the game was released on April 19 , 2011 . 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 In February 2013 , it was reported that J. J. Abrams is in talks with Valve to develop a movie based upon Portal , alongside an adaptation of Half @-@ Life . Both projects are currently in the early states of development with no production date yet confirmed . In early 2016 , Abrams was asked if the movies were still in development and he confirmed that the project had writers attached but there was no progress to comment on . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Portal received critical acclaim , often earning more praise than either Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode Two or Team Fortress 2 , two titles also included in The Orange Box . It was praised for its unique gameplay and dark , deadpan humor . Eurogamer cited that " the way the game progresses from being a simple set of perfunctory tasks to a full @-@ on part of the Half @-@ Life story is absolute genius " , while GameSpy noted that " What Portal lacks in length , it more than makes up for in exhilaration . " The game was criticized for sparse environments , and both criticized and praised for its short length . Aggregate reviews for the stand @-@ alone PC version of Portal gave the game an average rating of 89 % based on 27 reviews through Game Rankings , and 90 % through 28 reviews on Metacritic . Upon release of Portal 2 , Valve stated that Portal has sold more than four million copies through the retail versions , including the standalone game and The Orange Box , and from the Xbox Live Arcade version . This figure does not include sales figures for Valve 's own Steam digital download service . 
 The game generated a fan following for the Weighted Companion Cube — even though the cube itself does not talk or act in the game . Fans have created plush and papercraft versions of the cube and the various turrets , as well as PC case mods and models of the Portal cake and portal gun . Jeep Barnett , a programmer for Portal , noted that players have told Valve that they had found it more emotional to incinerate the Weighted Companion Cube than to harm one of the " Little Sisters " from BioShock . Both GLaDOS and the Weighted Companion Cube were nominated for the Best New Character Award on G4 , with GLaDOS winning the award for " having lines that will be quoted by gamers for years to come . " 
 The usually acerbic Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw of Zero Punctuation gave the game the only entirely positive review in the show 's history , calling it " the most fun you 'll have with your PC until they invent a force @-@ feedback <unk> " . Croshaw went on to say : " I went in expecting a slew of interesting portal @-@ based puzzles and that 's exactly what I got , but what I wasn 't expecting was some of the funniest pitch black humor I 've ever heard in a game " . He states that , while the game was short , the two- to three @-@ hour length of the game was perfect as the game did not outstay its welcome , and called the ending " balls @-@ <unk> fantastic " , while praising the game as " absolutely sublime from start to finish " ( adding that he would jam forks in his eyes if he ever praised a game so highly ever again ) . 
 Portal 's story has been stated to be well @-@ established in the context of Erving Goffman 's dissemination on dramaturgy , The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life , which equates one 's persona to the front and back stage areas of a theater . In the case of Portal , the story carefully establishes the front stage , the pretense of the Enrichment Center , and hints at problems in the back stage through various technical faults , and then slowly reveals more and more of the back stage to the player throughout the game . Due to this , the video game was made part of the required course material among other classical and contemporary works , including Goffman 's work , for a freshman course " devoted to engaging students with fundamental questions of humanity from multiple perspectives and fostering a sense of community " for Wabash College in 2010 . Portal has also been cited as a strong example of instructional scaffolding that can be adapted for more academic learning situations , as the player , through careful design of levels by Valve , is first hand @-@ held in solving simple puzzles with many hints at the correct solution , but this support is slowly removed as the player progresses in the game , and completely removed when the player reaches the second half of the game . Rock , Paper , Shotgun 's Hamish Todd considered Portal as an exemplary means of game design by demonstrating a series of chambers after the player has obtained the portal gun that gently introduce the concept of flinging without any explicit instructions . Portal was exhibited at the Smithsonian Art Exhibition in America from February 14 through September 30 , 2012 . Portal won the " Action " section for the platform " Modern Windows " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Portal has won several awards : 
 At the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards , Portal won Game of the Year award , along with the Innovation Award and Best Game Design award . 
 IGN honored Portal with several awards , for Best Puzzle Game for PC and Xbox 360 , Most Innovative Design for PC , and Best End Credit Song ( for " Still Alive " ) for Xbox 360 , along with overall honors for Best Puzzle Game and Most Innovative Design . 
 In its Best of 2007 , GameSpot honored The Orange Box with 4 awards in recognition of Portal , giving out honors for Best Puzzle Game , Best New Character ( s ) ( for GLaDOS ) , Funniest Game , and Best Original Game Mechanic ( for the portal gun ) . 
 Portal was awarded Game of the Year ( PC ) , Best Narrative ( PC ) , and Best Innovation ( PC and console ) honors by 1UP.com in its 2007 editorial awards . 
 GamePro honored the game for Most Memorable Villain ( for GLaDOS ) in its Editors ' Choice 2007 Awards . 
 Portal was awarded the Game of the Year award in 2007 by Joystiq , Good Game , and Shacknews . 
 The Most Original Game award by X @-@ Play . 
 In Official Xbox Magazine 's 2007 Game of the Year Awards , Portal won Best New Character ( for GLaDOS ) , Best Original Song ( for " Still Alive " ) , and Innovation of the Year . 
 In GameSpy 's 2007 Game of the Year awards , Portal was recognized as Best Puzzle Game , Best Character ( for GLaDOS ) , and Best Sidekick ( for the Weighted Companion Cube ) . 
 The A.V. Club called it the Best Game of 2007 . 
 The webcomic Penny Arcade awarded Portal Best Soundtrack , Best Writing , and Best New Game Mechanic in its satirical 2007 We 're Right Awards . 
 Eurogamer gave Portal first place in its Top 50 Games of 2007 rankings . 
 IGN also placed GLaDOS , ( from Portal ) as the # 1 Video Game Villain on its Top @-@ 100 Villains List . 
 GamesRadar named it the best game of all time . 
 In November 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time . 
 Wired considered Portal to be one of the most influential games of the first decade of the 21st century , believing it to be the prime example of quality over quantity for video games . 
 = Television in Croatia = 
 Television in Croatia was first introduced in 1956 . As of 2012 there are 10 nationwide and 21 regional DVB @-@ T ( Digital Video Broadcasting – Terrestrial ) television channels , and more than 30 other channels either produced in the Republic of Croatia or produced for the Croatian market and broadcast via IPTV ( Internet Protocol television ) , cable or satellite television . The electronic communications market in Croatia is regulated by the Croatian Regulatory Authority for Network Industries ( HAKOM ) , which issues broadcast licenses and monitors the market . The DVB @-@ T and satellite transmission infrastructure is developed and maintained by the state @-@ owned company Odašiljači i veze ( <unk> ) . 
 The first television signal broadcast in Croatia occurred in 1939 during the Zagreb Fair , where Philips showcased its television system . The first regular broadcasts started in 1956 , when Television Zagreb was established as the first TV station in the Yugoslav Radio Television system . Color broadcasts began in 1975 . Coverage and number of channels grew steadily , and by the 2000s there were four channels with nationwide coverage in Croatia . DVB @-@ T signal broadcasts began in 2002 , and in 2010 a full digital switchover was completed . During that period the IPTV , cable and satellite television markets grew considerably , and by 2011 only 60 @.@ 7 percent of households received DVB @-@ T television only ; the remainder were subscribed to IPTV , cable and satellite TV in addition , or as the sole source of TV reception . As of January 2012 DVB @-@ T is broadcast in three multiplexes , while the territory of Croatia is divided into nine main allotment regions and smaller local allotments corresponding to major cities . High @-@ definition television ( HDTV ) is broadcast only through IPTV , although HDTV DVB @-@ T test programming was broadcast from 2007 to 2011 . A DVB @-@ T2 test broadcast was conducted in 2011 . 
 Television in Croatia , as all other media in the country are criticised for lack of balance of global issues and trends on one hand and national topics covered on the other . All major television networks in Croatia are generally thought to be under excessive influence of commercialism . State owned Croatian Radiotelevision is required to produce and broadcast educational programmes , documentaries , and programmes aimed at the diaspora and national minorities in Croatia . The television in Croatia is considered to be important in avenue for non @-@ governmental organizations communicating their concerns to the public and to criticising the authorities . Television is the primary source of information for 57 % of the population of Croatia . 
 = = Analog television = = 
 = = = Introduction of television = = = 
 Zagreb was one of the first European cities where television pictures were broadcast . Beginning on 26 August 1939 the Zagreb Fair featured a Philips television system , operated for short periods each day of the exhibition ( until 4 September ) . The Philips television , consisting of a transmitter and several receivers , was operated by Eric Klaas de Vries in the Dutch pavilion at the fair . The fair newspaper announced the event as the first , after television broadcasts in London and Berlin . The programming consisted of comedy , opera , music performances and the first TV news broadcast in Croatia . 
 The first TV broadcast after the 1939 Zagreb Fair was in 1956 . A transmitter was set up on <unk> in the <unk> Dom Hotel and during the evening of 15 May 1956 , Austrian and Italian channels were transmitted ( including Rai 1 ) . The first live broadcast produced locally was the transmission of the opening of the Zagreb Fair on 7 September 1956 , and Television Zagreb began regular broadcasting on 29 November . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Zagreb TV centre became a member of the Yugoslav Radio Television ( JRT ) ( an umbrella organization of television stations in Yugoslavia ) , acting as Eurovision Technical Centre for the JRT . In 1972 Television Zagreb began broadcasting of its second channel , and switched to airing its programming in color in 1975 . The third Television Zagreb channel was introduced in 1988 , and teletext service was launched in 1990 . Following the breakup of Yugoslavia , Television Zagreb was renamed Croatian Radiotelevision ( HRT ) and it became a member of the European Broadcasting Union ; however , HRT suffered significant war damage to its infrastructure as 80 percent of its transmitters and 30 relay stations were damaged , destroyed or occupied . In October 1999 all three nationwide HRT channels started broadcasting around the clock , but in 2002 the third HRT channel ceased operation . Nova TV , the first privately owned television station in Croatia , began operating in 2000 . It was followed by another privately owned broadcaster , RTL Televizija , on 30 April 2004 . Both Nova TV and RTL Televizija aired a single analog TV channel each . 
 In 2002 , Odašiljači i veze d.o.o. was set up as an independent company ; it was previously a part of HRT and tasked with maintaining the television @-@ transmission infrastructure in Croatia . In 2014 there were 26 TV stations in Croatia , including the four nationwide channels . 
 = = = End of analog broadcasting = = = 
 The Government of Croatia decided that multicast ( simultaneous analog and digital DVB @-@ T broadcasting of the main channels ) was to cease in 2010 . The territory of Croatia was split into nine digital @-@ TV allotment regions . The analog broadcast network was switched off gradually ( by the digital @-@ TV allotment regions ) beginning on 26 January 2010 . The process was completed , achieving digital switchover on 5 October 2010 , but geographically isolated areas were left with analog broadcasts . The last analog TV transmitter in Croatia was shut down on 30 September 2011 , as DVB @-@ T coverage was extended to 98 @.@ 5 percent of households in Croatia and no less than 95 percent of households in each of the allotment regions . Approximately 6 @,@ 000 households were left with no reception of DVB @-@ T or analog TV broadcasts . 
 = = DVB @-@ T television = = 
 The first trial broadcasts of DVB @-@ T signals began in May 2002 in Zagreb , and in 2008 the government developed an Analogue to Digital Television Broadcasting Switchover Strategy for the Republic of Croatia . In July 2008 , this Government of Croatia announced that 106 million kuna ( c . 14 @.@ 1 million euros ) were earmarked for the purpose . The government @-@ subsidized purchase of DVB @-@ T receivers , distributing discount coupons worth 75 kuna ( c . 10 euros ) to subscribers of the Croatian Radiotelevision ( HRT ) . The first two multiplexes ( MUX A and MUX B ) were introduced in April 2009 , with the third ( MUX D ) introduced in July 2010 . On 5 October 2010 the switch to DVB @-@ T was virtually complete , as all major analog TV transmitters were phased out . The DVB @-@ T transmissions in Croatia are all standard @-@ definition , MPEG @-@ 2 . MUX A is available to more than 98 @.@ 5 percent of the population of Croatia , and both MUX A and MUX B are available to more than 95 percent of population in each multiplex @-@ allotment region . MUX D is available to approximately 90 percent of the population of Croatia , and at least 70 percent of the population in each of the allotment regions . There are 897 @,@ 496 households ( 60 @.@ 7 percent ) in Croatia receiving DVB @-@ T television only . The terrestrial television infrastructure in Croatia is operated by Odašiljači i veze d.o.o. ( OIV ) . The company was established as an independent entity in 2002 , when a division developing and maintaining electronic communications infrastructure was removed from the HRT corporate system . As of January 2012 , OIV operates and maintains 222 television transmitters and broadcast relay stations . 
 There are nine main regions of digital TV allotments ( encompassing larger portions of Croatia ) and additional , geographically small allotment areas designed for local broadcasters ( typically covering a single city ) . The main DVB @-@ T television allotment regions are assigned markings D1 – D9 . The D1 region encompasses Osijek @-@ Baranja and Vukovar @-@ Syrmia counties , as well as parts of Brod @-@ Posavina County east of Oprisavci . The D2 region covers the rest of Brod @-@ Posavina County , Požega @-@ Slavonia and Virovitica @-@ Podravina counties and nearly all of Bjelovar @-@ Bilogora County , except for an area north of the city of Bjelovar and part of Sisak @-@ Moslavina County around the town of Novska . The D3 region includes a part of Bjelovar @-@ Bilogora County not encompassed by the D2 region , as well as the territories of Koprivnica @-@ Križevci , Varaždin and Međimurje counties . The D4 region includes Sisak @-@ Moslavina County ( except the area around Novska ) , Krapina @-@ Zagorje and Zagreb counties , the city of Zagreb and the northern part of Karlovac County ( including Karlovac and Duga Resa ) . 
 The D5 region covers Istria County and Primorje @-@ Gorski Kotar County ( except parts of the county east of Ravna Gora and the area around <unk> on the island of Pag ) , but it includes the coastal areas of Lika @-@ Senj County opposite the islands of Krk and Rab . The D6 region encompasses parts of Primorje @-@ Gorski Kotar and Lika @-@ Senj counties outside the D4 and D5 regions , except for parts of the latter ( south of Lovinac ) and coastal parts of the same county opposite the island of Pag . Those two areas are a part of the D7 region , along with Zadar and Šibenik @-@ Knin counties . The D8 region includes the entire Split @-@ Dalmatia County as well as parts of Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County around Ploče and Metković , a part of Pelješac peninsula west of Dubrava and the islands of Korčula and Lastovo . The D9 region encompasses the rest of Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County . 
 There are also 12 local DVB @-@ T television allotment regions , covering specific cities and their immediate surroundings . Those are <unk> in Osijek , <unk> in Slavonski Brod , <unk> covering Varaždin and Čakovec , <unk> encompassing Zagreb and Velika Gorica , <unk> in Jastrebarsko , <unk> covering Karlovac and Duga Resa , <unk> encompassing Rijeka , Crikvenica , Novi Vinodolski and most of the island of Krk , <unk> in Pula and Rovinj , <unk> in Zadar , <unk> in Šibenik , <unk> covering Split , Trogir , Omiš , the island of Šolta and a large part of the island of Brač , and <unk> in Dubrovnik . A local multiplex named " L @-@ <unk> " started in 2015 on UHF 41 in the town of Sveta <unk> , transmitting local channel TV <unk> . 
 When Italian DVB @-@ T broadcasting started in December 2010 interference was observed in northwest parts of Istria , and later in areas around Zadar and Šibenik . The interference was caused by the use of frequencies assigned to Croatia by Italian transmitters and excessive transmitter power . A complaint was filed by the Croatian regulator of the DVB @-@ T market , the Croatian Regulatory Authority for Network Industries ( HAKOM ) , with the Italian authorities . OIV installed additional transmitters in the affected areas to strengthen its signal coverage and reduce interference by February 2011 at a cost of 1 million kuna ( c . 133 @,@ 000 euros ) . Although Italian Minister of Economic Development Paolo Romani announced in August 2011 that the problems should be resolved shortly ( a transmitter causing interference was shut down and the power of several others was reduced ) , the situation was not completely resolved throughout 2011 and the International Telecommunication Union 's Radio Regulations Board became involved in the process . In the meantime , other technical solutions were devised and implemented ( in addition to the emergency transmitters ) in order to improve digital @-@ television @-@ signal reception . 
 = = = Nationwide channels = = = 
 As of May 2014 , there are eleven nationwide free @-@ to @-@ air DVB @-@ T television channels , with HRT 's four channels , RTL Televizija operating three , Nova TV operating two and the remaining two operated by the Croatian Olympic Committee and Author d.o.o. companies and the government 's Central State Administrative Office for e @-@ Croatia . All ten DVB @-@ T television channels are free @-@ to @-@ air and privately owned , except for HRT 's channels and the Moja <unk> channel ( which are publicly owned broadcasters ) . Doma TV is part of the Nova TV group . Since 2007 television audience measurement is conducted by the Nielsen Company using 1 @,@ 086 peoplemeters , and it is applied to terrestrial , cable and satellite TV . As of January 2012 HRT , RTL Televizija and Nova TV are using the service . 
 HRT 1 , Nova TV and RTL Televizija channels ' programmes are not specialized and comprise news , a variety of scripted and unscripted entertainment , as well as documentaries . <unk> , Doma TV and RTL 2 channels , carry similar type of programmes , except for absence of news . In addition , Croatian Radiotelevision is legally required to produce and broadcast programmes covering education of youths , aimed at the Croatian diaspora , national minorities in Croatia , preservation of cultural and natural heritage , protection of the environment , promotion of democracy and civil society , and support national production of films , television programme and music . Other nationwide channels are specialized providing informational programmes , covering sports or music . 
 = = = Regional and local channels = = = 
 There are 21 regional ( or local ) DVB @-@ T television channels operating in Croatia in MUX D. The number of channels broadcasting in individual regions varies from one to four , while some local DVB @-@ T television local @-@ allotment regions are vacant as of December 2011 . Four regional ( or local ) television channels are broadcast in more than one allotment region . All regional and local channels are free @-@ to @-@ air . As of January 2012 Z1 televizija is measuring its audience with the Nielsen Company 's peoplemeters for terrestrial , cable and satellite TV . 
 = = = HDTV and DVB @-@ T2 = = = 
 Experimental high @-@ definition television ( HDTV ) broadcasting began in Zagreb in March 2007 ; it was expanded to Split , Rijeka and Osijek in 2008 . Experimental HDTV broadcasting ended in February 2011 . There were two experimental HDTV channels , operated by Croatian Radiotelevision and Nova TV . Pursuant to the digital television switchover developed by the Government of Croatia , broadcasting of DVB @-@ T HDTV channels was conducted in MPEG @-@ 4 . On 11 October 2011 experimental DVB @-@ T2 broadcasting began in Zagreb , using H.264 / MPEG @-@ 4 AVC coding and a conditional access system . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 There are three active multiplexes ( MUX ) in Croatia . MUX A and MUX B are reserved for nationwide channels , and MUX D is used for channels broadcast locally and nationwide . MUX A broadcasts HRT 1 , HRT 2 , RTL and Nova TV channels . MUX B broadcasts HRT 3 , HRT 4 , RTL 2 and Doma TV . MUX D broadcasts three nationwide channels <unk> televizija ( <unk> ) , RTL <unk> and Croatian Music Channel ( CMC ) in addition to local TV channels . 
 A competition for two channels in MUX B was announced in July 2010 , and HAKOM received offers for the following channels : RTL 2 , Doma TV , <unk> and KN . Finally , licenses were given to RTL 2 and Doma TV . RTL2 and Doma TV began broadcasting on 2 January 2011 . Licences for broadcasting in the national segment of <unk> D were given to Croatian Music Channel ( CMC ) , <unk> Televizija ( owned by the Croatian Olympic Committee ) and KN in December 2010 . They started broadcasting in late March and early April 2011 . KN was originally broadcast in MUX B ; as holder of a license for a testing period , they won an experimental 6 @-@ month period license ( and later switched to MUX D , which carries both local and nationwide services simultaneously ) . MUX B also carries two new channels — HRT 3 and HRT 4 . The two are expected to begin broadcasting by the end of 2012 . 
 = = IPTV , cable and satellite television = = 
 IPTV is recording rapid market growth ; between 2009 and 2010 , the number of households subscribed to an IPTV service grew by 23 percent to nearly 300 @,@ 000 . In terms of IPTV density Croatia is the fifth @-@ ranked market in the world , trailing only Singapore , Hong Kong , Cyprus and Estonia . The number rose further by the third quarter of 2011 to a total of 349 @,@ 138 households , representing 23 @.@ 6 percent of Croatian households . At the same time there were 144 @,@ 439 households with cable television connections and 104 @,@ 635 households with satellite television reception ( representing 9 @.@ 8 and 7 @.@ 1 percent of households in Croatia , respectively ) . The leading IPTV provider in Croatia is T @-@ Hrvatski Telekom with its <unk> service , while <unk> @-@ owned <unk> is the leading cable @-@ television provider in the country . Since 2009 , some providers offer HDTV reception of IPTV channels . The IPTV and satellite @-@ TV providers normally carry all channels otherwise available in DVB @-@ T , with additional channels ( produced in Croatia and abroad ) available through various subscription plans . A significant proportion of the foreign channels are localized through dubbing or subtitles . The two largest IPTV and cable TV providers offer 31 channels produced in Croatia ( or specifically for Croatia ) , in addition to those broadcasting in DVB @-@ T. Viewership of cable and satellite TV channels broadcast by HRT , RTL Televizija , Nova TV and Z1 Televizija is measured by Nielsen Company peoplemeters . 
 = = = Dedicated satellite channels = = = 
 HRT broadcasts dedicated satellite channels for Europe and the Middle East , North and South America , Australia and New Zealand ; viewing the channels requires a subscription . Channels broadcast to Europe and the Middle East via the Eutelsat 16A satellite ( using <unk> conditional access ) are HRT 1 , HRT 2 , HRT 3 and HRT 4 . The satellite channels are also used to transmit three free @-@ to @-@ air radio channels produced by HRT . 
 = = Market regulation = = 
 The television industry in Croatia is regulated by the Croatian Regulatory Authority for Network Industries ( HAKOM ) . HAKOM was established by the Electronic Communications Act of 26 June 2008 ; pursuant to Article 5 of the act , HAKOM is tasked with promoting and safeguarding market competition and the interests of service users in the field of electronic communication services and infrastructure , while contributing to the development of the internal market of the European Union . HAKOM 's goals include ensuring sustainable development of the electronic communications market at affordable prices for consumers , providing fair conditions for return on investment in the market and contributing to the quality of life in Croatia . Further regulation of the television is performed by the Electronic Media Council , which enacts mandatory regulation applying to both state @-@ run and privately owned broadcasters based in Croatia . One such regulation , aimed at protection of minors , restricts depictions of violence , sexual intercourse , profanity , use of intoxicating substances and tobacco and other scenes which may be harmful to development of minors between seven in the morning and nine , ten or eleven in the evening , depending on rating of specific programme — advising that the programme is not suitable for persons under 12 , 15 or 18 years of age respectively . The restriction does not apply to educational , documentary , science or news programming . 
 HAKOM grants , evaluates and revokes broadcast licenses for all forms of electronic communications in Croatia , approves mergers of communications @-@ industry companies , imposes fines on those who are found to be in breach of applicable regulation and conducts constant supervision of the industry . 
 = = Language localisation = = 
 National legislation requires that all television programmes broadcasts in Croatia are made in Croatian language or with appropriate translations either using dubbing or subtitling . In general , all foreign programming is subtitled , except for cartoons and narrated parts of documentaries and similar programmes . An attempt to change this was made by Nova TV in 2006 , when a soap opera was dubbed , but the move provoked negative response from viewers and critics , causing the experiment to be abandoned . The legislation does not provide for mutually intelligible languages . That led to formal requests made by the Electronic Media Council demanding language localisation of television programmes made in Serbian language . Ultimately , that issue was resolved through subtitling using teletext service normally used for closed captioning . 
 = = Social impact = = 
 Television in Croatia , as all other media in the country are criticized for lack of balance of global issues and trends on one hand and national topics covered on the other . All major television networks in Croatia are generally thought to be under excessive influence of commercialism . This is viewed through international ownership structures of the privately owned television broadcasters having little regard for promotion of national culture and social issues , as well as through efforts of the state @-@ run HRT to attract advertisers through programming that is thought to appeal to the viewers the best in spite of regulation of programming content and restricted advertising at the HRT . The HRT is limited by a special legislation regulating that broadcaster to four minutes of advertising in prime time period between 6 and 10 in the evening . On the other hand , the HRT receives income from a fee charged to owners of television sets in Croatia in the amount of 1 @.@ 5 % of average monthly net wage in Croatia . In 2012 , the fee charged is 80 kunas ( c . 10 @.@ 60 Euros ) . In 2010 , annual income of the HRT generated by the fee amounted to 1 @.@ 2 billion kunas ( c . 160 million Euros ) . 
 Even though social impact of television in Croatia is considered to be imperfect and that of variable quality , television is important in the society because it offers a way for non @-@ governmental organizations to communicate their concerns to the public and to criticize the government and other aspects of politics of Croatia . Television is the most widespread source of information in Croatia — on average 57 % of the population of Croatia uses television as their primary source of information . That percentage varies significantly by geographic region — from 43 % in Zagreb and areas surrounding the capital to 79 % in Slavonia — but in every region it surpasses all other sources of information , the second most widely used source of information being the Internet averaging at 19 % . In 2014 there were 1 @.@ 755 million registered television sets in the country . 
 = History of biology = 
 The history of biology traces the study of the living world from ancient to modern times . Although the concept of biology as a single coherent field arose in the 19th century , the biological sciences emerged from traditions of medicine and natural history reaching back to ayurveda , ancient Egyptian medicine and the works of Aristotle and Galen in the ancient Greco @-@ Roman world . This ancient work was further developed in the Middle Ages by Muslim physicians and scholars such as Avicenna . During the European Renaissance and early modern period , biological thought was revolutionized in Europe by a renewed interest in empiricism and the discovery of many novel organisms . Prominent in this movement were Vesalius and Harvey , who used experimentation and careful observation in physiology , and naturalists such as Linnaeus and Buffon who began to classify the diversity of life and the fossil record , as well as the development and behavior of organisms . Microscopy revealed the previously unknown world of microorganisms , laying the groundwork for cell theory . The growing importance of natural theology , partly a response to the rise of mechanical philosophy , encouraged the growth of natural history ( although it entrenched the argument from design ) . 
 Over the 18th and 19th centuries , biological sciences such as botany and zoology became increasingly professional scientific disciplines . Lavoisier and other physical scientists began to connect the animate and inanimate worlds through physics and chemistry . Explorer @-@ naturalists such as Alexander von Humboldt investigated the interaction between organisms and their environment , and the ways this relationship depends on geography — laying the foundations for biogeography , ecology and ethology . Naturalists began to reject essentialism and consider the importance of extinction and the mutability of species . Cell theory provided a new perspective on the fundamental basis of life . These developments , as well as the results from embryology and paleontology , were synthesized in Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution by natural selection . The end of the 19th century saw the fall of spontaneous generation and the rise of the germ theory of disease , though the mechanism of inheritance remained a mystery . 
 In the early 20th century , the rediscovery of Mendel 's work led to the rapid development of genetics by Thomas Hunt Morgan and his students , and by the 1930s the combination of population genetics and natural selection in the " neo @-@ Darwinian synthesis " . New disciplines developed rapidly , especially after Watson and Crick proposed the structure of DNA . Following the establishment of the Central Dogma and the cracking of the genetic code , biology was largely split between organismal biology — the fields that deal with whole organisms and groups of organisms — and the fields related to cellular and molecular biology . By the late 20th century , new fields like genomics and proteomics were reversing this trend , with organismal biologists using molecular techniques , and molecular and cell biologists investigating the interplay between genes and the environment , as well as the genetics of natural populations of organisms . 
 = = Etymology of " biology " = = 
 The word biology is formed by combining the Greek <unk> ( bios ) , meaning " life " , and the suffix ' <unk> ' , meaning " science of " , " knowledge of " , " study of " , based on the Greek verb <unk> , ' <unk> ' " to select " , " to gather " ( cf. the noun λόγος , ' logos ' " word " ) . The term biology in its modern sense appears to have been introduced independently by Thomas Beddoes ( in 1799 ) , Karl Friedrich Burdach ( in 1800 ) , Gottfried Reinhold <unk> ( Biologie oder Philosophie der <unk> Natur , 1802 ) and Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck ( <unk> , 1802 ) . The word itself appears in the title of Volume 3 of Michael Christoph <unk> 's Philosophiae naturalis sive physicae <unk> : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> generalis et <unk> , published in 1766 . 
 Before biology , there were several terms used for the study of animals and plants . Natural history referred to the descriptive aspects of biology , though it also included mineralogy and other non @-@ biological fields ; from the Middle Ages through the Renaissance , the unifying framework of natural history was the scala naturae or Great Chain of Being . Natural philosophy and natural theology encompassed the conceptual and metaphysical basis of plant and animal life , dealing with problems of why organisms exist and behave the way they do , though these subjects also included what is now geology , physics , chemistry , and astronomy . Physiology and ( botanical ) pharmacology were the province of medicine . Botany , zoology , and ( in the case of fossils ) geology replaced natural history and natural philosophy in the 18th and 19th centuries before biology was widely adopted . To this day , " botany " and " zoology " are widely used , although they have been joined by other sub @-@ disciplines of biology , such as mycology and molecular biology . 
 = = Ancient and medieval knowledge = = 
 = = = Early cultures = = = 
 The earliest humans must have had and passed on knowledge about plants and animals to increase their chances of survival . This may have included knowledge of human and animal anatomy and aspects of animal behavior ( such as migration patterns ) . However , the first major turning point in biological knowledge came with the Neolithic Revolution about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Humans first domesticated plants for farming , then livestock animals to accompany the resulting sedentary societies . 
 The ancient cultures of Mesopotamia , Egypt , the Indian subcontinent , and China , among others , produced renowned surgeons and students of the natural sciences such as <unk> and Zhang Zhongjing , reflecting independent sophisticated systems of natural philosophy . However , the roots of modern biology are usually traced back to the secular tradition of ancient Greek philosophy . 
 = = = = Ancient Chinese traditions = = = = 
 In ancient China , biological topics can be found dispersed across several different disciplines , including the work of <unk> , physicians , alchemists , and philosophers . The Taoist tradition of Chinese alchemy , for example , can be considered part of the life sciences due to its emphasis on health ( with the ultimate goal being the elixir of life ) . The system of classical Chinese medicine usually revolved around the theory of yin and yang , and the five phases . Taoist philosophers , such as Zhuangzi in the 4th century BCE , also expressed ideas related to evolution , such as denying the fixity of biological species and speculating that species had developed differing attributes in response to differing environments . 
 = = = = Ancient Indian traditions = = = = 
 One of the oldest organised systems of medicine is known from the Indian subcontinent in the form of Ayurveda which originated around 1500 BCE from Atharvaveda ( one of the four most ancient books of Indian knowledge , wisdom and culture ) . 
 The ancient Indian Ayurveda tradition independently developed the concept of three humours , resembling that of the four humours of ancient Greek medicine , though the Ayurvedic system included further complications , such as the body being composed of five elements and seven basic tissues . Ayurvedic writers also classified living things into four categories based on the method of birth ( from the womb , eggs , heat & moisture , and seeds ) and explained the conception of a fetus in detail . They also made considerable advances in the field of surgery , often without the use of human dissection or animal vivisection . One of the earliest Ayurvedic treatises was the Sushruta Samhita , attributed to Sushruta in the 6th century BCE . It was also an early materia medica , describing 700 medicinal plants , 64 preparations from mineral sources , and 57 preparations based on animal sources . 
 = = = = Ancient Mesopotamian traditions = = = = 
 Ancient Mesopotamian medicine may be represented by <unk> @-@ kin @-@ <unk> , a prominent scholar of the 11th century BCE , who made a compilation of medical prescriptions and procedures , which he presented as exorcisms . 
 = = = = Ancient Egyptian traditions = = = = 
 Over a dozen medical papyri have been preserved , most notably the Edwin Smith Papyrus ( the oldest extant surgical handbook ) and the Ebers Papyrus ( a handbook of preparing and using materia medica for various diseases ) , both from the 16th century BCE . 
 Ancient Egypt is also known for developing embalming , which was used for mummification , in order to preserve human remains and forestall decomposition . 
 = = = Ancient Greek and Roman traditions = = = 
 The pre @-@ Socratic philosophers asked many questions about life but produced little systematic knowledge of specifically biological interest — though the attempts of the atomists to explain life in purely physical terms would recur periodically through the history of biology . However , the medical theories of Hippocrates and his followers , especially humorism , had a lasting impact . 
 The philosopher Aristotle was the most influential scholar of the living world from classical antiquity . Though his early work in natural philosophy was speculative , Aristotle 's later biological writings were more empirical , focusing on biological causation and the diversity of life . He made countless observations of nature , especially the habits and attributes of plants and animals in the world around him , which he devoted considerable attention to categorizing . In all , Aristotle classified 540 animal species , and dissected at least 50 . He believed that intellectual purposes , formal causes , guided all natural processes . 
 Aristotle , and nearly all Western scholars after him until the 18th century , believed that creatures were arranged in a graded scale of perfection rising from plants on up to humans : the scala naturae or Great Chain of Being . Aristotle 's successor at the Lyceum , Theophrastus , wrote a series of books on botany — the History of Plants — which survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to botany , even into the Middle Ages . Many of Theophrastus ' names survive into modern times , such as <unk> for fruit , and <unk> for seed vessel . Dioscorides wrote a pioneering and encyclopaedic pharmacopoeia , De Materia Medica , incorporating descriptions of some 600 plants and their uses in medicine . Pliny the Elder , in his Natural History , assembled a similarly encyclopaedic account of things in nature , including accounts of many plants and animals . 
 A few scholars in the Hellenistic period under the Ptolemies — particularly Herophilus of Chalcedon and Erasistratus of Chios — amended Aristotle 's physiological work , even performing dissections and vivisections . Claudius Galen became the most important authority on medicine and anatomy . Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological Aristotelian viewpoint that all aspects of life are the result of design or purpose , teleology ( and after the rise of Christianity , natural theology ) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries . Ernst W. Mayr argued that " Nothing of any real consequence happened in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance . " The ideas of the Greek traditions of natural history and medicine survived , but they were generally taken unquestioningly in medieval Europe . 
 = = = Medieval and Islamic knowledge = = = 
 The decline of the Roman Empire led to the disappearance or destruction of much knowledge , though physicians still incorporated many aspects of the Greek tradition into training and practice . In Byzantium and the Islamic world , many of the Greek works were translated into Arabic and many of the works of Aristotle were preserved . 
 During the High Middle Ages , a few European scholars such as Hildegard of Bingen , Albertus Magnus and Frederick II expanded the natural history canon . The rise of European universities , though important for the development of physics and philosophy , had little impact on biological scholarship . 
 = = Renaissance and early modern developments = = 
 The European Renaissance brought expanded interest in both empirical natural history and physiology . In 1543 , Andreas Vesalius inaugurated the modern era of Western medicine with his seminal human anatomy treatise De humani corporis fabrica , which was based on dissection of corpses . Vesalius was the first in a series of anatomists who gradually replaced scholasticism with empiricism in physiology and medicine , relying on first @-@ hand experience rather than authority and abstract reasoning . Via herbalism , medicine was also indirectly the source of renewed empiricism in the study of plants . Otto Brunfels , Hieronymus Bock and Leonhart Fuchs wrote extensively on wild plants , the beginning of a nature @-@ based approach to the full range of plant life . <unk> — a genre that combines both the natural and figurative knowledge of animals — also became more sophisticated , especially with the work of William Turner , Pierre Belon , Guillaume Rondelet , Conrad Gessner , and Ulisse Aldrovandi . 
 Artists such as Albrecht Dürer and Leonardo da Vinci , often working with naturalists , were also interested in the bodies of animals and humans , studying physiology in detail and contributing to the growth of anatomical knowledge . The traditions of alchemy and natural magic , especially in the work of Paracelsus , also laid claim to knowledge of the living world . Alchemists subjected organic matter to chemical analysis and experimented liberally with both biological and mineral pharmacology . This was part of a larger transition in world views ( the rise of the mechanical philosophy ) that continued into the 17th century , as the traditional metaphor of nature as organism was replaced by the nature as machine metaphor . 
 = = = Seventeenth and eighteenth centuries = = = 
 <unk> , naming and classifying dominated natural history throughout much of the 17th and 18th centuries . Carl Linnaeus published a basic taxonomy for the natural world in 1735 ( variations of which have been in use ever since ) , and in the 1750s introduced scientific names for all his species . While Linnaeus conceived of species as unchanging parts of a designed hierarchy , the other great naturalist of the 18th century , Georges @-@ Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon , treated species as artificial categories and living forms as malleable — even suggesting the possibility of common descent . Though he was opposed to evolution , Buffon is a key figure in the history of evolutionary thought ; his work would influence the evolutionary theories of both Lamarck and Darwin . 
 The discovery and description of new species and the collection of specimens became a passion of scientific gentlemen and a lucrative enterprise for entrepreneurs ; many naturalists traveled the globe in search of scientific knowledge and adventure . 
 Extending the work of Vesalius into experiments on still living bodies ( of both humans and animals ) , William Harvey and other natural philosophers investigated the roles of blood , veins and arteries . Harvey 's De motu cordis in 1628 was the beginning of the end for Galenic theory , and alongside Santorio Santorio 's studies of metabolism , it served as an influential model of quantitative approaches to physiology . 
 In the early 17th century , the micro @-@ world of biology was just beginning to open up . A few <unk> and natural philosophers had been creating crude microscopes since the late 16th century , and Robert Hooke published the seminal Micrographia based on observations with his own compound microscope in 1665 . But it was not until Antony van Leeuwenhoek 's dramatic improvements in <unk> beginning in the 1670s — ultimately producing up to 200 @-@ fold magnification with a single lens — that scholars discovered spermatozoa , bacteria , infusoria and the sheer strangeness and diversity of microscopic life . Similar investigations by Jan Swammerdam led to new interest in entomology and built the basic techniques of microscopic dissection and staining . 
 As the microscopic world was expanding , the macroscopic world was shrinking . Botanists such as John Ray worked to incorporate the flood of newly discovered organisms shipped from across the globe into a coherent taxonomy , and a coherent theology ( natural theology ) . Debate over another flood , the Noachian , catalyzed the development of paleontology ; in 1669 Nicholas Steno published an essay on how the remains of living organisms could be trapped in layers of sediment and mineralized to produce fossils . Although Steno 's ideas about fossilization were well known and much debated among natural philosophers , an organic origin for all fossils would not be accepted by all naturalists until the end of the 18th century due to philosophical and theological debate about issues such as the age of the earth and extinction . 
 = = 19th century : the emergence of biological disciplines = = 
 Up through the 19th century , the scope of biology was largely divided between medicine , which investigated questions of form and function ( i.e. , physiology ) , and natural history , which was concerned with the diversity of life and interactions among different forms of life and between life and non @-@ life . By 1900 , much of these domains overlapped , while natural history ( and its counterpart natural philosophy ) had largely given way to more specialized scientific disciplines — cytology , bacteriology , morphology , embryology , geography , and geology . 
 = = = Natural history and natural philosophy = = = 
 Widespread travel by naturalists in the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 19th century resulted in a wealth of new information about the diversity and distribution of living organisms . Of particular importance was the work of Alexander von Humboldt , which analyzed the relationship between organisms and their environment ( i.e. , the domain of natural history ) using the quantitative approaches of natural philosophy ( i.e. , physics and chemistry ) . Humboldt 's work laid the foundations of biogeography and inspired several generations of scientists . 
 = = = = Geology and paleontology = = = = 
 The emerging discipline of geology also brought natural history and natural philosophy closer together ; the establishment of the stratigraphic column linked the spatial distribution of organisms to their temporal distribution , a key precursor to concepts of evolution . Georges Cuvier and others made great strides in comparative anatomy and paleontology in the late 1790s and early 19th century . In a series of lectures and papers that made detailed comparisons between living mammals and fossil remains Cuvier was able to establish that the fossils were remains of species that had become extinct — rather than being remains of species still alive elsewhere in the world , as had been widely believed . Fossils discovered and described by Gideon Mantell , William Buckland , Mary Anning , and Richard Owen among others helped establish that there had been an ' age of reptiles ' that had preceded even the prehistoric mammals . These discoveries captured the public imagination and focused attention on the history of life on earth . Most of these geologists held to catastrophism , but Charles Lyell 's influential Principles of Geology ( 1830 ) popularised Hutton 's uniformitarianism , a theory that explained the geological past and present on equal terms . 
 = = = = Evolution and biogeography = = = = 
 The most significant evolutionary theory before Darwin 's was that of Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck ; based on the inheritance of acquired characteristics ( an inheritance mechanism that was widely accepted until the 20th century ) , it described a chain of development stretching from the lowliest microbe to humans . The British naturalist Charles Darwin , combining the biogeographical approach of Humboldt , the uniformitarian geology of Lyell , Thomas Malthus 's writings on population growth , and his own morphological expertise , created a more successful evolutionary theory based on natural selection ; similar evidence led Alfred Russel Wallace to independently reach the same conclusions . 
 The 1859 publication of Darwin 's theory in On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection , or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life is often considered the central event in the history of modern biology . Darwin 's established credibility as a naturalist , the sober tone of the work , and most of all the sheer strength and volume of evidence presented , allowed Origin to succeed where previous evolutionary works such as the anonymous Vestiges of Creation had failed . Most scientists were convinced of evolution and common descent by the end of the 19th century . However , natural selection would not be accepted as the primary mechanism of evolution until well into the 20th century , as most contemporary theories of heredity seemed incompatible with the inheritance of random variation . 
 Wallace , following on earlier work by de Candolle , Humboldt and Darwin , made major contributions to zoogeography . Because of his interest in the transmutation hypothesis , he paid particular attention to the geographical distribution of closely allied species during his field work first in South America and then in the Malay archipelago . While in the archipelago he identified the Wallace line , which runs through the Spice Islands dividing the fauna of the archipelago between an Asian zone and a New Guinea / Australian zone . His key question , as to why the fauna of islands with such similar climates should be so different , could only be answered by considering their origin . In 1876 he wrote The Geographical Distribution of Animals , which was the standard reference work for over half a century , and a sequel , Island Life , in 1880 that focused on island biogeography . He extended the six @-@ zone system developed by Philip Sclater for describing the geographical distribution of birds to animals of all kinds . His method of tabulating data on animal groups in geographic zones highlighted the discontinuities ; and his appreciation of evolution allowed him to propose rational explanations , which had not been done before . 
 The scientific study of heredity grew rapidly in the wake of Darwin 's Origin of Species with the work of Francis Galton and the biometricians . The origin of genetics is usually traced to the 1866 work of the monk Gregor Mendel , who would later be credited with the laws of inheritance . However , his work was not recognized as significant until 35 years afterward . In the meantime , a variety of theories of inheritance ( based on pangenesis , orthogenesis , or other mechanisms ) were debated and investigated vigorously . Embryology and ecology also became central biological fields , especially as linked to evolution and popularized in the work of Ernst Haeckel . Most of the 19th century work on heredity , however , was not in the realm of natural history , but that of experimental physiology . 
 = = = Physiology = = = 
 Over the course of the 19th century , the scope of physiology expanded greatly , from a primarily medically oriented field to a wide @-@ ranging investigation of the physical and chemical processes of life — including plants , animals , and even microorganisms in addition to man . Living things as machines became a dominant metaphor in biological ( and social ) thinking . 
 = = = = Cell theory , embryology and germ theory = = = = 
 Advances in microscopy also had a profound impact on biological thinking . In the early 19th century , a number of biologists pointed to the central importance of the cell . In 1838 and 1839 , Schleiden and Schwann began promoting the ideas that ( 1 ) the basic unit of organisms is the cell and ( 2 ) that individual cells have all the characteristics of life , though they opposed the idea that ( 3 ) all cells come from the division of other cells . Thanks to the work of Robert Remak and Rudolf Virchow , however , by the 1860s most biologists accepted all three tenets of what came to be known as cell theory . 
 Cell theory led biologists to re @-@ envision individual organisms as interdependent assemblages of individual cells . Scientists in the rising field of cytology , armed with increasingly powerful microscopes and new staining methods , soon found that even single cells were far more complex than the homogeneous fluid @-@ filled chambers described by earlier <unk> . Robert Brown had described the nucleus in 1831 , and by the end of the 19th century cytologists identified many of the key cell components : chromosomes , centrosomes mitochondria , chloroplasts , and other structures made visible through staining . Between 1874 and 1884 Walther Flemming described the discrete stages of mitosis , showing that they were not artifacts of staining but occurred in living cells , and moreover , that chromosomes doubled in number just before the cell divided and a daughter cell was produced . Much of the research on cell reproduction came together in August Weismann 's theory of heredity : he identified the nucleus ( in particular chromosomes ) as the hereditary material , proposed the distinction between somatic cells and germ cells ( arguing that chromosome number must be halved for germ cells , a precursor to the concept of meiosis ) , and adopted Hugo de Vries 's theory of pangenes . <unk> was extremely influential , especially in the new field of experimental embryology . 
 By the mid @-@ 1850s the miasma theory of disease was largely superseded by the germ theory of disease , creating extensive interest in microorganisms and their interactions with other forms of life . By the 1880s , bacteriology was becoming a coherent discipline , especially through the work of Robert Koch , who introduced methods for growing pure cultures on agar gels containing specific nutrients in Petri dishes . The long @-@ held idea that living organisms could easily originate from nonliving matter ( spontaneous generation ) was attacked in a series of experiments carried out by Louis Pasteur , while debates over vitalism vs. mechanism ( a perennial issue since the time of Aristotle and the Greek atomists ) continued apace . 
 = = = = Rise of organic chemistry and experimental physiology = = = = 
 In chemistry , one central issue was the distinction between organic and inorganic substances , especially in the context of organic transformations such as fermentation and putrefaction . Since Aristotle these had been considered essentially biological ( vital ) processes . However , Friedrich Wöhler , Justus Liebig and other pioneers of the rising field of organic chemistry — building on the work of Lavoisier — showed that the organic world could often be analyzed by physical and chemical methods . In 1828 Wöhler showed that the organic substance urea could be created by chemical means that do not involve life , providing a powerful challenge to vitalism . Cell extracts ( " ferments " ) that could effect chemical transformations were discovered , beginning with <unk> in 1833 . By the end of the 19th century the concept of enzymes was well established , though equations of chemical kinetics would not be applied to enzymatic reactions until the early 20th century . 
 <unk> such as Claude Bernard explored ( through vivisection and other experimental methods ) the chemical and physical functions of living bodies to an unprecedented degree , laying the groundwork for endocrinology ( a field that developed quickly after the discovery of the first hormone , secretin , in 1902 ) , biomechanics , and the study of nutrition and digestion . The importance and diversity of experimental physiology methods , within both medicine and biology , grew dramatically over the second half of the 19th century . The control and manipulation of life processes became a central concern , and experiment was placed at the center of biological education . 
 = = Twentieth century biological sciences = = 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , biological research was largely a professional endeavour . Most work was still done in the natural history mode , which emphasized morphological and phylogenetic analysis over experiment @-@ based causal explanations . However , anti @-@ vitalist experimental physiologists and <unk> , especially in Europe , were increasingly influential . The tremendous success of experimental approaches to development , heredity , and metabolism in the 1900s and 1910s demonstrated the power of experimentation in biology . In the following decades , experimental work replaced natural history as the dominant mode of research . 
 = = = Ecology and environmental science = = = 
 In the early 20th century , naturalists were faced with increasing pressure to add rigor and preferably experimentation to their methods , as the newly prominent laboratory @-@ based biological disciplines had done . Ecology had emerged as a combination of biogeography with the biogeochemical cycle concept pioneered by chemists ; field biologists developed quantitative methods such as the <unk> and adapted laboratory instruments and cameras for the field to further set their work apart from traditional natural history . Zoologists and botanists did what they could to mitigate the unpredictability of the living world , performing laboratory experiments and studying semi @-@ controlled natural environments such as gardens ; new institutions like the Carnegie Station for Experimental Evolution and the Marine Biological Laboratory provided more controlled environments for studying organisms through their entire life cycles . 
 The ecological succession concept , pioneered in the 1900s and 1910s by Henry Chandler Cowles and Frederic Clements , was important in early plant ecology . Alfred <unk> 's predator @-@ prey equations , G. Evelyn Hutchinson 's studies of the biogeography and biogeochemical structure of lakes and rivers ( limnology ) and Charles Elton 's studies of animal food chains were pioneers among the succession of quantitative methods that colonized the developing ecological specialties . Ecology became an independent discipline in the 1940s and 1950s after Eugene P. Odum synthesized many of the concepts of ecosystem ecology , placing relationships between groups of organisms ( especially material and energy relationships ) at the center of the field . 
 In the 1960s , as evolutionary theorists explored the possibility of multiple units of selection , ecologists turned to evolutionary approaches . In population ecology , debate over group selection was brief but vigorous ; by 1970 , most biologists agreed that natural selection was rarely effective above the level of individual organisms . The evolution of ecosystems , however , became a lasting research focus . Ecology expanded rapidly with the rise of the environmental movement ; the International Biological Program attempted to apply the methods of big science ( which had been so successful in the physical sciences ) to ecosystem ecology and pressing environmental issues , while smaller @-@ scale independent efforts such as island biogeography and the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest helped redefine the scope of an increasingly diverse discipline . 
 = = = Classical genetics , the modern synthesis , and evolutionary theory = = = 
 1900 marked the so @-@ called rediscovery of Mendel : Hugo de Vries , Carl Correns , and Erich von <unk> independently arrived at Mendel 's laws ( which were not actually present in Mendel 's work ) . Soon after , cytologists ( cell biologists ) proposed that chromosomes were the hereditary material . Between 1910 and 1915 , Thomas Hunt Morgan and the " <unk> " in his fly lab forged these two ideas — both controversial — into the " Mendelian @-@ chromosome theory " of heredity . They quantified the phenomenon of genetic linkage and postulated that genes reside on chromosomes like beads on string ; they hypothesized crossing over to explain linkage and constructed genetic maps of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster , which became a widely used model organism . 
 Hugo de Vries tried to link the new genetics with evolution ; building on his work with heredity and hybridization , he proposed a theory of <unk> , which was widely accepted in the early 20th century . Lamarckism also had many adherents . Darwinism was seen as incompatible with the continuously variable traits studied by biometricians , which seemed only partially heritable . In the 1920s and 1930s — following the acceptance of the Mendelian @-@ chromosome theory — the emergence of the discipline of population genetics , with the work of R.A. Fisher , J.B.S. Haldane and Sewall Wright , unified the idea of evolution by natural selection with Mendelian genetics , producing the modern synthesis . The inheritance of acquired characters was rejected , while <unk> gave way as genetic theories matured . 
 In the second half of the century the ideas of population genetics began to be applied in the new discipline of the genetics of behavior , sociobiology , and , especially in humans , evolutionary psychology . In the 1960s W.D. Hamilton and others developed game theory approaches to explain altruism from an evolutionary perspective through kin selection . The possible origin of higher organisms through endosymbiosis , and contrasting approaches to molecular evolution in the gene @-@ centered view ( which held selection as the predominant cause of evolution ) and the neutral theory ( which made genetic drift a key factor ) spawned perennial debates over the proper balance of <unk> and contingency in evolutionary theory . 
 In the 1970s Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge proposed the theory of punctuated equilibrium which holds that stasis is the most prominent feature of the fossil record , and that most evolutionary changes occur rapidly over relatively short periods of time . In 1980 Luis Alvarez and Walter Alvarez proposed the hypothesis that an impact event was responsible for the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . Also in the early 1980s , statistical analysis of the fossil record of marine organisms published by Jack Sepkoski and David M. Raup led to a better appreciation of the importance of mass extinction events to the history of life on earth . 
 = = = Biochemistry , microbiology , and molecular biology = = = 
 By the end of the 19th century all of the major pathways of drug metabolism had been discovered , along with the outlines of protein and fatty acid metabolism and urea synthesis . In the early decades of the 20th century , the minor components of foods in human nutrition , the vitamins , began to be isolated and synthesized . Improved laboratory techniques such as chromatography and electrophoresis led to rapid advances in physiological chemistry , which — as biochemistry — began to achieve independence from its medical origins . In the 1920s and 1930s , biochemists — led by Hans Krebs and Carl and Gerty Cori — began to work out many of the central metabolic pathways of life : the citric acid cycle , <unk> and glycolysis , and the synthesis of steroids and porphyrins . Between the 1930s and 1950s , Fritz Lipmann and others established the role of ATP as the universal carrier of energy in the cell , and mitochondria as the powerhouse of the cell . Such traditionally biochemical work continued to be very actively pursued throughout the 20th century and into the 21st . 
 = = = = Origins of molecular biology = = = = 
 Following the rise of classical genetics , many biologists — including a new wave of physical scientists in biology — pursued the question of the gene and its physical nature . Warren Weaver — head of the science division of the Rockefeller Foundation — issued grants to promote research that applied the methods of physics and chemistry to basic biological problems , coining the term molecular biology for this approach in 1938 ; many of the significant biological breakthroughs of the 1930s and 1940s were funded by the Rockefeller Foundation . 
 Like biochemistry , the overlapping disciplines of bacteriology and virology ( later combined as microbiology ) , situated between science and medicine , developed rapidly in the early 20th century . Félix d 'Herelle 's isolation of bacteriophage during World War I initiated a long line of research focused on phage viruses and the bacteria they infect . 
 The development of standard , genetically uniform organisms that could produce repeatable experimental results was essential for the development of molecular genetics . After early work with Drosophila and maize , the adoption of simpler model systems like the bread mold Neurospora crassa made it possible to connect genetics to biochemistry , most importantly with Beadle and Tatum 's one gene @-@ one enzyme hypothesis in 1941 . Genetics experiments on even simpler systems like tobacco mosaic virus and bacteriophage , aided by the new technologies of electron microscopy and ultracentrifugation , forced scientists to re @-@ evaluate the literal meaning of life ; virus heredity and reproducing nucleoprotein cell structures outside the nucleus ( " <unk> " ) complicated the accepted Mendelian @-@ chromosome theory . 
 Oswald Avery showed in 1943 that DNA was likely the genetic material of the chromosome , not its protein ; the issue was settled decisively with the 1952 Hershey – Chase experiment — one of many contributions from the so @-@ called phage group centered around physicist @-@ turned @-@ biologist Max Delbrück . In 1953 James Watson and Francis Crick , building on the work of Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin , suggested that the structure of DNA was a double helix . In their famous paper " Molecular structure of Nucleic Acids " , Watson and Crick noted coyly , " It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material . " After the 1958 Meselson – Stahl experiment confirmed the <unk> replication of DNA , it was clear to most biologists that nucleic acid sequence must somehow determine amino acid sequence in proteins ; physicist George Gamow proposed that a fixed genetic code connected proteins and DNA . Between 1953 and 1961 , there were few known biological sequences — either DNA or protein — but an abundance of proposed code systems , a situation made even more complicated by expanding knowledge of the intermediate role of RNA . To actually decipher the code , it took an extensive series of experiments in biochemistry and bacterial genetics , between 1961 and 1966 — most importantly the work of Nirenberg and Khorana . 
 = = = = Expansion of molecular biology = = = = 
 In addition to the Division of Biology at Caltech , the Laboratory of Molecular Biology ( and its precursors ) at Cambridge , and a handful of other institutions , the Pasteur Institute became a major center for molecular biology research in the late 1950s . Scientists at Cambridge , led by Max Perutz and John Kendrew , focused on the rapidly developing field of structural biology , combining X @-@ ray crystallography with Molecular modelling and the new computational possibilities of digital computing ( benefiting both directly and indirectly from the military funding of science ) . A number of biochemists led by Frederick Sanger later joined the Cambridge lab , bringing together the study of macromolecular structure and function . At the Pasteur Institute , François Jacob and Jacques Monod followed the 1959 <unk> experiment with a series of publications regarding the lac operon that established the concept of gene regulation and identified what came to be known as messenger RNA . By the mid @-@ 1960s , the intellectual core of molecular biology — a model for the molecular basis of metabolism and reproduction — was largely complete . 
 The late 1950s to the early 1970s was a period of intense research and institutional expansion for molecular biology , which had only recently become a somewhat coherent discipline . In what organismic biologist E. O. Wilson called " The Molecular Wars " , the methods and practitioners of molecular biology spread rapidly , often coming to dominate departments and even entire disciplines . <unk> was particularly important in genetics , immunology , embryology , and neurobiology , while the idea that life is controlled by a " genetic program " — a metaphor Jacob and Monod introduced from the emerging fields of cybernetics and computer science — became an influential perspective throughout biology . Immunology in particular became linked with molecular biology , with innovation flowing both ways : the clonal selection theory developed by Niels Jerne and Frank Macfarlane Burnet in the mid @-@ 1950s helped shed light on the general mechanisms of protein synthesis . 
 Resistance to the growing influence of molecular biology was especially evident in evolutionary biology . Protein sequencing had great potential for the quantitative study of evolution ( through the molecular clock hypothesis ) , but leading evolutionary biologists questioned the relevance of molecular biology for answering the big questions of evolutionary causation . Departments and disciplines fractured as organismic biologists asserted their importance and independence : Theodosius Dobzhansky made the famous statement that " nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution " as a response to the molecular challenge . The issue became even more critical after 1968 ; Motoo Kimura 's neutral theory of molecular evolution suggested that natural selection was not the ubiquitous cause of evolution , at least at the molecular level , and that molecular evolution might be a fundamentally different process from morphological evolution . ( Resolving this " molecular / morphological paradox " has been a central focus of molecular evolution research since the 1960s . ) 
 = = = Biotechnology , genetic engineering , and genomics = = = 
 Biotechnology in the general sense has been an important part of biology since the late 19th century . With the industrialization of brewing and agriculture , chemists and biologists became aware of the great potential of human @-@ controlled biological processes . In particular , fermentation proved a great boon to chemical industries . By the early 1970s , a wide range of <unk> were being developed , from drugs like penicillin and steroids to foods like <unk> and single @-@ cell protein to gasohol — as well as a wide range of hybrid high @-@ yield crops and agricultural technologies , the basis for the Green Revolution . 
 = = = = Recombinant DNA = = = = 
 Biotechnology in the modern sense of genetic engineering began in the 1970s , with the invention of recombinant DNA techniques . Restriction enzymes were discovered and characterized in the late 1960s , following on the heels of the isolation , then duplication , then synthesis of viral genes . Beginning with the lab of Paul Berg in 1972 ( aided by <unk> from Herbert Boyer 's lab , building on work with ligase by Arthur Kornberg 's lab ) , molecular biologists put these pieces together to produce the first transgenic organisms . Soon after , others began using plasmid vectors and adding genes for antibiotic resistance , greatly increasing the reach of the recombinant techniques . 
 Wary of the potential dangers ( particularly the possibility of a prolific bacteria with a viral cancer @-@ causing gene ) , the scientific community as well as a wide range of scientific outsiders reacted to these developments with both enthusiasm and fearful restraint . Prominent molecular biologists led by Berg suggested a temporary moratorium on recombinant DNA research until the dangers could be assessed and policies could be created . This moratorium was largely respected , until the participants in the 1975 Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA created policy recommendations and concluded that the technology could be used safely . 
 Following Asilomar , new genetic engineering techniques and applications developed rapidly . DNA sequencing methods improved greatly ( pioneered by Frederick Sanger and Walter Gilbert ) , as did oligonucleotide synthesis and transfection techniques . Researchers learned to control the expression of transgenes , and were soon racing — in both academic and industrial contexts — to create organisms capable of expressing human genes for the production of human hormones . However , this was a more daunting task than molecular biologists had expected ; developments between 1977 and 1980 showed that , due to the phenomena of split genes and splicing , higher organisms had a much more complex system of gene expression than the bacteria models of earlier studies . The first such race , for synthesizing human insulin , was won by Genentech . This marked the beginning of the biotech boom ( and with it , the era of gene patents ) , with an unprecedented level of overlap between biology , industry , and law . 
 = = = = Molecular systematics and genomics = = = = 
 By the 1980s , protein sequencing had already transformed methods of scientific classification of organisms ( especially cladistics ) but biologists soon began to use RNA and DNA sequences as characters ; this expanded the significance of molecular evolution within evolutionary biology , as the results of molecular systematics could be compared with traditional evolutionary trees based on morphology . Following the pioneering ideas of Lynn Margulis on endosymbiotic theory , which holds that some of the organelles of eukaryotic cells originated from free living prokaryotic organisms through symbiotic relationships , even the overall division of the tree of life was revised . Into the 1990s , the five domains ( Plants , Animals , Fungi , <unk> , and <unk> ) became three ( the Archaea , the Bacteria , and the Eukarya ) based on Carl Woese 's pioneering molecular systematics work with 16S rRNA sequencing . 
 The development and popularization of the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) in mid @-@ 1980s ( by Kary Mullis and others at Cetus Corp. ) marked another watershed in the history of modern biotechnology , greatly increasing the ease and speed of genetic analysis . Coupled with the use of expressed sequence tags , PCR led to the discovery of many more genes than could be found through traditional biochemical or genetic methods and opened the possibility of sequencing entire genomes . 
 The unity of much of the morphogenesis of organisms from fertilized egg to adult began to be unraveled after the discovery of the homeobox genes , first in fruit flies , then in other insects and animals , including humans . These developments led to advances in the field of evolutionary developmental biology towards understanding how the various body plans of the animal phyla have evolved and how they are related to one another . 
 The Human Genome Project — the largest , most costly single biological study ever undertaken — began in 1988 under the leadership of James D. Watson , after preliminary work with genetically simpler model organisms such as E. coli , S. cerevisiae and C. elegans . Shotgun sequencing and gene discovery methods pioneered by Craig Venter — and fueled by the financial promise of gene patents with Celera Genomics — led to a public – private sequencing competition that ended in compromise with the first draft of the human DNA sequence announced in 2000 . 
 = = Twenty @-@ first century biological sciences = = 
 At the beginning of the 21st century , biological sciences converged with previously differentiated new and classic disciplines like Physics into research fields like Biophysics . Advances were made in analytical chemistry and physics instrumentation including improved sensors , optics , tracers , instrumentation , signal processing , networks , robots , satellites , and compute power for data collection , storage , analysis , modeling , visualization , and simulations . These technology advances allowed theoretical and experimental research including internet publication of molecular biochemistry , biological systems , and ecosystems science . This enabled worldwide access to better measurements , theoretical models , complex simulations , theory predictive model experimentation , analysis , worldwide internet observational data reporting , open peer @-@ review , collaboration , and internet publication . New fields of biological sciences research emerged including Bioinformatics , Neuroscience , Theoretical biology , Computational genomics , Astrobiology and Synthetic Biology . 
 = The Passing Zone = 
 The Passing Zone is an American comedy @-@ juggling duo comprising Jon Wee and Owen Morse . Wee , originally from Minnesota , and Morse , a California native , met at a juggling convention in northern California in 1986 and decided two years later to team up . Since then , the Passing Zone has won 18 gold medals from the International Jugglers ' Association ( IJA ) and holds five Guinness World Records . 
 The Passing Zone was one of ten finalists out of hundreds of acts to perform during the debut season of NBC 's America 's Got Talent where , despite finishing as " the highest rated comedy act , " Wee and Morse " lost one million dollars to an 11 @-@ year @-@ old . " They have entertained as part of the Royal Variety Performance for England 's Prince Charles — sharing the bill with Tony Bennett and the cast of Riverdance , among others — and also have been " guest performers " at the White House . The Passing Zone performs regularly for some of the top corporations in the United States while " inspiring groups to be better teams . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 Jonathan Wee is one of three children of David and Karen Wee and was raised in Northfield , Minnesota . A performer since age 14 , Wee preferred to juggle with partners . He performed with two childhood friends , calling themselves Three of Clubs , and worked the Minnesota Renaissance Fair . Wee admits that they " were really pretty bad , " although in the end he figures that fair officials " thought , ' we 'll let them in . ' " Owen Morse , of Tustin , California , began performing in high school , crafted a 15 @-@ minute @-@ long , sports @-@ themed routine set to music , and eventually earned work through an agency in Hollywood , playing the Sawdust Festival in Laguna Beach while in high school and working at Disneyland while in college . 
 A mutual friend introduced Wee and Morse at a jugglers ' convention in San Jose , California , and they spent the next year corresponding regularly . The two met again at the IJA convention in Akron , Ohio , and decided to pair up in 1988 for the Teams Championships in Denver , Colorado , where they took the silver medal only " two weeks after their first performance together . " The following year , they took the gold . 
 Wee elected to move to southern California after he graduated from Luther College that spring . Morse graduated one year later from University of California , Irvine . By the end of 2006 , Morse was living in Tustin with his wife and their two daughters while Wee lived in Hermosa Beach with his wife and their son and daughter . 
 = = Career = = 
 Wee and Morse spent several years honing their act at comedy clubs , trade shows and colleges . They were the first jugglers documented to pass eleven clubs between them . In addition , their performances have been seen as innovative , having created such routines as " The Chainsaw Ballet " ( performed to The Blue Danube ) and " people juggling " ( featuring three audience members hanging from special rigging ) . All in all the pair owns five Guinness World Records and has collected 18 gold medals from the IJA . 
 The Passing Zone was among the varied acts taking part in the Royal Variety Performance at Dominion Theatre in 1994 for England 's Prince Charles , who called their act " very clever , although I 'm glad I wasn 't sitting in the front row ! " Wee and Morse have performed during half @-@ time shows at NBA , CBA and NCAA sporting events . They have been featured on such television programs as Comic Strip Live , The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson ( in 1990 and 1991 ) , Donny & Marie and Live with Regis and Kathie Lee . They were hired as juggling stand @-@ ins for Raúl Juliá and Christopher Lloyd in The Addams Family ( 1991 ) , performing " in the climactic <unk> dagger @-@ passing scene . " In 2005 , the pair took part in Penn Jillette 's comedy documentary The Aristocrats , and appeared as juggling chefs in an episode of Hell 's Kitchen . 
 Wee and Morse have been " guest performers " at the White House . They also were hired to provide guest commentary for ESPN 's coverage of the World Juggling Federation competitions . 
 The men actively market their act to corporate events , where they demonstrate the concept of teamwork by bringing executives and employees to the stage and by using the company 's products and logos as part of their act . They have performed to stress the value of teamwork for such diverse organizations as Boeing , Deloitte and Touche , Hewlett @-@ Packard , Mattel and the United States Army . 
 = = = America 's Got Talent , 2006 = = = 
 The Passing Zone made its first appearance during the third week of America 's Got Talent , as part of the Chicago auditions aired on July 5 , 2006 . Wee bounced a rubber ( prop ) bowling ball off of Morse 's face ( " to make sure you 're paying attention " ) , then climbed onto Morse 's shoulders while Morse balanced on a Rola Bola long enough for the duo to juggle a total of six flaming torches in unison . The judges ' assessments were not unanimous ; David Hasselhoff rejected them ( " That 's the act ? ! " ) while Brandy and Piers Morgan wanted to see more . 
 Wee and Morse replicated " people juggling " for the semi @-@ finals on August 2 , 2006 , winning over the audience and Hasselhoff ( " I think I have just gotten out of ' I Hate Jugglers Anonymous ' . I thought that was fantastic ! " ) . One of ten acts to return for the finals two weeks later , The Passing Zone brought Hasselhoff to the stage and , as all three men wore torches atop construction helmets ( and with Hasselhoff holding four spinning plates ) , Wee and Morse passed sickles back and forth around him . Though Morgan thought they had done exceptionally well , the act finished in the bottom five when the results of the viewers ' vote were announced on August 17 , 2006 . 
 = = = " Gravity Attacks ! " = = = 
 Wee and Morse debuted their act " Gravity Attacks ! " in 2012 . The performance incorporates such elements as " chainsaws , torches and knives " flying through the air , along with audience members seemingly floating in space , " orbiting planets [ and ] narrowly escaping dangerous collisions . " 
 = = = America 's Got Talent , 2016 = = = 
 The Passing Zone auditioned for season 11 of America 's Got Talent in an episode broadcast on July 5 , 2016 . Wee and Morse asked judge Howie Mandel to lie on the stage ; Morse straddled him while juggling a mouse trap , a flaming plunger and a taser . Wee then jumped over Morse while keeping the items in the air . The act was put through to the next round . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Phengaris rebeli = 
 The Phengaris rebeli ( formerly Maculinea rebeli ) , common name mountain alcon blue , is a species of butterfly in the Lycaenidae family . It was first found and described in Styria , Austria on Mount <unk> around 1700 . Although it was initially classified as a subspecies of P. alcon , a European researcher , Lucien A. Berger , designated it as a separate species in 1946 . 
 Although P. rebeli is found across the Palearctic ( see subspecies ) , it is difficult to determine exactly where they inhabit because of their similarity with P. alcon . In West Europe they are thought to be concentrated in the Alps and in Southern Europe . 
 Behavioral ecologists have found its role as a brood parasite to be of particular interest as , unlike many brood parasites , it does not directly <unk> in the hosts ' nests . The P. rebeli parasitizes the colony ant species Myrmica schencki as a larva by using chemical mimicry to trick the ants into believing that they are ant larvae ; thus , the ants bring the P. rebeli larvae back to their own nests and feed them . It also parasitizes the foodplant Gentiana cruciata early in its lifecycle , but in turn , is parasitized by the Ichneumon eumerus when it is in the M. schencki 's nest . It was placed on the IUCN Red List in 2000 and is classified as a species ' vulnerable ' to extinction . Although a separate species from the P. alcon , its DNA genome and appearance are extremely similar , leading many researchers to argue that any differences between the two species are due to intraspecific variation . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Phengaris genus is a subsect within the Maculinea genus ( explaining why the P. rebeli was formerly known as the M. rebeli ) and the Maculinea @-@ Phengaris clade is thought to be a sect within <unk> . There are three groups within this Maculinea @-@ Phengaris clade : the alcon group , the teleius group , and the Arion @-@ Phengaris group . 
 The groups are divided based on their alternative strategies of parasitizing its host colony ( Myrmica ants ) . The predatory ( in which the caterpillar preys on the host ants ) and ' cuckoo ' ( in which the caterpillars feed off of the ants ' regurgitation ) strategies are derived characteristics from the alcon group , with the predatory strategy having evolved from the teleius group and the cuckoo strategy having evolved from the arion @-@ Phengaris group . Another way these groups are categorized is by whether or not they release a certain chemical ( dorsal nectary organ secretions ) to attract the attention of the host ant . This trait is not as prominent in ancestors of the alcon group and in the M. <unk> , which is part of the teleius group . 
 The P. rebeli is most closely related to both species of the Maculinea alcon ( the M. alcon alcon and the M. alcon kondakovi ) with the M. alcon alcon being more closely related to the P. rebeli than to the M. alcon kondakovi . 
 = = Subspecies = = 
 Phengaris rebeli rebeli ( <unk> , 1904 ) Central and South Europe 
 Phengaris rebeli <unk> ( <unk> , [ 1909 ] ) Caucasus Major 
 Phengaris rebeli imitator <unk> , 2000 North Tian @-@ Shan , <unk> , <unk> 
 Phengaris rebeli kondakovi <unk> , 1970 <unk> , Amur Oblast , Ussuri Northeast China 
 Phengaris rebeli monticola ( Staudinger , 1901 ) Armenia 
 Phengaris rebeli ssp . Altai mountains 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The P. rebeli are noted for their large blue wings , with the males displaying a violet blue shade and the females displaying blue basal areas interspersed with brown spots , similar to other butterflies in its genus . The undersides of the butterfly are a dark brown with small black spots that are circled in white . It can be distinguished from its close relative , the P. alcon , by the broader black margins of the upperside male and the extensive blue basal areas in the females . It has a wingspan of approximately 32 – 36 mm long . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 It resides in fairly dry areas at lower levels and damp meadows amongst trees at alpine levels and is found in altitudes of 1000 – 2000 meters . Although it is found around the globe , populations of P. rebeli are concentrated in the northern part of Portugal and Greece , the western Pyrenees , France , and eastern part of Germany . 
 = = Brood parasitism = = 
 = = = Discovery of brood parasitism = = = 
 The Phengaris rebeli is a brood parasite , an organism that manipulates another organism ( the host ) to raise its offspring ; in this case , the P. rebeli parasitizes a particular species of ant , the Myrmica schencki . The P. rebeli was first discovered to be a brood parasite when a researcher observed M. schencki ants bringing the P. rebeli larvae back to their own nest . One of the proposed hypotheses for this parasitism was that P. rebeli larvae released chemicals to confuse the ants into believing they were ant larvae . 
 It was determined that P. rebeli larvae use chemical mimicry to persuade the M. schencki ants that the P. rebeli are part of the ant brood . Furthermore , M. schencki ants cannot distinguish the physical differences between the P. rebeli larvae and other non @-@ kin brood because the P. rebeli larvae are far more similar to the M. schencki ’ s larvae than to any other ant species larvae . 
 P. rebeli live in different habitats ; therefore , they do not parasitize the same Myrmica ant species . Through observation and experimentation , researchers found that if P. rebeli try to parasitize a different Myrmica ant species than the one they normally do , the Myrmica ants will identify the P. rebeli larvae as intruders and will kill 100 % of the P. rebeli larvae . The differences between the P. rebeli are that they synthesize different hydrocarbons , which allow them to mimic different species of Myrmica ants . This explains why they have no success in being mistaken for another species of Myrmica ant and the ensuing 100 % mortality rate when the other Myrmica ant species is not fooled . 
 = = = Acoustics and social rank in host hierarchy = = = 
 Once the P. rebeli larvae infiltrate the host ’ s brood , they ascend to the highest social ranks of the host ’ s hierarchy by using acoustics to achieve social acceptance from worker M. schencki ants . P. rebeli larvae and pupa accomplish this by mimicking the sound that the queen of the ant colony makes , both while as a larva and as a pupa in the colony . 
 While the Myrmica ant colony can identify each other through chemical signaling , social ranks are partially determined by sound acoustics . Therefore , once the P. rebeli begin to mimic the sound of the queen ant , the worker ants begin to treat the P. rebeli as if it were the queen ant . On the other hand , the queen ant treats the P. rebeli larvae and pupae as if they were rivals , as she is the only one in the colony that recognizes that the P. rebeli larvae is not ant larvae . 
 The most common functions of the queen ant sounds are to recruit workers , smell nestmates , and facilitate oral exchanges of food and pheromones . Most importantly , however , is the fact that distress noises made by the queen causes workers to raise their guard and bolster her protection . 
 Researchers speculate that acoustical mimicry is related to the level of interaction between the host and parasite . In the Phengaris genus , there are two different strategies : the cuckoo strategy used by P. rebeli and the predatory strategy used by Phengaris arion . In P. rebeli , the Phengaris larvae become integrated into the colony and are attended by worker ants . However , larvae in predatory species prey on the ants ’ brood and consequently spend much of their life hiding in pockets of the brood nest . 
 = = = Integration into host ’ s life = = = 
 There are two phases for P. rebeli ’ s complete integration into the Myrmica schencki ant colony : initial integration and full integration . In both stages of integration , the P. rebeli caterpillar is brought into the brood nest ; however , in full integration , the P. rebeli also achieves its high social status within the host society . That status is crucial for surviving periods of host colony stress such as food shortage . 
 Studies have shown that the P. rebeli caterpillars benefit most when they parasitize off of the Myrmica schencki ant colony than any other ant colony . When Myrmica ant colonies encounter a period of food shortage , more P. rebeli caterpillars survive than if this food shortage were to occur in any other species of ant colony . This is because the P. rebeli caterpillars have a lower social rank in other ant species compared to their social rank in the M. schencki ant colony . This phenomenon is seen during times of stress , when some of the hungry P. <unk> caterpillars secrete compounds to attract attention from the ant colony it has parasitized . While the M. schencki ants are still fooled into believing that the P. rebeli are of their own brood , these compounds do not mimic those of non @-@ host species ' societies in other ant species , and thus , results in the P. rebeli being identified as intruders and killed . 
 On the other hand , the M. schencki prefers to feeds the P. rebeli during times of food shortage . Thus , in periods of starvation , P. rebeli caterpillars overall exhibit a higher survival rate than those of the M. schencki larvae . 
 = = = Polymorphism of growth in larvae = = = 
 Polymorphism in Lepidoptera is a common occurrence and the P. rebeli caterpillar is no exception as it displays polymorphism in its larval form . The P. rebeli caterpillars have two strategies for living and growing underground : to exist as fast @-@ developing larvae ( FDL ) or slow @-@ developing larvae ( SDL ) . After the ant brood adopts the FDL , which comprise approximately 25 % of the total P. rebeli larvae , the FDL complete growth the following spring and eclose ( emerge as an adult from the pupa ) in early summer to complete their life cycle . The SDL , which comprise 75 % of P. rebeli larvae , do not grow much during the first year , but grow rapidly during the early part of the second summer and remain a second winter within the ant colonies . While both larva types ultimately form similar @-@ sized pupae , their polymorphic growth rates could indicate alternative fitness strategies and different ways to exploit the M. schencki ’ s food resources . 
 Other researchers hypothesize that another alternative growth strategy will evolve in the P. rebeli , in which the P. rebeli will parasitize the M. schencki ants for an even longer period of time than the slow developing larvae . Most researchers , however , find this hypothesis highly unlikely because it is not an evolutionarily stable strategy . At the rate the P. rebeli parasitizes the M. schencki ants , the host colony is unlikely to last as a viable food source for more than two years ( the average lifespan of the longer polymorph of P. rebeli ) . Once the host colony reaches its lifespan of two years and dies , the P. rebeli loses its food source and dies as well . 
 The P. rebeli ’ s developmental rate shows great phenotypic plasticity ( changing its developmental rate in response to changes in the environment ) , as it develops very quickly in the lab and in the Pyrenees and Southern Alps . Scientists hypothesize that this plasticity is due to warm conditions and more light exposure , which affects larval development . Abundant food resources are also thought to play a part in quickened development . 
 Studies have shown that smaller @-@ sized P. rebeli from Hungary normally eclose at the end of June or mid @-@ July ; however , when these populations are studied in laboratories , they do not eclose until late August . This has led researchers to speculate that P. rebeli larvae that do not receive adequate food can still fully develop in one year and act as a functioning adult . However , they are unlikely to be <unk> ( producing two broods in one season ) . This hypothesis is supported by the fact that certain researchers claim that P. rebeli larvae can have continuous development . 
 = = = <unk> mutualism = = = 
 P. rebeli pupae prey upon their <unk> , while producing sugar @-@ rich secretions which worker ants imbibe . In one experiment , P. rebeli specimens which consumed ant larvae developed more quickly than those who did not . However , despite their nourishing offering to the community , they invariably imposed a net loss in the survival rates of workers and <unk> , demonstrating that the species is parasitic ( rather than mutualistic ) at all stages in its host colony . 
 = = Relationship with host plant Gentiana cruciata = = 
 Besides parasitizing the host ant , P. rebeli also parasitizes the grassland plant Gentiana cruciata as a source of nutrition and feed off of its flowers and developing fruits . 
 The larger the population size of the G. cruciata , the more flowers and seeds the plant produces ; however , there is also a positive link between the population size of the G. cruciata and the frequency of P. rebeli parasitizing the plant . Researchers are particularly interested in the G. cruciata plant because both the P. rebeli and G. cruciata are endangered . As a result , lepidopterists believe that conserving the P. rebeli requires focusing conservation efforts on preserving G. cruciata as well . 
 Researchers discovered that where the P. rebeli lay their eggs is based on the size of the G. cruciata leaves and not upon the location of the closest Myrmica ant colony . Evidence for P. rebeli ’ s oviposition depending upon the range of the food plant rather than the range of the ants is supported by the timing of its oviposition . P. rebeli lays their eggs during the warm summer season , when Myrmica ants are most likely to be underground . Researchers also observed females did not base their oviposition on where they found Myrmica nests . 
 = = Relationship with the parasitic wasp , Ichneumon eumerus = = 
 Though P. rebeli parasitizes the Myrmica schencki ants and Gentiana cruciata foodplant , it also acts as a host to the parasitoid Ichneumon wasp ( Ichneumon eumerus ) . The I. eumerus is a wasp that attempts to parasitize the P. rebeli after it has been introduced to the Myrmica ants ’ nests . The adult wasp searches for Myrmica ant nests by responding strongly to the scent of Myrmica schencki ants , the species that P. rebeli most commonly and successfully parasitizes . 
 After locating the M. <unk> nest , the wasp enters only the nests that contain P. rebeli caterpillars . It is able to enter the nest without being swarmed because it releases a chemical that causes the worker ants to attack one another instead of concentrating all their efforts on the wasp . Once the wasp reaches the caterpillars , it marks the individuals most likely to survive by ovipositing in them . Once the wasp ’ s eggs hatch from the caterpillar ’ s body , the newborn offspring feast on the caterpillar ’ s carcass . 
 = = Conflicts over classification = = 
 Several researchers argue that the P. rebeli has not evolved into a separate species from the Phengaris alcon . Researchers have determined that both species share a similar adult morphology , DNA and allozymes . They found that any variation between the two species is due to intraspecific variation , meaning that they are not distinct species . Furthermore , they both have similar methods of parasitizing the host ant : they act as parasitic " cuckoos " within the ant nest and feed upon the ants ' regurgitation . This is compared to the alternative method of predation that other butterflies , such as the Maculinea arion utilize to parasitize the host ant . 
 To test this hypothesis , researchers examined how each species utilized the host ants . The M. schencki , M. <unk> are parasitized by P. rebeli while the M. salina and M. <unk> are parasitized by the P. alcon . The M. <unk> is parasitized by both the P. rebeli and the P. alcon ; however , the P. alcon is far more likely to parasitize M. <unk> than the P. rebeli . Researchers found that in general , P. alcon was far more likely to parasitize the host ant than P. rebeli ; however , ant nests that supported the P. alcon were much smaller and supported lower populations than ant nests that supported P. rebeli . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The P. rebeli has been rigorously studied in Europe because it has priority conservation status and was classified as “ vulnerable ” in 2000 by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species , which is described to be “ the world ’ s most comprehensive inventory ” that lists the conservation status of plants and animals . It was first brought to the IUCN ’ s attention and listed on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species in 1986 . The reason for being categorized as “ vulnerable ” is that despite its wide distribution , it has decreased by 20 @-@ 50 % over the last 25 years and has reached extinction in at least one country . 
 The reasons for this drastic population reduction are thought to be due to agricultural improvements , abandonment of extensive management , and deforestation . As the area of the Gentiana cruciata , the foodplant that the P. rebeli depends on , decreases , the P. rebeli population also decreases . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Isaac Shelby = 
 Isaac Shelby ( December 11 , 1750 – July 18 , 1826 ) was the first and fifth Governor of the U.S. state of Kentucky and served in the state legislatures of Virginia and North Carolina . He was also a soldier in Lord Dunmore 's War , the Revolutionary War , and the War of 1812 . While governor , he personally led the Kentucky militia in the Battle of the Thames , an action that was rewarded with a Congressional Gold Medal . Counties in nine states , and several cities and military bases , have been named in his honor . His fondness for John Dickinson 's The Liberty Song is believed to be the reason Kentucky adopted the state motto " United we stand , divided we fall " . 
 Shelby 's military service began when he served as second @-@ in @-@ command to his father at the Battle of Point Pleasant , the only major battle of Lord Dunmore 's War . He gained the reputation of an expert woodsman and surveyor , and spent the early part of the Revolutionary War gathering supplies for the Continental Army . Later in the war , he and John Sevier led expeditions over the Appalachian Mountains against the British forces in North Carolina . He played a pivotal role in the British defeat at the Battle of King 's Mountain . For his service , he was presented with a ceremonial sword and a pair of pistols by the North Carolina legislature , and the nickname " Old King 's Mountain " followed him the rest of his life . 
 Following the war , Shelby relocated to Kentucky on lands awarded to him for his military service and became involved in Kentucky 's transition from a county of Virginia to an independent state . His heroism made him popular with the citizens of the state , and the state electoral college unanimously elected him governor in 1792 . He secured the state from Indian attacks and organized its first government . He leveraged the Citizen Genet affair to convince the Washington administration to make an agreement with the Spanish for free trade on the Mississippi River . 
 At the end of his gubernatorial term , Shelby retired from public life , but he was called back into politics by the impending War of 1812 . Kentuckians urged Shelby to run for governor again and lead them through the anticipated conflict . He was elected easily , and at the request of General William Henry Harrison , commanded troops from Kentucky at the Battle of the Thames . At the conclusion of the war , he declined President James Monroe 's offer to become Secretary of War . In his last act of public service , he and Andrew Jackson acted as commissioners to negotiate the Jackson Purchase from the Chickasaw Indian tribe . Shelby died at his estate in Lincoln County , Kentucky , on July 18 , 1826 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Isaac Shelby was born in the Province of Maryland on December 11 , 1750 , near Hagerstown in Frederick ( now Washington ) County . He was the third child and second son of Evan and Letitia ( Cox ) Shelby , who immigrated from Tregaron , Wales , in 1735 . Though the family had historically been loyal to the Church of England , they became Presbyterians after coming to British America ; this was the denomination Isaac Shelby embraced during his life . 
 Shelby was educated at the local schools in his native colony . He worked on his father 's plantation , and occasionally found work as a surveyor . At age eighteen , he was appointed deputy sheriff of Frederick County . Shelby 's father lost a great deal of money when Pontiac 's Rebellion disrupted his lucrative fur trade business , and two years later , the business ' records were destroyed in a house fire . Consequently in December 1770 , the family moved to the area near Bristol , Tennessee , where they built a fort and a trading post . Here , Shelby and his father worked for three years herding cattle . 
 During Lord Dunmore 's War , a border conflict between colonists and American Indians , Shelby was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Virginia militia by Colonel William Preston . As second @-@ in @-@ command of his father 's Fincastle County company , he participated in the decisive Battle of Point Pleasant on October 10 , 1774 . The younger Shelby earned commendation for his skill and gallantry in this battle . The victorious militiamen erected Fort Blair on the site of the battle . They remained stationed there , with Shelby as second @-@ in @-@ command , until July 1775 when Lord Dunmore ordered the fort destroyed , fearing it might become useful to colonial rebels in the growing American Revolution . 
 = = Revolutionary War = = 
 After his unit was disbanded , Shelby surveyed for the Transylvania Company , a land company that had purchased much of present @-@ day Kentucky from the Cherokees in a deal that was later invalidated by the government of Virginia . After fulfilling his duties with the Transylvania Company , he rejoined his family in Virginia , but returned to Kentucky the following year to claim and improve land there for himself . While there , he fell ill , and went home to recover in July 1776 . Back in Virginia , fighting in the American Revolutionary War was underway , and Shelby found a commission from the Virginia Committee of Safety appointing him captain of a company of Minutemen . In 1777 , Virginia governor Patrick Henry appointed Shelby to a position securing provisions for the army on the frontier . He served a similar role for units in the Continental Army in 1778 and 1779 . With his own money , Shelby purchased provisions for John Sevier 's 1779 expedition against the Chickamauga , a band of Cherokees who were resisting colonial expansion . 
 Shelby was elected to represent Washington County in the Virginia House of Delegates in 1779 . Later that year , he was commissioned a major by Governor Thomas Jefferson and charged with escorting a group of commissioners to establish a frontier boundary line between Virginia and North Carolina . Shortly after his arrival in the region , North Carolina Governor Richard Caswell elevated him to the rank of colonel and made him magistrate of newly formed Sullivan County . 
 Shelby was surveying lands in Kentucky in 1780 when he heard of the colonists ' defeat at Charleston . He hurried to North Carolina , where he found a request for aid from General Charles McDowell to defend the borders of North Carolina from the British . Shelby assembled three hundred militiamen and joined McDowell at Cherokee Ford in South Carolina . On the morning of July 31 , 1780 , he surrounded the British stronghold at <unk> Fort on the <unk> River with 600 men . He immediately demanded a surrender , but the British refused . Shelby brought his men within musket range and again demanded surrender . Though the fort likely would have withstood the attack , the British commander lost his nerve and capitulated . Without firing a shot , Shelby 's men captured 94 prisoners . 
 Following the surrender of <unk> Fort , Shelby joined a band of partisans under Lieutenant Elijah Clarke . This unit was pursued by British Major Patrick Ferguson . On the morning of August 8 , 1780 , some of Shelby 's men were gathering peaches from an orchard when they were surprised by some of Ferguson 's men on a reconnaissance mission . Shelby 's men quickly readied their arms and drove back the British patrol . Soon , however , the British were reinforced and the colonists fell back . The pattern continued , with one side being reinforced and gaining an advantage , followed by the other . Shelby 's men were winning the battle when Ferguson 's main force of 1 @,@ 000 men arrived . <unk> , they retreated to a nearby hill where British musket fire could not reach them . Now safe , they taunted the British , and Ferguson 's force withdrew from the area . Thus ended the Battle of Cedar Springs . 
 General McDowell then ordered Shelby and Clarke to take Musgrove 's Mill , a British encampment on the Enoree River . They rode all night with two hundred men , reaching their location about dawn on August 18 , 1780 . The colonists had estimated that the enemy force was of comparable size , but an advance scout brought word that there were approximately 500 British soldiers in the camp who were preparing for battle . Shelby 's men and horses were too tired for a retreat and they had lost the element of surprise . He ordered his men to construct a breastwork from nearby logs and brush . In half an hour the makeshift fortifications were complete , and twenty @-@ five colonial riders charged the British camp to provoke the attack . The British pursued them back to the main colonial force . Despite being outnumbered , the colonists killed several British officers and put their army to flight . 
 = = = Battle of King 's Mountain = = = 
 Shelby and Clarke elected not to pursue the British fleeing the Battle of Musgrove Mill . Instead , they set their sights on a British fort at Ninety Six , South Carolina , where they were sure they would find Ferguson . However , while en route , Shelby and his men were met with news of General Horatio Gates ' defeat at the Battle of Camden . With the backing of General Cornwallis , Ferguson could ride to meet Shelby with his entire force , so Shelby retreated over the Appalachian Mountains into North Carolina . 
 Following the colonists ' retreat , an emboldened Ferguson dispatched a paroled prisoner across the mountains to warn the colonists to cease their opposition or Ferguson would lay waste to the countryside . Angered by this act , Shelby and John Sevier began to plan another raid on the British . Shelby and Sevier raised 240 men each , and were joined by William Campbell with 400 from Washington County , Virginia and Charles McDowell with 160 men from Burke and Rutherford counties in North Carolina . The forces mustered at Sycamore Shoals on September 25 , 1780 . The troops crossed the difficult terrain of the Blue Ridge Mountains and arrived at McDowell 's estate near <unk> , North Carolina , on September 30 , 1780 . Here , they were joined by Colonel Benjamin Cleveland and Major Joseph Winston with 350 men from Surry and Wilkes counties . 
 The combined force pursued Ferguson to King 's Mountain , where he had fortified himself , declaring that " God Almighty and all the rebels out of hell " could not move him from it . The Battle of Kings Mountain commenced October 7 , 1780 . Shelby had ordered his men to advance from tree to tree , firing from behind each one ; he called this technique " Indian play " because he had seen the Indians use it in his previous battles with them . Ferguson ordered bayonet charges that forced Shelby 's men to fall back on three separate occasions , but eventually the colonists dislodged Ferguson 's men from their position . Seeing the battle was lost , Ferguson and his key officers attempted a retreat . The colonists were instructed to kill Ferguson . Simultaneous shots by Sevier 's men broke both Ferguson 's arms , fatally pierced his skull , and knocked him from his mount . Seeing their commander dead , the remaining British soldiers waved white flags of surrender . 
 King 's Mountain was the high point of Shelby 's military service , and from that point forward his men dubbed him " Old King 's Mountain " . The North Carolina legislature passed a vote of thanks to Shelby and Sevier for their service and ordered that each be presented a pair of pistols and a ceremonial sword . ( Shelby did not receive these items until he requested them from the legislature in 1813 . ) 
 As the colonists and their prisoners began the march from King 's Mountain , they learned that nine colonial prisoners had been hanged by the British at Fort Ninety @-@ Six . This was not the first such incident in the region , and the enraged colonists vowed that they would now put a stop to the hangings in the Carolinas . Summoning a jury from their number – which was legal because two North Carolina magistrates were present – the colonists selected random prisoners and charged them with crimes ranging from theft to arson to murder . By evening , the jury had convicted thirty @-@ six prisoners and sentenced them to hang . After the first nine hangings , however , Shelby ordered them stopped . He never gave a reason for this action , but his order was obeyed nonetheless , and the remaining " convicts " rejoined their fellow prisoners . 
 The King 's Mountain victors and their prisoners returned to McDowell 's estate early on the morning of October 10 , 1780 . From there , the various commanders and their men went their separate ways . Shelby and his men joined General Daniel Morgan at New Providence , South Carolina . While there , Shelby advised Morgan to take Fort Ninety @-@ Six and Augusta because he believed the British forces there were supplying the Cherokee with weapons for their raids against colonial settlers . Morgan agreed to the plan , as did General Horatio Gates , the supreme commander of colonial forces in the region . Assured that his plan would be carried out , Shelby returned home and promised to return the following spring with 300 men . On his way to Fort Ninety @-@ Six , Morgan was attacked by Banastre Tarleton and gained a decisive victory over him at the Battle of Cowpens . Shelby later lamented the fact that General Nathanael Greene , who relieved Gates only days after Shelby departed for home , claimed the lion 's share of the credit for Cowpens when it was Shelby 's plan that had put Morgan in the position to begin with . 
 = = = Later wartime service and settlement in Kentucky = = = 
 Upon his return home , Shelby and his father were named commissioners to negotiate a treaty between colonial settlers and the Chickamauga . This service delayed his return to Greene , but in October 1781 he and Sevier led 600 riflemen to join Greene in South Carolina . Greene had thought to use Shelby 's and Sevier 's men to prevent Cornwallis from returning to Charleston . However , Cornwallis was defeated at the Siege of Yorktown shortly after Shelby and Sevier arrived , and Greene sent them on to join General Francis Marion on the Pee Dee River . On Marion 's orders , Shelby and Colonel Hezekiah <unk> captured a British fort at Fair Lawn near Moncks Corner on November 27 , 1781 . 
 While still in the field , Shelby was elected to the North Carolina General Assembly . He requested and was granted a leave of absence from the Army to attend the legislative session of December 1781 . He was re @-@ elected in 1782 and attended the April session of the legislature that year . In early 1783 he was chosen as a commissioner to survey preemption claims of soldiers along the Cumberland River . 
 Shelby returned to Kentucky in April 1783 , settling at Boonesborough . He married Susannah Hart on April 19 , 1783 ; the couple had eleven children . Their eldest daughter , Sarah , married Dr. Ephraim McDowell , and the youngest daughter , Letitia , married future Kentucky secretary of state Charles Stewart Todd . On November 1 , 1783 , the family moved to Lincoln County , near Knob Lick , and occupied land awarded to Shelby for his military service . Shelby was named one of the first trustees of Transylvania Seminary ( later Transylvania University ) in 1783 , and on December 1 , 1787 , founded the Kentucky Society for the Promotion of Useful Knowledge . 
 Shelby began working to secure Kentucky 's separation from Virginia as early as 1784 . That year , he attended a convention to consider leading an expedition against the Indians and separating Kentucky from Virginia . He was a delegate to subsequent conventions in 1787 , 1788 , and 1789 that worked toward a constitution for Kentucky . During these conventions he helped thwart James Wilkinson 's scheme to align Kentucky with the Spanish . In 1791 Shelby , Charles Scott and Benjamin Logan were among those chosen by the Virginia legislature to serve on the Board of War for the district of Kentucky . Shelby was also made High Sheriff on Lincoln County . In 1792 he was a delegate to the final convention that framed the first Kentucky Constitution . 
 = = First term as governor = = 
 Under the new constitution , the voters chose electors who then elected the governor and members of the Kentucky Senate . Though there is no indication that Shelby actively sought the office of governor , he was elected unanimously to that post by the electors on May 17 , 1791 . He took office on June 4 , 1792 , the day the state was admitted to the Union . Though not actively partisan , he identified with the Democratic @-@ Republicans . Much of his term was devoted to establishing basic laws , military divisions and a tax structure . 
 One of Shelby 's chief concerns was securing federal aid to defend the frontier . Although Kentuckians were engaged in an undeclared war with American Indians north of the Ohio River , Shelby had been ordered by Secretary of War Henry Knox not to conduct offensive military actions against the Indians . Furthermore , he was limited by federal regulations that restricted the service of state militiamen to thirty days , which was too short to be effective . With the meager resources of his fledgling state he was only able to defend the most vulnerable areas from Indian attack . Meanwhile , Kentuckians suspected that the Indians were being stirred up and supplied by the British . 
 Shelby appealed to President Washington for help ; Washington responded by appointing General " Mad " Anthony Wayne to the area with orders to push the Indians out of the Northwest Territory . Wayne arrived at Fort Washington ( present @-@ day Cincinnati , Ohio ) in May 1793 , but was prevented from taking any immediate action because federal commissioners were still attempting to negotiate a treaty with the Indians . He called for 1 @,@ 000 volunteer troops from Kentucky , but few heeded the call and Shelby resorted to conscription . By the time the soldiers arrived , winter had set in . He ordered the men to go home and return in the spring . 
 After a winter filled with Indian attacks , including one which claimed the life of Shelby 's younger brother Evan Shelby III , Kentucky militia units won some minor victories over the Indians in early 1794 . In spring the response to Wayne 's call for troops was more enthusiastic ; 1 @,@ 600 volunteers mustered at Fort Greenville and were hastily trained . By August , 1794 , Wayne was on the offensive against the Indians and dealt them a decisive blow at the August 20 , 1794 Battle of Fallen Timbers . This victory , and the ensuing Treaty of Greenville , secured the territory , and although Shelby did not agree with some of the restrictions placed upon western settlers by this treaty , he abided by its terms and enforced those that were under his jurisdiction . 
 Another major concern of the Shelby administration was free navigation on the Mississippi River , which was vital to the state 's economic interests . For political reasons the Spanish had closed the port at New Orleans to the Americans . This would have been the natural market for the tobacco , flour and hemp grown by Kentucky farmers ; overland routes were too expensive to be profitable . This made it difficult for land speculators to entice immigration to the area to turn a profit on their investments . Many Kentuckians felt the federal government was not acting decisively or quickly enough to remedy this situation . 
 = = = Citizen Genêt affair = = = 
 While Kentuckians despised the British and Spanish , they had a strong affinity for the French . They admired the republican government that had arisen from the French Revolution , and they had not forgotten France 's aid during the Revolutionary War . When French Ambassador Edmond @-@ Charles Genêt , popularly known as Citizen Genêt , arrived in the United States in April 1793 , George Rogers Clark was already considering an expedition to capture Spanish lands in the west . Genêt 's agent , André Michaux , was dispatched to Kentucky to assess the support of Kentuckians toward Clark 's expedition . When he gained an audience with Governor Shelby , he did so with letters of introduction from Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and Kentucky Senator John Brown . 
 Jefferson had written a separate letter to Shelby warning him against aiding the French schemes and informing him that negotiations were under way with the Spanish regarding trade on the Mississippi . When the letter was sent on August 29 , 1793 , it was Jefferson 's intent that it reach Shelby before Michaux did , but Shelby did not receive it until October 1793 . On September 13 , 1793 , Michaux met with Shelby , but there is no evidence that Shelby agreed to help him . In his response to Jefferson 's delayed letter , Shelby assured Jefferson that Kentuckians " possess too just a sense of the obligation they owe the General Government , to embark in any enterprise that would be so injurious to the United States " . 
 In November 1793 , Shelby received a letter from another of Genêt 's agents , Charles <unk> . He confided to Shelby that he had been sent to secure supplies for an expedition against Spanish holdings , and inquired whether Shelby had been instructed to arrest individuals associated with such a scheme . Three days later Shelby responded by letter , relating Jefferson 's warning against aiding the French . Despite having no evidence that Shelby was party to Genêt 's scheme , both Jefferson and Knox felt compelled to warn him a second time . Jefferson provided names and descriptions of the French agents believed to be in Kentucky and encouraged their arrest . Knox went a step further by suggesting Kentucky would be reimbursed for any costs incurred resisting the French by force , should such action become necessary . General Anthony Wayne informed him that his cavalry was at the state 's disposal . Arthur St. Clair , governor of the American Northwest Territory , also admonished Shelby against cooperation with Genêt . 
 In his response to Jefferson , Shelby questioned whether he had the legal authority to intervene with force against his constituency and expressed his personal aversion to doing so . 
 I shall upon all occasions be averse to the exercise of any power which I do not consider myself as being clearly and explicitly invested with , much less would I assume power to exercise it against men whom I consider as friends and brethren , in favor of a man whom I view as an enemy and a tyrant [ the king of Spain ] . I shall also feel but little inclination to take an active part in punishing or restraining any of my fellow @-@ citizens for a supposed intention only to gratify or remove the fears of the ministers of a foreign prince , who openly withholds from us an invaluable right [ navigation of the Mississippi ] and who secretly instigates against us a most savage and cruel enemy . 
 Shelby tempered this lukewarm commitment by assuring Jefferson that " I shall , at all times , hold it my duty to perform whatever may be constitutionally required of me , as Governor of Kentucky , by the President of the United States . " 
 In March 1794 , perhaps in response to Shelby 's concerns , Congress passed a measure granting the government additional powers in the event of an invasion or insurrection . Jefferson 's successor Edmund Randolph , who actually received Shelby 's letter , wrote Shelby to inform him of the new powers at his disposal , and informing him that the new regime in France had recalled Genêt . Two months later Genêt 's agents ceased their operations in Kentucky and the potential crisis was averted . In 1795 , President Washington negotiated an agreement with the Spanish that secured the right of Americans to trade on the river . 
 Having successfully dealt with the major challenges and issues involved in forming a new state government , Shelby left the state safe and financially sound . Kentucky 's constitution prevented a governor from serving consecutive terms , so Shelby retired to Traveler 's Rest , his Lincoln County estate , at the conclusion of his term in 1796 . For the next 15 years he tended to affairs on his farm . He was selected as a presidential elector in six consecutive elections , but these were his only appearances in public life during this period . 
 = = Second term as governor = = 
 Gabriel Slaughter was the favorite choice for governor of Kentucky in 1812 . Only one impediment to his potential candidacy existed . Growing tensions between the United States , France , and Great Britain threatened to break into open war . With this prospect looming , Isaac Shelby 's name began circulating as a possible candidate for governor . Slaughter , who lived near Shelby , visited him and asked whether he would run . Shelby assured him that he had no desire to do so unless a national emergency that required his leadership emerged . Satisfied with this answer , Slaughter began his campaign . 
 The situation with the European powers grew worse , and on June 18 , 1812 the United States declared war on Great Britain , beginning the War of 1812 . Cries grew louder for Shelby to return as Kentucky 's chief executive . On July 18 , 1812 , less than a month before the election , Shelby acquiesced and announced his candidacy . 
 During the campaign Shelby 's political enemies , notably Humphrey Marshall , criticized his response to Jefferson 's second letter regarding the Genêt affair and questioned his loyalty to the United States . Shelby contended that his noncommittal response to the letter was meant to draw the federal government 's attention to the situation in the west . He cited the agreement between Washington and the Spanish as evidence that his ploy had worked . He also claimed to have known at the time he wrote the letter that the French scheme was destined to fail . 
 Slaughter 's supporters mocked Shelby 's advanced age ( he was almost 62 ) , calling him " Old Daddy Shelby " . One Kentucky paper even printed an anonymous charge that Shelby had run from the Battle of King 's Mountain . Though few even among Shelby 's enemies believed the story , his supporters and Shelby himself responded through missives in the state 's newspapers . One supporter typified these responses , writing " It is reported that Colonel Shelby ' run [ sic ] at King 's Mountain . ' True he did . He first run [ sic ] up to the enemy ... then after an action of about forty @-@ seven minutes , he run [ sic ] again with 900 prisoners . " 
 As the canvass stretched into August , Shelby grew more confident of victory and began preparations to return to the state house . He predicted a victory of 10 @,@ 000 votes ; the final margin was more than 17 @,@ 000 . When he took the oath of office , Shelby became the first Kentucky governor to serve non @-@ consecutive terms . ( James Garrard had been permitted to serve consecutive terms in 1796 and 1800 by special legislative exemption . ) 
 Preparations for the war dominated Shelby 's second term . Two days before his inauguration , he and outgoing governor Charles Scott met at the state house to appoint William Henry Harrison commander of the Kentucky militia . This was done in violation of a constitutional mandate that the post be held by a native Kentuckian . Already commander of the militias of Indiana and Illinois , Harrison picked up Kentucky volunteers at Newport before hurrying to the defense of Fort Wayne . 
 Shelby pressured President James Madison to give Harrison command of all military forces in the Northwest . Madison acceded , rescinding his earlier appointment of James Winchester . On the state level , Shelby revised militia laws to make every male between the ages of 18 and 45 eligible for military service ; ministers were excluded from the provision . Seven thousand volunteers enlisted , and many more had to be turned away . Shelby encouraged the state 's women to sew and knit items for Kentucky 's troops . 
 Shelby 's confidence in the federal government 's war planning was shaken by the disastrous Battle of Frenchtown in which a number of Kentucky soldiers died . He vowed to personally act to aid the war effort should the opportunity arise , and was authorized by the legislature to do so . In March 1813 , Harrison requested another 1 @,@ 200 Kentuckians to join him at Fort Meigs . Shelby dispatched the requested number , among whom was his oldest son James , under General Green Clay . The reinforcements arrived to find Fort Meigs under siege by a combined force of British and Indians . Clay 's force was able to stop the siege , but a large number of them were captured and massacred by Indians . Initial reports put James Shelby among the dead , but he was later discovered to have been captured and released in a prisoner exchange . 
 On July 30 , 1813 , General Harrison again wrote Shelby requesting volunteers , and this time he asked that Shelby lead them personally . Shelby raised a force of 3 @,@ 500 volunteers , double the number Harrison requested . Future governor John J. Crittenden served as Shelby 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp . Now a Major General , Shelby led the volunteers to join Harrison in a campaign that culminated in the American victory at the Battle of the Thames . 
 In Harrison 's report of the battle to Secretary of War John Armstrong , Jr . , he said of Shelby , " I am at a loss to how to mention [ the service ] of Governor Shelby , being convinced that no <unk> of mine can reach his merit . " In 1817 , Shelby received the thanks of Congress and was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal for his service in the war . Friends of Shelby suggested he run for Vice President , but Shelby quickly and emphatically declined . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Upon Shelby 's leaving office in 1816 , President Monroe offered him the post of Secretary of War , but he declined because of his age . Already a founding member of the Kentucky Bible Society , Shelby consented to serve as vice @-@ president of the New American Bible Society in 1816 . He was a faithful member of Danville Presbyterian church , but in 1816 , built a small nondenominational church on his property . In 1818 , he accompanied Andrew Jackson in negotiating the Jackson Purchase with the Chickasaw . He also served as the first president of the Kentucky Agricultural Society in 1818 and was chairman of the first board of trustees of Centre College in 1819 . 
 In 1820 Shelby was stricken with paralysis in his right arm and leg . He died of a stroke on July 18 , 1826 , at his home in Lincoln County . He was buried on the grounds of his estate , Traveller 's Rest . The state erected a monument over his grave in 1827 . In 1952 the Shelby family cemetery was given to the state government and became the Isaac Shelby Cemetery State Historic Site . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Shelby 's patriotism is believed to have inspired the Kentucky state motto : " United we stand , divided we fall " . He was fond of The Liberty Song , a 1768 composition by John Dickinson , which contains the line " They join in hand , brave Americans all , By uniting we stand , by dividing we fall . " Though he is sometimes credited with designing the state seal , his public papers show that the design was suggested by James Wilkinson . 
 Centre College began awarding the Isaac Shelby Medallion in 1972 , and since then , it has become the College 's most prestigious honor . Those awarded the Medallion exemplify the ideals of service to Centre and dedication to the public good that were embraced by Shelby during his time at Centre and in Kentucky . 
 = = = Places named for Isaac Shelby = = = 
 Nine states have a county named after Shelby , as do numerous cities and military installations . 
 = Grammy Award for Best Hawaiian Music Album = 
 The Grammy Award for Best Hawaiian Music Album was an honor presented to recording artists from 2005 to 2011 for quality Hawaiian music albums . The Grammy Awards , an annual ceremony that was established in 1958 and originally called the Gramophone Awards , are presented by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States to " honor artistic achievement , technical proficiency , and overall excellence in the recording industry , without regard to album sales or chart position " . 
 Campaigning resulted in the Hawaiian category 's establishment in 2005 . Prior to its creation , Hawaiian music recordings were eligible for the Best World Music Album category but no Hawaiian musician or group had ever won a Grammy Award . During its seven @-@ year history , awards were presented to Charles M. Brotman for Slack Key Guitar : Volume 2 , producers Daniel Ho , Paul Konwiser and Wayne Wong for Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Volume One , the same production team plus George Kahumoku , Jr. for Legends of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Live from Maui in 2007 followed by Treasures of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar in 2008 , and Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Volume 2 in 2010 , Tia Carrere and Ho for <unk> , and Carrere for Huana Ke Aloha in 2011 . Eligible recordings had to feature the Hawaiian language on " more than half of its vocal tracks " , though instrumental albums were also acceptable . Awards were presented to the engineers , mixers , and / or producers in addition to the performing artists . 
 Daniel Ho holds the record for the most wins , with five . Four @-@ time recipients include Paul Konwiser and Wayne Wong as producers . George Kahumoku , Jr. earned three awards as a producer , and Tia Carrere earned two as a performing artist . Ho also holds the record for the most nominations , with seven . Amy Hanaiali 'i Gilliom holds the record for the most nominations without a win , with five . Six of the seven Grammy @-@ winning albums were released through the record label Daniel Ho Creations . In 2011 , the Recording Academy announced the retirement of the award category . Beginning in 2012 , Hawaiian music recordings were eligible for the Best Regional Roots Music Album category . 
 = = Background = = 
 For decades prior to the creation of the Best Hawaiian Music Album category , advocates for Hawaiian music took issue with recordings only being eligible for the Best World Music Album category . Advocates included musicians , record labels , government officials , and the Seattle @-@ based Pacific Northwest Chapter of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences . No Hawaiian musician or group had been awarded a Grammy prior to the establishment of the Hawaiian Music category . One obstacle to the category 's creation was defining Hawaiian music , and the eligibility requirements , in terms of music stylings and language restrictions . There has been conflict between traditional and Western @-@ influenced Hawaiian music , mostly pertaining to the use of the slack @-@ key guitar , an instrument invented in Hawaii but commercialized by " mainlanders " . According to Academy representative Bill Freimuth , the category was designed " for recordings of a more traditional nature " . Requiring the use of Hawaiian language on more than half of its vocal tracks encouraged the recognition of traditional music , but instrumental albums ( such as the compilation album honored at the 47th Grammy Awards ) circumvented this requirement . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 Nominees for the 47th Grammy Awards ( 2005 ) included : The Brothers <unk> for Some Call It Aloha ... Don 't Tell , producer Charles M. Brotman for Slack Key Guitar : Volume 2 , Ho <unk> for Cool Elevation , Amy <unk> Gilliom , and arranger and multi @-@ instrumentalist Willie K. ( born William <unk> ) for Amy & Willie Live , and Kealiʻi Reichel for <unk> . <unk> and Reichel both expressed happiness at being nominated , the latter stating , " This is the culmination of the work of <unk> , singers and poetry writers that dates back over a thousand years . " One NPR contributor wrote that the nominees illustrated the range of Hawaiian music at the time , " from traditional songs for guitar and ukulele to more modernized approaches " . Some Call It Aloha ... Don 't Tell contained traditional Hawaiian folk songs and chants and the use of traditional instruments such as the acoustic bass and 12 @-@ string guitar . Hoʻokena members Many Boyd , <unk> K. Dudoit III , Chris <unk> and Glen H.K. Smith created music for Cool Elevation using the ukulele , acoustic bass , and guitar . Scott Iwasaki of the Deseret News described Amy & Willie Live as a " playful array of Hawaiian jazz " . Ke <unk> , a concept album about Reichel 's immediate ancestors , combines traditional Hawaiian chants with original songs . The album also included contemporary covers of Babyface 's " You Were There " , Karla <unk> 's " Goodbye My Friend " , and Sting 's " Fields of Gold " . The award went to Brotman for the slack key guitar compilation album recorded in Hawaii and described by journalist Nate Chinen as " an easy @-@ listening instrumental compilation seemingly tailored to mainland tastes " . According to Jon de Mello , founder of Hawaiian record label Mountain Apple Company , other nominees ' " jaws dropped on the ground " at the ceremony in reaction to their works being overlooked . Chinen claimed the Academy 's " safe , bland " choice set a precedent for compilations and slack key use ( five nominees the following year were slack key albums ) . 
 For the 48th Grammy Awards ( 2006 ) , nominees included : Kapono Beamer for Slack Key Dreams of the <unk> , Raiatea Helm for Sweet & Lovely , Ledward Kaapana for <unk> <unk> : Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar , Sonny Lim for Slack Key Guitar : The Artistry of Sonny Lim , and Daniel Ho , Paul Konwiser and Wayne Wong for Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Volume One . Allmusic 's Adam Greenberg described Slack Key Dreams of the <unk> as an ambient album with an " easy listening " sound accented with slack key motives . Songs about Beamer 's family and childhood were sung in Hawaiian but also English . Sweet & Lovely featured " classic , early tourist @-@ era " Hawaiian music and guest performances by Kealiʻi Reichel and Auntie Genoa <unk> . Greenberg complimented Helm for her ukulele playing and " stunning " falsetto . Lim 's first solo album contained slack key compositions fused with " touches of folk and possibly even adult contemporary stylings " . Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar , which peaked at number fifteen on Billboard 's Top World Music Albums chart , featured twelve live tracks recorded from the weekly slack key guitar concerts that took place in Maui . Awards were presented to Ho , Konwiser and Wong as producers of the compilation album . Peter deAquino , George and <unk> Kahumoku , and Garrett Probst joined producers Ho and Wong on stage at the podium during the pre @-@ telecast ceremony to accept the award . 
 2007 nominees included : Amy Hanaiali 'i for Generation Hawai 'i , producers Daniel Ho , George Kahumoku , Jr . , Paul Konwiser and Wayne Wong for the compilation album Legends of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Live from Maui , Ledward Kaapana for Grandmaster Slack Key Guitar , Henry Kapono for The Wild Hawaiian , and producers Chris and Milton Lau for the compilation album Hawaiian Slack Key Kings . Generation Hawai 'i and The Wild Hawaiian were the two vocal @-@ driven albums nominated , while the three remaining nominees were slack @-@ key driven . The Wild Hawaiian consisted of rock songs in Hawaiian which drew sound comparisons to Jimi Hendrix and Carlos Santana . Awards were presented to Ho , Kahumoku , Konwiser and Wong . Ho , Konwiser and Wong became the first multiple recipients in the category as well as the first consecutive award recipients . Musicians Peter deAquino , Richard Ho <unk> 'i , Kaapana , and Garrett Probst of Da Ukulele Boys , all of whom contributed live tracks to the album , joined the producers on stage to perform " Hawaii Aloha " a cappella for the audience and to accept the award . Kahumoku 's acceptance speech stressed the importance of funding public arts and music education , earning him a standing ovation from the audience . 
 Nominees for the 50th Grammy Awards ( 2008 ) included : <unk> Beamer for Ka <unk> O Ka Hau ( The Coming of the Snow ) , Tia Carrere for <unk> , Raiatea Helm for Hawaiian Blossom , Cyril <unk> for He ‘ <unk> , and previous award recipients Ho , Kahumoku , Konwiser and Wong for Treasures of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar . For Ka <unk> O Ka Hau , Beamer layers multiple guitars in different tunings to works by John Dowland , Ástor Piazzolla , Erik Satie , Igor Stravinsky , and other composers . Carrere 's nomination resulted in People magazine including her on their list of " Strange Grammy Nominees " for her past associations with the Wayne 's World films and television show Dancing with the Stars . Hawaiian Blossom , Helm 's third studio album , included guest artists Robert <unk> and Led Kaapana . Greenberg again complimented Helm 's falsetto vocals and recommended the album for fans of traditional Hawaiian music with a " contemporary twist " . Awards were presented to Ho , Kahumoku , Konwiser and Wong ; Daniel Ho also received an award as the engineer of the compilation album , which reached number twelve on Billboard 's Top World Music Albums chart . This marked the third consecutive win for the production team 's live recording of Maui 's long @-@ running " Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar " concert series . 2008 was also the first year in which the presentation of the award for Hawaiian Music Album was broadcast live on the Academy 's official website . 
 2009 nominees included : Tia Carrere and Daniel Ho for <unk> , Amy Hanaiali 'i for <unk> , Led Kaapana and Mike <unk> for Forces of Nature , producers Chris and Milton Lau for Hawaiian Slack Key Kings Masters Series : Volume II , and Ho , Kahumoku , Dennis Kamakahi , Konwiser and Wong for the compilation album The Spirit of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar . This year marked the first time in the category 's history that all nominees were previous Best Hawaiian Music Album nominees — Hanaiali 'i and Kaapana both received nominations in 2004 and 2006 , Carrere was nominated in 2008 , and Chris and Milton Lau were also nominated in 2006 . Awards were presented to Carrere and Ho as performing artists , Amy Ku <unk> Stillman as a producer , and Ho as both a producer and engineer . Carrere and Ho became the first nominees to win awards as recording artists following four consecutive years of producers and engineers receiving awards for compilation albums . 
 For the 52nd Grammy Awards ( 2010 ) , nominees included : Tia Carrere and Daniel Ho for He Nani , Amy Hanaiali 'i for Friends & Family of Hawai 'i , Ho <unk> for Nani Mau Loa : Everlasting Beauty , and producers Ho , Kahumoku , Konwiser and Wong for Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar : Volume 2 . A tied vote for the fifth nominee resulted in only four nominated works . Family & Friends of Hawai 'i contained vocal pop duets set to Matt <unk> 's orchestral arrangements and reached a peak position of number three on Billboard 's Top World Albums chart . The album featured guests Dennis Kamakahi , Willie Nelson , and <unk> 'i Reichel , among others . The second volume of Masters of Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar contained performances by falsetto vocalist Richard Ho <unk> 'i , steel guitarist Bobby <unk> , and slack @-@ key players <unk> <unk> , Dennis Kamakahi , Sonny Lim , and co @-@ producer Kahumoku . Hanaiali 'i and her brother Eric Gilliom performed during the awards ceremony , providing a " mock opera lead @-@ in " for Jamie Foxx on the song " Blame It " . In addition to Ho , Kahumoku , Konwiser and Wong , awards were given to Peter deAquino , Ho and Sterling Seaton as the engineers / mixers . Guitarist Jeff Peterson joined the award winners on stage during the presentation . The win marked the fifth for a compilation album and the fourth to be co @-@ produced by Ho . Konwiser and Wong became four @-@ time award recipients , while Kahumoku ( who was not credited as a producer of the 2006 award @-@ winning compilation album ) became a three @-@ time recipient . 
 Nominees for the 53rd Grammy Awards included : Tia Carrere for Huana Ke Aloha , Amy Hanaiali 'i and Slack Key Masters of Hawaii for Amy Hanaiali 'i and Slack Key Masters of Hawaii , Daniel Ho for <unk> , Ledward Kaapana for The Legend , and Jeff Peterson for Maui on My Mind : Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar . Neither of Ho 's nominated compilation albums featured the slack @-@ key guitar . In addition to Carrere , awards were presented to Amy Ku <unk> Stillman as a producer and Daniel Ho as a producer and engineer / mixer . Related to the controversy surrounding Ho 's multiple wins and supposed connections to the music industry , New York magazine called Carrere 's win the " Best Grammy That 'll Piss People Off " . Carrere reportedly gave much of the credit to Ho , her long @-@ time friend and producer . Huana Ke Aloha became the sixth consecutive Grammy @-@ winning album released through the record label Daniel Ho Creations , causing some musicians and journalists to question whether or not the " playing field " was level . Carrere , Ho and Stillman claimed to have faced " serious consequences for the reception of [ their ] work and success " by being nominated , since all three lived and worked outside of Hawaii . Ho had been specifically targeted for residing in Los Angeles and participating in various Grammy @-@ related events throughout the year , providing an unfair advantage . Voting members of the Academy had also been criticized for not being qualified to judge Hawaiian music . 
 = = Category retirement = = 
 In 2011 , the category Best Hawaiian Music Album , along with thirty others , was eliminated due to a major category overhaul by the Recording Academy . Four additional categories in the American Roots Music field were eliminated ( Best Contemporary Folk Album , Best Native American Music Album , Best Traditional Folk Album , Best Zydeco or Cajun Music Album ) . These were all replaced by one American Roots Music award , the Grammy for Best Regional Roots Music Album . 
 Daniel Ho was disappointed by the category 's retirement , but considered the seven years the award was presented a " gift from the Recording Academy " . Ho hoped that the category 's elimination would eliminate the " craziness " surrounding the Hawaiian music controversy ( he and Carrere were accused of lacking appreciation for Hawaiian music and for having inside connections to the music industry by residing in Los Angeles ) . Four @-@ time award winner George Kahumoku , Jr. expressed similar disappointment , but was partly consoled by the fact that Hawaiian music recordings would still be included in the Regional Roots Music Album category . The record label Mountain Apple Company issued a statement claiming : " Hawaiian music deserves to be acknowledged as a category in its own right , not only for reasons of language but for cultural and historical reasons as well ... The loss of the Grammy for Best Hawaiian Music Album is not only a major loss to the Hawaiian , but to music lovers across the globe " . Michael Cord of <unk> Records was also saddened by the elimination , but considered it " a long time coming " . Hawaiian music works will now be eligible for the Best Regional Roots Music Album category . 
 = The Juice Is Loose = 
 " The Juice Is Loose " is the ninth episode of the seventh season of the animated television series Family Guy . It originally aired on March 15 , 2009 on Fox . In the episode , Peter cashes in an old raffle ticket from 1989 and wins a golf outing with O. J. Simpson . When he befriends Simpson and brings him home to meet the family , the residents of Quahog are not as welcoming of the infamous running back and try to force him out of town . 
 The episode was written by Andrew Goldberg and directed by Cyndi Tang . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 21 million homes in its original airing . The episode received negative reviews for its use of a three @-@ minute long live @-@ action segment of Conway Twitty . Series regular Mike Henry provided the voice of O.J. Simpson , Cathy <unk> Ryan guest starred as Fred Goldman 's wife in a cutaway , and Jeff Bergman guest starred as a parody of Homer Simpson . 
 = = Plot = = 
 According to an opening title card , this is one of several recently discovered " lost episodes " found in the Griffin family basement ; it takes place in March 2007 , prior to O. J. Simpson 's September 2007 arrest for armed robbery . 
 Lois goes to her book club and forces Peter to babysit Stewie . Instead , he invites Cleveland , Quagmire and Joe and they all play Truth or Dare , which results in a make out session between Cleveland and Joe . After a fiasco involving Stewie attempting to fix their satellite TV , Stewie ends up getting stuck on the roof , due to Peter 's lack of supervision . Brian tries to tell Peter but he does not listen and instead reads a magazine featuring Nick Jonas . After Peter starts a pillow fight that turns violent , Lois comes in , furious at Peter for leaving Stewie on the roof . Peter attempts to go fix the satellite himself , at which point he comes across a raffle ticket from 1989 that he had forgotten to cash in , winning him a chance to play golf with O. J. Simpson . 
 Unaware of Simpson 's accusation for the murders of his wife and his wife 's friend Ron , he grows fearful after Joe convinces him to walk around town with the song Dust in the Wind while thinking about the murders . Ultimately deciding to cash in the ticket , his friends suggest he spy on Simpson during the golf game and try to get him to confess to the murders . Hooking Peter to a wire , his cover is blown when the device shorts out . Simpson laments having lost a chance of escaping the accusation . Feeling guilty , Peter decides that Simpson is actually innocent , and decides to befriend him . 
 Peter brings Simpson home with him to meet the family , who are initially less tolerant of Simpson than Peter . Brian tries to tell Peter that he should not trust Simpson just because he idolized him as a kid but Peter refuses . 
 Deciding to let Simpson stay at their house , word soon gets out of Simpson 's presence in Quahog , causing Peter to decide to throw a house party and help everyone else get to know him better . Later that day , Peter and Simpson are met with an angry mob instead led by Mayor Adam West , intent on driving the latter out of town . Desperate for a place to live without being bothered by furious citizens , Simpson makes a heartfelt speech , professing that he is just as imperfect as everyone else , causing the residents of Quahog to apologize and embrace with him . A split second later , however , the tables turn to a surprise ending as Simpson takes out a knife and kills three people before running off . A furious mob goes on to chase after Simpson , as the Griffins look on , with Peter , wearing a guilty disappointed look , indifferently declaring , " I guess he did do it . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Juice Is Loose " was written by Andrew Goldberg and directed by Cyndi Tang . The writing process began when Goldberg was creator Seth MacFarlane 's assistant and was given a freelance episode . He wrote " Believe It or Not , Joe 's Walking on Air " , and executive producer David A. Goodman thought he did a " fantastic job " . Goldberg submitted a three @-@ page list of ideas for his next episode , and MacFarlane especially liked the story for " The Juice Is Loose " . They had to add a title card in the beginning of the episode saying that it was a " lost episode " , as O.J. Simpson was sent to jail before the episode aired . The episode features a three @-@ minute long segment of an archive video of Conway Twitty performing " I See the Want To in Your Eyes " , and executive producer Chris Sheridan had to explain to the Fox executives why the segment should be featured in the episode . 
 Series regular Mike Henry provided the voice of O.J. Simpson in the episode , and Cathy <unk> Ryan guest starred as Fred Goldman 's wife in a cutaway gag . In addition to Henry and Ryan , actors Reid Bruton , Jules Green , Augie <unk> , <unk> Lind guest starred in the episode . Recurring voice actors Jeff Bergman , Max Burkholder , Ralph Garman , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on March 15 , 2009 , " The Juice is Loose " was watched by 7 @.@ 21 million households and acquired a 3 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . It was the most @-@ watched show in the " Animation Domination " block , surpassing The Simpsons , American Dad ! and King of the Hill . The episode received mixed reviews from television sources and critics . Ahsan Haque of IGN gave " The Juice Is Loose " 5 @.@ 5 / 10 , saying that the episode was " a largely forgettable episode with only a few moments of brilliance " . The review criticized the usage of a three @-@ minute long Conway Twitty live action singing clip which was received as an " effort to reduce the amount of animation [ ... ] for the episode " . Alex Rocha of TV Guide said that he " did enjoy this episode " but called the Conway Twitty clip a " filler " and that he would have wanted to see a " blank screen or even commercials " instead . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club stated that the episode " relied on an overabundance of pop culture riffs far too dated to elicit much more than a brief chuckle " , and also criticized the Conway Twitty clip . He graded " The Juice Is Loose " a C + . 
 = HMS Cressy ( 1899 ) = 
 HMS Cressy was a Cressy @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy around 1900 . Upon completion she was assigned to the China Station . In 1907 she was transferred to the North America and West Indies Station before being placed in reserve in 1909 . Recommissioned at the start of World War I , she played a minor role in the Battle of Heligoland Bight a few weeks after the beginning of the war . Cressy , together with two of her sister ships , was torpedoed and sunk by the German submarine U @-@ 9 on 22 September 1914 with the loss of 560 of her crew . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Cressy was designed to displace 12 @,@ 000 long tons ( 12 @,@ 190 t ) . The ship had an overall length of 472 feet ( 143 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 69 feet 9 inches ( 21 @.@ 3 m ) and a deep draught of 26 feet 9 inches ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 21 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 15 @,@ 660 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The engines were powered by 30 Belleville boilers . On her sea trials , Cressy only reached 20 @.@ 7 knots ( 38 @.@ 3 km / h ; 23 @.@ 8 mph ) , the slowest performance of any of her class . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of coal and her complement ranged from 725 to 760 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of two breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) Mk X guns in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . They fired 380 @-@ pound ( 170 kg ) shells to a range of 15 @,@ 500 yards ( 14 @,@ 200 m ) . Her secondary armament of twelve BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships . Eight of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . A dozen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats , eight on casemates on the upper deck and four in the superstructure . The ship also carried three 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged torpedo tubes . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) and was closed off by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was 6 inches thick while the casemate armour was 5 inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from 1 – 3 inches ( 25 – 76 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by 12 inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Cressy , named after the 1346 Battle of Crécy , was laid down by Fairfield Shipbuilding at their shipyard in Govan , Scotland on 12 October 1898 and launched on 4 December 1899 . After finishing her sea trials she passed into the fleet reserve at Portsmouth on 24 May 1901 . She was commissioned by Captain Henry Tudor for service on the China Station on 28 May 1901 , but her departure was delayed for several months when her steering gear broke down shortly after leaving the base and she had to return . She eventually left home waters in early October 1901 , arriving at Colombo on 7 November , and then Singapore on 16 November . She was assigned to the North America and West Indies Station from 1907 through 1909 and placed in reserve upon her return home . 
 The ship was assigned to the 7th Cruiser Squadron shortly after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . The squadron was tasked with patrolling the Broad Fourteens of the North Sea in support of a force of destroyers and submarines based at Harwich which protected the eastern end of the English Channel from German warships attempting to attack the supply route between England and France . During the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August , the ship was part of Cruiser Force ' C ' , in reserve off the Dutch coast , and saw no action . After the battle , Rear Admiral Arthur Christian ordered Cressy to take aboard 165 unwounded German survivors from the badly damaged ships of Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force . Escorted by her sister Bacchante , she set sail for the Nore to unload their prisoners . 
